
Prepare, Apply, and Confirm
•  Enhanced eText Features­—Keep students engaged in 
learning on their own time, while helping them achieve greater 
conceptual understanding of course material through author-
created solutions videos and animations.
•  Dynamic Study Modules—Work by continuously assessing 
student performance and activity, then using data and analytics to 
provide personalized content in real time to reinforce concepts 
that target each student’s particular strengths and weaknesses.
•  Learning Catalytics—Generates classroom 
discussion, guides lecture, and promotes  
peer-to-peer learning with real-time analytics. Now, 
students can use any device to interact in the 
classroom.
•  Hallmark Features—Personalized Learning Aids, like 
Help Me Solve This, View an Example, and instant feedback 
are available for further practice and mastery when 
students need the help most!
•  Adaptive Study Plan—Assists students in monitoring 
their own progress by offering them a customized study plan 
powered by Knewton, based on Homework, Quiz, and Test 
results. Includes regenerated exercises with unlimited practice 
and the opportunity to prove mastery through quizzes on 
recommended learning objectives.

with MyFinanceLab
™
•  Worked Solutions—Provide step-by-step explanations on 
how to solve select problems using the exact numbers and data 
that were presented in the problem. Instructors will have access 
to the Worked Solutions in preview and review mode.
•  Algorithmic Test Bank—Instructors have the ability 
to create multiple versions of a test or extra practice for 
students.
123
•  Mobile Ready—Students and instructors can access 
multimedia resources and complete assessments right  
at their fingertips, on any mobile device.
•  Financial Calculator—The Financial Calculator is available as 
a smartphone application, as well as on a computer, and includes 
important functions such as cash flow, net present value, and 
internal rate of return. Fifteen helpful tutorial videos show the 
many ways to use the Financial Calculator  
in MyFinanceLab.
•  LMS Integration—Link from any LMS platform to access 
assignments, rosters, and resources, and synchronize MyLab grades 
with your LMS gradebook. For students, new direct, single sign-on 
provides access to all the personalized learning MyLab resources that 
make studying more efficient and effective.
•  Reporting Dashboard—View, analyze, and report 
learning outcomes clearly and easily. Available via the 
Gradebook and fully mobile-ready, the Reporting 
Dashboard presents student performance data at the 
class, section, and program levels in an accessible, visual 
manner.

Multinational  
Business Finance
Fourteenth EDITION

Berk/DeMarzo
Corporate Finance*
Corporate Finance: The Core*
Berk/DeMarzo/Harford
Fundamentals of Corporate  
Finance*
Brooks
Financial Management:  
Core Concepts*
Copeland/Weston/Shastri
Financial Theory and Corporate 
Policy
Dorfman/Cather
Introduction to Risk Management
and Insurance
Eakins/McNally
Corporate Finance Online*
Eiteman/Stonehill/Moffett
Multinational Business Finance*
Fabozzi
Bond Markets: Analysis  
and Strategies
Fabozzi/Modigliani/Jones
Foundations of Financial Markets
and Institutions
Foerster
Financial Management:  
Concepts and Applications*
Frasca
Personal Finance
Gitman/Zutter
Principles of Managerial Finance*
Principles of Managerial  
Finance—Brief Edition*
Haugen
The Inefficient Stock Market:  
What Pays Off and Why
Modern Investment Theory
Holden
Excel Modeling in Corporate 
Finance
Excel Modeling in Investments
Hughes/MacDonald
International Banking:  
Text and Cases
Hull
Fundamentals of Futures  
and Options Markets
Options, Futures, and Other  
Derivatives
Keown
Personal Finance: Turning Money 
into Wealth*
Keown/Martin/Petty
Foundations of Finance:  
The Logic and Practice  
of Financial Management*
Madura
Personal Finance*
Marthinsen
Risk Takers: Uses and Abuses  
of Financial Derivatives
McDonald
Derivatives Markets
Fundamentals of Derivatives 
Markets
Mishkin/Eakins
Financial Markets and Institutions
Moffett/Stonehill/Eiteman
Fundamentals of Multinational 
Finance
Nofsinger
Psychology of Investing
Pennacchi
Theory of Asset Pricing
Rejda/McNamara
Principles of Risk Management 
and Insurance
Smart/Gitman/Joehnk
Fundamentals of Investing*
Solnik/McLeavey
Global Investments
Titman/Keown/Martin
Financial Management:  
Principles and Applications*
Titman/Martin
Valuation: The Art and Science  
of Corporate Investment  
Decisions
Weston/Mitchell/Mulherin
Takeovers, Restructuring,  
and Corporate Governance
The Pearson Series in Finance
*denotes MyFinanceLab titles  Log onto www.myfinancelab.com to learn more

Multinational  
Business Finance
Fourteenth Edition
David K.  
Eiteman
University of California,  
Los Angeles
Arthur I.  
Stonehill
Oregon State University  
and University  
of Hawaii at Manoa
Michael H.  
Moffett
Thunderbird School  
of Global Management  
at Arizona State University
Boston  Columbus  Indianapolis  New York  San Francisco
Amsterdam  Cape Town  Dubai  London  Madrid  Milan  Munich  Paris  Montreal  Toronto
Delhi  Mexico City  Sao Paulo  Sydney  Hong Kong  Seoul  Singapore  Taipei  Tokyo

Vice President, Business Publishing: Donna Battista
Acquisitions Editor: Kate Fernandes
Editorial Assistant: Kathryn Brightney
Vice President, Product Marketing: Maggie Moylan
Director of Marketing, Digital Services and Products:  
Jeanette Koskinas
Senior Product Marketing Manager: Alison Haskins
Executive Field Marketing Manager: Adam Goldstein
Team Lead, Program Management: Ashley Santora
Program Manager: Kathryn Dinovo
Team Lead, Project Management: Jeff Holcomb
Project Manager: Meredith Gertz
Operations Specialist: Carol Melville
Creative Director: Blair Brown
Art Director: Jon Boylan
Vice President, Director of Digital Strategy and Assessment:  
Paul Gentile
Manager of Learning Applications: Paul DeLuca
Digital Editor: Megan Rees 
Director, Digital Studio: Sacha Laustsen
Digital Studio Manager: Diane Lombardo
Digital Studio Project Manager: Melissa Honig 
Product Manager: Elizabeth Cameron 
Digital Content Team Lead: Noel Lotz
Digital Content Project Lead: Miguel Leonarte 
Project Management and Text Design: Gillian Hall
Composition and Art Creation: Laserwords Maine
Cover Designer: Joyce Wells
Cover Art: © iStock by Getty Images/chinaface
Printer/Binder: Edwards Brothers Malloy
Cover Printer: Phoenix Color/Hagerstown
ISBN-13:  978-0-13-387987-2
ISBN-10: 	
0-13-387987-9
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Copyright © 2016, 2013, 2010 by Pearson Education, Inc. or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved. Manufactured in the United States of 
America. This publication is protected by copyright, and permission should be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited 
reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, record-
ing, or otherwise. For information regarding permissions, request forms, and the appropriate contacts within the Pearson Education 
Global Rights and Permissions department, please visit www.pearsoned.com/permissions/.
Acknowledgments of third-party content appear on the appropriate page within the text, which constitutes an extension of this copy-
right page.
PEARSON, ALWAYS LEARNING, and MYFINANCELABTM are exclusive trademarks owned by Pearson Education, Inc. or its affili-
ates in the U.S. and/or other countries.
Unless otherwise indicated herein, any third-party trademarks that may appear in this work are the property of their respective owners, 
and any references to third-party trademarks, logos, or other trade dress are for demonstrative or descriptive purposes only. Such refer-
ences are not intended to imply any sponsorship, endorsement, authorization, or promotion of Pearson’s products by the owners of such 
marks, or any relationship between the owner and Pearson Education, Inc. or its affiliates, authors, licensees, or distributors.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Eiteman, David K.
     Multinational business finance / David K. Eiteman, University of California, Los Angeles, Arthur I. Stonehill, Oregon State Univer-
sity and the University of Hawaii at Manoa, Michael H. Moffett, Thunderbird School of Global Management.—Fourteenth edition.
       pages cm
  Includes index.
  ISBN 978-0-13-387987-2
  1. International business enterprises--Finance. I. Stonehill, Arthur I. II. Moffett,  
Michael H. III. Title.
  HG4027.5.E36 2015
  658.15’99--dc23
2015020241

Multinational Business Finance, Fourteenth Edition, continues to evolve as the global busi-
ness and financial environment it describes evolves. Institutions, markets, and business itself 
are changing rapidly, challenging many long-held assumptions of financial management. We 
have chosen to design the content of this edition along three points of emphasis.
■
■
Organizations of All Kinds.   Multinational enterprises (MNEs) applies to organi-
zations of all kinds—the publicly traded, the privately held, the state-run, the state-
owned organizations—all forms that permeate global business today.
■
■
Role of Emerging Markets.   Firms from all countries and all markets are looking to 
the economic drivers of the global economy today, the emerging markets, and the many 
new roles they play in terms of competition and opportunity. These markets present 
a multitude of specific risks and challenges for multinational business and finance.
■
■
Financial Leadership.   The leaders of MNEs face numerous foreign exchange 
and political risks. These risks can be daunting but they also present opportunities 
for creating value if properly understood. These opportunities and risks are most 
effectively understood in the context of the global business itself, and the ability of 
management to integrate the strategic and financial challenges that business faces.
New in the Fourteenth Edition
The theme for this Fourteenth Edition could in some ways be considered an emerging market 
strength, weakness, opportunity, threat (SWOT) analysis. A world in which the developed or 
industrialized countries see slower growth, poorer job opportunities, and a growing insecurity over 
their competitiveness in the global marketplace, but emerging markets offer promise and risk.
A short overview of the features in the Fourteenth Edition can be segmented into struc-
ture and teaching, content and theoretical structures, and new Mini-Case offerings.
Book Structure and Teaching
■
■
All chapters are structured around a series of pedagogical Learning Objectives 
aligned with the MyFinanceLab platform for Multinational Business Finance’s 
teaching.
■
■
An increased focus is placed on how multinational firms financially operate similarly/
differently across industrial markets and emerging markets.
■
■
A new chapter, Chapter 8, is devoted solely to interest rate risk and interest rate 
risk management, with a focus on the use of interest rate and cross-currency swaps.
■
■
A multitude of new Mini-Cases explore the current global financial market’s many 
challenges.
■
■
End-of-chapter questions and problems are revised throughout, aligned with 
MyFinanceLab, and cover the gamut of the increasing complexity of how multinational 
enterprises—for profit and not-for-profit—operate and compete globally.
Preface
v

vi
Preface
Content and Theoretical Structures
■
■
Two-level chapter structure is offered with primary chapter content focused on criti-
cal components of multinational corporate finance.
■
■
Selected second-level complexity of chapter content is delivered in appendices 
devoted to topics such as algebraic derivation of international parity conditions, for-
eign currency option pricing theory, advanced topics in transaction exposure hedging, 
foreign subsidiary funding and capitalization, among others.
■
■
Use of fundamental theoretical foundations is expanded like that of the foreign cur-
rency/interest rate box diagram and the triangular structure of the Impossible Trinity.
■
■
Selected business and industry practices are delivered in Global Finance in Practice 
boxes in each chapter that both support and on occasion oppose theoretical prin-
ciples in international finance.
New Chapter Mini-Cases
Nine of the 18 chapter Mini-Cases in the fourteenth edition are new:
■
■
Chapter 1 on Multinational Financial Management: Crowdfunding Kenya
■
■
Chapter 2 on the International Monetary System: Iceland: A Small Country in a 
Global Crisis
■
■
Chapter 5 on the Balance of Payments: Global Remittances
■
■
Chapter 7 on Foreign Currency Futures and Options: KiKos and the South Korean 
Won
■
■
Chapter 8 on Interest Rate Derivatives and Swaps: Argentina and the Vulture Funds
■
■
Chapter 9 on Exchange Rate Determination: Russian Ruble Roulette
■
■
Chapter 10 on Transaction Exposure: China Noah Corporation
■
■
Chapter 15 on Multinational Tax Management: Apple’s Global iTax Strategy
■
■
Chapter 18 on Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisition: Elan 
and Royalty Pharma
A final note on style. International finance is a subject of sophistication, constant change, 
yet rich in history. We have tried to bridge the past and future with a mix of currency notations 
and symbols throughout the book, using both the increasingly common three-letter currency 
codes—USD, CNY, EUR—with the currency symbols of the past—$, ¥, £, €—which live on 
in modern media.
Audience
Multinational Business Finance, Fourteenth Edition, is aimed at university-level courses in 
international financial management, international business finance, international finance, and 
similar titles. It can be used at either the undergraduate or graduate level as well as in executive 
education and corporate learning courses.
A prerequisite course or experience in corporate finance or financial management would 
be ideal. However, we review the basic finance concepts before we extend them to the multi-
national case. We also review the basic concepts of international economics and international 
business.
Over many years and many editions, as language translations and sales have expanded, 
we have observed a widening global audience for this book. We continue to try to service this 

vii
Preface
greater global audience with multicountry companies and markets in theoretical applications, 
examples, Mini-Cases, and Global Finance in Practice features, as seen in the business and news 
press (including anecdotes and illustrations).
Organization
Multinational Business Finance, Fourteenth Edition, has a number of new subjects, but is also 
shorter. This has been accomplished by integrating a number of previous topics along finan-
cial management threads. The book is in five parts, the parts unified by the common thread of 
the globalization process by which a firm moves from a domestic to a multinational business 
orientation.
■
■
Part 1 introduces the global financial environment
■
■
Part 2 explains foreign exchange theory and markets
■
■
Part 3 analyzes foreign exchange exposure
■
■
Part 4 explores the financing of the global firm
■
■
Part 5 analyzes foreign investments and operations
Pedagogical Tools
To make Multinational Business Finance, Fourteenth Edition, as comprehensible as possible, 
we use a large number of proven pedagogical tools. Again, our efforts have been informed by 
the detailed reviews and suggestions of a panel of professors who are recognized individually 
for excellence in the field of international finance, particularly at the undergraduate level. 
Among these pedagogical tools are the following:
■
■
A student-friendly writing style is utilized combined with a structured presentation 
of material, beginning with learning objectives for each chapter, and ending with a 
summarization of how those learning objectives were realized.
■
■
A wealth of illustrations and exhibits provide a visual parallel to the concepts and 
content presented.
■
■
A running case on a hypothetical U.S.-based firm, Trident Corporation, provides a 
cohesive framework for the multifaceted globalization process, and is reinforced in 
several end-of-chapter problems.
■
■
A Mini-Case at the end of each chapter illustrates the chapter (18 in all) content and 
extends it to the multinational financial business environment. And as noted, 9 of the 
18 Mini-Cases in the Fourteenth Edition are new.
■
■
Global Finance in Practice boxes in every chapter illuminate the theory with accounts 
of actual business practices. These applications extend the concepts without adding 
to the length of the text itself.
■
■
The power and resources of the Internet are leveraged throughout the text in a vari-
ety of applications. Every chapter has a number of end-of-chapter exercises requiring 
the use of the Internet, while a variety of Internet references are dispersed through-
out the chapters in text and exhibits.
■
■
A multitude of end-of-chapter questions and problems, which assess the students’ 
understanding of the course material, are included. All end-of-chapter problems are 
solved using spreadsheet solutions. Selected end-of-chapter problem answers are 
included at the back of the book.

viii
Preface
A Rich Array of Support Materials
A robust package of materials for both instructor and student accompanies the text to facili-
tate learning and to support teaching and testing.
MyFinanceLab. Multinational Business Finance, Fourteenth Edition, is now available with
MyFinanceLab. MyFinanceLab, a fully integrated homework and tutorial system, solves 
one of the biggest teaching problems in finance courses: providing students with unlimited 
practice homework problems along with a structured blueprint for studying the material. 
MyFinanceLab offers:
■
■
Textbook problems online
■
■
Algorithmically generated values for more practice
■
■
Partial credit
■
■
Personalized study plans
■
■
Extra help for students
■
■
Online gradebook
End-of-chapter Questions and Problems that provide assessment and practice opportunities, 
are available in MyFinanceLab. Internet exercises, glossary flash cards, and Web links are also 
available in MyFinanceLab.
Online Instructor’s Resource Manual. The Online Instructor’s Resource Manual, prepared 
by the authors, contains complete answers to all end-of-chapter questions, problems, and chap-
ter Mini-Cases. All quantitative end-of-chapter problems are solved using spreadsheets, which 
are also available online.
Online Test Bank. The Online Test Bank, prepared by Rodrigo Hernandez, Radford Univer-
sity, College of Business and Economics, contains over 1,200 multiple-choice and short-essay 
questions. The multiple-choice questions are labeled by topic and by category-recognition, 
conceptual, and analytical types.
Computerized Test Bank. The Test Bank is also available in Pearson Education’s TestGen 
Software. Fully networkable, it is available for Windows and Macintosh. TestGen’s graphical 
interface enables instructors to view, edit and add questions; transfer questions to tests; and 
print different forms of tests. Search-and-sort features enable the instructor to locate questions 
quickly and arrange them in a preferred order. The TestGen plug-in allows the instructor to 
administer TestGen tests in CourseCompass QuizMaster, working with your school’s computer 
network, automatically grades the exams, stores the results on a disk, and allows the instructor 
to view and print a variety of reports.
Online Mini-Case PowerPoint Presentations. A significant addition to the instructor’s 
resources in this new Fourteenth Edition, each of the 18 Mini-Cases has a stand-alone Power-
Point presentation available online.
Online PowerPoint Presentation Slides. The extensive set of PowerPoint slides, prepared by 
Sonya Britt of Kansas State University, provides lecture outlines and selected graphics from 
the text for each chapter.
All of the teaching resources are available online for download at the Instructor Resource 
Center at www.pearsonhighered.com and on the catalog page for Multinational Business 
Finance.

ix
Preface
International Editions
Multinational Business Finance has been used throughout the world to teach students of inter-
national finance. Our books are published in a number of foreign languages including Chinese, 
French, Spanish, Indonesian, Portuguese, and Ukrainian.
Acknowledgments
The authors are very thankful for the many detailed reviews of previous editions and sug-
gestions from a number of colleagues. The final version of Multinational Business Finance, 
Fourteenth Edition, reflects most of the suggestions provided by these reviewers. The survey 
reviewers were anonymous, but the detailed reviewers were:
Jennifer Foo, Stetson University
John Gonzales, University of San Francisco
Delroy M. Hunter, University  
of Southern Florida
Chee K. Ng, Fairleigh Dickinson University
Richard L. Patterson, Indiana University,  
Bloomington
Sanjiv Sabherwal, University of Texas  
at Arlington
Tzveta Vateva, Kent State University
Special thanks are extended to the reviewers and survey participants of the previous editions:
Otto Adleberger
Essen University, Germany
Alan Alford
Northeastern University
Stephen Archer
Willamette University
Bala Arshanapalli
Indiana University Northwest
Hossein G. Askari
George Washington University
Robert T. Aubey
University of Wisconsin  
at Madison
David Babbel
University of Pennsylvania
James Baker
Kent State University
Morten Balling
Arhus School of Business,  
Denmark
Arindam Bandopadhyaya
University of Massachusetts at 
Boston
Ari Beenhakker
University of South Florida
Carl Beidleman
Lehigh University
Robert Boatler
Texas Christian University
Gordon M. Bodnar
Johns Hopkins University
Nancy Bord
University of Hartford
Finbarr Bradley
University of Dublin, Ireland
Tom Brewer
Georgetown University
Michael Brooke
University of Manchester,  
England
Robert Carlson
Assumption University,  
Thailand
Kam C. Chan
University of Dayton
Chun Chang
University of Minnesota
Sam Chee
Boston University Metropolitan 
College
Kevin Cheng
New York University
It-Keong Chew
University of Kentucky
Frederick D. S. Choi
New York University
Jay Choi
Temple University
Nikolai Chuvakhin
Pepperdine University
Mark Ciechon
University of California,  
Los Angeles
J. Markham Collins
University of Tulsa
Alan N. Cook
Baylor University
Kerry Cooper
Texas A&M University
Robert Cornu
Cranfield School  
of Management, U.K.
Roy Crum
University of Florida
Steven Dawson
University of Hawaii at Manoa
David Distad
University of California, Berkeley
Gunter Dufey
University of Michigan,  
Ann Arbor
Mark Eaker
Duke University
Rodney Eldridge
George Washington University
Imad A. Elhah
University of Louisville

x
Preface
Vihang Errunza
McGill University
Cheol S. Eun
Georgia Tech University
Mara Faccio
University of Notre Dame
Larry Fauver
University of Tennessee
Joseph Finnerty
University of Illinois  
at Urbana-Champaign
William R. Folks, Jr.
University of South Carolina
Lewis Freitas
University of Hawaii at Manoa
Anne Fremault
Boston University
Fariborg Ghadar
George Washington University
Ian Giddy
New York University
Martin Glaum
Justus-Lievig-Universitat Giessen, 
Germany
Deborah Gregory
University of Georgia
Robert Grosse
Thunderbird
Christine Hekman
Georgia Tech University
Steven Heston
University of Maryland
James Hodder
University of Wisconsin, Madison
Alfred Hofflander
University of California, Los 
Angeles
Janice Jadlow
Oklahoma State University
Veikko Jaaskelainen
Helsinki School of Economics 
and Business Administration
Benjamas Jirasakuldech
University of the Pacific
Ronald A. Johnson
Northeastern University
Fred Kaen
University of New Hampshire
John Kallianiotis
University of Scranton
Charles Kane
Boston College
Robert Kemp
University of Virginia
W. Carl Kester
Harvard Business School
Seung Kim
St. Louis University
Yong Kim
University of Cincinnati
Yong-Cheol Kim
University of  
Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Gordon Klein
University of California,  
Los Angeles
Steven Kobrin
University of Pennsylvania
Paul Korsvold
Norwegian School  
of Management
Chris Korth
University of South Carolina
Chuck C. Y. Kwok
University of South Carolina
John P. Lajaunie
Nicholls State University
Sarah Lane
Boston University
Martin Laurence
William Patterson College
Eric Y. Lee
Fairleigh Dickinson University
Yen-Sheng Lee
Bellevue University
Donald Lessard
Massachusetts  
Institute of Technology
Arvind Mahajan
Texas A&M University
Rita Maldonado-Baer
New York University
Anthony Matias
Palm Beach Atlantic College
Charles Maxwell
Murray State University
Sam McCord
Auburn University
Jeanette Medewitz
University of Nebraska at Omaha
Robert Mefford
University of San Francisco
Paritash Mehta
Temple University
Antonio Mello
University of Wisconsin  
at Madison
Eloy Mestre
American University
Kenneth Moon
Suffolk University
Gregory Noronha
Arizona State University
Edmund Outslay
Michigan State University
Lars Oxelheim
Lund University, Sweden
Jacob Park
Green Mountain College
Yoon Shik Park
George Washington University
John Petersen,
George Mason University
Harvey Poniachek
New York University
Yash Puri
University of Massachusetts  
at Lowell
R. Ravichandrarn
University of Colorado  
at Boulder
Scheherazade Rehman
George Washington University
Jeff Rosenlog
Emory University
David Rubinstein
University of Houston
Alan Rugman
Oxford University, U.K.
R. J. Rummel
University of Hawaii at Manoa
Mehdi Salehizadeh
San Diego State University
Michael Salt
San Jose State University
Roland Schmidt
Erasmus University,  
the Netherlands
Lemma Senbet
University of Maryland

xi
Preface
Alan Shapiro
University of Southern  
California
Hany Shawky
State University of New York, 
Albany
Hamid Shomali
Golden Gate University
Vijay Singal
Virginia Tech University
Sheryl Winston Smith
University of Minnesota
Luc Soenen
California Polytechnic State 
University
Marjorie Stanley
Texas Christian University
Joseph Stokes
University  
of Massachusetts-Amherst
Jahangir Sultan
Bentley College
Lawrence Tai
Loyola Marymount University
Kishore Tandon
CUNY—Bernard  
Baruch College
Russell Taussig
University of Hawaii at Manoa
Lee Tavis
University of Notre Dame
Sean Toohey
University of Western Sydney, 
Australia
Norman Toy
Columbia University
Joseph Ueng
University of St. Thomas
Gwinyai Utete
Auburn University
Rahul Verma
University of Houston-Downtown
Harald Vestergaard
Copenhagen Business School
K. G. Viswanathan
Hofstra University
Joseph D. Vu
University of Illinois,  
Chicago
Mahmoud Wahab
University of Hartford
Masahiro Watanabe
Rice University
Michael Williams
University of Texas at Austin
Brent Wilson
Brigham Young University
Bob Wood
Tennessee Technological  
University
Alexander Zamperion
Bentley College
Emilio Zarruk
Florida Atlantic University
Tom Zwirlein
University of Colorado,  
Colorado Springs
Industry  
(present or former affiliation)
Paul Adaire
Philadelphia Stock Exchange
Barbara Block
Tektronix, Inc.
Holly Bowman
Bankers Trust
Payson Cha
HKR International,  
Hong Kong
John A. Deuchler
Private Export Funding  
Corporation
Kåre Dullum
Gudme Raaschou Investment
Bank, Denmark
Steven Ford
Hewlett Packard
David Heenan
Campbell Estate, Hawaii
Sharyn H. Hess
Foreign Credit Insurance  
Association
Aage Jacobsen
Gudme Raaschou Investment
Bank, Denmark
Ira G. Kawaller
Chicago Mercantile Exchange
Kenneth Knox
Tektronix, Inc.
Arthur J. Obesler
Eximbank
I. Barry Thompson
Continental Bank
Gerald T. West
Overseas Private Investment 
Corporation
Willem Winter
First Interstate Bank of Oregon
A note of thanks is also extended to our accuracy reviewer, Dev Prasad, of the University of 
Massachusetts Lowell.
We would also like to thank all those with Pearson Education who have worked so dili-
gently on this edition: Kate Fernandes, Kathryn Dinovo, and Meredith Gertz. In addition, Gil-
lian Hall, our outstanding project manager at The Aardvark Group, deserves much gratitude.
Finally, we would like to dedicate this book to our parents, the late Wilford and Sylvia 
Eiteman, the late Harold and Norma Stonehill, and Bennie Ruth and the late Hoy K. Moffett, 
who gave us the motivation to become academicians and authors. We thank our wives, 
Keng-Fong, Kari, and Megan, for their patience while we were preparing Multinational 
Business Finance, Fourteenth Edition.
Pacific Palisades, California	
D.K.E.
Honolulu, Hawaii	
A.I.S.
Glendale, Arizona	
M.H.M.

xii
David K. Eiteman. David K. Eiteman is Professor Emeritus of Finance at the John 
E. Anderson Graduate School of Management at UCLA. He has also held teaching or 
research appointments at the Hong Kong University of Science & Technology, Showa 
Academy of Music (Japan), the National University of Singapore, Dalian University (China), 
the Helsinki School of Economics and Business Administration (Finland), University of 
Hawaii at Manoa, University of Bradford (U.K.), Cranfield School of Management (U.K.), 
and IDEA (Argentina). He is a former president of the International Trade and Finance 
Association, Society for Economics and Management in China, and Western Finance 
Association.
Professor Eiteman received a B.B.A. (Business Administration) from the University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor (1952); M.A. (Economics) from the University of California, Berkeley 
(1956); and a Ph.D. (Finance) from Northwestern University (1959).
He has authored or co-authored four books and twenty-nine other publications. His 
articles have appeared in The Journal of Finance, The International Trade Journal, Financial 
Analysts Journal, Journal of World Business, Management International, Business Horizons, 
MSU Business Topics, Public Utilities Fortnightly, and others.
Arthur I. Stonehill. Arthur I. Stonehill is a Professor of Finance and International Business, 
Emeritus, at Oregon State University, where he taught for 24 years (1966–1990). During 
1991–1997 he held a split appointment at the University of Hawaii at Manoa and Copenha-
gen Business School. From 1997 to 2001 he continued as a Visiting Professor at the University 
of Hawaii at Manoa. He has also held teaching or research appointments at the University 
of California, Berkeley; Cranfield School of Management (U.K.); and the North European 
Management Institute (Norway). He was a former president of the Academy of International 
Business, and was a western director of the Financial Management Association.
Professor Stonehill received a B.A. (History) from Yale University (1953); an M.B.A. 
from Harvard Business School (1957); and a Ph.D. in Business Administration from the 
University of California, Berkeley (1965). He was awarded honorary doctorates from the 
Aarhus School of Business (Denmark, 1989), the Copenhagen Business School (Denmark, 
1992), and Lund University (Sweden, 1998).
He has authored or co-authored nine books and twenty-five other publications. His 
articles have appeared in Financial Management, Journal of International Business Studies, 
California Management Review, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Journal 
of International Financial Management and Accounting, International Business Review, 
European Management Journal, The Investment Analyst (U.K.), Nationaløkonomisk Tidskrift 
(Denmark), Sosialøkonomen (Norway), Journal of Financial Education, and others.
Michael H. Moffett. Michael H. Moffett is Continental Grain Professor in Finance at the 
Thunderbird School of Global Management at Arizona State University, where he has been 
since 1994. He also has held teaching or research appointments at Oregon State University 
(1985–1993); the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (1991–1993); the Brookings Institution, 
About the Authors

xiii
About the Authors
Washington, D.C.; the University of Hawaii at Manoa; the Aarhus School of Business 
(Denmark); the Helsinki School of Economics and Business Administration (Finland), the 
International Centre for Public Enterprises (Yugoslavia); and the University of Colorado, 
Boulder.
Professor Moffett received a B.A. (Economics) from the University of Texas at Austin 
(1977), an M.S. (Resource Economics) from Colorado State University (1979), an M.A. 
(Economics) from the University of Colorado, Boulder (1983), and Ph.D. (Economics) from 
the University of Colorado, Boulder (1985).
He has authored, co-authored, or contributed to a number of books, articles, case studies, 
and other publications. He has co-authored two books with Art Stonehill and David Eiteman, 
Fundamentals of Multinational Finance, and this book, Multinational Business Finance. His 
articles have appeared in the Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,  Journal of Applied 
Corporate Finance, Journal of International Money and Finance, Journal of International 
Financial Management and Accounting, Contemporary Policy Issues, Brookings Discussion 
Papers in International Economics, and others. He has contributed to a number of collected 
works including the Handbook of Modern Finance, the International Accounting and Finance 
Handbook, and the Encyclopedia of International Business. He is also co-author of two books 
in multinational business with Michael Czinkota and Ilkka Ronkainen, International Business 
(7th Edition) and Global Business (4th Edition), and The Global Oil and Gas Industry: Strategy, 
Finance, and Management, with Andrew Inkpen.

	
Part 1	
Global Financial Environment  1
Chapter 1  Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities  
and Challenges  2
Chapter 2  The International Monetary System  28
Chapter 3  The Balance of Payments  57
Chapter 4  Financial Goals and Corporate Governance  87
	
Part 2	
Foreign Exchange Theory and Markets  117
Chapter 5  The Foreign Exchange Market  118
Chapter 6  International Parity Conditions  147
Chapter 7  Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options  181
Chapter 8  Interest Rate Risk and Swaps  209
Chapter 9  Foreign Exchange Rate Determination  241
	
Part 3	
Foreign Exchange Exposure  273
Chapter 10  Transaction Exposure  274
Chapter 11  Translation Exposure  313
Chapter 12  Operating Exposure  331
	
Part 4	
Financing the Global Firm  357
Chapter 13  The Global Cost and Availability of Capital  358
Chapter 14  Raising Equity and Debt Globally  384
Chapter 15  Multinational Tax Management  421
Chapter 16  International Trade Finance  450
	
Part 5	
Foreign Investments and Investment Analysis  477
Chapter 17  Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk  478
Chapter 18  Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions  510
Answers to Selected End-of-Chapter Problems  545
Glossary  549
Index  565
Brief Contents
xiv

Contents
	
Part 1	 Global Financial Environment  1
Chapter 1  Multinational Financial Management:  
Opportunities and Challenges  2
Financial Globalization and Risk  3
The Global Financial Marketplace  4
The Theory of Comparative Advantage  11
What Is Different about International Financial Management?  13
Market Imperfections: A Rationale for the Existence of the Multinational Firm  14
The Globalization Process  15
Summary Points  19
Mini-Case: Crowdfunding Kenya  19
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  22
Chapter 2  The International Monetary System  28
History of the International Monetary System  29
IMF Classification of Currency Regimes  33
Fixed versus Flexible Exchange Rates  37
A Single Currency for Europe: The Euro  39
Emerging Markets and Regime Choices  42
Globalizing the Chinese Renminbi  44
Summary Points  48
Mini-Case: Iceland—A Small Country in a Global Crisis  49
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  54
Chapter 3  The Balance of Payments  57
Fundamentals of BOP Accounting  58
The Accounts of the Balance of Payments  60
BOP Impacts on Key Macroeconomic Rates  68
Trade Balances and Exchange Rates  70
Capital Mobility  72
Summary Points  77
Mini-Case: Global Remittances  78
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  82
Chapter 4  Financial Goals and Corporate Governance  87
Who Owns the Business?  87
The Goal of Management  90
Publicly Traded versus Privately Held: The Global Shift  96
Corporate Governance  99
Summary Points  107
Mini-Case: Luxury Wars—LVMH vs. Hermès  108
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  112
xv

xvi
Contents
	
Part 2	 Foreign Exchange Theory and Markets  117
Chapter 5  The Foreign Exchange Market  118
Functions of the Foreign Exchange Market  119
Structure of the Foreign Exchange Market  119
Transactions in the Foreign Exchange Market  123
Size of the Foreign Exchange Market  126
Foreign Exchange Rates and Quotations  129
Summary Points  138
Mini-Case: The Venezuelan Bolivar Black Market  139
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  142
Chapter 6  International Parity Conditions  147
Prices and Exchange Rates  148
Interest Rates and Exchange Rates  155
Forward Rate as an Unbiased Predictor of the Future Spot Rate  164
Prices, Interest Rates, and Exchange Rates in Equilibrium  165
Summary Points  167
Mini-Case: Mrs. Watanabe and the Japanese Yen Carry Trade  167
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  170
Appendix: An Algebraic Primer to International Parity Conditions  177
Chapter 7  Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options  181
Foreign Currency Futures  182
Currency Options  184
Option Pricing and Valuation  192
Advanced Topic: Currency Option Pricing Sensitivity  193
Summary Points  200
Mini-Case: KiKos and the South Korean Won  200
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  203
Appendix: Currency Option Pricing Theory  207
Chapter 8  Interest Rate Risk and Swaps  209
Interest Rate Foundations  210
Interest Rate Risk  217
Interest Rate Futures and FRAs  220
Interest Rate Swaps  222
Cross-Currency Swaps  226
Summary Points  230
Mini-Case: Argentina and the Vulture Funds  231
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  236
Chapter 9  Foreign Exchange Rate Determination  241
Exchange Rate Determination: The Theoretical Thread  242
Currency Market Intervention  247
Disequilibrium: Exchange Rates in Emerging Markets  253
Forecasting in Practice  258
Summary Points  263
Mini-Case: Russian Ruble Roulette  263
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  266

xvii
Contents
	
Part 3	 Foreign Exchange Exposure  273
Chapter 10  Transaction Exposure  274
Types of Foreign Exchange Exposure  274
Why Hedge?  275
Ganado’s Transaction Exposure  280
Risk Management in Practice  289
Advanced Topics in Hedging  290
Summary Points  292
Mini-Case: China Noah Corporation  292
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  298
Appendix: Complex Option Hedges  305
Chapter 11  Translation Exposure  313
Overview of Translation  314
Translation Methods  315
Ganado Corporation’s Translation Exposure  318
Managing Translation Exposure  322
Summary Points  325
Mini-Case: McDonald’s, Hoover Hedges, and Cross-Currency Swaps  325
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  327
Chapter 12  Operating Exposure  331
A Multinational’s Operating Exposure  331
Measuring Operating Exposure: Ganado Germany  336
Strategic Management of Operating Exposure  341
Proactive Management of Operating Exposure  344
Summary Points  350
Mini-Case: Toyota’s European Operating Exposure  350
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  353
	
Part 4	 Financing the Global Firm  357
Chapter 13  The Global Cost and Availability of Capital  358
Financial Globalization and Strategy  358
International Portfolio Theory and Diversification  361
The Demand for Foreign Securities: The Role of International Portfolio Investors  367
The Cost of Capital for MNEs Compared to Domestic Firms  372
Summary Points  375
Mini-Case: Novo Industri A/S (Novo)  376
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  379
Chapter 14  Raising Equity and Debt Globally  384
Designing a Strategy to Source Capital Globally  385
Optimal Financial Structure  386
Optimal Financial Structure and the Multinational  387
Raising Equity Globally  389
Depositary Receipts  393
Private Placement  399
Foreign Equity Listing and Issuance  400

xviii
Raising Debt Globally  403
Summary Points  408
Mini-Case: Petrobrás of Brazil and the Cost of Capital  409
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  412
Appendix: Financial Structure of Foreign Subsidiaries  417
Chapter 15  Multinational Tax Management  421
Tax Principles  422
Multinational Tax Management  429
Tax Havens and International Offshore Financial Centers  435
Google: An Illustrative Case of Profit Repositioning  437
Corporate Inversion  439
Summary Points  440
Mini-Case: Apple’s Global iTax Strategy  441
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  445
Chapter 16  International Trade Finance  450
The Trade Relationship  450
Benefits of the System  453
Key Documents  455
Government Programs to Help Finance Exports  462
Trade Financing Alternatives  463
Forfaiting: Medium- and Long-Term Financing  466
Summary Points  468
Mini-Case: Crosswell International and Brazil  469
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  472
	
Part 5	 Foreign Investments and Investment Analysis  477
Chapter 17  Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk  478
Sustaining and Transferring Competitive Advantage  479
The OLI Paradigm and Internationalization  481
Deciding Where to Invest  483
Modes of Foreign Investment  484
Illustrative Case: Corporate Competition from the Emerging Markets  488
Predicting Political Risk  490
Country-Specific Risk: Transfer Risk  496
Country-Specific Risk: Cultural and Institutional Risk  499
Global-Specific Risk  502
Summary Points  505
Mini-Case: Strategic Portfolio Theory, Black Swans, and [Avoiding] Being the Turkey  506
Questions  ■  Internet Exercises  508
Contents

xix
Chapter 18  Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border  
Acquisitions  510
Complexities of Budgeting for a Foreign Project  511
Illustrative Case: Cemex Enters Indonesia  514
Real Option Analysis  527
Project Financing  528
Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions  529
Summary Points  535
Mini-Case: Elan and Royalty Pharma  535
Questions  ■  Problems  ■  Internet Exercises  539
Answers to Selected End-of-Chapter Problems  545
Glossary  549
Index  565
Contents

This page intentionally left blank 

1
Part  1 
Global Financial 
Environment
Chapter 1
Multinational Financial Management:  
Opportunities and Challenges
Chapter 2
The International Monetary System
Chapter 3
The Balance of Payments
Chapter 4
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance

The subject of this book is the financial management of multinational enterprises (MNEs)— 
multinational financial management. MNEs are firms—both for-profit companies and not-
for-profit organizations—that have operations in more than one country and conduct their 
business through branches, foreign subsidiaries, or joint ventures with host country firms. 
That conduct of business comes with challenges as suggested by the following news release 
from Procter & Gamble Co. (P&G), an American multinational consumer goods company:
“The October–December 2014 quarter was a challenging one with unprecedented cur-
rency devaluations,” said Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer A.G. Lafley. 
“Virtually every currency in the world devalued versus the U.S. dollar, with the Russian 
Ruble leading the way. While we continue to make steady progress on the strategic 
■
■
Understand the complexity of risks associated with financial globalization
■
■
Explore how global capital markets are critical for the exchange of products, services, 
and capital in the execution of global business
■
■
Consider how the theory of comparative advantage establishes the foundations for 
the justification for international trade and commerce
■
■
Discover what is different about international financial management, and which 
market imperfections give rise to the multinational enterprise
■
■
Examine how imperfections in global markets translate into opportunities for multi-
national enterprises
■
■
Consider how the globalization process moves a business from a purely domestic 
focus in its financial relationships and composition to one truly global in scope
Multinational 
Financial Management: 
Opportunities and Challenges
The objects of a financier are, then, to secure an ample revenue; to impose it 
with judgment and equality; to employ it economically; and, when necessity 
obliges him to make use of credit, to secure its foundations in that instance, 
and for ever, by the clearness and candor of his proceedings, the exactness of 
his calculations, and the solidity of his funds.
—Edmund Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France, 1790, p. 467.
Chapter	 1
Learning Objectives
2

3
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
transformation of the company—which focuses P&G on about a dozen core categories 
and 70 to 80 brands, on leading brand growth, on accelerating meaningful product inno-
vation and increasing productivity savings—the considerable business portfolio, product 
innovation, and productivity progress was not enough to overcome foreign exchange.”
—P&G News Release, January 27, 2015.
P&G is not alone. New MNEs are appearing all over the world every day, while many of 
the older and established ones (like P&G) are struggling to survive. Businesses of all kinds 
are seeing a very different world than in the past. Today’s MNEs depend not only on the 
emerging markets for cheaper labor, raw materials, and outsourced manufacturing, but also 
increasingly on those same emerging markets for sales and profits. These markets—whether 
they are emerging, less developed, or developing, or are BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India, and 
China), BIITS (Brazil, India, Indonesia, Turkey, South Africa, which are also termed the Fragile 
Five), or MINT (Mexico, Indonesia, Nigeria, Turkey)—represent the majority of the earth’s 
population and, therefore, the majority of potential customers. And adding market complexity 
to this changing global landscape is the risky and challenging international macroeconomic 
environment, both from a long-term and short-term perspective. The global financial crisis of 
2008–2009 is already well into the business past, and capital is flowing again—although both 
into and out of economies—at an ever-increasing pace.
How to identify and navigate these risks is the focus of this book. These risks may all 
occur on the playing field of the global financial marketplace, but they are still a question of 
management—of navigating complexity in pursuit of the goals of the firm.
Financial Globalization and Risk
Back in the halcyon pre-crisis days of the late 20th and early 21st centuries, it was taken 
as self evident that financial globalization was a good thing. But the subprime crisis and 
eurozone dramas are shaking that belief. . . . what is the bigger risk now—particularly in 
the eurozone—is that financial globalization has created a system that is interconnected 
in some dangerous ways.
—“Crisis Fears Fuel Debate on Capital Controls,” 
Gillian Tett, Financial Times, December 15, 2011.
The theme dominating global financial markets today is the complexity of risks associated 
with financial globalization—far beyond whether it is simply good or bad, but how to lead and 
manage multinational firms in the rapidly moving marketplace. The following is but a sampling 
of this complexity of risks.
■
■
The international monetary system, an eclectic mix of floating and managed fixed 
exchange rates, is under constant scrutiny. The rise of the Chinese renminbi is chang-
ing much of the world’s outlook on currency exchange, reserve currencies, and the 
roles of the dollar and the euro (see Chapter 2).
■
■
Large fiscal deficits, including the current eurozone crisis, plague most of the major 
trading countries of the world, complicating fiscal and monetary policies, and ulti-
mately, interest rates and exchange rates (see Chapter 3).
■
■
Many countries experience continuing balance of payments imbalances, and in some 
cases, dangerously large deficits and surpluses—whether it be the twin surpluses 
enjoyed by China, the current account surplus of Germany amidst a sea of euro-
zone deficits, or the continuing current account deficit of the United States, all will 
­inevitably move exchange rates (see Chapter 3).

4
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
■
■
Ownership, control, and governance vary radically across the world. The publicly 
traded company is not the dominant global business organization—the privately held 
or family-owned business is the prevalent structure—and goals and measures of per-
formance vary dramatically between these business models (see Chapter 4).
■
■
Global capital markets that normally provide the means to lower a firm’s cost of 
capital, and even more critically, increase the availability of capital, have in many 
ways shrunk in size and have become less open and accessible to many of the world’s 
organizations (see Chapter 2).
■
■
Today’s emerging markets are confronted with a new dilemma: the problem of first 
being the recipients of capital inflows, and then of experiencing rapid and massive 
capital outflows. Financial globalization has resulted in the ebb and flow of capital 
into and out of both industrial and emerging markets, greatly complicating financial 
management (Chapters 5 and 8).
This first chapter is meant only as an introduction and a taste of the complexity of risks 
associated with financial globalization. The Mini-Case at the end of this first chapter, Crowd-
funding Kenya, is intended to push you in your thinking about how and why money moves 
across the globe today.
The Global Financial Marketplace
Business—domestic, international, global—involves the interaction of individuals and indi-
vidual organizations for the exchange of products, services, and capital through markets. The 
global capital markets are critical for the conduct of this exchange. The global financial crisis 
of 2008–2009 served as an illustration and a warning of how tightly integrated and fragile this 
marketplace can be.
Assets, Institutions, and Linkages
Exhibit 1.1 provides a map of the global capital markets. One way to characterize the global 
financial marketplace is through its assets, institutions, and linkages.
Assets. The assets—financial assets—at the heart of the global capital markets are the debt 
securities issued by governments (e.g., U.S. Treasury Bonds). These low-risk or risk-free assets 
form the foundation for the creation, trading, and pricing of other financial assets like bank 
loans, corporate bonds, and equities (stock). In recent years, a number of additional securities 
have been created from existing securities—derivatives, the value of which is based on mar-
ket value changes of the underlying securities. The health and security of the global financial 
system relies on the quality of these assets.
Institutions. The institutions of global finance are the central banks, which create and control 
each country’s money supply; the commercial banks, which take deposits and extend loans to 
businesses, both local and global; and the multitude of other financial institutions created to 
trade securities and derivatives. These institutions take many shapes and are subject to many 
different regulatory frameworks. The health and security of the global financial system relies 
on the stability of these financial institutions.
Linkages. The links between the financial institutions—the actual fluid or medium for 
exchange—are the interbank networks using currency. The ready exchange of currencies in 
the global marketplace is the first and foremost necessary element for the conduct of financial 
trading, and the global currency markets are the largest markets in the world. The exchange 
of currencies, and the subsequent exchange of all other securities globally via currency, is the 

5
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
international interbank network. This network, whose primary price is the London Interbank 
Offered Rate (LIBOR), is the core component of the global financial system.
The movement of capital across currencies and continents for the conduct of business has 
existed in many different forms for thousands of years. Yet, it is only within the past 50 years 
that these capital movements have started to move at the pace of an electron in the digital 
marketplace. And it is only within the past 20 years that this market has been able to reach the 
most distant corners of the earth at any moment of the day. The result has been an explosion 
of innovative products and services—some for better and some for worse. And as illustrated 
by Global Finance in Practice 1.1, conditions and markets can change—often quickly.
The Market for Currencies
The price of any one country’s currency in terms of another country’s currency is called a ­foreign 
currency exchange rate. For example, the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar ($ or USD) 
and the European euro (€ or EUR) may be stated as “1.0922 dollar per euro” or simply abbre-
viated as $1.0922/€. This is the same exchange rate as when stated “EUR1.00 = USD1.0922.” 
Since most international business activities require at least one of the two parties in a business 
transaction to either pay or receive payment in a currency that is different from their own, an 
understanding of exchange rates is critical to the conduct of global business.
Currency Symbols. As noted, USD and EUR are often used as the symbols for the U.S. ­dollar 
and the European Union’s euro. These are the computer symbols (ISO-4217 codes) used 
today on the world’s digital networks. The field of international finance, however, has a rich 
­history of using a variety of different symbols in the financial press, and a variety of different 
Bank
Mortgage Loan
Corporate Loan
Corporate Bond
Bank
Interbank
Market
(LIBOR )
Bank
Public Debt
Private Debt
Private Equity
Central Banks
Institutions
Currency
Currency
Currency
The global capital market is a collection of institutions (central banks, commercial banks, investment banks, not-for-
proﬁt ﬁnancial institutions like the IMF and World Bank) and securities (bonds, mortgages, derivatives, loans, etc.),
which are all linked via a global network—the Interbank Market. This interbank market, in which securities of all
kinds are traded, is the critical pipeline system for the movement of capital.
The exchange of securities—the movement of capital in the global ﬁnancial system—must all take place through
a vehicle—currency. The exchange of currencies is itself the largest of the ﬁnancial markets. The interbank market,
which must pass-through and exchange securities using currencies, bases all of its pricing through the single most
widely quoted interest rate in the world—LIBOR (the London Interbank Oﬀered Rate).
Exhibit 1.1
Global Capital Markets

6
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
The Swiss franc has been fighting its appreciation against 
the European euro for years. While it is not a member of the 
European Union and while its currency has been one of 
the world’s most stable for over a century, Switzerland is 
an economy and a currency completely encased within the 
Eurozone.
In 2011, in an attempt to stop the Swiss franc from con-
tinuing to grow in value against the euro (to stop its appre-
ciation), the Swiss Central Bank announced a “floor” on its 
value against the euro of 1.20 Swiss francs to one euro. To 
preserve this value, the Bank would intervene in the market by 
buying euros with Swiss francs anytime the market exchange 
rate threatened to hit the floor. As illustrated in Exhibit A, the 
Bank had to intervene only a few select times in the past three 
years—until early 2015.
In early 2015, the markets continued to apply upward 
pressure on the Swiss franc’s value against the euro (which 
means pushing its exchange value to less than 1.20 Swiss 
francs per euro). The Swiss Central Bank continued to 
intervene, buying euros with Swiss francs and accumulat-
ing more and more euros in its reserves of foreign currency. 
The Bank also set central bank interest rates at negative 
levels—yes, negative. This meant that the Bank charged 
depositors to hold Swiss franc deposits, an effort to dis-
suade investors from exchanging any currency, including 
the euro, for Swiss francs.
But the European Union’s economies continued 
to struggle in 2014, and early reports of economic activ-
ity  in 2015 were showing further slowing. Investors 
wished to exit the euro ­fearing its future fall in value. The 
European Central Bank added to investor anxiety when 
it announced that it would be undertaking expansionary 
­government debt purchases—quantitative ­easing—(expan-
sionary monetary policy) to kick-start the sluggish EU 
economy.
On the morning of January 15, 2015, the Swiss Cen-
tral Bank shocked the markets by announcing that it was 
abandoning the 1.20 floor and cutting interest rates further 
(more negative). It had concluded that with the forthcom-
ing monetary expansion from the ECB, there was no longer 
any way to keep the flood gates closed. The Swiss franc, as 
illustrated in Exhibit B, appreciated against the euro within 
minutes. For two of the world’s major currencies, it was a 
very eventful day.
Global Finance in Practice 1.1
The Rocketing Swiss Franc
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1/1/2006
3/1/2006
5/1/2006
7/1/2006
9/1/2006
11/1/2006
1/1/2007
3/1/2007
5/1/2007
7/1/2007
9/1/2007
11/1/2007
1/1/2008
3/1/2008
5/1/2008
7/1/2008
9/1/2008
11/1/2008
1/1/2009
3/1/2009
5/1/2009
7/1/2009
9/1/2009
11/1/2009
1/1/2010
3/1/2010
5/1/2010
7/1/2010
9/1/2010
11/1/2010
1/1/2011
3/1/2011
5/1/2011
7/1/2011
9/1/2011
11/1/2011
1/1/2012
3/1/2012
5/1/2012
7/1/2012
9/1/2012
11/1/2012
1/1/2013
3/1/2012
5/1/2013
7/1/2013
9/1/13
11/1/2013
1/1/2014
3/1/2014
05/1/2014
7/1/2014
9/1/2014
11/1/2014
1/1/2015
Swiss Central Bank sets a “ﬂoor” of
1.20 Swiss francs = 1 euro in 2011
Swiss francs (CHF) = 1 European euro (EUR)
Exhibit A
Swiss Franc–Euro Exchange Rate

7
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
abbreviations are commonly used. For example, the British pound sterling may be £ (the 
pound symbol), GBP (Great Britain pound), STG (British pound sterling), ST£ (pound ster-
ling), or UKL or UK£ (United Kingdom pound). This book uses both the simpler common 
symbols—the $ (dollar), the € (euro), the ¥ (yen), the £ (pound)—and the three letter ISO 
codes throughout. And as Global Finance in Practice 1.2 describes, this would include BTC, 
the three-letter digital code for Bitcoin.
Exhibit B
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.25
1.20
Swiss francs (CHF) = 1 European euro (EUR)
Morning of 15 January 2015 (Zurich)
Swiss ﬂoor at 1.20
At 9:25 am on Jan 15, 2015, in a
surprise move, the Swiss Central
Bank announces it is “discontinuing
the minimum exchange rate of 1.20
per euro”
At 9:53 am Swiss franc hits
0.887, then falls back
(+26.14% in 28 minutes)
Stabilizes at CHF1.04 = EUR1.00
30 minutes later
= +26.14% against the euro
CHF 1.210 – CHF 0.887
CHF 1.210
Closing rate on Jan 15, 2015, is
CHF 1.024 = EUR 1.00, a 14.74%
appreciation of the Swiss franc
versus the euro in one trading day
8:50
8:54
8:57
9:00
9:04
9:08
9:11
9:14
9:25
9:28
9:32
9:35
9:39
9:43
9:46
9:50
9:53
9:57
10:00
10:04
10:08
10:11
10:15
10:18
10:22
10:25
10:29
10:33
10:36
10:40
10:43
10:45
10:50
10:54
10:58
11:01
 Swiss Franc’s Appreciation by the Minute . . . January 2015
The difference is that established fiat currencies—ones 
where the bills and coins, or their digital versions, get 
their value by dint of regulation or law—are underwritten 
by the state which is, in principle at least, answerable to 
its citizens. Bitcoin, on the other hand, is a community 
currency. It requires self-policing on the part of its users. 
To some, this is a feature, not a bug. But, in the grand 
scheme of things, the necessary open-source engage-
ment remains a niche pursuit.
—“Bits and bob,” The Economist, June 13, 2011.
Bitcoin is an open-source, peer-to-peer, digital currency. It 
is a cryptocurrency, a digital currency that is created and 
managed using advanced encryption techniques known 
as cryptography. And it may be the world’s first completely 
decentralized digital-payments system. But is Bitcoin a 
true currency?
Bitcoin was invented in 2009 by a man calling himself 
Satoshi Nakamoto. Nakamoto published, via the Internet, a 
nine-page paper outlining how the Bitcoin system would work. 
He also provided the open-source code needed to both pro-
duce the digital coins (mine in Bitcoin terminology) and trade 
Bitcoins digitally as money. (Nakamoto is not thought to be a 
real person, likely being a nome de plume for some relatively 
small working group.)
Global Finance in Practice 1.2
Bitcoin-Cryptocurrency or Commodity?

8
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
Exchange Rate Quotations and Terminology. Exhibit 1.2 lists currency exchange rates for 
December 31, 2014, as would be quoted in New York or London. The exchange rate listed is 
for a specific country’s currency—for example, the Argentina peso is Peso 8.7851 = 1.00 U.S. 
dollar, is Peso 9.5990 = 1.00 Euro, and Peso 13.1197 = 1.00 British pound. The rate listed is 
termed a “mid-rate” because it is the middle or average of the rates at which currency traders 
buy currency (bid rate) and sell currency (offer rate).
The U.S. dollar has been the focal point of most currency trading since the 1940s. As a 
result, most of the world’s currencies have been quoted against the dollar—Mexican pesos 
per dollar, Brazilian real per dollar, Hong Kong dollars per dollar, etc. This quotation conven-
tion is also followed against the world’s major currencies, as listed in Exhibit 1.2. For example, 
the Japanese yen is commonly quoted against the dollar, euro, and pound, as in ¥119.765/$, 
¥130.861/€, and  ¥178.858/£.
Quotation Conventions. Several of the world’s major currency exchange rates, however, fol-
low a specific quotation convention that is the result of tradition and history. The exchange rate 
between the U.S. dollar and the euro is always quoted as “dollars per euro” or $/€. For example, 
$1.0926 listed in Exhibit 1.2 under “United States.” Similarly, the exchange rate between the 
U.S. dollar and the British pound is always quoted as “dollars per pound” or $/£. For example, 
$1.4934 listed under “United States” in Exhibit 1.2. In addition, countries that were formerly 
members of the British Commonwealth will often be quoted against the U.S. dollar, as in U.S. 
dollars per Australian dollar or U.S. dollars per Canadian dollar.
Mining of Bitcoins is a mathematical process. The miner 
must find a sequence of data (called a block) that produces a 
particular pattern when the Bitcoin hash algorithm is applied 
to it. When a match is found, the miner obtains a bounty—an 
allocation—of Bitcoins. This repetitive guessing, conducted by 
increasingly complex computers, is called hashing. The moti-
vation for mining is clear: to make money.
The Bitcoin software system is designed to release a 
25-coin reward to the miner in the worldwide network who 
succeeds in solving the mathematical problem. Once solved, 
the solution is broadcast network-wide, and competition for 
the next 25-coin reward begins. The system’s protocol is 
designed to release a new block of Bitcoins every 10 minutes 
until all 21 million are released. The difficulty of the search con-
tinually increases over time with mining. This causes increasing 
scarcity over time, similar to what many believe about gold 
when gold was the basis of currency values. But ultimately 
the Bitcoin system is limited in both time (every 10 minutes) 
and total issuance (21 million). Theoretically the last of the 
21 million Bitcoins would be mined in 2140. Once mined, Bit-
coins are considered a pseudonymous—nearly anonymous—
cryptocurrency. Owners can buy things with Bitcoins or sell 
Bitcoins to non-miners who wish to use digital currency for 
purchases or speculate on its future value.
Ownership of each and every coin is verified and regis-
tered through a digital chain timestamp across the thousands 
of network nodes. Like cash, this prevents double spending, 
since every Bitcoin exchange is authenticated across the 
decentralized Bitcoin network (currently estimated at 20,000 
nodes). Unlike cash, every transaction that has ever occurred 
in the Bitcoin system is recorded in terms of the two public 
keys (the transactors, the Bitcoin addresses) in the system. 
This record, called the block chain, includes the time, amount, 
and the two near-anonymous IP addresses (public keys are 
not tied to any person’s identity).
Traditional currencies are issued by governments, which 
regulate the growth and supply of the currency, while implicitly 
guaranteeing the currency’s value. Bitcoin has no such guar-
antor, no insurer, and no lender-of-last-resort. A gold standard 
like that used in the first part of the twentieth century, is a sys-
tem based on specie; it has some fixed link to a scarce metal 
of some intrinsic value. Bitcoins have no intrinsic value; they 
are not composed of a precious metal; they are nothing more 
than digital code. Their value reflects the supply and demand 
by those in the marketplace who believe in their value. This 
makes Bitcoin a fiat currency similar to major currencies today. 
Their value has been quite volatile.
The ability of Bitcoin to bypass authorities has led to con-
cerns about the potential use of Bitcoin for illicit trade, the 
laundering of money associated with illegal drugs and other 
illegal business activity globally. One low was seen when Bit-
coin became the primary currency for sales on Silk Road, an 
underground Web site for illegal drug trafficking. Although 
eventually shut down by the U.S. government, Bitcoin’s poten-
tial use for illegal activities has impacted the public’s percep-
tion of its potential. Others, however, see promise.

9
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
March 23, 2015
Country
Currency
Symbol
Code
Currency  
Equal to 1 Dollar
Currency  
Equal to 1 Euro
Currency  
Equal to 1 Pound
Argentina
peso
Ps
ARS
8.7851
9.5990
13.1197
Australia
dollar
A$
AUD
1.2744
1.3924
1.9032
Brazil
real
R$
BRL
3.1610
3.4538
4.7206
Canada
dollar
C$
CAD
1.2516
1.3676
1.8691
Chile
peso
$
CLP
625.98
683.97
934.84
China
yuan
¥
CNY
6.2160
6.7919
9.2830
Czech Republic
koruna
Kc
CZK
25.0240
27.3424
37.3710
Denmark
krone
Dkr
DKK
6.8243
7.4566
10.1915
Egypt
pound
£
EGP
7.6301
8.3369
11.3948
Euro
euro
€
EUR
0.9152
1.0000
1.3668
India
rupee
Rs
INR
62.2650
68.0336
92.9870
Indonesia
rupiah
Rp
IDR
13,019.50
14,225.70
19,443.41
Israel
shekel
Shk
ILS
3.9655
4.3329
5.9221
Japan
yen
¥
JPY
119.765
130.861
178.858
Kenya
shilling
KSh
KES
91.90
100.41
137.24
Malaysia
ringgit
RM
MYR
3.6950
4.0373
5.5181
Mexico
new peso
$
MXN
14.9583
16.3441
22.3387
New Zealand
dollar
NZ$
NZD
1.3120
1.4335
1.9593
Nigeria
naira
NGN
199.700
218.201
298.233
Norway
krone
NKr
NOK
7.8845
8.6149
11.7747
Philippines
peso
PHP
44.7900
48.9396
66.8897
Poland
zloty
—
PLN
3.7600
4.1084
5.6153
Russia
ruble
R
RUB
58.7450
64.1875
87.7302
Singapore
dollar
S$
SGD
1.3671
1.4938
2.0416
South Africa
rand
R
ZAR
11.9100
13.0134
17.7865
South Korea
won
W
KRW
1,114.65
1,217.92
1,664.63
Sweden
krona
SKr
SEK
8.5016
9.2892
12.6963
Switzerland
franc
Fr.
CHF
0.9669
1.0565
1.4440
Taiwan
dollar
T$
TWD
31.4350
34.3473
46.9452
Thailand
baht
B
THB
32.5450
35.5601
48.6029
Turkey
lira
YTL
TRY
2.5477
2.7837
3.8048
United Kingdom
pound
£
GBP
0.6696
0.7316
1.0000
Ukraine
hrywnja
—
UAH
22.6500
24.7484
33.8257
Uruguay
peso
$U
UYU
25.5300
27.8952
38.1267
United States
dollar
$
USD
1.0000
1.0926
1.4934
Venezuela
Bolivar fuerte
Bs
VEB
6.2935
6.8766
9.3988
Vietnam
dong
d
VND
21,525.00
23,519.23
32,145.66
Special Drawing 
Right
—
—
SDR
0.7199
0.7867
1.0752
Note that a number of different currencies use the same symbol (for example, both China and Japan have traditionally used the ¥ symbol, yen or yuan, 
meaning round or circle). All quotes are mid-rates, and are drawn from the Financial Times.
Exhibit 1.2
Selected Global Currency Exchange Rates

10
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
Eurocurrencies and LIBOR
One of the major linkages of global money and capital markets is the eurocurrency market and 
its interest rate, LIBOR. Eurocurrencies are domestic currencies of one country on deposit in a 
second country for a period ranging from overnight to more than a year or longer. Certificates 
of deposit are usually for three months or more and in million-dollar increments. A eurodollar 
deposit is not a demand deposit—it is not created on the bank’s books by writing loans against 
required fractional reserves, and it cannot be transferred by a check drawn on the bank hav-
ing the deposit. Eurodollar deposits are transferred by wire or cable transfer of an underlying 
balance held in a correspondent bank located within the United States. In most countries, a 
domestic analogy would be the transfer of deposits held in nonbank savings associations. These 
are transferred when the association writes its own check on a commercial bank.
Any convertible currency can exist in “euro” form. Note that this use of “euro” prefix 
should not be confused with the European currency called the euro. The eurocurrency mar-
ket includes eurosterling (British pounds deposited outside the United Kingdom); euroeuros 
(euros on deposit outside the eurozone); euroyen (Japanese yen deposited outside Japan) and 
eurodollars (U.S. dollars deposited outside the U.S.). Eurocurrency markets serve two valuable 
purposes: (1) eurocurrency deposits are an efficient and convenient money market device for 
holding excess corporate  liquidity; and (2) the eurocurrency market is a major source of short-
term bank loans to finance corporate working capital needs, including the financing of imports 
and exports. Banks in which eurocurrencies are deposited are called eurobanks. A eurobank 
is a financial intermediary that simultaneously bids for time deposits and makes loans in a 
currency other than that of its home currency. Eurobanks are major world banks that conduct 
a eurocurrency business in addition to all other banking functions. Thus, the eurocurrency 
operation that qualifies a bank for the name eurobank is, in fact, a department of a large com-
mercial bank, and the name springs from the performance of this function.
The modern eurocurrency market was born shortly after World War II. Eastern European 
holders of dollars, including the various state trading banks of the Soviet Union, were afraid 
to deposit their dollar holdings in the United States because those deposits might be attached 
by U.S. residents with claims against communist governments. Therefore, Eastern European 
holders deposited their dollars in Western Europe, particularly with two Soviet banks: the Mos-
cow Narodny Bank in London and the Banque Commerciale pour l’Europe du Nord in Paris. 
These banks redeposited the funds in other Western banks, especially in London. Additional 
dollar deposits were received from various central banks in Western Europe, which elected to 
hold part of their dollar reserves in this form to obtain a higher yield. Commercial banks also 
placed their dollar balances in the market because specific maturities could be negotiated in 
the eurodollar market. Such companies found it financially advantageous to keep their dollar 
reserves in the higher-yielding eurodollar market. Various holders of international refugee 
funds also supplied funds.
Although the basic causes of the growth of the eurocurrency market are economic efficien-
cies, many unique institutional events during the 1950s and 1960s contributed to its growth.
■
■
In 1957, British monetary authorities responded to a weakening of the pound by 
imposing tight controls on U.K. bank lending in sterling to nonresidents of the United 
Kingdom. Encouraged by the Bank of England, U.K. banks turned to dollar lending 
as the only alternative that would allow them to maintain their leading position in 
world finance. For this they needed dollar deposits.
■
■
Although New York was “home base” for the dollar and had a large domestic money 
and capital market, international trading in the dollar centered in London because of 
that city’s expertise in international monetary matters and its proximity in time and 
distance to major customers.

11
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
■
■
Additional support for a European-based dollar market came from the balance of 
payments difficulties of the U.S. during the 1960s, which temporarily segmented the 
U.S. domestic capital market.
Ultimately, however, the eurocurrency market continues to thrive because it is a large 
international money market relatively free from governmental regulation and interference.
Eurocurrency Interest Rates. The reference rate of interest in the eurocurrency market is 
the London Interbank Offered Rate, or LIBOR. LIBOR is the most widely accepted rate of 
interest used in standardized quotations, loan agreements, or financial derivatives valuations. 
The use of interbank offered rates, however, is not confined to London. Most major domes-
tic financial centers construct their own interbank offered rates for local loan agreements. 
Examples of such rates include PIBOR (Paris Interbank Offered Rate), MIBOR (Madrid 
Interbank Offered Rate), SIBOR (Singapore Interbank Offered Rate), and FIBOR (Frankfurt 
Interbank Offered Rate), to name just a few.
The key factor attracting both depositors and borrowers to the eurocurrency loan market 
is the narrow interest rate spread within that market. The difference between deposit and loan 
rates is often less than 1%. Interest spreads in the eurocurrency market are small for many 
reasons. Low lending rates exist because the eurocurrency market is a wholesale market where 
deposits and loans are made in amounts of $500,000 or more on an unsecured basis. Borrow-
ers are usually large corporations or government entities that qualify for low rates because of 
their credit standing and because the transaction size is large. In addition, overhead assigned 
to the eurocurrency operation by participating banks is small.
Deposit rates are higher in the eurocurrency markets than in most domestic currency 
markets because the financial institutions offering eurocurrency activities are not subject to 
many of the regulations and reserve requirements imposed on traditional domestic banks and 
banking activities. With these costs removed, rates are subject to more competitive pressures, 
deposit rates are higher, and loan rates are lower. A second major area of cost avoided in the 
eurocurrency markets is the payment of deposit insurance fees (such as the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation, FDIC) and assessments paid on deposits in the United States.
The Theory of Comparative Advantage
The theory of comparative advantage provides a basis for explaining and justifying international 
trade in a model world assumed to enjoy free trade, perfect competition, no uncertainty, cost-
less information, and no government interference. The theory’s origins lie in the work of Adam 
Smith, and particularly with his seminal book, The Wealth of Nations, published in 1776. Smith 
sought to explain why the division of labor in productive activities, and subsequently interna-
tional trade of those goods, increased the quality of life for all citizens. Smith based his work on 
the concept of absolute advantage, with every country specializing in the production of those 
goods for which it was uniquely suited. More would be produced for less. Thus, with each coun-
try specializing in products for which it possessed absolute advantage, countries could produce 
more in total and trade for goods that were cheaper in price than those produced at home.
In his work, On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, published in 1817, David 
Ricardo sought to take the basic ideas set down by Adam Smith a few logical steps further. 
Ricardo noted that even if a country possessed absolute advantage in the production of two 
goods, it might still be relatively more efficient than the other country in one good’s production 
than the production of the other good. Ricardo termed this comparative advantage. Each country 
would then possess comparative advantage in the production of one of the two products, and both 
countries would then benefit by specializing completely in one product and trading for the other.

12
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
Although international trade might have approached the comparative advantage model 
during the nineteenth century, it certainly does not today, for a variety of reasons. Countries do 
not appear to specialize only in those products that could be most efficiently produced by that 
country’s particular factors of production. Instead, governments interfere with comparative 
advantage for a variety of economic and political reasons, such as to achieve full employment, 
economic development, national self-sufficiency in defense-related industries, and protection 
of an agricultural sector’s way of life. Government interference takes the form of tariffs, quotas, 
and other non-tariff restrictions.
At least two of the factors of production—capital and technology—now flow directly and 
easily between countries, rather than only indirectly through traded goods and services. This 
direct flow occurs between related subsidiaries and affiliates of multinational firms, as well as 
between unrelated firms via loans and license and management contracts. Even labor flows 
between countries, such as immigrants into the United States (legal and illegal), immigrants 
within the European Union, and other unions.
Modern factors of production are more numerous than in this simple model. Factors con-
sidered in the location of production facilities worldwide include local and managerial skills, 
a dependable legal structure for settling contract disputes, research and development compe-
tence, educational levels of available workers, energy resources, consumer demand for brand 
name goods, mineral and raw material availability, access to capital, tax differentials, supporting 
infrastructure (roads, ports, and communication facilities), and possibly others.
Although the terms of trade are ultimately determined by supply and demand, the process 
by which the terms are set is different from that visualized in traditional trade theory. They are 
determined partly by administered pricing in oligopolistic markets.
Comparative advantage shifts over time as less-developed countries become more developed 
and realize their latent opportunities. For example, over the past 150 years, comparative advan-
tage in producing cotton textiles has shifted from the United Kingdom to the United States, to 
Japan, to Hong Kong, to Taiwan, and to China. The classical model of comparative advantage also 
did not really address certain other issues such as the effect of uncertainty and information costs, 
the role of differentiated products in imperfectly competitive markets, and economies of scale.
Nevertheless, although the world is a long way from the classical trade model, the general 
principle of comparative advantage is still valid. The closer the world gets to true international 
specialization, the more world production and consumption can be increased, provided that the 
problem of equitable distribution of the benefits can be solved to the satisfaction of consum-
ers, producers, and political leaders. Complete specialization, however, remains an unrealistic 
limiting case, just as perfect competition is a limiting case in microeconomic theory.
Global Outsourcing of Comparative Advantage
Comparative advantage is still a relevant theory to explain why particular countries are most 
suitable for exports of goods and services that support the global supply chain of both MNEs 
and domestic firms. The comparative advantage of the twenty-first century, however, is one 
that is based more on services, and their cross-border facilitation by telecommunications and 
the Internet. The source of a nation’s comparative advantage, however, still is created from the 
mixture of its own labor skills, access to capital, and technology.
For example, India has developed a highly efficient and low-cost software industry. This 
industry supplies not only the creation of custom software, but also call centers for customer 
support, and other information technology services. The Indian software industry is composed 
of subsidiaries of MNEs and independent companies. If you own a Hewlett-Packard computer 
and call the customer support center number for help, you are likely to reach a call center 
in India. Answering your call will be a knowledgeable Indian software engineer or program-
mer who will “walk you through” your problem. India has a large number of well-educated, 

13
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
English-speaking technical experts who are paid only a fraction of the salary and overhead 
earned by their U.S. counterparts. The overcapacity and low cost of international telecommu-
nication networks today further enhances the comparative advantage of an Indian location.
The extent of global outsourcing is already reaching out to every corner of the globe. From 
financial back-offices in Manila, to information technology engineers in Hungary, modern 
telecommunications now take business activities to labor rather than moving labor to the 
places of business.
What Is Different about International Financial Management?
Exhibit 1.3 details some of the main differences between international and domestic financial 
management. These component differences include institutions, foreign exchange and political 
risks, and the modifications required of financial theory and financial instruments.
Multinational financial management requires an understanding of cultural, historical, and 
institutional differences such as those affecting corporate governance. Although both domestic 
firms and MNEs are exposed to foreign exchange risks, MNEs alone face certain unique risks, 
such as political risks, that are not normally a threat to domestic operations.
MNEs also face other risks that can be classified as extensions of domestic finance theory. 
For example, the normal domestic approach to the cost of capital, sourcing debt and equity, 
capital budgeting, working capital management, taxation, and credit analysis needs to be modi-
fied to accommodate foreign complexities. Moreover, a number of financial instruments that 
are used in domestic financial management have been modified for use in international finan-
cial management. Examples are foreign currency options and futures, interest rate and cur-
rency swaps, and letters of credit.
The main theme of this book is to analyze how an MNE’s financial management evolves 
as it pursues global strategic opportunities and new constraints emerge. In this chapter, we will 
take a brief look at the challenges and risks associated with Ganado Corporation (Ganado), 
a company evolving from domestic in scope to becoming truly multinational. The discussion 
Concept
International
Domestic
Culture, history, and 
institutions
Each foreign country is unique and not 
always understood by MNE management
Each country has a known base case
Corporate governance
Foreign countries’ regulations and 
institutional practices are all uniquely different
Regulations and institutions are well 
known
Foreign exchange risk
MNEs face foreign exchange risks due to 
their subsidiaries, as well as import/export 
and foreign competitors
Foreign exchange risks from import/
export and foreign competition (no 
subsidiaries)
Political risk
MNEs face political risk because of their 
foreign subsidiaries and high profile
Negligible political risks
Modification of domestic 
finance theories
MNEs must modify finance theories like 
capital budgeting and the cost of capital 
because of foreign complexities
Traditional financial theory applies
Modification of domestic 
financial instruments
MNEs utilize modified financial instruments 
such as options, forwards, swaps, and 
letters of credit
Limited use of financial instruments 
and derivatives because of few 
foreign exchange and political risks
Exhibit 1.3
What Is Different about International Financial Management?

14
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
will include constraints that a company will face in terms of managerial goals and governance 
as it becomes increasingly involved in multinational operations. But first we need to clarify the 
unique value proposition and advantages that the MNE was created to exploit. And as noted 
by Global Finance in Practice 1.3, the objectives and responsibilities of the modern multi­
national have grown significantly more complex in the twenty-first century.
Market Imperfections: A Rationale for the Existence  
of the Multinational Firm
MNEs strive to take advantage of imperfections in national markets for products, factors of 
production, and financial assets. Imperfections in the market for products translate into market 
opportunities for MNEs. Large international firms are better able to exploit such competitive 
factors as economies of scale, managerial and technological expertise, product differentiation, 
and financial strength than are their local competitors. In fact, MNEs thrive best in markets 
characterized by international oligopolistic competition, where these factors are particularly 
critical. In addition, once MNEs have established a physical presence abroad, they are in a 
better position than purely domestic firms to identify and implement market opportunities 
through their own internal information network.
Why Do Firms Become Multinational?
Strategic motives drive the decision to invest abroad and become an MNE. These motives can 
be summarized under the following categories:
1.	 Market seekers produce in foreign markets either to satisfy local demand or to export 
to markets other than their home market. U.S. automobile firms manufacturing in 
Europe for local consumption are an example of market-seeking motivation.
2.	 Raw material seekers extract raw materials wherever they can be found, either for export 
or for further processing and sale in the country in which they are found—the host 
country. Firms in the oil, mining, plantation, and forest industries fall into this category.
Sustainable development is development that meets the 
needs of the present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs.
—Brundtland Report, 1987, p. 54.
What is the purpose of the corporation? It is accepted that the 
purpose of the corporation is to certainly create profits and 
value for its stakeholders, but the responsibility of the corpora-
tion is to do so in a way that inflicts no costs on society, includ-
ing the environment. As a result of globalization, this growing 
responsibility and role of the corporation in society has added 
a level of complexity to the leadership challenges faced by the 
multinational firm.
This developing controversy has been somewhat ham-
pered to date by conflicting terms and labels—corporate good-
ness, corporate responsibility, corporate social responsibility 
(CSR), corporate philanthropy, and corporate sustainability, to 
list but a few. Confusion can be reduced by using a guiding 
principle—that sustainability is a goal, while responsibility is 
an obligation. It follows that the obligation of leadership in the 
modern multinational is to pursue profit, social development, 
and the environment, all along sustainable principles.
The term sustainability has evolved greatly within the con-
text of global business in the past decade. A traditional primary 
objective of the family-owned business has been the “sustain-
ability of the organization”—the long-term ability of the com-
pany to remain commercially viable and provide security and 
income for future generations. Although narrower in scope, 
the concept of environmental sustainability shares a common 
core thread—the ability of a company, a culture, or even the 
earth, to survive and renew over time.
Global Finance in Practice 1.3
Corporate Responsibility and Corporate Sustainability

15
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
3.	 Production efficiency seekers produce in countries where one or more of the factors of 
production are underpriced relative to their productivity. Labor-intensive production of 
electronic components in Taiwan, Malaysia, and Mexico is an example of this motivation.
4.	 Knowledge seekers operate in foreign countries to gain access to technology or mana-
gerial expertise. For example, German, Dutch, and Japanese firms have purchased 
U.S. electronics firms for their technology.
5.	 Political safety seekers acquire or establish new operations in countries that are con-
sidered unlikely to expropriate or interfere with private enterprise. For example, 
Hong Kong firms invested heavily in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, 
and Australia in anticipation of the consequences of China’s 1997 takeover of the 
British colony.
These five types of strategic considerations are not mutually exclusive. Forest products 
firms seeking wood fiber in Brazil, for example, may also find a large Brazilian market for a 
portion of their output.
In industries characterized by worldwide oligopolistic competition, each of the above 
strategic motives should be subdivided into proactive and defensive investments. Proactive 
investments are designed to enhance the growth and profitability of the firm itself. Defensive 
investments are designed to deny growth and profitability to the firm’s competitors. Examples 
of the latter are investments that try to preempt a market before competitors can get estab-
lished in it, or capture raw material sources and deny them to competitors.
The Globalization Process
Ganado is a hypothetical U.S.-based firm that will be used as an illustrative example through-
out the book to demonstrate the globalization process—the structural and managerial changes 
and challenges experienced by a firm as it moves its operations from domestic to global.
Global Transition I: Ganado Moves from the Domestic Phase  
to the International Trade Phase
Ganado is a young firm that manufactures and distributes an array of telecommunication 
devices. Its initial strategy is to develop a sustainable competitive advantage in the U.S. mar-
ket. Like many other young firms, it is constrained by its small size, competitors, and lack of 
access to cheap and plentiful sources of capital. The top half of Exhibit 1.4 shows Ganado in 
its early domestic phase.
Ganado sells its products in U.S. dollars to U.S. customers and buys its manufacturing 
and service inputs from U.S. suppliers, paying U.S. dollars. The creditworth of all suppliers 
and buyers is established under domestic U.S. practices and procedures. A potential issue for 
Ganado at this time is that although Ganado is not international or global in its operations, 
some of its competitors, suppliers, or buyers may be. This is often the impetus to push a firm 
like Ganado into the first phase of the globalization process—into international trade. Ganado 
was founded in Los Angeles by James Winston in 1948 to make telecommunications equip-
ment. The family-owned business expanded slowly but steadily over the following 40 years. The 
demands of continual technological investment in the 1980s, however, required that the firm 
raise additional equity capital in order to compete. This need led to its initial public offering 
(IPO) in 1988. As a U.S.-based publicly traded company on the New York Stock Exchange, 
Ganado’s management sought to create value for its shareholders.
As Ganado became a visible and viable competitor in the U.S. market, strategic opportu-
nities arose to expand the firm’s market reach by exporting products and services to one or 

16
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
more foreign markets. The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) made trade with 
Mexico and Canada attractive. This second phase of the globalization process is shown in the 
lower half of Exhibit 1.4. Ganado responded to these globalization forces by importing inputs 
from Mexican suppliers and making export sales to Canadian buyers. We define this phase of 
the globalization process as the International Trade Phase.
Exporting and importing products and services increases the demands of financial man-
agement over and above the traditional requirements of the domestic-only business in two 
ways. First, direct foreign exchange risks are now borne by the firm. Ganado may now need 
to quote prices in foreign currencies, accept payment in foreign currencies, or pay suppliers 
in foreign currencies. As the values of currencies change from minute to minute in the global 
marketplace, Ganado will increasingly experience significant risks from the changing values 
associated with these foreign currency payments and receipts.
Second, the evaluation of the credit quality of foreign buyers and sellers is now more 
important than ever. Reducing the possibility of non-payment for exports and non-delivery 
of imports becomes a key financial management task during the international trade phase. 
This credit risk management task is much more difficult in international business, as buyers 
and suppliers are new, subject to differing business practices and legal systems, and generally 
more challenging to assess.
Global Transition II: The International Trade Phase to the Multinational Phase
If Ganado is successful in its international trade activities, the time will come when the 
globalization process will progress to the next phase. Ganado will soon need to establish 
foreign sales and service affiliates. This step is often followed by establishing manufacturing 
operations abroad or by licensing foreign firms to produce and service Ganado’s products. 
Mexican Suppliers
Canadian Buyers
Are Mexican suppliers dependable?
Will Ganado pay US$ or Mexican pesos?
All payments in U.S. dollars.
All credit risk under U.S. law.
Are Canadian buyers creditworthy?
Will payment be made in US$ or C$?
Ganado Corporation
(Los Angeles, USA)
Phase Two: Expansion into International Trade
U.S. Suppliers
(domestic)
U.S. Buyers
(domestic)
Phase One: Domestic Operations
Exhibit 1.4
Ganado Corp: Initiation of the Globalization Process

17
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
The multitude of issues and activities associated with this second larger global transition is 
the real focus of this book.
Ganado’s continued globalization will require it to identify the sources of its competitive 
advantage, and with that knowledge, expand its intellectual capital and physical presence glob-
ally. A variety of strategic alternatives are available to Ganado—the foreign direct investment 
sequence—as shown in Exhibit 1.5. These alternatives include the creation of foreign sales 
offices, the licensing of the company name and everything associated with it, and the manu-
facturing and distribution of its products to other firms in foreign markets. As Ganado moves 
further down and to the right in Exhibit 1.5, the degree of its physical presence in foreign mar-
kets increases. It may now own its own distribution and production facilities, and ultimately, 
may want to acquire other companies. Once Ganado owns assets and enterprises in foreign 
countries it has entered the multinational phase of its globalization.
The Limits to Financial Globalization
The theories of international business and international finance introduced in this chap-
ter have long argued that with an increasingly open and transparent global marketplace 
in which capital may flow freely, capital will increasingly flow and support countries and 
companies based on the theory of comparative advantage. Since the mid-twentieth century, 
this has indeed been the case as more and more countries have pursued more open and 
competitive markets. But the past decade has seen the growth of a new kind of limit or 
impediment to financial globalization: the growth in the influence and self-enrichment of 
organizational insiders.
Greater
Foreign
Investment
Greater
Foreign
Presence
Production Abroad
Control Assets
Abroad
Exploit Existing Competitive
Advantage Abroad
Production at Home:
Exporting
Licensing
Management Contract
Change
Competitive Advantage
Ganado and Its
Competitive Advantage
Wholly Owned
Subsidiary
Joint Venture
Acquisition of a 
Foreign Enterprise
Acquisition of a
Foreign Enterprise
Greenﬁeld
Investment
Exhibit 1.5
Ganado’s Foreign Direct Investment Sequence

18
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
One possible representation of this process can be seen in Exhibit 1.6. If influential 
insiders in corporations and sovereign states continue to pursue the increase in firm value, 
there will be a definite and continuing growth in financial globalization. But, if these same 
influential insiders pursue their own personal agendas, which may increase their personal 
power and influence or personal wealth, or both, then capital will not flow into these 
sovereign states and corporations. The result is the growth of financial inefficiency and 
the segmentation of globalization outcomes—creating winners and losers. As we will see 
throughout this book, this barrier to international finance may indeed be increasingly 
troublesome.
This growing dilemma is also something of a composite of what this book is about. The 
three fundamental elements—financial theory, global business, and management beliefs and 
actions—combine to present either the problem or the solution to the growing debate over 
the benefits of globalization to countries and cultures worldwide.
We close this chapter—and open this book—with the simple words of one of our 
colleagues in a recent conference on the outlook for global finance and global financial 
management.
Welcome to the future. This will be a constant struggle. We need leadership, citizenship, 
and dialogue.
—Donald Lessard, in Global Risk, New Perspectives and Opportunities, 2011, p. 33.
Source: Constructed by authors based on “The Limits of Financial Globalization,” Rene M. Stulz, Journal of Applied Corporate
Finance, Vol. 19, No. 1, Winter 2007, pp. 8–15.
If these inﬂuential insiders are building personal wealth over that of the ﬁrm, it will indeed result in preventing
the ﬂow of capital across borders, currencies, and institutions to create a more open and integrated global
ﬁnancial community.
There is a growing debate over whether many of the insiders and rulers of organizations with enterprises
globally are taking actions consistent with creating ﬁrm value or consistent with increasing their own
personal stakes and power.
The Twin Agency
Problems Limiting
Financial Globalization
Actions of Rulers 
of Sovereign States
Higher Firm Value
(possibly lower
insider value)
Lower Firm Value
(possibly higher
insider value)
Actions of
Corporate Insiders
Exhibit 1.6
The Limits of Financial Globalization

19
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
Summary Points
■
■
The creation of value requires combining three critical 
elements: (1) an open marketplace; (2) high-quality stra-
tegic management; and (3) access to capital.
■
■
The theory of comparative advantage provides a basis 
for explaining and justifying international trade in a 
model world of free and open competition.
■
■
International financial management requires an under-
standing of cultural, historical, and institutional differ-
ences, such as those affecting corporate governance.
■
■
Although both domestic firms and MNEs are exposed 
to foreign exchange risks, MNEs alone face certain 
unique risks, such as political risks, that are not normally 
a threat to domestic operations.
■
■
MNEs strive to take advantage of imperfections in 
national markets for products, factors of production, 
and financial assets.
■
■
The decision whether or not to invest abroad is driven 
by strategic motives and may require the MNE to enter 
into global licensing agreements, joint ventures, cross-
border acquisitions, or greenfield investments.
■
■
If influential insiders in corporations and sovereign 
states pursue their own personal agendas, which may 
increase their personal power, influence, or wealth, then 
capital will not flow into these sovereign states and cor-
porations. This will, in turn, create limitations to global-
ization in finance.
The concept of crowdfunding has a number of parallels in 
traditional Kenyan culture. Harambee is a long-used prac-
tice of collective fundraising for an individual obligation 
like a travel or medical expense. Another Kenyan practice, 
chama, involves group fundraising for loans or investments 
by private groups. In either case, they have strong links to 
the fundamental principle of a community. In the case of 
crowdfunding, it is an online community.
Crowdfunding is an Internet-enabled method of rais-
ing capital for business startups without going through the 
arduous, costly, and time-consuming process of traditional 
equity capital fundraising. The rapid growth in crowdfund-
ing over recent years has been based primarily in the major 
industrial country markets of North America and Western 
Europe where there is a highly organized, developed, and 
deep financial sector, but a sector that often shuts out the 
small, innovative, non-traditional entrepreneur.
The concept of raising funds from a large crowd or group 
is not new. It is a technique that has been employed by indi-
viduals, organizations, and even governments for centuries. 
Beethoven and Mozart both raised funds for their work 
through pre-creation subscriptions. The United States and 
France both used a form of crowdfunding fundraising to 
construct the Statue of Liberty. But crowdfunding’s real 
potential may now lie in funding new business startups 
in emerging markets—markets where the capital sources 
and institutions available to small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) within the country may be limited. If crowdfunding 
can provide access to capital that many entrepreneurs need, 
tapping a larger more affordable cross-border financial eco-
system, business and economic and social development in 
the emerging markets may be able to take a great step for-
ward. Kenya is one country attempting to pilot the effort.
The Capital Lifecycle
The ability of a startup business to access affordable capi-
tal through the early stages of its lifecycle has been the 
focus of a multitude of financial innovations in the past 
two decades. But the capital lifecycle, the institutions and 
sources of capital available to an enterprise as it evolves, 
has until recently possessed a number of gaps, putting many 
startup businesses at risk.
Exhibit A illustrates the capital lifecycle of a for-profit 
enterprise. An entrepreneur—the founder—puts up his 
own money in the first stage, the proof of concept. This 
is followed by further pre-seed capital typically funded 
Crowdfunding Kenya1
1Copyright © 2015 Thunderbird School of Global Management at Arizona State University. All rights reserved. This case was prepared 
by Professor Michael H. Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only. The author would like to thank Sherwood Neiss of 
Crowdfunding Capital Advisors for helpful comments; any errors are, however, the sole responsibility of the author.
Mini-Case

20
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
from friends and family, or in some cases, angel financing 
from angel investors. Angel investors are individuals or 
small groups of professional investors who invest at the 
earliest stages of business development, playing the role of 
a “guardian angel.” The principle is to provide the capital 
to move the business opportunity further along while still 
protecting the interests of the entrepreneurial owners. 
This is often referred to as the pre-seed stage of business 
development.
It is immediately after this, in the seed stage, that 
many firms fail to advance in their development due to 
a vacuum of available capital and capital providers. This 
vacuum, often referred to as the Valley of Death, is a criti-
cal period in which the firm is building and moving toward 
operational launch. But without operating activities and 
therefore revenues and cash flows, additional investors and 
access to capital is scarce. It is this vacuum which crowd-
funding has filled in many industrial country markets.
Following their launch, promising businesses often then 
find they have added sources of capital for the financing 
of rapid growth—the venture capital rounds. Venture 
capitalists (VCs) are investment firms focused on taking an 
equity position in new businesses that are showing revenue 
results, but may not yet be positive in terms of cash flow or 
profitability. VCs focus their attention on businesses that 
are considered to have high growth potential but need 
capital—now—to acquire the scale and assets needed to 
pursue the growth opportunity.
The final stage of the capital lifecycle is that of the 
growing and maturing company. It is only now that the 
business possesses the track record of sales, profits, and 
cash flow that assure bank lenders of the creditworthiness 
of the firm. Bank loan-based debt is now accessible. It is 
also at this time that the firm may consider an initial pub-
lic offering (IPO), to issue equity and raise capital in the 
marketplace. Firms now gain access to debt, bank loans, 
after operations have commenced and firms demonstrate 
operating cash flow capability. However, debt service obli-
gations are not desirable in rapid growth businesses trying 
to retain as much capital as humanly possible in these early 
growth stages.
If the business appears to have true value growth pros-
pects, it may catch the eye of private equity (PE). Private 
equity firms invest in greater amounts at later stages of 
business development. PE investors provide capital to busi-
nesses that are fully established and successful, but are in 
need of capital for growth and business strategy fulfillment. 
They rarely invest in startup business, searching instead 
Capital
Structure
Time
Stage
Capital
Source
Proof
of Concept
Founder
Pre-Seed
Friends
& Family
(Angel
Financing)
Seed &
Startup
Valley
of Death
Early
Stage
Second
Stage
Venture Capital Rounds
Late
Stage
Growth & Maturity
Revenue
Private Equity &
Institutional Finance
(bank loans, securitized debt,
securitized equity)
Operating Cash Flow
Proﬁt
Startup
……All Equity ……......................................................................Introduction of Debt ……...…...........Increasing Debt …...…
— Crowdfunding —
Exhibit A
The Capital Lifecycle

21
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
principal. Micro-finance organizations like Grameen 
Bank have long used this structure successfully to 
fund entrepreneurial efforts particularly in emerging 
markets. The investor is typically promised repayment 
of principal, but often—as is the case of kiva.org, no 
payment of interest is made by the borrower or paid to 
the “investor.”
4.	 Equity-based. Investors gain a share of ownership in 
the project or company. These are enterprise funding 
efforts to support for-profit business development, the 
investor receiving voting rights and the possibility (but 
not the promise) of a return on their capital. This is 
an investment, not a gift, and although the investors 
may be drawn from interested or like-minded groups, 
returns on investment are expected and therefore the 
business plan and prospects are evaluated critically.
The last two are fundraising efforts focused on business 
development, and categorically referred to as investment-
geared crowdfunding (IGCF). For longer-term sustainable 
market-based economies, it is category four—equity-based 
crowdfunding—that is thought to offer the greatest poten-
tial for economic development and employment.
Critical Requirements
There are at least three critical components to a successful 
equity-based crowdfunding initiative: (1) a well-defined 
and capable crowdsourcing ecosystem; (2) a defined solid 
business plan and competitive analysis; and (3) a motivated, 
capable, and committed entrepreneur.
Crowdfunding’s true singular strength is the ability of 
a potential investment to reach an extended crowdfunding 
ecosystem—a linked crowd accessible via the Internet and 
therefore not limited by geography, currency, or nationality. 
It is based on the digital reach of the Internet via social net-
works and viral marketing, rather than on the traditional 
institutional structure of the financial and investment sec-
tors in countries. However, given that the object of the 
investment is a for-profit business that is resident in a diffi-
cult to fund or finance marketplace, a successful ecosystem 
will still be defined by some commonality of experience, 
culture, ethnicity, or diaspora.4 As many in the crowdfund-
ing sector will note, when you are raising funds for a for-
profit investment anywhere in the world, relationships and 
linkages play a critical role in moving from a token “gift for 
a good cause” to an investment in a business.
4Crowdfunding Investing for Dummies, Sherwood Neiss, Jason W. Best, Zak Cassady-Dorion, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2013.
for investment opportunities that will yield higher rates of 
return than traditional investments in public companies.
Crowdfunding Principles
I believe that crowdfunding may have the potential to 
help catalyze existing efforts to create entrepreneurial 
cultures and ecosystems in developing nations. Devel-
opment organizations like the World Bank and other 
institutions will play an ongoing role to act as “trusted 
third parties” in creating these new models of funding 
and providing mentorship, capacity building as well as 
ongoing monitoring and reporting.
—Steve Case, Chairman and CEO, Revolution, and 
Founder, America Online2
Crowdfunding began as an online extension of the pre-seed 
stage in which traditional financing relies upon friends and 
family to pool funds to finance business development. It 
seeks to connect an extended group of interested inves-
tors, still based on friends and family—the so-called crowd-
funding ecosystem—directly with startups in need of seed 
capital. It attempts to open up these funding channels by 
bypassing the traditional regulatory and institutional barri-
ers, restrictions, costs, and burdens, that capital raising car-
ries in every country around the globe.
Crowdfunding structures typically fall into any one of 
four categories: donation-based, rewards-based, loan or 
debt-based, or equity-based.3
1.	 Donation-based. Non-profit foundations often employ 
crowdfunding methods to raise funds for causes of all 
kinds. Contributors receive nothing in return for their 
gifts other than positive emotional and intellectual 
gratification.
2.	 Rewards-based. In rewards-based crowdfunding 
efforts contributors receive a perk, a benefit, a T-shirt, 
a ticket, a back-stage pass, some small form of reward. 
One highly successful platform using this structure is 
Kickstarter, a U.S.-based arts and project-based fund 
raiser. As with donation-based funds, there is no guar-
antee of the project’s execution or success, and no 
return on the investment other than a small reward, 
perk, or token benefit.
3.	 Debt-based. Debt-based or lending-based crowdfunding 
efforts provide capital to individuals and organizations 
in need of growth capital in return for repayment of 
2Crowdfunding’s Potential for the Developing World, infoDev/The World Bank, by Jason Best, Sherwood Neiss, and Richard Swart, 
Crowdfunding Capital Advisors (CCA), 2013.
3“Issue Brief: Investment-Geared Crowdfunding,” CFA Institute, March 2014.

22
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
22
■
■
Lighting Up Kenya. Join the Solar Generation cre-
ation in Kenya. Help us extinguish kerosene lamps and 
improve lives. Co-Founder of Skynotch Energy Africa, 
Patrick Kimathi is trying to bring clean-lighting solu-
tions (solar lamps) for off-grid indoor lighting.
■
■
Wanda Organic. Nurture the Soil—Climate Smart 
Agriculture. Help us improve access to bio-organic fer-
tilizer and biotechnology for farmers in Kenya. Marion 
Moon, founder of Wanda Organic, wants to enable 
Kenyan farmers to produce more, increase profitabil-
ity and family income, improve nutrition, and create 
new employment in rural economies, while restoring 
and strengthening the health of Kenya’s soil.
■
■
Briquette Energy Drive. Biomass Briquettes are made 
from agricultural plant waste and are a replacement for 
fossil fuels such as oil or coal, and burn hotter, cleaner, and 
longer. Allan Marega is the managing director of Global 
Supply Solutions, whose goal is to make briquettes the 
preferred replacement to charcoal and wood fuel.
■
■
iCoal Concepts. James Nyaga, Director of Strategy 
and Innovation at iCoal Concepts, wants to use recy-
cled charcoal dust to make briquettes that are denser, 
burn longer, odorless, and smokeless, ultimately reduc-
ing indoor air pollution.
The Kenyan projects are among a number of pilot pro-
grams testing crowdfunding applications in emerging mar-
kets. Only time and experience will tell if crowdfunding 
delivers sustainable financial development for the global 
economy. 
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 Where does crowdfunding fit in the capital lifecycle of 
business development?
2.	 Is crowdfunding really all that unique? What does it offer 
that traditional funding channels and institutions do not?
3.	 What is likely to differentiate successes from failures 
in emerging market crowdfunding programs?
Secondly, a business plan must be defined. Crowdfund-
ing is not based on the madness of crowds, but rather their 
strength in numbers, knowledge, and will. If enough small 
individual investors collectively support a startup enter-
prise, anywhere in the world, they can fund the develop-
ment and growth of the business. But to even reach the 
proposal stage at which point a crowdfunding platform 
will entertain discussions, the entrepreneur will need to 
have refined a business plan. This must include prospec-
tive profitability, financial forecasts, and competitive 
analysis. Any business anywhere, needs a plan to gener-
ate sales, control costs, and compete if it is to eventually 
make a profit.
Finally, as it has been since the beginning of time, suc-
cess will only come from a truly capable and committed 
founder—the entrepreneur. Even a business which is well-
funded, well-defined, and exceptionally innovative will fail 
without an entrepreneur who is willing to roll up his sleeves, 
day after day after day, to go the extra mile (or kilometer) to 
achieve success. Whether that entrepreneur is named Rock-
efeller, Gates, Jobs, or Zuckerburg, ultimately—commitment, 
passion, hunger—has to be ingrained in his DNA.
Kenyan Challenge
Kenya was not all that different from many other major 
emerging markets when it came to business startups: a 
shortage of capital and institutions and interest in funding 
new business development. Funding startups, particularly 
SMEs, was always challenging, even in the largest and most 
developed industrial countries. Gaining access to afford-
able capital in a country like Kenya, even with a burgeon-
ing domestic economy, was extremely difficult.
After a series of successive rounds of evaluation and com-
petition, four crowdfunding projects had been identified for 
its pilot program by infoDev of the World Bank Group, work-
ing through its Kenya Climate Innovation Center (KICC) 
with the support of Crowdfund Capital Advisors (CCA).
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Globalization Risks in Business. What are some of 
the risks that come with the growing globalization of 
business?
2.	 Globalization and the Multinational Enterprise 
(MNE). The term globalization has become widely 
used in recent years. How would you define it?
3.	 Assets, Institutions, and Linkages. Which assets play 
the most critical role in linking the major institutions 
that make up the global financial marketplace?
4.	 Currencies and Symbols. What technological change is 
even changing the symbols we use in the representa-
tion of different country currencies?
5.	 Eurocurrencies and LIBOR. Why have eurocurrencies 
and LIBOR remained the centerpiece of the global 
financial marketplace for so long?
6.	 Theory of Comparative Advantage. Define and 
explain the theory of comparative advantage.
7.	 Limitations of Comparative Advantage. Key to under-
standing most theories is what they say and what they 
don’t. Name four key limitations to the theory of com-
parative advantage.

23
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
8.	 International Financial Management. What is differ-
ent about international financial management?
9.	 Ganado’s Globalization. After reading the chapter’s 
description of Ganado’s globalization process, how 
would you explain the distinctions between interna-
tional, multinational, and global companies?
10.	 Ganado, the MNE. At what point in the globalization 
process did Ganado become a multinational enter-
prise (MNE)?
11.	 Role of Market Imperfections. What is the role of mar-
ket imperfections in the creation of opportunities for 
the multinational firm?
12.	 Why Go. Why do firms become multinational?
13.	 Multinational Versus International. What is the dif-
ference between an international firm and a multi-
national firm?
14.	 Ganado’s Phases. What are the main phases that Ganado 
passed through as it evolved into a truly global firm? 
What are the advantages and disadvantages of each?
15.	 Financial Globalization. How do the motivations 
of individuals, both inside and outside the orga-
nization or business, define the limits of financial 
globalization?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Comparing Cheap Dates Around the World. Com-
parison of prices or costs across different country and 
currency environments requires translation of the 
local currency into a single common currency. This is 
most meaningful when the comparison is for the iden-
tical or near-identical product or service across coun-
tries. Deutsche Bank has recently started publishing a 
comparison of cheap dates—an evening on the town 
for two to eat at McDonald’s, see a movie, and drink 
a beer. Once all costs are converted to a common cur-
rency, the U.S. dollar in this case, the cost of the date 
can be compared across cities relative to the base case 
of a cheap date in USD in New York City.
After completing the table below, answer the fol-
lowing questions.
a.	 Which city in the table is truly the cheapest date?
b.	 Which city in the table is the most expensive cheap 
date?
c.	 If the exchange rate in Moscow on the Russian 
ruble (RUB) was 0.04200, instead of 0.0283, what 
would be the USD price?
d.	 If the exchange rate in Shanghai was 
CNY6.66 = 1 USD, what would be its cost in USD 
and relative to a cheap date in New York City?
Country
City
Cheap Date in 
Local Currency
Exchange Rate 
Quote
Exchange  
Rate 7  
April 2014
USD 
Price
Relative  
to NYC
Australia
Sydney
AUD111.96
USD = 1 AUD
0.9290
104.01
112%
Brazil
Rio de Janeiro
BRL135.43
USD = 1 BRL
0.4363
_______
_______
Canada
Ottawa
CAD78.33
USD = 1 CAD
0.9106
_______
_______
China
Shanghai
CNY373.87
USD = 1 CNY
0.1619
_______
_______
France
Paris
EUR75.57
USD = 1 EUR
1.3702
_______
_______
Germany
Berlin
EUR76.49
USD = 1 EUR
1.3702
_______
_______
Hong Kong
Hong Kong
HKD467.03
USD = 1 HKD
0.1289
_______
_______
India
Mumbai
INR1,379.64
USD = 1 INR
0.0167
_______
_______
Indonesia
Jakarta
IDR314,700
USD = 1 IDR
0.0001
_______
_______
Japan
Tokyo
JPY10,269.07
USD = 1 JPY
0.0097
_______
_______
Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
MY 117.85
USD = 1 MYR
0.3048
_______
_______
Mexico
Mexico City
MX 423.93
USD = 1 MXN
0.0769
_______
_______
New Zealand
Auckland
NZD111.52
USD = 1 NZD
0.8595
_______
_______
Phillipines
Manila
PHP1,182.88
USD = 1 PHP
0.0222
_______
_______
(continued)

24
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
Country
City
Cheap Date in 
Local Currency
Exchange Rate 
Quote
Exchange  
Rate 7  
April 2014
USD 
Price
Relative  
to NYC
Russia
Moscow
RUB2,451.24
USD = 1 RUB
0.0283
_______
_______
Singapore
Singapore
SGD77.89
USD = 1 SGD
0.7939
_______
_______
South Africa
Cape Town
ZAR388.58
USD = 1 ZAR
0.0946
_______
_______
United Kingdom
London
GBP73.29
USD = 1 GBP
1.6566
_______
_______
United States
New York City
USD93.20
1 USD
1.0000
93.20
100%
United States
San Francisco
USD88.72
1 USD
1.0000
_______
_______
Source: Data drawn from The Random Walk, Mapping the World’s Prices 2014, Deutsche Bank Research, 09 May 2014, Figures 30 and 32, with author 
calculations. “Relative to NYC” is calculated as = (Cheap Date in USD)/(93.20).
Note: The cheap date combines the local currency cost of a cab ride for two, two McDonald’s hamburgers, two soft 
drinks, two movie tickets, and two beers. In 2013 Deutsche Bank had included sending a bouquet of roses in the date, 
but did not include that in the 2014 index, making the two years not directly comparable.
Net Income
Japanese
Subsidiary
British
Subsidiary
European
Subsidiary
Chinese
Subsidiary
Russian
Subsidiary
United States
Subsidiary
2013
JPY1,500
GBP100.00
EUR204.00
CNY168.00
RUB124.00
USD360.00
2014
JPY1,460
GBP106.40
EUR208.00
CNY194.00
RUB116.00
USD382.00
(a)
Exchange 
Rate
JPY =  1 USD
USD = 1 GBP
USD = 1 EUR
CNY = 1 USD
RUB = 1 USD
USD
2013
97.57
1.5646
1.3286
6.1484
31.86
1.0000
2014
105.88
1.6473
1.3288
6.1612
38.62
1.0000
(b)
2.	 Blundell Biotech. Blundell Biotech is a U.S.-based 
biotechnology company with operations and earnings 
in a number of foreign countries. The company’s prof-
its by subsidiary, in local currency (in millions), are 
shown in the table (a) below for 2013 and 2014.
The average exchange rate for each year, by cur-
rency pairs, was as shown in table (b) below. Use this 
data to answer the following questions.
a.	 What were Blundvell Biotech’s consolidated profits 
in U.S. dollars in 2013 and 2014?
b.	 If the same exchange rates were used for both 
years, what was the change in corporate earnings 
on a “constant currency” basis?
c.	 Using the results of the constant currency analysis in 
part b, is it possible to separate Blundell’s growth in 
earnings between local currency earnings and foreign 
exchange rate impacts on a consolidated basis?
Comparative Advantage
Problems 3–7 illustrate an example of trade induced by comparative advantage. They assume that China and France each 
have 1,000 production units. With one unit of production (a mix of land, labor, capital, and technology), China can produce 
either 10 containers of toys or 7 cases of wine. France can produce either 2 cases of toys or 7 cases of wine. Thus, a production 
unit in China is five times as efficient compared to France when producing toys, but equally efficient when producing wine. 
Assume at first that no trade takes place. China allocates 800 production units to building toys and 200 production units to 
producing wine. France allocates 200 production units to building toys and 800 production units to producing wine.

25
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
Problem 8.
Fixed Rmb Pricing of the PT350 Plasma Cutting Torch
Year
Cost 
(Rmb)
Margin 
(Rmb)
Price 
(Rmb)
Margin 
(percent)
Average Rate  
(Rmb/US$)
Price 
(US$)
Percent Change  
in US$ Price
2007
16,000
   2,000
 18,000
11.1%
7.61
2,365
—
2008
15,400
______
______
______
6.95
______
______
2009
14,800
______
______
______
6.83
______
______
2010
14,700
______
______
______
6.77
______
______
2011
14,200
______
______
______
6.46
______
______
2012
14,400
______
______
______
6.31
______
______
2013
14,600
______
______
______
6.15
______
______
2014
14,800
______
______
______
6.16
______
______
Cumulative
______
3.	 Production and Consumption. What is the production 
and consumption of China and France without trade?
4.	 Specialization. Assume complete specialization, where 
China produces only toys and France produces only 
wine. What would be the effect on total production?
5.	 Trade at China’s Domestic Price. China’s domestic 
price is 10 containers of toys equals 7 cases of wine. 
Assume China produces 10,000 containers of toys 
and exports 2,000 to France. Assume France produces 
7,000 cases of wine and exports 1,400 cases to China. 
What happens to total production and consumption?
6.	 Trade at France’s Domestic Price. France’s domestic 
price is 2 containers of toys equals 7 cases of wine. 
Assume China produces 10,000 containers of toys and 
exports 400 containers to France. Assume France in 
turn produces 7,000 cases of wine and exports 1,400 
cases to China. What happens to total production and 
consumption?
7.	 Trade at Negotiated Mid-Price. The mid-price for 
exchange between France and China can be calcu-
lated as follows. What happens to total production 
and consumption?
Assumptions
Toys 
(containers/
unit)
Wine 
(cases/unit)
China—output per unit 
of production input
10
7
France—output per unit 
of production input
2
7
China—total production 
inputs
1,000
France—total  
production inputs
1,000
8.	 Peng Plasma Pricing. Peng Plasma is a privately held 
Chinese business. It specializes in the manufacture 
of plasma cutting torches. Over the past eight years 
it has held the Chinese renminbi price of the PT350 
cutting torch fixed at Rmb 18,000 per unit. Over that 
same period it has worked to reduce costs per unit, but 
has struggled of late due to higher input costs. Over 
that same period the renminbi has continued to be 
revalued against the U.S. dollar by the Chinese govern-
ment. After completing the table—assuming the same 
price in renminbi for all years—answer the following 
questions.
a.	 What has been the impact of Peng’s pricing strategy 
on the US$ price? How would you expect their U.S. 
dollar-based customers to have reacted to this?
b.	 What has been the impact on Peng’s margins from 
this pricing strategy?
9.	 Santiago Pirolta’s Compensation Agreement. San-
tiago Pirolta has accepted the Managing Director 
position for Vitro de Mexico’s U.S. operations. Vitro 
is a Mexico-based manufacturer of flat and custom 
glass products. Much of its U.S. sales are based on a 
variety of bottle products, both mass market (e.g., 
glass bottles for soft drinks and beer) as well as spe-
cialty products (high-end cosmetic bottles with rare 
metal coloring and quality). He will live and work in 
the United States (Dallas, Texas) and wishes to be 
paid in U.S. dollars. Vitro has agreed that his base 
salary of USD350,000 will be paid in U.S. dollars, 
but Vitro wishes to tie his annual performance bonus 
(potentially 10% to 30% above his base salary) to 
the Mexican peso value of U.S. sales since Vitro con-
solidates all final results for reporting to stockhold-
ers in Mexican pesos (MXN).

26
CHAPTER 1    Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
Santiago, however, is a bit uncertain on having his 
bonus based on the Mexican peso values of U.S. sales. 
As a close friend and colleague, what advice would 
you give him based on your completion of the table 
below?
Year
(million USD)
Change
MXN = 1 USD
(million MXN)
Change
2011
USD820
12.80
MXN _______
2012
USD842
____%
13.30
MXN _______
____%
2013
USD845
____%
12.70
MXN _______
____%
2014
USD860
____%
13.40
MXN _______
____%
Americo Industries—2010
Problems 10–14 are based on Americo Industries. Americo is a U.S.-based multinational manufacturing firm with wholly 
owned subsidiaries in Brazil, Germany, and China, in addition to domestic operations in the United States. Americo is 
traded on the NASDAQ. Americo currently has 650,000 shares outstanding. The basic operating characteristics of the 
various business units is as follows:
Business Performance (000s)
U.S. Parent 
(US$)
Brazilian Subsidiary 
(reais, R$)
German Subsidiary 
(euros, €)
Chinese Subsidiary 
(yuan, ¥)
Earnings before taxes (EBT)
$4,500
R$6,250
€4,500
¥2,500
Corporate income tax rate
35%
25%
40%
30%
Average exchange rate for  
the period
—
R$1.80/$
€0.7018/$
¥7.750/$
10.	 Americo Industries’ Consolidate Earnings. Americo 
must pay corporate income tax in each country in 
which it currently has operations.
a.	 After deducting taxes in each country, what are 
Americo’s consolidated earnings and consolidated 
earnings per share in U.S. dollars?
b.	 What proportion of Americo’s consolidated earn-
ings arise from each individual country?
c.	 What proportion of Americo’s consolidated earn-
ings arise from outside the United States?
11.	 Americo’s EPS Sensitivity to Exchange Rates (A). 
Assume a major political crisis wracks Brazil, first 
affecting the value of the Brazilian reais and, subse-
quently, inducing an economic recession within the 
country. What would be the impact on Americo’s con-
solidated EPS if the Brazilian reais were to fall in value 
to R$3.00/$, with all other earnings and exchange rates 
remaining the same?
12.	 Americo’s EPS Sensitivity to Exchange Rates (B). 
Assume a major political crisis wracks Brazil, first 
affecting the value of the Brazilian reais and, sub-
sequently, inducing an economic recession within 
the country. What would be the impact on Ameri-
co’s consolidated EPS if, in addition to the fall in 
the value of the reais to R$3.00/$, earnings before 
taxes in Brazil fell as a result of the recession to 
R$5,800,000?
13.	 Americo’s Earnings and the Fall of the Dollar. The 
dollar has experienced significant swings in value 
against most of the world’s currencies in recent years.
a.	 What would be the impact on Americo’s consoli-
dated EPS if all foreign currencies were to appreci-
ate 20% against the U.S. dollar?
b.	 What would be the impact on Americo’s consoli-
dated EPS if all foreign currencies were to depreci-
ate 20% against the U.S. dollar?
14.	 Americo’s Earnings and Global Taxation. All MNEs 
attempt to minimize their global tax liabilities. Return 
to the original set of baseline assumptions and answer 
the following questions regarding Americo’s global 
tax liabilities:
a.	 What is the total amount—in U.S. dollars—that 
Americo is paying across its global business in cor-
porate income taxes?
b.	 What is Americo’s effective tax rate (total taxes paid 
as a proportion of pre-tax profit)?
c.	 What would be the impact on Americo’s EPS and 
global effective tax rate if Germany instituted a 
corporate tax reduction to 28%, and Americo’s 
earnings before tax in Germany rose to €5,000,000?

27
Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges    CHAPTER 1 
Internet Exercises
1.	 International Capital Flows: Public and Private. Major 
multinational organizations (some of which are listed 
next) attempt to track the relative movements and 
magnitudes of global capital investment. Using these 
Web pages and others you may find, prepare a two-
page executive briefing on the question of whether 
capital generated in the industrialized countries is 
finding its way to the less-developed and emerging 
markets. Is there some critical distinction between 
“less-developed” and “emerging”?
The World Bank
www.worldbank.org
OECD
www.oecd.org
European Bank for 
Reconstruction and 
Development
www.ebrd.org
2.	 External Debt. The World Bank regularly compiles 
and analyzes the external debt of all countries globally. 
As part of their annual publication on World Devel-
opment Indicators (WDI), they provide summaries 
of the long-term and short-term external debt obliga-
tions of selected countries online like that of Poland 
shown here. Go to their Web site and find the decom-
position of external debt for Brazil, Mexico, and the 
Russian Federation.
The World Bank
www.worldbank.org/data
3.	 World Economic Outlook. The International Mon-
etary Fund (IMF) regularly publishes its assessment 
of the prospects for the world economy. Choose a 
country of interest and use the IMF’s current analysis 
to form your own expectations of its immediate eco-
nomic prospects.
IMF Economic Outlook
www.imf.org/external/ 
index.htm
4.	 Financial Times Currency Global Macromaps. The 
Financial Times provides a very helpful real-time 
global map of currency values and movements online. 
Use it to track the movements in currency.
Financial Times
markets.ft.com/research/ 
Markets/Currencies

Chapter	 2
The International 
Monetary System
The price of every thing rises and falls from time to time and place to place; 
and with every such change the purchasing power of money changes so far 
as that thing goes.
—Alfred Marshall.
This chapter begins with a brief history of the international monetary system, from the days 
of the classical gold standard to the present time. The first section describes ­contemporary 
currency regimes and their construction and classification, fixed versus flexible exchange rate 
principles, and what we would consider the theoretical core of the chapter—the attributes of 
the ideal currency and the choices nations must make in establishing their currency regime. 
The second section describes the many different exchange rate regimes at work today, fol-
lowing the IMF’s classification system. The third section details the differences between 
fixed and flexible exchange rate systems, leading to the fourth section’s description of the 
creation and development of the euro for European Union participating countries. The fifth 
section then details the difficult currency regime choices faced by many emerging market 
countries. The sixth and final section traces the rapid globalization of the Chinese renminbi 
now underway. The chapter concludes with the Mini-Case, Iceland—A Small Country in a 
Learning Objectives
■
■
Explore how the international monetary system has evolved from the days of the 
gold standard to today’s eclectic currency arrangement
■
■
Detail how the International Monetary Fund categorizes the many different 
exchange rate regimes operating across the globe today
■
■
Examine how the choice of fixed versus flexible exchange rate regimes is made by 
a country in the context of its desires for economic and social independence and 
openness
■
■
Explain the dramatic choices the creation of a single currency for Europe—the 
euro—required of the European Union’s member states
■
■
Study the complexity of exchange rate regime choices faced by many emerging 
­market countries today
■
■
Describe the detailed strategy being deployed by China in the gradual globalization 
of the Chinese renminbi
28

29
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
Global Crisis, which examines the rather classic case of how Iceland was confronted with the 
theoretical choices a country must make in defining its currency—described throughout the 
chapter—the Impossible Trinity.
History of the International Monetary System
Over the centuries, currencies have been defined in terms of gold, silver, and other items of 
value, all within a variety of different agreements between nations to recognize these vary-
ing definitions. A review of the evolution of these systems—or eras as we refer to them in 
Exhibit 2.1—provides a useful perspective against which to understand today’s rather eclec-
tic system of fixed rates, floating rates, crawling pegs, and others, and helps us to evaluate 
­weaknesses in and challenges for all enterprises conducting global business.
The Gold Standard, 1876–1913
Since the days of the pharaohs (about 3000 b.c.), gold has served as a medium of exchange and 
a store of value. The Greeks and Romans used gold coins, and they passed on this tradition 
through the mercantile era to the nineteenth century. The great increase in trade during the 
free-trade period of the late nineteenth century led to a need for a more formalized system for 
settling international trade balances. One country after another set a par value for its currency 
in terms of gold and then tried to adhere to the so-called “rules of the game.” This later came 
to be known as the classical gold standard. The gold standard, as an international monetary 
system, gained acceptance in Western Europe in the 1870s. The United States was something 
of a latecomer to the system, not officially adopting the gold standard until 1879.
Under the gold standard, the rules of the game were clear and simple: Each country set the 
rate at which its currency unit (paper or coin) could be converted to a given weight of gold. 
The United States, for example, declared the dollar to be convertible to gold at a rate of $20.67 
per ounce (this rate was in effect until the beginning of World War I). The British pound was 
1860
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020
Classical Gold
Standard
Inter-War
Years
Fixed
Exchange
Rates
Floating
Exchange
Rates
Emerging Era
1870s
1914
1923
1938 1944
1973
1997
World War I
World War II
Impact
on
Trade
Impact
on
Economies
Increased world
trade with limited
capital ﬂows
Trade dominated
capital ﬂows
Protectionism &
nationalism
Increased barriers
to trade &
capital ﬂows
Expanded open
economies
Capital ﬂows
begin to
dominate trade
Capital ﬂows
dominate trade
Selected emerging
nations open
capital markets
Industrial
economies
increasingly
open; emerging
nations
open slowly
Capital ﬂows
drive economic
development
Exhibit 2.1
The Evolution of the Global Monetary System

30
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
pegged at £4.2474 per ounce of gold. As long as both currencies were freely convertible into 
gold, the dollar/pound exchange rate was
$20.67/Ounce of Gold
£4.2474/Ounce of Gold = $4.8665/£
Because the government of each country on the gold standard agreed to buy or sell gold 
on demand at its own fixed parity rate, the value of each individual currency in terms of gold, 
and therefore exchange rates between currencies, was fixed. Maintaining reserves of gold that 
were sufficient to back its currency’s value was very important for a country under this system. 
The system also had the effect of implicitly limiting the rate at which any individual country 
could expand its money supply. Growth in the money supply was limited to the rate at which 
official authorities (government treasuries or central banks) could acquire additional gold.
The gold standard worked adequately until the outbreak of World War I interrupted trade 
flows and the free movement of gold. This event caused the main trading nations to suspend 
operation of the gold standard.
The Interwar Years and World War II, 1914–1944
During World War I and through the early 1920s, currencies were allowed to fluctuate over 
fairly wide ranges in terms of gold and in relation to each other. Theoretically, supply and 
demand for a country’s exports and imports caused moderate changes in an exchange rate 
about a central equilibrium value. This was the same function that gold had performed under 
the previous gold standard. Unfortunately, such flexible exchange rates did not work in an 
equilibrating manner. On the contrary: international speculators sold the weak currencies 
short, causing them to fall further in value than warranted by real economic factors. Selling 
short is a speculation technique in which an individual speculator sells an asset, such as a cur-
rency, to another party for delivery at a future date. The speculator, however, does not yet own 
the asset and expects the price of the asset to fall before the date by which the speculator must 
purchase the asset in the open market for delivery.
The reverse happened with strong currencies. Fluctuations in currency values could not 
be offset by the relatively illiquid forward exchange market, except at exorbitant cost. The net 
result was that the volume of world trade did not grow in the 1920s in proportion to world 
gross domestic product. Instead, it declined to a very low level with the advent of the Great 
Depression in the 1930s.
The United States adopted a modified gold standard in 1934 when the U.S. dollar was 
devalued to $35 per ounce of gold from the $20.67 per ounce price in effect prior to World 
War I. Contrary to previous practice, the U.S. Treasury traded gold only with foreign central 
banks, not private citizens. From 1934 to the end of World War II, exchange rates were theo-
retically determined by each currency’s value in terms of gold. During World War II and its 
chaotic aftermath, however, many of the main trading currencies lost their convertibility into 
other currencies. The dollar was one of the few currencies that continued to be convertible.
Bretton Woods and the International Monetary Fund, 1944
As World War II drew to a close in 1944, the Allied Powers met at Bretton Woods, New Hamp-
shire, to create a new postwar international monetary system. The Bretton Woods Agree-
ment established a U.S. dollar–based international monetary system and provided for two new 
institutions: the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. The International Mon-
etary Fund (IMF) aids countries with balance of payments and exchange rate problems. The 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD or the World Bank) helped 
fund postwar reconstruction and has since supported general economic development. Global 
Finance in Practice 2.1 provides some insight into the debates at Bretton Woods.

31
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
The IMF was the key institution in the new international monetary system, and it has 
remained so to the present day. The IMF was established to render temporary assistance 
to member countries trying to defend their currencies against cyclical, seasonal, or random 
occurrences. It also assists countries having structural trade problems if they promise to take 
adequate steps to correct their problems. If persistent deficits occur, however, the IMF can-
not save a country from eventual devaluation. In recent years, the IMF has attempted to help 
countries facing financial crises, providing massive loans as well as advice to Russia, Brazil, 
Greece, Indonesia, and South Korea, to name but a few.
Under the original provisions of Bretton Woods, all countries fixed the value of their 
currencies in terms of gold but they were not required to exchange their currencies for gold. 
Only the dollar remained convertible into gold (at $35 per ounce). Therefore, each country 
established its exchange rate vis-à-vis the dollar, and then calculated the gold par value of its 
currency to create the desired dollar exchange rate. Participating countries agreed to try to 
maintain the value of their currencies within 1% (later expanded to 2.25%) of par by buying 
or selling foreign exchange or gold as needed. Devaluation was not to be used as a competi-
tive trade policy, but if a currency became too weak to defend, devaluation of up to 10% was 
allowed without formal approval by the IMF. Larger devaluations required IMF approval. This 
became known as the gold-exchange standard.
The governments of the Allied powers knew that the devastat-
ing impacts of World War II would require swift and decisive 
policies. In the summer of 1944 (July 1–22), representatives of 
all 45 allied nations met at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, 
for the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference. 
Their purpose was to plan the postwar international monetary 
system. It was a difficult process, and the final synthesis was 
shaded by pragmatism.
The leading policymakers at Bretton Woods were the 
British and the Americans. The British delegation was led by 
Lord John Maynard Keynes, known as “Britain’s economic 
heavy weight.” The British argued for a postwar system that 
would be more flexible than the various gold standards used 
before the war. Keynes argued, as he had after World War 
I, that attempts to tie currency values to gold would create 
pressures for deflation in many of the war-ravaged economies.
The American delegation was led by the director of the 
U.S. Treasury’s monetary research department, Harry D. White, 
and the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, Henry Morgenthau, Jr. 
The Americans argued for stability (fixed exchange rates) but 
not a return to the gold standard itself. In fact, although the U.S. 
at that time held most of the gold of the Allied powers, the U.S. 
delegates argued that currencies should be fixed in ­parities, 
but that redemption of gold should occur only between official 
authorities like central banks.*
On the more pragmatic side, all parties agreed that a 
postwar system would be stable and sustainable only if there 
was sufficient credit available for countries to defend their cur-
rencies in the event of payment imbalances, which they knew 
to be inevitable in a reconstructing world order.
The conference divided into three commissions for weeks 
of negotiation. One commission, led by U.S. Treasury Secre-
tary Morgenthau, was charged with the organization of a fund 
of capital to be used for exchange rate stabilization. A second 
commission, chaired by Lord Keynes, was charged with the 
organization of a second “bank” whose purpose would be for 
long-term reconstruction and development. A third commis-
sion was to hammer out details such as what role silver would 
have in any new system.
After weeks of meetings, the participants came to a 
three-part agreement—the Bretton Woods Agreement. The 
plan called for: (1) fixed exchange rates, termed an ­“adjustable 
peg,” among members; (2) a fund of gold and constituent 
­currencies available to members for stabilization of their 
respective currencies, called the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF); and (3) a bank for financing long-term development 
projects (eventually known as the World Bank). One proposal 
resulting from the meetings, which was not ratified by the 
United States, was the establishment of an international trade 
organization to promote free trade.
Global Finance in Practice 2.1
Hammering Out an Agreement  
at Bretton Woods
*Fixed in parities is an old expression in this field, which means that the 
value of currencies should be set or fixed at rates that equalize their value, 
typically purchasing power.

32
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
An additional innovation introduced by Bretton Woods was the creation of the Special 
Drawing Right or SDR. The SDR is an international reserve asset created by the IMF to sup-
plement existing foreign exchange reserves. It serves as a unit of account for the IMF and other 
international and regional organizations. It is also the base against which some countries peg 
the exchange rate for their currencies. Initially defined in terms of a fixed quantity of gold, the 
SDR is currently the weighted average of four major currencies: the U.S. dollar, the euro, the 
Japanese yen, and the British pound. The weight assigned to each currency is updated every 
five years by the IMF. Individual countries hold SDRs in the form of deposits in the IMF. These 
holdings are part of each country’s international monetary reserves, along with its official hold-
ings of gold, its foreign exchange, and its reserve position at the IMF. Member countries may 
settle transactions among themselves by transferring SDRs.
Fixed Exchange Rates, 1945–1973
The currency arrangement negotiated at Bretton Woods and monitored by the IMF worked 
fairly well during the postwar period of reconstruction and rapid growth in world trade. How-
ever, widely diverging national monetary and fiscal policies, differential rates of inflation, and 
various unexpected external shocks eventually resulted in the system’s demise. The U.S. dollar 
was the main reserve currency held by central banks and was the key to the web of exchange 
rate values. Unfortunately, the U.S. ran persistent and growing deficits in its balance of pay-
ments. A heavy capital outflow of dollars was required to finance these deficits and to meet 
the growing demand for dollars from investors and businesses. Eventually, the heavy overhang 
of dollars held by foreigners resulted in a lack of confidence in the ability of the U.S. to meet 
its commitments in gold.
This lack of confidence came to a head in the first half of 1971. In a little less than seven 
months, the United States suffered the loss of nearly one-third of its official gold reserves as 
global confidence in the value of the dollar plummeted. Exchange rates between most major 
currencies and the U.S. dollar began to float, and thus indirectly, their values relative to gold. 
A year and a half later, the U.S. dollar once again came under attack, thereby forcing a second 
devaluation in February1973; this time by 10% to $42.22 per ounce of gold. By late February 
1973, a fixed-rate system no longer appeared feasible given the speculative flows of curren-
cies. The major foreign exchange markets were actually closed for several weeks in March 
1973. When they reopened, most currencies were allowed to float to levels determined by 
market forces.
The Floating Era, 1973–1997
Since March 1973, exchange rates have become much more volatile and less predictable than 
they were during the “fixed” exchange rate period, when changes occurred infrequently. 
Exhibit 2.2 illustrates the wide swings exhibited by the nominal exchange rate index of the 
U.S. dollar since 1964. Clearly, volatility has increased for this currency measure since 1973.
Exhibit 2.2 notes some of the most important shocks in recent history: the creation of the 
European Monetary System (EMS) in 1979; the run-up and peak of the U.S. dollar in 1985; 
the EMS crisis of 1992; the Asian crisis of 1997; the launch of the European euro in 1999; the 
rise of the dollar in 2014 and 2015.
The Emerging Era, 1997–Present
The period following the Asian Crisis of 1997 has seen growth in both breadth and depth 
of emerging market economies and currencies. We may end up being proven wrong on this 
count, but the final section of this chapter argues that the global monetary system has already 
begun embracing—for over a decade now—a number of major emerging market currencies, 
­beginning with the Chinese renminbi. Feel free to disagree.

33
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
IMF Classification of Currency Regimes
The global monetary system—if there is indeed a singular “system”—is an eclectic combina-
tion of exchange rate regimes and arrangements. Although there is no single governing body, 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has at least played the role of “town crier” since World 
War II. We present its current classification system of currency regimes here.
Brief Classification History
The IMF was for many years the central clearinghouse for exchange rate classifications. Mem-
ber states submitted their exchange rate policies to the IMF, and those submissions were the 
basis for its categorization of exchange rate regimes. However, that all changed in 1997–1998 
with the Asian Financial Crisis. During the Asian Financial Crisis, many countries began fol-
lowing very different exchange rate practices than those they had committed to with the IMF. 
Their actual practices—their de facto systems—were not what they had publicly and officially 
committed to—their de jure systems.
Beginning in 1998 the IMF changed its practice and stopped collecting regime classifica-
tion submissions from member states. Instead, it confined its regime classifications and reports 
to analysis performed in-house. (This included the cessation of publishing its Annual Report 
on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions, a document on which much of the 
world’s financial institutions depended on for decades.) As a global institution, which is in 
principle apolitical, the IMF’s analysis today is focused on classifying currencies on the basis 
of an ex post analysis of how the currency’s value was based in the recent past. This analysis 
focuses on observed behavior, not on official government policy pronouncements.
Exhibit 2.2
The BIS Exchange Rate Index of the Dollar
 90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
Dollar peaks on
Feb 28, 1985
Jamaica
Agreement
Jan 1976
Louvre
Accords
Feb 1987
Bretton Woods
period ends
Aug 1971
Asian Crisis
June 1997
Euro, €
launched
Jan 1999
Euro
peaks at
$1.60/€
April 2008
Dollar
strengthens
in 2015
EMS Crisis
of Sept 1992
Dollar reaches
low on index basis
Aug 2011
EMS created
March 1979
US dollar
devalued
Feb 1973
2010 = 100
Index Value
Source: BIS.org. Nominal exchange rate index (narrow deﬁnition) for the U.S. dollar.
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014

34
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
1“Revised System for the Classification of Exchange Rate Arrangements,” by Karl Habermeier, Annamaria 
­Kokenyne, Romain Veyrune, and Harald Anderson, Monetary and Capital Markets Department, IMF Working 
Paper 09/211, November 17, 2009. The system presented is a revision of the IMF’s 1998 revision to a de facto system.
The IMF’s de facto System
The IMF’s methodology of classifying exchange rate regimes today, in effect since January 
2009, is presented in Exhibit 2.3. It is based on actual observed behavior, de facto results, and 
not on the official policy statements of the respective governments, de jure classification.1 
Exhibit 2.3
IMF Exchange Rate Classification
Rate Classification
2009 de facto System
Description and Requirements
Hard Pegs
Arrangement with no 
separate legal tender
The currency of another country circulates as the sole legal tender 
(formal dollarization), as well as members of a monetary or currency 
union in which the same legal tender is shared by the members.
Currency board 
arrangement
A monetary arrangement based on an explicit legislative 
commitment to exchange domestic currency for a specific foreign 
currency at a fixed exchange rate, combined with restrictions on 
the issuing authority. Restrictions imply that domestic currency 
will be issued only against foreign exchange and that it remains 
fully backed by foreign assets.
Soft Pegs
Conventional pegged 
arrangement
A country formally pegs its currency at a fixed rate to another 
currency or a basket of currencies of major financial or trading 
partners. Country authorities stand ready to maintain the fixed 
parity through direct or indirect intervention. The exchange rate 
may vary ;1% around a central rate, or may vary no more than 
2% for a six-month period.
Stabilized arrangement
A spot market rate that remains within a margin of 2% for six 
months or more and is not floating. Margin stability can be met 
by either a single currency or basket of currencies (assuming 
statistical measurement). Exchange rate remains stable as a result 
of official action.
Intermediate pegs:
Crawling peg
Currency is adjusted in small amounts at a fixed rate or in response to 
changes in quantitative indicators (e.g., inflation differentials).
Crawl-like arrangement
Exchange rate must remain with a narrow margin of 2% relative to 
a statistically defined trend for six months or more. Exchange rate 
cannot be considered floating. Minimum rate of change is greater 
than allowed under a stabilized arrangement.
Pegged exchange rate 
within horizontal bands
The value of the currency is maintained within 1% of a fixed 
central rate, or the margin between the maximum and minimum 
value of the exchange rate exceeds 2%. This includes countries 
that are today members of the Exchange Rate Mechanism II 
(ERM II) system.
Floating 
Arrangements
Floating
Exchange rate is largely market determined without an 
ascertainable or predictable path. Market intervention may be 
direct or indirect, and serves to moderate the rate of change (but 
not targeting). Rate may exhibit more or less volatility.
Free floating
A floating rate is freely floating if intervention occurs only 
exceptionally, and confirmation of intervention is limited to at most 
three instances in a six-month period, each lasting no more than 
three business days.
Residual
Other managed 
arrangements
This category is residual, and is used when the exchange rate 
does not meet the criteria for any other category. Arrangements 
characterized by frequent shifts in policies fall into this category.
Source: “Revised System for the Classification of Exchange Rate Arrangements,” by Karl Habermeier, Anamaria Kokenyne, Romain Veyrune, and Harald 
Anderson, IMF Working Paper WP/09/211, International Monetary Fund, November 17, 2009.

35
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
The classification process begins with the determination of whether the exchange rate of the 
country’s currency is dominated by markets or by official action. Although the classification 
system is a bit challenging, there are four basic categories.
Category 1: Hard Pegs. These countries have given up their own sovereignty over monetary 
policy. This category includes countries that have adopted other countries’ currencies (e.g., 
Zimbabwe’s dollarization—its adoption of the U.S. dollar), and countries utilizing a currency 
board structure that limits monetary expansion to the accumulation of foreign exchange.
Category 2: Soft Pegs. This general category is colloquially referred to as fixed exchange 
rates. The five subcategories of soft peg regimes are differentiated on the basis of what the 
currency is fixed to, whether that fix is allowed to change—and if so under what conditions, 
what types, magnitudes, and frequencies of intervention are allowed/used, and the degree of 
variance about the fixed rate.
Category 3: Floating Arrangements. Currencies that are predominantly market-driven are 
further subdivided into free floating with values determined by open market forces without 
governmental influence or intervention, and simple floating or floating with intervention, where 
government occasionally does intervene in the market in pursuit of some rate goals or objectives.
Category 4: Residual. As one would suspect, this category includes all exchange rate arrange-
ments that do not meet the criteria of the previous three categories. Country systems demon-
strating frequent shifts in policy typically make up the bulk of this category.
Exhibit 2.4 provides a glimpse as to what these major regime categories translate into in 
the global market—fixed or floating. The vertical dashed line, the crawling peg, is the zone 
some currencies move into and out of depending on their relative currency stability. Although 
the classification regimes appear clear and distinct, the distinctions are often more difficult 
Fixed (pegged) or Floating?
Hard Peg
Soft Peg
Managed Float
Free Floating
Extreme currency
regime peg forms
such as Currency
Boards and
Dollarization
Fixed Exchange Rates
where authorities
maintain a set but
variable band about
some other currency 
Market forces of
supply and demand
set the exchange rate,
but with occasional
government
intervention
Market forces of
supply and demand
are allowed to set the
exchange rate with no
government
intervention
Fixed
(pegged to something)
Floating
(market driven)
Intermediate or
Crawling Peg
Exhibit 2.4
Taxonomy of Exchange Rate Regimes

36
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
to distinguish in practice in the market. For example, in January 2014, the Bank of Russia 
announced it would no longer conduct intervention activities with regard to the value of the 
ruble and that it planned to allow the ruble to trade freely, with no intervention.
A Global Eclectic
Despite the IMF’s attempt to lend rigor to regime classifications, the global monetary system 
today is indeed a global eclectic in every sense of the term.  As Chapter 5 will describe in detail, 
the current global market in currency is dominated by two major currencies, the U.S. dollar and 
the European euro, and after that, a multitude of systems, arrangements, currency areas, and zones.
The euro itself is an example of a rigidly fixed system, acting as a single currency for its 
member countries. However, the euro is also an independently floating currency against all 
other currencies. Other examples of rigidly fixed exchange regimes include Ecuador, Panama, 
and Zimbabwe, which use the U.S. dollar as their official currency; the Central African Franc 
(CFA) zone, in which countries such as Mali, Niger, Senegal, Cameroon, and Chad among 
others use a single common currency (the franc, which is tied to the euro); and the Eastern 
Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU), a set of countries that use the Eastern Caribbean dollar.
At the other extreme are countries with independently floating currencies. These include 
many of the most developed countries, such as Japan, the United States, the United King-
dom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Sweden, and Switzerland. However, this category also 
includes a number of unwilling participants—emerging market countries that tried to maintain 
fixed rates but were forced by the marketplace to let them float. Among these are Korea, the 
Philippines, Brazil, Indonesia, Mexico, and Thailand.
As illustrated by Exhibit 2.5, the proportion of IMF member countries (188 reporting in 
2014) with floating regimes (managed floats and free floats) has been holding at about 34%. 
Soft pegs continue to dominate, at 43.5% of all member countries in 2014. Although the 
0
20
40
60
80
10
30
50
70
90
100
Percentage of IMF membership by regime choice
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Soft Peg
Hard Peg
Residual
Floating
Source: Data drawn from Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions 2014, International Monetary Fund, 2014,
Table 3, Exchange Rate Arrangements 2008–2014.
12.2%
13.2%
13.2%
13.2%
13.1%
13.1%
39.9%
34.6%
42.0%
8%
12.2%
39.9%
11.2%
39.7%
36.0%
11.1%
43.2%
34.7%
8.9%
39.5%
34.7%
12.6%
42.9%
34.0%
9.9%
43.5%
34.0%
9.4%
Exhibit 2.5
IMF Membership Exchange Rate Regime Choices

37
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
contemporary international monetary system is typically referred to as a “floating regime,” it 
is clearly not the case for the majority of the world’s nations.
Fixed versus Flexible Exchange Rates
A nation’s choice as to which currency regime to follow reflects national priorities about all 
facets of the economy, including inflation, unemployment, interest rate levels, trade balances, 
and economic growth. The choice between fixed and flexible rates may change over time as 
priorities change. At the risk of overgeneralizing, the following points partly explain why coun-
tries pursue certain exchange rate regimes. They are based on the premise that, other things 
being equal, countries would prefer fixed exchange rates.
■
■
Fixed rates provide stability in international prices for the conduct of trade. Stable 
prices aid in the growth of international trade and lessen risks for all businesses.
■
■
Fixed exchange rates are inherently anti-inflationary, requiring the country to follow 
restrictive monetary and fiscal policies. This restrictiveness, however, can often be a 
burden to a country wishing to pursue policies to alleviate internal economic prob-
lems such as high unemployment or slow economic growth.
Fixed exchange rate regimes necessitate that central banks maintain large quantities of 
international reserves (hard currencies and gold) for use in the occasional defense of the fixed 
rate. As international currency markets have grown rapidly in size and volume, increasing 
reserve holdings has become a significant burden to many nations.
Fixed rates, once in place, may be maintained at levels that are inconsistent with economic 
fundamentals. As the structure of a nation’s economy changes, and as its trade relationships and 
balances evolve, the exchange rate itself should change. Flexible exchange rates allow this to 
happen gradually and efficiently, but fixed rates must be changed administratively—usually too 
late, with too much publicity, and at too large a one-time cost to the nation’s economic health.
The terminology associated with changes in currency values is also technically specific. 
When a government officially declares its own currency to be worth less or more relative to 
other currencies, it is termed a devaluation or revaluation, respectively. This obviously applies 
to currencies whose value is controlled by government. When a currency’s value is changed 
in the open currency market—not directly by government—it is called a depreciation (with a 
fall in value) or appreciation (with an increase in value).
The Impossible Trinity
If the ideal currency existed in today’s world, it would possess the following three attributes, 
illustrated in Exhibit 2.6, often referred to as the impossible trinity.
1.	 Exchange rate stability. The value of the currency is fixed in relationship to other 
major currencies, so traders and investors could be relatively certain of the foreign 
exchange value of each currency in the present and into the near future.
2.	 Full financial integration. Complete freedom of monetary flows would be allowed, 
so traders and investors could easily move funds from one country and currency to 
another in response to perceived economic opportunities or risks.
3.	 Monetary independence. Domestic monetary and interest rate policies would be set 
by each individual country to pursue desired national economic policies, especially as 
they might relate to limiting inflation, combating recessions, and fostering prosperity 
and full employment.
These qualities are termed the impossible trinity (also referred to as the trilemma of inter-
national finance) because the forces of economics do not allow a country to simultaneously 

38
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
achieve all three goals: monetary independence, exchange rate stability, and full financial inte-
gration. For example a country like the United States has knowingly given up having a fixed 
exchange rate—moving from the center of the pyramid toward point C—because it wishes to 
have an independent monetary policy, and it allows an extremely high level of freedom in the 
movement of capital into and out of the country.
China today is a clear example of a nation that has chosen to continue to control and 
manage the value of its currency and to conduct an independent monetary policy—moving 
from the center of the pyramid toward point A—while continuing to restrict the flow of capital 
into and out of the country. To say it has “given up” the free flow of capital probably would be 
inaccurate, as China has allowed no real freedom of capital flows in the past century.
The consensus of many experts is that the force of increased capital mobility has been 
pushing more and more countries toward full financial integration in an attempt to stimulate 
their domestic economies and to feed the capital appetites of their own MNEs. As a result, 
their currency regimes are being “cornered” into being either purely floating (like the United 
States) or integrated with other countries in monetary unions (like the European Union). 
Global Finance in Practice 2.2 drives this debate home.
Exchange Rate Stability:
A Managed or Pegged Exchange Rate
China & major industrial countries
under Bretton Woods
(give up free ﬂow of capital )
Nations must choose in which direction to move from the center—toward points A, B, or C. Their choice is a choice of what
to pursue and what to give up—that of the opposite point of the pyramid. Marginal compromise is possible, but only marginal.
Individual European Union Member States
(give up independent monetary policy )
United States, Japan
(give up a ﬁxed exchange rate)
Full Financial Integration:
Free Flow of Capital
B
C
A
Monetary Independence:
An Independent Monetary Policy
Exhibit 2.6
The Impossible Trinity
The global financial crisis of 2008–2009 sparked much debate 
over the value of currencies—in some cases invoking what 
some termed currency wars. With most of the non-Chinese 
world suffering very slow economic growth, and under heavy 
pressure to stimulate their economies and alleviate high unem-
ployment rates, more and more arguments and efforts for a 
weak or undervalued currency arose. Although sounding logi-
cal, the impossible trinity makes it very clear that each economy 
must choose its own medicine. Here is what many argue are 
the choices of three of the major global economic players:
Choice #1
Choice #2
Implied 
Condition #3
United 
States
Independent 
monetary policy
Free movement 
of capital
Currency value 
floats
China
Independent 
monetary policy
Fixed rate of 
exchange
Restricted 
movement of 
capital
Europe 
(EU)
Free movement  
of capital
Fixed rate of 
exchange
Integrated 
monetary 
policy
Global Finance in Practice 2.2
Who Is Choosing What in the Trinity/Trilemma?

39
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
A Single Currency for Europe: The Euro
Beginning with the Treaty of Rome in 1957 and continuing with the Single European Act of 
1987, the Maastricht Treaty of 1991–1992, and the Treaty of Amsterdam of 1997, a core set of 
European countries worked steadily toward integrating their individual countries into one 
larger, more efficient, domestic market. However, even after the launch of the 1992 Single 
Europe program, a number of barriers to true openness remained, including the use of dif-
ferent currencies. The use of different currencies required both consumers and companies to 
treat the individual markets separately. Currency risk of cross-border commerce still persisted. 
The creation of a single currency was seen as the way to move beyond these last vestiges of 
separated markets.
The original 15 members of the EU were also members of the European Monetary System 
(EMS). The EMS formed a system of fixed exchange rates amongst the member currencies, 
with deviations managed through bilateral responsibility to maintain rates at {2.5% of an 
established central rate. This system of fixed rates, with adjustments along the way, remained 
in effect from 1979–1999. Its resiliency was seriously tested with exchange rate crises in 1992 
and 1993, but it held and moved onward.
The Maastricht Treaty and Monetary Union
In December 1991, the members of the EU met at Maastricht, the Netherlands, and concluded 
a treaty that changed Europe’s currency future. The Maastricht Treaty specified a timetable 
and a plan to replace all individual EMS member currencies with a single currency—eventu-
ally named the euro. Other aspects of the treaty were also adopted that would lead to a full 
European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). According to the EU, the EMU is a single-
currency area within the singular EU market, now known informally as the eurozone, in which 
people, goods, services, and capital are allowed to move without restrictions.
The integration of separate country monetary systems is not, however, a minor task. To 
prepare for the EMU, the Maastricht Treaty called for the integration and coordination of the 
member countries’ monetary and fiscal policies. The EMU would be implemented by a process 
called convergence.
Before becoming a full member of the EMU, each member country was expected to meet 
a set of convergence criteria in order to integrate systems that were at the same relative per-
formance levels: (1) nominal inflation should be no more than 1.5% above the average for the 
three members of the EU that had the lowest inflation rates during the previous year; (2) long-
term interest rates should be no more than 2% above the average of the three members with 
the lowest interest rates; (3) individual government budget deficits—fiscal deficits—should 
be no more than 3% of gross domestic product; and (4) government debt outstanding should 
be no more than 60% of gross domestic product. The convergence criteria were so tough that 
few, if any, of the members could satisfy them at that time, but 11 countries managed to do so 
just prior to 1999 (Greece was added two years later).
The choices made by the European Union (EU) are clearly 
the more complex. As a combination of different sovereign 
states, the EU has pursued integration of a common currency, 
the euro, and free movement of labor and capital. The result, 
according to the impossible trinity, is that EU member states 
had to give up independent monetary policy, replacing indi-
vidual central banks with the European Central Bank (ECB). 
The recent fiscal deficits and near-collapses of government 
debt issuances in Greece, Portugal, and Ireland have raised 
questions over the efficacy of the arrangement.

40
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
The European Central Bank (ECB)
The cornerstone of any monetary system is a strong, disciplined, central bank. The Maastricht 
Treaty established this single institution for the EMU, the European Central Bank (ECB), 
which was established in 1998. (The EU created the European Monetary Institute (EMI) in 
1994 as a transitional step in establishing the European Central Bank.) The ECB’s structure 
and functions were modeled after the German Bundesbank, which in turn had been modeled 
after the U.S. Federal Reserve System. The ECB is an independent central bank that dominates 
the activities of the individual countries’ central banks. The individual central banks continue 
to regulate banks resident within their borders, but all financial market intervention and the 
issuance of the single currency is the sole responsibility of the ECB. The single most important 
mandate of the ECB is its charge to promote price stability within the European Union.
The Launch of the Euro
On January 4, 1999, 11 member states of the EU initiated the EMU. They established a single 
currency, the euro, which replaced the individual currencies of the participating member states. 
The 11 countries were Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, 
the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. Greece did not qualify for EMU participation at the time, 
but joined the euro group later, in 2001. On December 31, 1998, the final fixed rates between 
the 11 participating currencies and the euro were put into place. On January 4, 1999, the euro 
was officially launched.
The United Kingdom, Sweden, and Denmark chose to maintain their individual curren-
cies. The United Kingdom has been skeptical of increasing EU infringement on its sovereignty, 
and has opted not to participate. Sweden, which has failed to see significant benefits from EU 
membership (although it is one of the newest members), has also been skeptical of EMU par-
ticipation. Denmark, like the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Norway has so far opted not to 
participate. (Denmark is, however, a member of ERM II, the Exchange Rate Mechanism II, 
which effectively allows Denmark to keep its own currency and monetary sovereignty, but 
fixes the value of its currency, the krone, to the euro.)
The official currency symbol of the euro, EUR, was registered with the International 
Standards Organization. The official symbol of the euro is €. According to the EU, the € ­symbol 
was inspired by the Greek letter epsilon (e), simultaneously referring to Greece’s ancient role 
as the source of European civilization and recalling the first letter of the word Europe.
The euro would generate a number of benefits for the participating states: (1) Countries 
within the eurozone enjoy cheaper transaction costs; (2) Currency risks and costs related to 
exchange rate uncertainty are reduced; and (3) All consumers and businesses both inside and 
outside the eurozone enjoy price transparency and increased price-based competition. The 
primary “cost” of adopting the euro, the loss of monetary independence, would be a continuing 
challenge for the members for years to come.
On January 4, 1999, the euro began trading on world currency markets. Its introduction 
was a smooth one. The euro’s value slid steadily following its introduction, however, primarily 
as a result of the robustness of the U.S. economy and U.S. dollar, and sluggish economic sectors 
in the EMU countries. Beginning in 2002, the euro appreciated versus the dollar. Since that 
time, as illustrated in Exhibit 2.7, it had remained in a range of roughly $1.20 to $1.50 per euro. 
It has, however, demonstrated significant volatility.
The use of the euro has continued to expand since its introduction. As of January 2012, the 
euro was the official currency for 17 of the 27 member countries in the European Union, as well 
as five other countries (Montenegro, Andorra, Monaco, San Marino, and the Vatican) that may 
eventually join the EU. The 17 countries that currently use the euro—the so-called eurozone—
are Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxem-
bourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Spain. Although all members of 

41
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
The European Monetary Union is a complex organism com-
pared to the customary country structure of fiscal and mon-
etary policy institutions and policies described in a typical 
Economics 101 course. The members of the EU do not have 
the ability to conduct independent monetary policy. When the 
EU moved to a single currency with the adoption of the euro, 
its member states agreed to use a single currency (exchange 
rate stability), allow the free movement of capital in and out 
of their economies (financial integration), but give up indi-
vidual control of their own money supply (monetary indepen-
dence). Once again, a choice was made among the three 
competing dimensions of the impossible trinity; in this case, 
to form a single monetary policy body—the European Central 
Bank (ECB)—to conduct monetary policy on behalf of all EU 
members.
But fiscal and monetary policies are still somewhat inter-
twined. Government deficits that are funded by issuing debt to 
the international financial markets still impact monetary policy. 
Proliferating sovereign debt—debt issued by Greece, Portugal, 
and Ireland, for example—may be euro-denominated, but it is the 
debt obligation of each individual government. However, if one or 
more of these governments flood the market with debt, this may 
result in increased cost and decreased availability of capital to 
other member states. In the end, if monetary independence is not 
preserved, then one or both of the other elements of the impos-
sible trinity may fail—capital mobility or exchange rate stability.
Global Finance in Practice 2.3
The Euro and the Greek/EU Debt Crisis
0.80
Jan-99
Sep-99
May-00
Jan-01
Sep-01
May-02
Jan-03
Sep-03
May-04
Jan-05
Sep-05
May-06
Jan-07
Sep-07
May-08
Jan-09
Sep-09
May-10
Jan-11
Sep-11
May-12
Sep-13
May-14
Jan-15
Jan-13
0.90
1.00
1.10
1.20
1.30
1.40
1.50
1.60
U.S. dollars (USD) to = 1 euro (EUR)
Exhibit 2.7
The U.S. Dollar–European Euro Spot Exchange Rate
the EU are expected eventually to replace their currencies with the euro, recent years have seen 
growing debates and continual postponements by new members in moving toward full euro 
adoption. The continuing issues with European sovereign debt, as discussed in Global Finance 
in Practice 2.3, also continue to pose serious challenges to further euro expansion.

42
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
Emerging Markets and Regime Choices
The 1997–2005 period specifically saw increasing pressures on emerging market countries to 
choose among more extreme types of exchange rate regimes. The increased capital mobility 
pressures noted in the previous section have driven a number of countries to choose between 
a free-floating exchange rate (as in Turkey in 2002) or, at the opposite extreme, a fixed-rate 
regime—such as a currency board (as in Argentina throughout the 1990s and detailed in the 
following section) or even dollarization (as in Ecuador in 2000). These systems deserve a bit 
more time and depth in our discussions.
Currency Boards
A currency board exists when a country’s central bank commits to back its monetary base—its 
money supply—entirely with foreign reserves at all times. This commitment means that a unit 
of domestic currency cannot be introduced into the economy without an additional unit of 
foreign exchange reserves being obtained first. Eight countries, including Hong Kong, utilize 
currency boards as a means of fixing their exchange rates.
Argentina. In 1991, Argentina moved from its previous managed exchange rate of the 
Argentine peso to a currency board structure. The currency board structure pegged the 
Argentine peso’s value to the U.S. dollar on a one-to-one basis. The Argentine govern-
ment preserved the fixed rate of exchange by requiring that every peso issued through the 
Argentine banking system be backed by either gold or U.S. dollars held on account in banks 
in Argentina. This 100% reserve system made the monetary policy of Argentina depen-
dent on the country’s ability to obtain U.S. dollars through trade or investment. Only after 
Argentina had earned these dollars through trade could its money supply be expanded. This 
requirement eliminated the possibility of the nation’s money supply growing too rapidly 
and causing inflation.
Argentina’s system also allowed all Argentines and foreigners to hold dollar-denominated 
accounts in Argentine banks. These accounts were in actuality eurodollar accounts, dollar-
denominated deposits in non-U.S. banks. These accounts provided savers with the ability to 
choose whether or not to hold pesos.
From the very beginning there was substantial doubt in the market that the Argentine 
government could maintain the fixed exchange rate. Argentine banks regularly paid slightly 
higher interest rates on peso-denominated accounts than on dollar-denominated accounts. This 
interest differential represented the market’s assessment of the risk inherent in the Argentine 
financial system. Depositors were rewarded for accepting risk—for keeping their money in 
peso-denominated accounts. In January 2002, after months of economic and political turmoil 
and nearly three years of economic recession, the Argentine currency board was ended. The 
peso was first devalued from Peso1.00/$ to Peso1.40/$, then it was floated completely. It fell 
in value dramatically within days. The Argentine decade-long experiment with a rigidly fixed 
exchange rate was over.
Dollarization
Several countries have suffered currency devaluation for many years, primarily as a result of 
inflation, and have taken steps toward dollarization. Dollarization is the use of the U.S. dol-
lar as the official currency of the country. Panama has used the dollar as its official currency 
since 1907. Ecuador, after suffering a severe banking and inflationary crisis in 1998 and 1999, 
adopted the U.S. dollar as its official currency in January 2000. One of the primary attributes 

43
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
of dollarization was summarized well by BusinessWeek in a December 11, 2000, article entitled 
“The Dollar Club”:
One attraction of dollarization is that sound monetary and exchange-rate policies no longer 
depend on the intelligence and discipline of domestic policymakers. Their monetary policy 
becomes essentially the one followed by the U.S., and the exchange rate is fixed forever.
The arguments for dollarization follow logically from the previous discussion of the impossi-
ble trinity. A country that dollarizes removes any currency volatility (against the dollar) and would 
theoretically eliminate the possibility of future currency crises. Additional benefits are expecta-
tions of greater economic integration with other dollar-based markets, both product and financial. 
This last point has led many to argue in favor of regional dollarization, in which several countries 
that are highly economically integrated may benefit significantly from dollarizing together.
Three major arguments exist against dollarization. The first is the loss of sovereignty over 
monetary policy. This is, however, the point of dollarization. Second, the country loses the 
power of seigniorage, the ability to profit from its ability to print its own money. Third, the 
central bank of the country, because it no longer has the ability to create money within its 
economic and financial system, can no longer serve the role of lender of last resort. This role 
carries with it the ability to provide liquidity to save financial institutions that may be on the 
brink of failure during times of financial crisis.
Ecuador. Ecuador officially completed the replacement of the Ecuadorian sucre with the U.S. 
dollar as legal tender in September 2000. This step made Ecuador the largest national adopter 
of the U.S. dollar, and in many ways it made Ecuador a test case of dollarization for other 
emerging market countries to watch closely. This was the last stage of a massive depreciation 
of the sucre in a brief two-year period.
During 1999, Ecuador suffered a rising rate of inflation and a falling level of economic 
output. In March 1999, the Ecuadorian banking sector was hit with a series of devastating 
“bank runs,” financial panics in which all depositors attempted to withdraw all of their funds 
simultaneously. Although there were severe problems in the Ecuadorian banking system, the 
truth was that even the healthiest financial institution would fail under the strain of this finan-
cial drain. Ecuador’s president immediately froze all deposits (this was termed a bank holiday 
in the United States in the 1930s when banks closed their doors). The value of the Ecuadorian 
sucre plummeted in early March, inducing the country to default on more than $13 billion in 
foreign debt in 1999 alone. Ecuador’s president moved quickly to propose dollarization to save 
the Ecuadorian economy.
By January 2000, when the next president took office (after a rather complicated military coup 
and subsequent withdrawal), the sucre had fallen in value to Sucre 25,000/$. The new president 
continued the dollarization initiative. Although unsupported by the U.S. government and the 
IMF, Ecuador completed its replacement of its own currency with the dollar over the next nine 
months. The results of dollarization in Ecuador are still unknown. Today, many years later, Ecuador 
continues to struggle to find both economic and political balance with its new currency regime.
Currency Regime Choices for Emerging Markets
There is no doubt that for many emerging markets the choice of a currency regime may lie 
somewhere between the extremes of a hard peg (a currency board or dollarization) or free-
floating. However, many experts have argued for years that the global financial marketplace 
will drive more and more emerging market nations toward one of these extremes. As shown 
in Exhibit 2.8, there is a distinct lack of middle ground between rigidly fixed and free-floating 
extremes. But is the so-called bi-polar choice inevitable?

44
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
There is general consensus that three common features of emerging market countries 
make any specific currency regime choice difficult: (1) weak fiscal, financial, and monetary 
institutions; (2) tendencies for commerce to allow currency substitution and the denomina-
tion of liabilities in dollars; and (3) the emerging market’s vulnerability to sudden stoppages 
of outside capital flows. Calvo and Mishkin may have said it best:2
Indeed, we believe that the choice of exchange rate regime is likely to be one second order 
importance to the development of good fiscal, financial and monetary institutions in produc-
ing macroeconomic success in emerging market countries. Rather than treating the exchange 
rate regime as a primary choice, we would encourage a greater focus on institutional reforms 
like improved bank and financial sector regulation, fiscal restraint, building consensus for 
a sustainable and predictable monetary policy and increasing openness to trade.
In anecdotal support of this argument, a poll of the general population in Mexico in 1999 
indicated that 9 out of 10 people would prefer dollarization to a floating-rate peso. Clearly, 
many in the emerging markets have little faith in their leadership and institutions to implement 
an effective exchange rate policy.
Globalizing the Chinese Renminbi
Logically, it would be reasonable to expect China to make the RMB fully convertible 
before embarking on the ultimate goal of internationalizing the currency. But China 
appears to have put “the horse before the cart” by creating an offshore market to promote 
2“The Mirage of Exchange Rate Regimes for Emerging Market Countries,” Guillermo A. Calvo and Frederic S. 
Mishkin, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 17, No. 4, Autumn 2003, pp. 99–118.
Currency Board or Dollarization 
High capital mobility is forcing 
emerging market nations to
choose between two extremes
 
Free-Floating Regime
Currency value is free to ﬂoat up and 
down with international market forces
Independent monetary policy and free 
movement of capital allowed, but at 
the loss of stability
Increased volatility may be more than 
what a small country with a small 
ﬁnancial market can withstand
Currency board ﬁxes the value of local 
currency to another currency or basket; 
dollarization replaces the currency 
with the U.S. dollar
Independent monetary policy is lost; 
political inﬂuence on monetary policy 
is eliminated
Seignorage, the beneﬁts accruing to 
a government from the ability to print 
its own money, is lost
Emerging Market
Country
Exhibit 2.8
Regime Choices for Emerging Markets

45
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
the currency’s use in international trade and investments first. And this offshore trade has 
taken the lead over the onshore market.
—“RMB to Be a Globally Traded Currency by 2015,” 
John McCormick, RBS, in the May 3, 2013, China Briefing.
The Chinese renminbi (RMB) or yuan (CNY) is going global.3 Although trading in the RMB 
is closely controlled by the People’s Republic of China (PRC)—with all trading inside China 
between the RMB and foreign currencies (primarily the U.S. dollar) being conducted only 
according to Chinese regulations—its reach is spreading. The RMB’s value, as illustrated in 
Exhibit 2.9, has been carefully controlled but allowed to gradually revalue against the dollar. 
It is now quickly moving toward what most think is an inevitable role as a true international 
currency.
Two-Market Currency Development
The RMB continues to develop along a segmented onshore/offshore two-market structure 
regulated by the PRC, as seen in Exhibit 2.10. The onshore market (carrying the official ISO 
code for the Chinese RMB, CNY) is a two-tier market, with retail exchange and an interbank 
wholesale exchange. The currency has, since mid-2005, been a managed float regime. Internally, 
3The People’s Republic of China officially recognizes the terms renminbi (RMB) and yuan (CNY) as names of its 
official currency. Yuan is used in reference to the unit of account, while the physical currency is termed the renminbi.
Chinese yuan (CNY) to = 1.00 U.S. dollar (USD)
Value ﬁxed at RMB 8.28 = USD 1.0 
People’s Bank of China announces
it is abandoning its peg to the
U.S. dollar on July 21, 2005 
Continuation of a “managed ﬂoating
exchange rate regime” translating into
a gradual revaluation of the RMB
against the dollar
6.0
6.5
5.0
5.5
Jan-94
Oct-94
Jul-95
Apr-96
Jan-97
Oct-97
Jul-98
Apr-99
Jan-00
Oct-00
Jul-01
Apr-02
Jan-03
Oct-03
Jul-04
Apr-05
Jan-06
Oct-06
Jul-07
Apr-08
Jan-09
Oct-09
Jul-10
Apr-11
Jan-12
Jul-13
Apr-14
Jan-15
Oct-12
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
Exhibit 2.9
 The Revaluation of the Chinese Yuan (1994–2015)

46
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
the currency is traded through the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS), in which 
the People’s Bank of China sets a daily central parity rate against the dollar (fixing). Actual 
trading is allowed to range within {1% of the parity rate on a daily basis. This internal market 
continues to be gradually deregulated, with banks now being allowed to exchange negotiable 
certificates of deposit amongst themselves, with fewer and fewer interest rate restrictions. Nine 
different currencies are traded daily in the market against the RMB and themselves.
The offshore market for the RMB has grown out of a Hong Kong base (accounts labeled 
CNH, an unofficial symbol). This offshore market has enjoyed preferred access to the onshore 
market by government regulators, both in acquiring funds and re-injecting funds (termed 
back-flow). Growth in this market has been fueled by the issuance of RMB-denominated debt, 
so-called Panda Bonds, by McDonald’s Corporation, Caterpillar, and the World Bank, among 
others. Hong Kong-based institutional investors are now allowed access to onshore financial 
deposits (interest bearing), allowing a stronger use of these offshore deposits. The PRC also 
continues to promote the expansion of the offshore market to other major regional and global 
financial centers like Singapore and London.
Theoretical Principles and Practical Concerns
As the world’s largest commercial trader and second-largest economy, it is inevitable that 
the currency of China become an international currency. But there is a variety of degrees of 
internationalization.
First and foremost, an international currency must become readily accessible for trade (this 
is technically described as Current Account use, to be described in detail in the next chapter). 
As noted in Exhibit 2.11, it is estimated that more than 16% of all Chinese trade is now denomi-
nated in RMB, which although small, is a radical increase from just 1% a mere four years ago. 
China Onshore Market (CNY)
Restricted exchange of currency
in and out of the onshore market
Hong Kong Oﬀshore
Market (CNH)
Backﬂow
to onshore
Hong Kong-based banks have preferred
access to RMB for trade ﬁnancing (import
and exports).
Corporate bond issues in RMB growing, the Panda Bond or Dim Sum Market
RMB Qualiﬁed Foreign Institutional Investors gaining greater access to onshore ﬁnancial deposits
Expansion of oﬀshore market to Singapore, Macau, and Taiwan, with trading hubs in London,
Sydney, and Seoul
Exchange of RMB in and out of the onshore market continues to be heavily
controlled and restricted. But RMB-denominated trade has risen
to more than 16% of all foreign trade settlement.
Exhibit 2.10
Structure of the Chinese Renminbi Market

47
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
A Chinese exporter was typically paid in U.S. dollars, and was not allowed to keep those dollar 
proceeds in any bank account. Exporters were required to exchange all foreign currencies for 
RMB at the official exchange rate set by the PRC, and to turn them over to the Chinese gov-
ernment (resulting in a gross accumulation of foreign currency reserves). Now, importers and 
exporters are encouraged to use the RMB for trade denomination and settlement purposes.
A second degree of internationalization occurs with the use of the currency for interna-
tional investment—capital account/market activity. This is an area of substantial concern and 
caution for the PRC at this time. The Chinese marketplace is the focus of many of the world’s 
businesses, and if they were allowed free and open access to the market and its currency there 
is fear that the value of the RMB could be driven up, decreasing Chinese export competitive-
ness. Simultaneously, as major capital markets like the dollar and euro head into stages of rising 
interest rates, there is a concern that large quantities of Chinese savings could flow out of the 
country in search of higher returns—capital flight.
A third degree of internationalization occurs when a currency takes on a role as a reserve 
currency (also termed an anchor currency), a currency to be held in the foreign exchange 
reserves of the world’s central banks. The continued dilemma of fiscal deficits in the United 
States and the European Union has led to growing unease over the ability of the dollar and 
euro to maintain their value over time. Could, or should, the RMB serve as a reserve currency? 
Forecasts of the RMB’s share of global reserves vary between 15% and 50% by the year 2020.
The Triffin Dilemma. One theoretical concern about becoming a reserve currency is the ­Triffin 
Dilemma (or sometimes called the Triffin Paradox).4 The Triffin Dilemma is the potential con-
flict in objectives that may arise between domestic monetary and currency policy objectives 
4The theory is the namesake of its originator, Belgian-American economist Robert Triffin (1911–1963), who was an 
outspoken critic of the Bretton Woods Agreement, as well as a strong advocate and collaborated in the development 
of the European Monetary System (EMS).
Discretionary Policy
Policy Rules
Non-Cooperation
Between
Countries
Cooperation
Between
Countries
Pre-WWII
Gold Standard
Bretton Woods
European
Monetary
System 1979–1999
The Future?
U.S. Dollar,
1981–1985 
Exhibit 2.11
Exchange Rate Regime Tradeoffs

48
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
and external or international policy objectives when a country’s currency is used as a reserve 
currency. Domestic monetary and economic policies may on occasion require both contraction 
and the creation of a current account surplus (balance on trade surplus).
If a currency rises to the status of a global reserve currency, in which it is considered one 
of the two or three key stores of value on earth (possibly finding its way into the IMF’s Spe-
cial Drawing Right [SDR] definition), other countries will require the country to run current 
account deficits, essentially dumping growing quantities of the currency on global markets. 
This means that the country needs to become internationally indebted as part of its role as 
a reserve currency country. In short, when the world adopts a currency as a reserve currency, 
demands are placed on the use and availability of that currency, which many countries would 
prefer not to deal with. In fact, both Japan and Switzerland both worked for decades to pre-
vent their currencies from gaining wider international use, partially because of these complex 
issues. The Chinese RMB, however, may eventually find that it has no choice—the global 
market may choose.
Exchange Rate Regimes: What Lies Ahead?
All exchange rate regimes must deal with the tradeoff between rules and discretion, as well 
as between cooperation and independence. Exhibit 2.11 illustrates the tradeoffs between 
exchange rate regimes based on rules, discretion, cooperation, and independence.
1.	 Vertically, different exchange rate arrangements may dictate whether a country’s 
government has strict intervention requirements (rules) or if it may choose whether, 
when, and to what degree to intervene in the foreign exchange markets (discretion).
2.	 Horizontally, the tradeoff for countries participating in a specific system is between 
consulting and acting in unison with other countries (cooperation) or operating as a 
member of the system, but acting on their own (independence).
Regime structures like the gold standard required no cooperative policies among coun-
tries, only the assurance that all would abide by the “rules of the game.” Under the gold stan-
dard, this assurance translated into the willingness of governments to buy or sell gold at parity 
rates on demand. The Bretton Woods Agreement, the system in place between 1944 and 1973, 
required more in the way of cooperation, in that gold was no longer the “rule,” and countries 
were required to cooperate to a higher degree to maintain the dollar-based system. Exchange 
rate systems, like the European Monetary System’s (EMS) fixed exchange rate band system 
used from 1979 to 1999, were hybrids of these cooperative and rule regimes.
The present international monetary system is characterized by no rules, with varying 
degrees of cooperation. Although there is no present solution to the continuing debate over 
what form a new international monetary system should take, many believe that it will succeed 
only if it combines cooperation among nations with individual discretion to pursue domestic 
social, economic, and financial goals.
Summary Points
■
■
Under the gold standard (1876–1913), the “rules of the 
game” were that each country set the rate at which its 
currency unit could be converted to a weight of gold.
■
■
During the inter-war years (1914–1944), currencies were 
allowed to fluctuate over fairly wide ranges in terms of 
gold and each other. Supply and demand forces deter-
mined exchange rate values.
■
■
The Bretton Woods Agreement (1944) established a U.S. 
dollar-based international monetary system. Under the 
original provisions of the Bretton Woods Agreement, all 
countries fixed the value of their currencies in terms of 
gold but were not required to exchange their currencies 
for gold. Only the dollar remained convertible into gold 
(at $35 per ounce).

49
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
There was the short story, and the longer more complex 
story. Iceland had seen both. And what was the moral of the 
story? Was the moral that it’s better to be a big fish in a little 
pond, or was it once burned twice shy, or something else?
Iceland was a country of only 300,000 people. It was rel-
atively geographically isolated, but its culture and economy 
were heavily intertwined with that of Europe, specifically 
northern Europe and Scandinavia. A former property of 
Denmark, it considered itself both independent and yet 
Danish. Iceland’s economy was historically driven by fish-
ing and natural resource development. Although not flashy 
by any sense of the word, they had proven to be solid and 
lasting industries, and in recent years, increasingly profit-
able. At least that was until Iceland discovered “banking.”
The Icelandic Crisis: The Short Story
Iceland’s economy had grown very rapidly in the 2000 to 
2008 period. Growth was so strong and so rapid that infla-
tion—an ill of the past in most of the economic world—
was a growing problem. As a small, industrialized and open 
economy, capital was allowed to flow into and out of Ice-
land with economic change. As inflationary pressures rose, 
the Central Bank of Iceland had tightened monetary policy, 
interest rates rose. Higher interest rates attracted capital 
from outside Iceland, primarily European capital, and the 
banking system was flooded with capital. The banks in turn 
invested heavily in everything from real estate to Land 
Rovers (or Game Overs as they became known).
Then September of 2008 happened. The global financial 
crisis, largely originating in the United States and its real 
estate-securitized-mortgage-debt-credit-default-swap cri-
sis brought much of the international financial system and 
major industrial economies to a halt. Investments failed—
in the U.S., in Europe, in Iceland. Loans to finance those 
bad investments fell delinquent. The Icelandic economy 
and its currency—the krona—collapsed. As illustrated in 
Exhibit A, the Krona fell more than 40% against the euro 
in roughly 30 days, more than 50% in 90 days. Companies 
failed, banks failed, unemployment grew, and inflation 
boomed. A long, slow, and painful recovery began.
The Icelandic Crisis: The Longer Story
The longer story of Iceland’s crisis has its roots in mid-
1990s, when Iceland—like many other major industrial 
economies—embraced privatization and deregulation. 
The financial sector, once completely owned and operated 
by government, was privatized and largely deregulated 
by 2003. Home mortgages were deregulated in 2003; new 
mortgages required only a 10% down payment. Invest-
ment—foreign direct investment (FDI)—flowed into 
Iceland rapidly. A large part of the new investment was 
in aluminum production, an energy-intensive process that 
Iceland—A Small Country in a Global Crisis5
Mini-Case
■
■
A variety of economic forces led to the suspension of 
the convertibility of the dollar into gold in August 1971. 
Exchange rates of most of the leading trading countries 
were then allowed to float in relation to the dollar and 
thus indirectly in relation to gold.
■
■
If the ideal currency existed in today’s world, it would 
possess three attributes: a fixed value, convertibility, and 
independent monetary policy. However, in both theory 
and practice, it is impossible for all three attributes to 
be simultaneously maintained.
■
■
Emerging market countries must often choose between 
two extreme exchange rate regimes: a free-floating 
regime or an extremely fixed regime, such as a currency 
board or dollarization.
■
■
The members of the European Union are also mem-
bers of the European Monetary System (EMS). This 
group has tried to form an island of fixed exchange rates 
among themselves in a sea of major floating currencies. 
Members of the EMS rely heavily on trade with each 
other, so the day-to-day benefits of fixed exchange rates 
between them are perceived to be great.
■
■
The euro affects markets in three ways: (1) Coun-
tries within the eurozone enjoy cheaper transaction 
costs; (2) Currency risks and costs related to exchange 
rate uncertainty are reduced; and (3) All consumers 
and businesses both inside and outside the eurozone 
enjoy price transparency and increased price-based 
competition.
5Copyright © 2015 Thunderbird School of Global Management at Arizona State University. All rights reserved. This case was ­prepared 
by Professor Michael H. Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only, and not to indicate either effective or ineffective 
management.

50
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
economic powers was roughly 6%, Iceland’s overheat-
ing economy had only 3% unemployment. But rapid eco-
nomic growth in a small economy, as happens frequently 
in economic history, stoked inflation. And the Icelandic 
government and central bank then applied the standard 
prescription: slow money supply growth to try to control 
inflationary forces. The result—as expected—was higher 
interest rates.
A financial crash in Iceland snowballed yesterday, setting 
off a series of tremors as far afield as Brazil and South 
Africa. At one point the Icelandic krona was down 4.7 
per cent at a 15-month low of IKr69.07 to the dollar, hav-
ing fallen a further 4.5 per cent on Tuesday, its biggest 
one-day slide in almost five years. The krona’s collapse 
meant carry trade investors who borrowed in euros to 
gain exposure to Reykjavik’s 10 per cent interest rate, saw 
one-and-a-half years’ worth of carry trade profit wiped 
out in less than two days.
could utilize much of Iceland’s natural (natural after mas-
sive damn construction) hydroelectric power. But FDI of 
all kinds also flowed into the country, including household 
and business capital.
The new Icelandic financial sector was dominated 
by three banks—Glitnir, Kaupthing, and Landsbanki 
Islands. Their opportunities for growth and profitability 
seemed unlimited, both domestically and internationally. 
Iceland’s membership in the European Economic Area 
(EEA) provided the Icelandic banks a financial passport 
to expand their reach throughout the greater European 
marketplace.
As capital flowed into Iceland rapidly in 2003–2006, 
the krona rose, increasing the purchasing power of Ice-
landers but raising concerns with investors and govern-
ment. Gross domestic product (GDP) had grown at 8% 
in 2004, 6% in 2005, and was still above 4% by 2006. 
While the average unemployment rate of the major 
Icelandic krona (ISK) = Euro 1.00 (EUR)
140
150
120
8/1/2008
8/8/2008
8/15/2008
8/22/2008
8/29/2008
9/5/2008
9/12/2008
9/19/2008
9/26/2008
10/3/2008
10/10/2008
10/17/2008
10/24/2008
10/31/2008
11/7/2008
11/14/2008
11/21/2008
11/28/2008
12/5/2008
12/12/2008
12/19/2008
12/26/2008
130
160
170
180
190
ISK 121.28
ISK 172.16
ISK 187.70
Date
ISK = EUR 1.00
Percent Chg
Sept 3, 2008
Oct 6, 2008
Dec 2, 2008
121.28
172.16
187.70
–42.0%
–54.8%
Exhibit A
 The Icelandic Short Story—Fall of the Krona

51
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
Now those same interest rates, which had been driven 
up by both markets and policy, prevented any form of 
renewal—mortgage loans were either impossible to get 
or impossible to afford, business loans were too expensive 
given the new limited business outlook. The international 
interbank market, which had largely frozen-up during the 
midst of the crisis in September and October 2008, now 
treated the Icelandic financial sector like a leper. As illus-
trated by Exhibit C, interest rates had a long way to fall to 
reach earth (the Central Bank of Iceland’s overnight rate 
rose to well over 20%).
Aftermath: The Policy Response
There is a common precept observed by governments and 
central banks when they fall victim to financial crises: save 
the banks. Regardless of whether the banks and bankers 
were considered the cause of the crisis, or complicit (one 
Icelandic central banker termed them the usual suspects), 
it is common belief that all economies need a function-
ing banking system in order to have any hope for business 
rebirth and employment recovery. This was the same rule 
used in the U.S. in the 1930s and across South Asia in 1997 
and 1998.
But the Icelandic people did not prescribe to the usual 
medicinal. Their preference: let the banks fail. Taking to 
the streets in what was called the pots and pans revolu-
tion, the people wanted no part of the banks, the bankers, 
the bank regulators, or even the Prime Minister. The logic 
was some combination of “allow free markets to work” 
and “I want some revenge.” (This is actually quite similar 
to what many analysts have debated over what happened 
in the U.S. at the same time when the U.S. government let 
Lehman go.)
In contrast to the bank bailouts in the United States 
in 2008 following the onset of the financial crisis under-
taken under the mantra of “too big to fail,” Iceland’s banks 
were considered “too big to save.” Each of the three major 
banks, which had all been effectively nationalized by the 
second week of October in 2008, was closed. As illustrated 
in Exhibit D, although Iceland’s bank assets and exter-
nal liabilities were large, and had grown rapidly, Iceland 
was not alone. Each failed bank was reorganized by the 
government into a good bank and a bad bank in terms 
of assets, but not combined into singular good banks and 
bad banks.
The governing authorities surviving in office in the 
fall of 2008 undertook a thee-point emergency plan: (1) 
stabilize the exchange rate; (2) regain fiscal sustainability; 
and (3) rebuild the financial sector. The primary tool was 
capital controls. Iceland shut down the borders and the 
Internet lines for moving capital into or out of the coun-
try. The most immediate problem was the exchange rate. 
The collapse, which was sparked by Fitch downgrad-
ing its outlook on Iceland, citing fears over an “unsus-
tainable” current account deficit and drawing parallels 
with the imbalances evident before the 1997 Asian crisis, 
led to a generalised sell-off in Icelandic assets . . . 
—“Iceland’s Collapse Has Global Impact,” 
Financial Times, Feb 23, 2006, p. 42.
Lessons Not Learned
Brennt barn forðast eldinn (A burnt child keeps away 
from fire)
—Icelandic proverb
The mini-shock suffered by Iceland in 2006 was short lived, 
and investors and markets quickly shook off its effects. 
Bank lending returned, and within two years the Icelandic 
economy was in more trouble than ever.
In 2007 and 2008 Iceland’s interest rates continued to 
rise—both market rates (like bank overnight rates) and 
central bank policy rates. Global credit agencies rated the 
major Icelandic banks AAA. Capital flowed into Icelandic 
banks, and the banks in turn funneled that capital into all 
possible investments (and loans) domestically and interna-
tionally. Iceland’s banks created Icesave, an Internet bank-
ing system to reach out to depositors in Great Britain and 
the Netherlands. It worked. Iceland’s bank balance sheets 
grew from 100% of GDP in 2003 to just under 1,000% of 
GDP by 2008.
Iceland’s banks were now more international than Ice-
landic. (By the end of 2007 their total deposits were 45% 
in British pounds, 22% Icelandic krona, 16% euro, 3% 
dollar, and 14% other.) Icelandic real estate and equity 
prices boomed. Increased consumer and business spend-
ing resulted in the growth in merchandise and service 
imports, while the rising krona depressed exports. The 
merchandise, service, and income balances in the current 
account all went into deficit. Behaving like an emerging 
market country that had just discovered oil, Icelanders 
dropped their fish hooks, abandoned their boats, and 
became bankers. Everyone wanted a piece of the pie, 
and the pie appeared to be growing at an infinite rate. 
­Everyone could become rich.
Then it all stopped, suddenly, without notice. Whether 
it was caused by the failure of Lehman Brothers in the 
U.S., or was a victim of the same forces, it is hard to say. 
But beginning in September 2008 the krona started falling 
and capital started fleeing. Interest rates were increased 
even further to try and entice (or ‘bribe’) money to stay in 
Iceland and in krona. None of it worked. As illustrated by 
Exhibit B, the krona’s fall was large, dramatic, and some-
what permanent. In retrospect, the 2006 crisis had been 
only a small rain shower; 2008 proved a tsunami.

52
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
Icelandic krona (ISK) = Euro 1.00 (EUR)
100
120
60
80
140
160
180
200
2006 Crisis
2008 Crisis
1/2000
4/2000
7/2000
10/2000
1/2001
4/2001
7/2001
10/2001
1/2002
4/2002
7/2002
10/2002
1/2003
4/2003
7/2003
10/2003
1/2004
4/2004
7/2004
10/2004
1/2005
4/2005
7/2005
10/2005
1/2006
4/2006
7/2006
10/2006
1/2007
4/2007
7/2007
10/2007
1/2008
4/2008
7/2008
10/2008
1/2009
4/2009
7/2009
10/2009
1/2010
4/2010
7/2010
10/2010
1/2011
4/2011
7/2011
10/2011
1/2012
4/2012
7/2012
10/2012
1/2013
4/2013
7/2013
10/2013
1/2014
4/2014
7/2014
10/2014
Exhibit B
 The Icelandic Krona—European Euro Spot Exchange Rate
Percent per annum (Icelandic krona, ISK)
CBI = Central Bank of Iceland
10
15
0
5
20
25
2006 Crisis
2008 Crisis
Overnight CBI rate
Bank privatization
& deregulation
completed
Collateralized lending rate
CBI current account rate
1/4/2000
5/4/2000
9/4/2000
1/4/2001
5/4/2001
9/4/2001
1/4/2002
5/4/2002
9/4/2002
1/4/2003
5/4/2003
9/4/2003
1/4/2004
5/4/2004
9/4/2004
1/4/2005
5/4/2005
9/4/2005
1/4/2006
5/4/2006
9/4/2006
1/4/2007
5/4/2007
9/4/2007
1/4/2008
5/4/2008
9/4/2008
1/4/2009
5/4/2009
9/4/2009
1/4/2010
5/4/2010
9/4/2010
1/4/2011
5/4/2011
9/4/2011
1/4/2012
5/4/2012
9/4/2012
1/4/2013
5/4/2013
9/4/2013
1/4/2014
5/4/2014
9/4/2014
Exhibit C
 Icelandic Central Bank Interest Rates

53
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
magnified in revisions in November and December 2008 
and again in March of 2009.
Payments linked to current account transactions and 
inward FDI were released after a short period of time. 
Thus, transactions involving actual imports and exports 
of goods and services are allowed and so are interest pay-
ments, if exchanged within a specified time limit. Most 
capital transactions are controlled both for residents and 
non-residents; that is, their ability to shift between ISK 
and FX is restricted. Króna-denominated bonds and 
other like instruments cannot be converted to foreign 
currency upon maturity. The proceeds must be rein-
vested in other ISK instruments. Furthermore, the Rules 
require residents to repatriate all foreign currency that 
they acquire.
—Capital Control Liberalisation, Central Bank of 
Iceland, August 5, 2009, p. 2–3.
It also turned out that the crisis itself was not such a 
big surprise. The Central Bank of Iceland had approached 
the European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of Eng-
land, and the U.S. Federal Reserve in the spring of 2008 
(months before the crisis erupted), hoping to arrange 
foreign exchange swap agreements in case its foreign 
exchange reserves proved inadequate. The answer was no, 
The falling krona had decimated purchasing power, and 
the rising prices of imported goods were adding even more 
inflationary pressure.
Given the substantial macroeconomic risks, capital 
controls were an unfortunate but indispensable ingredi-
ent in the policy mix that was adopted to stabilise the 
króna when the interbank foreign-exchange market was 
restarted in early December 2008.
—Capital Control Liberalisation, Central Bank of 
Iceland, August 5, 2009, p. 2.
The bank failures (without bailout) raised serious 
and contentious discussions between Iceland and other 
authorities in the United Kingdom, the EU, the Nether-
lands, and elsewhere. Because so many of the deposits in 
Iceland banks were from foreign depositors, home-country 
authorities wanted assurance that their citizens’ financial 
assets would be protected. In Iceland, although the gov-
ernment guaranteed domestic residents that their money 
was insured (up to a limit), foreign depositors were not. 
Foreign residents holding accounts with Icelandic financial 
institutions were prohibited from pulling the money out of 
Iceland and out of the krona.
Capital controls were introduced in October—upon 
the recommendation of the IMF—and then altered and 
0%
200%
400%
600%
800%
100%
300%
500%
700%
900%
1000%
Iceland
Ireland
Hong Kong SAR
Singapore
Switzerland
Bank Assets to GDP - 2007
Bank Assets to GDP - 2001
Bank External Debt Liabilities to GDP - 2007
Bank External Debt Liabilities to GDP - 2001
Source: IMF and Iceland Central Bank.
Exhibit D
 Icelandic Banks Compared to Others in Potential Crisis

regulations allow banks to borrow too much, where they 
shouldn’t, and invest too much where they shouldn’t? Bank 
loan books and bank capital needs to be regulated? Small 
countries cannot conduct independent monetary policy? 
Small fish should not swim in big ponds? Or . . . 
The paper concludes that, to prevent future crises of simi-
lar proportions, it is impossible for a small country to 
have a large international banking sector, its own cur-
rency and an independent monetary policy.
—“Iceland’s Economic and Financial Crisis: 
Causes, Consequences and Implications,” by 
Rob Spruk, European Enterprise Institute, 
23 February 2010.
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 Do you think a country the size of Iceland—a Lillipu-
tian—is more or less sensitive to the potential impacts 
of global capital movements?
2.	 Many countries have used interest rate increases to 
protect their currencies for many years. What are the 
pros and cons of using this strategy?
3.	 How does the Iceland story fit with our understanding 
of the Impossible Trinity? In your opinion, which of 
the three elements of the Trinity should Iceland have 
taken steps to control more?
4.	 In the case of Iceland, the country was able to sustain 
a large current account deficit for several years, and 
at the same time have ever-rising interest rates and 
a stronger and stronger currency. Then one day, it all 
changed. How does that happen?
basically summarized as “talk to the IMF (International 
Monetary Fund).” In the end the IMF did indeed help, 
providing a Stand-By Arrangement to provide favorable 
access to foreign capital markets and additional credit 
and credibility for the Icelandic government’s recovery 
program.
The krona’s value was indeed stabilized, as seen previ-
ously in Exhibit B, but has stayed weaker, which has helped 
return the merchandise trade account to surplus in subse-
quent years. Inflation took a bit longer to get under control, 
but was successfully cut to near 2% by the end of 2010. 
Iceland remains a heavily indebted Lilliputian country 
(according to the Financial Times), in both public debt and 
private debt as a percentage of GDP.
20-20 Hindsight
Interestingly, in the years since the crisis, there has been a 
reversal (or as one writer described it, 20-20-20-20 hind-
sight) in the assessment of Iceland’s response to the crisis. 
In the first few years it was believed that Iceland’s recovery 
would be shorter and stronger than other European coun-
tries falling into crisis in 2009 and 2010, like Ireland, Estonia, 
and others. But then, after a few more years of experience, 
revised hindsight concluded that Iceland’s recovery has 
been slower, weaker, and less successful than that of others, 
partly a result of allowing the banks to fail, partly a result of 
the country’s “addiction” to capital controls.
And the lessons? What are the lessons to be taken from 
the Icelandic saga? Deregulation of the financial system 
is risky? Banks and bankers are not to be trusted? Cross-
border banking is risky? Inadequate cross-border banking 
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 The Rules of the Game. Under the gold standard, all 
national governments promised to follow the “rules of 
the game.” What did this mean?
2.	 Defending a Fixed Exchange Rate. What did it mean 
under the gold standard to “defend a fixed exchange 
rate,” and what did this imply about a country’s money 
supply?
3.	 Bretton Woods. What was the foundation of the Bret-
ton Woods international monetary system, and why 
did it eventually fail?
4.	 Technical Float. What specifically does a floating rate 
of exchange mean? What is the role of government?
5.	 Fixed versus Flexible. What are the advantages and 
disadvantages of fixed exchange rates?
6.	 De facto and de jure. What do the terms de facto 
and de jure mean in reference to the International 
­Monetary Fund’s use of the terms?
7.	 Crawling Peg. How does a crawling peg fundamentally 
differ from a pegged exchange rate?
8.	 Global Eclectic. What does it mean to say the inter-
national monetary system today is a global eclectic?
9.	 The Impossible Trinity. Explain what is meant by the 
term impossible trinity and why it is, in fact, “impossible.”
10.	 The Euro. Why is the formation and use of the euro 
considered to be of such a great accomplishment? Was 
it really needed? Has it been successful?
54
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System

55
The International Monetary System    CHAPTER 2 
11.	 Currency Board or Dollarization. Fixed exchange rate 
regimes are sometimes implemented through a cur-
rency board (Hong Kong) or dollarization (Ecuador). 
What is the difference between the two approaches?
12.	 Argentine Currency Board. How did the Argentine 
currency board function from 1991 to January 2002 
and why did it collapse?
13.	 Special Drawing Rights. What are Special Drawing 
Rights?
14.	 The Ideal Currency. What are the attributes of the 
ideal currency?
15.	 Emerging Market Regimes. High capital mobility is 
forcing emerging market nations to choose between 
free-floating regimes and currency board or dollariza-
tion regimes. What are the main outcomes of each of 
these regimes from the perspective of emerging mar-
ket nations?
16.	 Globalizing the Yuan. What are the major changes and 
developments that must occur for the Chinese yuan to 
be considered “globalized”?
17.	 Triffin Dilemma. What is the Triffin Dilemma? How 
does it apply to the development of the Chinese yuan 
as a true global currency?
18.	 China and the Impossible Trinity. What choices do you 
believe that China will make in terms of the Impos-
sible Trinity as it continues to develop global trading 
and use of the Chinese yuan?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Chantal DuBois in Brussels. Chantal DuBois lives in 
Brussels. She can buy a U.S. dollar for €0.7600. Chris-
topher Keller, living in New York City, can buy a euro 
for $1.3200. What is the foreign exchange rate between 
the dollar and the euro?
2.	 Quartzite Inc. The spot rate for Mexican pesos is 
Ps12.42/$. If the U.S.-based company Quartzite Inc. 
buys Ps500,000 spot from its bank on Monday, how 
much must Quartzite pay and on what day?
3.	 Gilded Question. Before World War I, $20.67 was 
needed to buy one ounce of gold. If, at the same time, 
one ounce of gold could be purchased in France for 
FF410.00, what was the exchange rate between French 
francs and U.S. dollars?
4.	 Golden Rule. Under the gold standard, the price of an 
ounce of gold in U.S. dollars was $20.67, while the price 
of that same ounce in British pounds was £3.7683. 
What would be the exchange rate between the dollar 
and the pound if the U.S. dollar price had been $42.00 
per ounce of gold?
5.	 Toyota Exports to the United Kingdom. Toyota manu-
factures in Japan most of the vehicles it sells in the 
United Kingdom. The base platform for the Toyota 
Tundra truck line is ¥1,650,000. The spot rate of the 
Japanese yen against the British pound has recently 
moved from ¥197/£ to ¥190/£. How does this change 
the price of the Tundra to Toyota’s British subsidiary 
in British pounds?
6.	 Loonie Parity. If the price of former Chairman of 
the U.S. Federal Reserve Alan Greenspan’s memoir, 
The Age of Turbulence, is listed on Amazon.ca as 
C$26.33, but costs just US$23.10 on Amazon.com, 
what exchange rate does that imply between the two 
currencies?
7.	 Mexican Peso Changes. In December 1994, the gov-
ernment of Mexico officially changed the value of the 
Mexican peso from 3.2 pesos per dollar to 5.5 pesos 
per dollar. What was the percentage change in its 
value? Was this a depreciation, devaluation, apprecia-
tion, or revaluation? Explain.
8.	 Hong Kong Dollar and the Chinese Yuan. The Hong 
Kong dollar has long been pegged to the U.S. dollar 
at HK$7.80/$. When the Chinese yuan was revalued 
in July 2005 against the U.S. dollar from Yuan8.28/$ 
to Yuan8.11/$, how did the value of the Hong Kong 
dollar change against the yuan?
9.	 Chinese Yuan Revaluation. Many experts believe 
that the Chinese currency should not only be reval-
ued against the U.S. dollar as it was in July 2005, but 
also be revalued by 20% or 30%. What would be the 
new exchange rate value if the yuan were revalued an 
additional 20% or 30% from its initial post-revalua-
tion rate of Yuan8.11/$?
10.	 Ranbaxy (India) in Brazil. Ranbaxy, an India-based 
pharmaceutical firm, has continuing problems with its 
cholesterol reduction product’s price in one of its rap-
idly growing markets, Brazil. All product is produced 
in India, with costs and pricing initially stated in Indian 
rupees (Rps), but converted to Brazilian reais (R$) for 
distribution and sale in Brazil. In 2009, the unit volume 
was priced at Rps21,900, with a Brazilian reais price 
set at R$895. But in 2010, the reais appreciated in value 
versus the rupee, averaging Rps26.15/R$. In order to 
preserve the reais price and product profit margin in 
rupees, what should the new rupee price be set at?

56
CHAPTER 2    The International Monetary System
11.	 Vietnamese Coffee Coyote. Many people were sur-
prised when Vietnam became the second largest cof-
fee producing country in the world in recent years, 
second only to Brazil. The Vietnamese dong, VND 
or d, is managed against the U.S. dollar but is not 
widely traded. If you were a traveling coffee buyer 
for the wholesale market (a “coyote” by industry ter-
minology), which of the following currency rates and 
exchange commission fees would be in your best inter-
est if traveling to Vietnam on a buying trip?
Currency  
Exchange
Rate
Commission
Vietnamese bank rate
d19,800
2.50%
Saigon Airport 
exchange bureau rate
d19,500
2.00%
Hotel exchange  
bureau rate
d19,400
1.50%
12.	 Chunnel Choices. The Channel Tunnel or “Chun-
nel” passes underneath the English Channel between 
Great Britain and France, a land-link between the 
Continent and the British Isles. One side is therefore 
an economy of British pounds, the other euros. If you 
were to check the Chunnel’s rail ticket Internet rates 
you would find that they would be denominated in 
U.S. dollars (USD). For example, a first class round 
trip fare for a single adult from London to Paris via the 
Chunnel through RailEurope may cost USD170.00. 
This currency neutrality, however, means that custom-
ers on both ends of the Chunnel pay differing rates 
in their home currencies from day to day. What is the 
British pound and euro denominated prices for the 
USD170.00 round trip fare in local currency if pur-
chased on the following dates at the accompanying 
spot rates drawn from the Financial Times?
Date of Spot 
Rate
British Pound 
Spot Rate 
(£/$)
Euro Spot 
Rate (€/$)
Monday
0.5702
0.8304
Tuesday
0.5712
0.8293
Wednesday
0.5756
0.8340
13.	 Barcelona Exports. Oriol D’ez Miguel S.R.L., a 
manufacturer of heavy-duty machine tools near 
Barcelona, ships an order to a buyer in Jordan. The 
purchase price is €425,000. Jordan imposes a 13% 
import duty on all products purchased from the Euro-
pean Union. The Jordanian importer then re-exports 
the product to a Saudi Arabian importer, but only 
after imposing its own resale fee of 28%. Given the 
following spot exchange rates on April 11, 2010, what 
is the total cost to the Saudi Arabian importer in Saudi 
Arabian riyal, and what is the U.S. dollar equivalent 
of that price?
Internet Exercises
1.	 International Monetary Fund’s Special Drawing 
Rights. Use the IMF’s Web site to find the current 
weights and valuation of the SDR.
International 
Monetary Fund
www.imf.org/external/np/tre/sdr/
sdrbasket.htm
2.	 Malaysian Currency Controls. The institution of cur-
rency controls by the Malaysian government in the 
aftermath of the Asian currency crisis is a classic 
response by government to unstable currency con-
ditions. Use the following Web site to increase your 
knowledge of how currency controls work.
International 
Monetary Fund
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/
bl/rr08.htm
3.	 Personal Transfers. As anyone who has traveled inter-
nationally learns, the exchange rates available to pri-
vate retail customers are not always as attractive as 
those accessed by companies. The OzForex Web site 
possesses a section on “customer rates” that illustrates 
the difference. Use the site to calculate what the per-
centage difference between Australian dollar/U.S. 
­dollar spot exchange rates are for retail customers 
versus interbank rates.
OzForex
www.ozforex.com.au/exchange-rate
4.	 Exchange Rate History. Use the Pacific Exchange 
Rate database and plot capability to track value 
changes of the British pound, the U.S. dollar, and the 
Japanese yen against each other over the past 15 years.
Pacific Exchange Rate 
Service
fx.sauder.ubc.ca

Chapter	 3
The Balance of Payments
The sort of dependence that results from exchange, i.e., from commercial 
transactions, is a reciprocal dependence. We cannot be dependent upon a 
foreigner without his being dependent on us. Now, this is what constitutes the 
very essence of society. To sever natural interrelations is not to make oneself 
independent, but to isolate oneself completely.
—Frederic Bastiat.
The measurement of all international economic transactions that take place between the 
residents of a country and foreign residents is called the balance of payments (BOP). This 
chapter provides a sort of navigational map to aid in interpreting the balance of payments 
and the multitude of economic, political, and business issues that it involves. But our empha-
sis is far from descriptive, as a deep understanding of trade and capital flows is integral to the 
management of multinational enterprises. In fact, the second half of the chapter emphasizes a 
more detailed analysis of how elements of the balance of payments affect trade volumes and 
prices, as well as how capital flows, capital controls, and capital flight alter the cost and ability 
to do business internationally. The chapter concludes with a Mini-Case, Global Remittances, 
a sector only recently explored in depth by governments as they try to monitor and control 
capital flows across their borders.
Home-country and host-country BOP data, and their subaccounts, are important to 
business managers, investors, consumers, and government officials because the data simul-
taneously influences and is influenced by other key macroeconomic variables, such as gross 
domestic product (GDP), employment levels, price levels, exchange rates, and interest rates. 
Monetary and fiscal policy must take the BOP into account at the national level. Business 
Learning Objectives
■
■
Learn how government and multinational enterprise management uses balance of 
payments accounts and accounting in decision-making
■
■
Examine how the primary accounts of the balance of payments reflects fundamental 
economic and financial activities across borders
■
■
Explore how changes in the balance of payments affect key macroeconomic rates 
like exchange rates and interest rates
■
■
Analyze how exchange rate changes affect the prices and competitiveness of 
­international trade
■
■
Evaluate how governments have responded to the globalization of capital markets 
in their use of capital restrictions in an effort to hinder capital mobility
57

58
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
managers and investors need BOP data to anticipate changes in host-country economic poli-
cies that might be driven by BOP events. BOP data is also important for the following reasons:
■
■
The BOP is an important indicator of pressure on a country’s foreign exchange rate, 
and thus of the potential for a firm trading with or investing in that country to experi-
ence foreign exchange gains or losses. Changes in the BOP may predict the imposi-
tion or removal of foreign exchange controls.
■
■
Changes in a country’s BOP may signal the imposition or removal of controls over 
payment of dividends and interest, license fees, royalty fees, or other cash disburse-
ments to foreign firms or investors.
■
■
The BOP helps to forecast a country’s market potential, especially in the short run. 
A country experiencing a serious trade deficit is not as likely to expand imports, as 
it would be if running a surplus. It may, however, welcome investments that increase 
its exports.
Fundamentals of BOP Accounting
BOP accounting is saddled with terminology from corporate accounting that has different 
meanings in this instance. The word “balance” creates a false image of a corporate balance 
sheet. A BOP statement is a statement of cash flows over an interval of time more in accord 
with a corporate income statement, but on a cash basis. It also uses the terms debit and credit 
in its own unique way. A BOP credit is an event, such as the export of a good or service, 
that records foreign exchange earned—an inflow of foreign exchange to the country. A debit 
records foreign exchange spent, such as payments for imports or purchases of services—an 
outflow of foreign exchange.
International transactions take many forms. Each of the following examples is an inter-
national economic transaction that is counted and captured in the U.S. balance of payments:
■
■
A U.S.-based firm, Fluor Corporation, manages the construction of a major water 
treatment facility in Bangkok, Thailand.
■
■
The U.S. subsidiary of a French firm, Saint Gobain, pays profits back to its parent 
firm in Paris.
■
■
An American tourist purchases a small Lapponia necklace in Finland.
■
■
The U.S. government finances the purchase of military equipment for its military 
ally, Norway.
■
■
A Mexican lawyer purchases a U.S. corporate bond through an investment broker 
in Cleveland.
The BOP provides a systematic method for classifying these transactions. A rule of thumb 
always aids the understanding of BOP accounting: Follow the cash flow.
The BOP has three major sub-accounts—the current account, the capital account, and the 
financial account.
The BOP must balance. If it does not, something has not been counted or has been counted 
improperly. Therefore, it is incorrect to state that “the BOP is in disequilibrium.” It cannot be. 
The supply and demand for a country’s currency may be imbalanced, but that is not the same 
thing as for the whole BOP. A sub-account of the BOP, such as the balance on goods and 
services (a sub-account of any country’s current account), may be imbalanced (in surplus or 
deficit), but the entire BOP of a single country is always balanced.
Exhibit 3.1 illustrates that the BOP does indeed balance, in this case for the United States 
from 2005 through 2012. The five balances listed in Exhibit 3.1—current account, capital 

59
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
account, financial account, net errors and omissions, and reserves and related items—do indeed 
sum to zero.
There are three main elements of the actual process of measuring international economic 
activity: (1) identifying what is and is not an international economic transaction; (2) under-
standing how the flow of goods, services, assets, and money creates debits and credits to the 
overall BOP; and (3) understanding the bookkeeping procedures for BOP accounting.
Defining International Economic Transactions
Identifying international transactions is ordinarily not difficult. The export of merchandise—
goods such as trucks, machinery, computers, telecommunications equipment, and so forth—is 
obviously an international transaction. Imports such as French wine, Japanese cameras, and 
German automobiles are also clearly international transactions. But this merchandise trade is 
only a portion of the thousands of different international transactions that occur in the United 
States and other countries each year.
Many other international transactions are not so obvious. The purchase of a good, like a 
glass figure in Venice, Italy, by a U.S. tourist is classified as a U.S. merchandise import. In fact, 
all expenditures made by U.S. tourists around the globe for services provided by, for example, 
restaurants and hotels are recorded in the U.S. balance of payments as imports of travel ser-
vices in the current account.
The BOP as a Flow Statement
As noted above, the BOP is often misunderstood because many people infer from its name that 
it is a balance sheet, whereas in fact it is a cash flow statement. By recording all international 
transactions over a period of time such as a year, the BOP tracks the continuing flows of pur-
chases and payments between a country and all other countries. It does not add up the value of 
all assets and liabilities of a country on a specific date like a balance sheet does for an individual 
firm (that is, in fact, the net international investment position (NIIP) of a country, described in a 
later section). Two types of business transactions dominate the balance of payments:
1.	 Exchange of real assets. The exchange of goods (e.g., automobiles, computers, tex-
tiles) and services (e.g., banking, consulting, and travel services) for other goods and 
services (barter) or for money
2.	 Exchange of financial assets. The exchange of financial claims (e.g., stocks, bonds, 
loans, and purchases or sales of companies) for other financial claims or money
Although assets can be identified as real or financial, it is often easier to think of all assets 
as goods that can be bought and sold. The purchase of a hand-woven area rug in a shop in 
Exhibit 3.1
The U.S. Balance of Payments Accounts, Summary
Balance
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Current Account Balance
-740
-807
-719
-687
-381
-444
-459
-461
-400
Capital Account Balance
13
-2
0
6
0
0
-1
7
0
Financial Account Balance
687
807
617
735
283
439
532
428
368
Net Errors and Omissions
26
-1
101
-50
150
7
-55
30
30
Reserves and Related
14
2
0
-5
-52
-2
-16
-4
3
Sum or Total
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Source: International Monetary Fund, Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook, 2013.

60
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
Bangkok by a U.S. tourist is not all that different from a Wall Street banker buying a British 
government bond for investment purposes.
BOP Accounting
The measurement of all transactions in and out of a country is a daunting task. Mistakes, errors, 
and statistical discrepancies will occur. The primary problem is that double-entry bookkeeping 
is employed in theory, but not in practice. Individual purchase and sale transactions should—in 
theory—result in financing entries in the balance of payments that match. In reality, current, 
capital, and financial account entries are recorded independently of one another, not together 
as double-entry bookkeeping would prescribe. Thus, there will be discrepancies (to use a nice 
term for it) between debits and credits.
The Accounts of the Balance of Payments
The balance of payments is composed of three major sub-accounts: the current account, the 
capital account, and the financial account. In addition, the official reserves account tracks gov-
ernment currency transactions, and a fifth statistical sub-account, the net errors and omissions 
account, is produced to preserve the balance in the BOP. The word “net” in account titles 
means that payments and receipts, i.e., debits and credits, are netted within that account.
The Current Account
The current account includes all international economic transactions with income or pay-
ment flows occurring within the year, the current period. The current account consists of four 
subcategories:
1.	 Goods trade. The export and import of goods is known as the goods trade. 
­Merchandise trade is the oldest and most traditional form of international economic 
activity. Although many countries depend on both imports and exports of goods, most 
countries seek to preserve either a balance or surplus on goods trade.
2.	 Services trade. The export and import of services is known as the services trade. Com-
mon international services are financial services provided by banks to foreign import-
ers and exporters, travel services of airlines, and construction services of domestic 
firms in other countries. For the major industrial countries, this sub-account has 
shown the fastest growth in the past decade.
3.	 Income. This is predominantly current income associated with investments made in 
previous periods. If a U.S. firm created a subsidiary in South Korea to produce metal 
parts in a previous year, the proportion of net income that is paid back to the parent 
company in the current year (the dividend) constitutes current investment income. 
Additionally, wages and salaries paid to nonresident workers are also included in 
this category.
4.	 Current transfers. Financial settlements associated with the change in ownership of 
real resources or financial items are called current transfers. Any transfer between 
countries that is one-way—a gift or grant—is termed a current transfer. For example, 
funds provided by the U.S. government to aid in the development of a less-developed 
nation are a current transfer. Transfer payments made by migrant or guest workers 
back to their home countries, global remittances, are an example of current transfers.
All countries possess some amount of trade, most of which is merchandise. Many 
­less-developed countries have little in the way of service trade, or items that fall under the 

61
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
income or transfers sub-accounts. The current account is typically dominated by the first com-
ponent described above, the export and import of merchandise. For this reason, the balance 
of trade (BOT) that is so widely quoted in the business press refers to the balance of exports 
and imports of goods trade only. If the country is a larger industrialized country, however, the 
BOT is somewhat misleading, in that service trade is not included.
Exhibit 3.2 presents the two major components of the U.S. current account for the  
2000–2012 period: (1) goods trade and (2) services trade and investment income. The first and 
most striking message is the magnitude of the goods trade deficit. The balance on services and 
income, although not large in comparison to net goods trade, has run a small but consistent 
surplus over the past two decades.
Merchandise trade is the original core of international trade. The manufacturing of goods 
was the basis of the industrial revolution and the focus of the theory of comparative advantage 
in international trade. Manufacturing is traditionally the sector of the economy that employs 
most of a country’s workers. Declines in the U.S. BOT attributed to specific sectors, such as 
steel, automobiles, automotive parts, textiles, and shoe manufacturing, caused massive eco-
nomic and social disruption.
Understanding merchandise import and export performance is much like understand-
ing the market for any single product. The demand factors that drive both are income, the 
economic growth rate of the buyer, and price of the product in the eyes of the consumer after 
passing through an exchange rate. U.S. merchandise imports reflect the income level of U.S. 
consumers and growth of industry. As income rises, so does the demand for imports. Exports 
follow the same principles, but in the reverse. U.S. manufacturing exports depend not on the 
incomes of U.S. residents, but on the incomes of buyers of U.S. products in all other countries 
around the world. When these economies are growing, the demand for U.S. products is growing.
As illustrated in Exhibit 3.2, the United States has consistently run a surplus in services 
trade income. The major categories of services include travel and passenger fares; transpor-
tation services; expenditures by U.S. students abroad, foreign students studying in the U.S.; 
telecommunications services; and financial services.
–1000
–800
–600
–400
–200
0
200
400
Balance on goods
Balance on services 
Source: Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook, International Monetary Fund, December 2014, p. 1,060.
Billions of U.S. dollars
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Exhibit 3.2
U.S. Trade Balances on Goods and Services

62
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
The Capital and Financial Accounts
The capital and financial accounts of the balance of payments measure all international eco-
nomic transactions of financial assets. The capital account is made up of transfers of financial 
assets and the acquisition and disposal of nonproduced/nonfinancial assets. This account has 
been introduced as a separate component in the IMF’s balance of payments only recently. The 
magnitude of capital transactions covered by the Capital Account is relatively minor, and we 
will include it in principle in all of the following discussions of the financial account. But as 
noted in Global Finance in Practice 3.1, some mysteries in global accounts remain!
Financial Account
The financial account consists of four components: direct investment, portfolio investment, net 
financial derivatives, and other asset investment. Financial assets can be classified in a number 
of different ways, including by the length of the life of the asset (its maturity) and the nature of 
the ownership (public or private). The financial account, however, uses degree of control over 
assets or operations to classify financial assets. Direct investment is defined as investment that 
has a long-term life or maturity and in which the investor exerts some explicit degree of control 
over the assets. In contrast, portfolio investment is defined as both short-term in maturity and 
as an investment in which the investor has no control over the assets.
Direct Investment. This investment measure is the net balance of capital dispersed from and 
into a country like the United States for the purpose of exerting control over assets. If a U.S. 
firm builds a new automotive parts facility in another country or purchases a company in 
another country, this is a direct investment in the U.S. balance of payments accounts. When 
the capital flows out of the U.S., it enters the balance of payments as a negative cash flow. If, 
however, a foreign firm purchases a firm in the U.S., it is a capital inflow and enters the bal-
ance of payments positively.
Foreign resident purchases of assets in a country are always somewhat controversial. The 
focus of concern over foreign investment in any country, including the United States, is on 
There are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies and 
statistics.
—Author unknown, though frequently attributed 
to Lord Courtney, Sir Charles Dilke, or Mark Twain.
One country’s surplus is another country’s deficit. That is, indi-
vidual countries may and do run current account deficits and 
surpluses, but it should be, theoretically, a zero sum game. 
According to the IMF’s most recent World Economic Outlook, 
however, the world is running a current account surplus. At 
least that is what the statistics say.*
The rational explanation is that the statistics, as reported 
to the IMF by its member countries, are in error. The errors 
are most likely both accidental and intentional. The IMF 
believed for many years that the most likely explanation was 
under-reporting of foreign investment income by residents 
of the wealthier industrialized countries, as well as under-­
reporting of transportation and freight charges.
Many alternative explanations focus on intentional mis-
reporting of international current account activities. Over- or 
under-invoicing has long been a ploy used in international 
trade to avoid taxes, capital controls, or purchasing restric-
tions. Other arguments, like under-reporting of foreign income 
for tax avoidance and the complexity of intra-company 
transactions and transfer prices, all offer potential partial 
explanations.
But in the end, while the theory says it can’t be, the 
numbers say it is. As noted by The Economist, planet Earth 
appears to be running a current account surplus in its trade 
with extraterrestrials.**
Global Finance in Practice 3.1
The Global Current Account Surplus
*World Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth, Rising Risks, International Monetary Fund, September 2011.
**“Economics Focus, Exports to Mars,” The Economist, November 12, 2011, p. 90

63
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
two issues: control and profit. Some countries place restrictions on what foreigners may own 
in their country. This rule is based on the premise that domestic land, assets, and industry in 
general should be owned by residents of the country. The U.S., however, has traditionally had 
few restrictions on what foreign residents or firms can own or control in the country (with 
the exception of national security concerns). Unlike the case in the traditional debates over 
whether international trade should be free, there is no consensus on international investment.
The second major focus of concern over foreign direct investment is who receives the 
profits from the enterprise. Foreign companies owning firms in the U.S. will ultimately profit 
from the activities of those firms—or to put it another way, foreign companies will profit from 
the efforts of U.S. workers. In spite of evidence that indicates foreign firms in the U.S. reinvest 
most of their profits in their U.S. businesses (in fact, at a higher rate than do domestic firms), 
the debate on possible profit drains has continued. Regardless of the actual choices made, 
workers of any nation feel that the profits of their work should remain in their own hands in 
their own country.
The choice of words used to describe foreign investment can also influence public opinion. 
If these massive capital inflows are described as “capital investments from all over the world 
showing their faith in the future of U.S. industry,” the net capital surplus is represented as 
decidedly positive. If, however, the net capital surplus is described as resulting in “the United 
States being the world’s largest debtor nation,” the negative connotation is obvious. Both are 
essentially spins on the same economic principles at work.
Capital, whether short-term or long-term, flows to where the investor believes it can 
earn the greatest return for the level of risk. And although in an accounting sense this is 
“international debt,” when the majority of the capital inflow is in the form of direct invest-
ment, a long-term commitment to jobs, production, services, technological, and other competi-
tive investments, the impact on the competitiveness of industry located within a country is 
increased. Net direct investment cash flows for the U.S. are shown in Exhibit 3.3.
Portfolio Investment. This is the net balance of capital that flows into and out of a country but 
that does not reach the 10% ownership threshold of direct investment. If a U.S. resident pur-
chases shares in a Japanese firm but does not attain the 10% threshold, we define the purchase 
as a portfolio investment (and an outflow of capital). The purchase or sale of debt securities 
(like U.S. Treasury bills) across borders is also classified as portfolio investment, because debt 
securities by definition do not provide the buyer with ownership or control.
Portfolio investment is capital invested in activities that are purely profit-motivated 
(return), rather than activities to control or manage the investment. Purchases of debt secu-
rities, bonds, interest-bearing bank accounts, and the like are intended only to earn a return. 
They provide no vote or control over the party issuing the debt. Purchases of debt issued 
by the U.S. government (U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds) by foreign investors consti-
tute net portfolio investment in the United States. It is worth noting that most U.S. debt 
purchased by foreigners is U.S. dollar-denominated in the currency of the issuing country 
(dollars). Much of the foreign debt issued by countries such as Russia, Brazil, and Southeast 
Asian countries is also U.S. dollar-denominated, and is therefore the currency of a foreign 
country. The foreign country must then earn dollars to repay its foreign-held debt, typically 
through exports.
As illustrated in Exhibit 3.3, portfolio investment has shown much more volatile behavior 
than net foreign direct investment has over the past decade. Many U.S. debt securities, such 
as U.S. Treasury securities and corporate bonds, are consistently in high demand by foreign 
investors of all kinds. The motivating forces for portfolio investment flows are always the same: 
return and risk. These same debt securities have also been influential in a different measure of 
international investment activity, as described in Global Finance in Practice 3.2.

64
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
–200
–100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Source: Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook, International Monetary Fund, 2013.
Net portfolio investment
Net direct investment
Billions of U.S. dollars
1985
1987
1988
1986
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Exhibit 3.3
The U.S. Financial Accounts, 1985–2013
The net international investment position (NIIP) of a country is 
an annual measure of the assets owned abroad by its citizens, 
its companies, and its government, less the assets owned by 
foreigners public and private in their country. Whereas a coun-
try’s balance of payments is often described as a country’s 
international cash flow statement, the NIIP may be interpreted 
as the country’s international balance sheet. NIIP is a country’s 
stock of foreign assets minus its stock of foreign liabilities.
The NIIP, in the same way company cash flows are 
related to a company’s balance sheet, is based upon and 
categorized by the same capital and financial accounts used 
in the balance of payments: direct investment, portfolio invest-
ment, other investment and reserve assets. As international 
capital has found it easier and easier to move between cur-
rencies and cross borders in recent years, ownership of assets 
and securities has clearly boomed.
One common method of putting a country’s NIIP into 
perspective is to measure it as a percentage of the total eco-
nomic size of the nation—the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
of the country. As illustrated here, the NIIP of the U.S. has 
clearly seen a dramatic increase since 2005, now averaging 
25% of U.S. GDP.
Although some observers have seen this growing per-
centage as a risk to the U.S. economy (such as calling the U.S. 
the world’s largest debtor nation), these investments in assets 
of all kinds in many ways represent the faith foreign investors 
have in the future of the nation and its economy. A large part 
of this investment is the purchase of U.S. government securi-
ties, Treasury notes and bonds, issued in part to finance the 
U.S. government’s growing deficits. These foreign purchasers 
have therefore aided in the financing of the U.S. government’s 
budget deficit.
Global Finance in Practice 3.2
A Country’s Net International Investment Position (NIIP)

65
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
–30%
–25%
–20%
–15%
–10%
0%
–5%
U.S. NIIP as Percentage of Gross Domestic Product
The U.S. NIIP as a percentage of GDP has been growing steadily and
rapidly over the past 16 years.
A large part of this growth has resulted from foreign investors purchasing U.S. government notes and bonds–U.S. Treasuries. This has aided in 
the ﬁnancing of the U.S. government budget deﬁcit while keeping the cost of that ﬁnancing from rising rapidly.
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
30,000
25,000
Billions of U.S. dollars
Foreign-Owned Assets
in the United States
The United States has been running a negative NIIP 
consistently since 1985
U.S.-Owned Assets
Abroad
Source: Congressional Research Service.
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 
U.S. Net International Investment Position (NIIP)
Other Asset Investment. This final component of the financial account consists of various 
short-term and long-term trade credits, cross-border loans from all types of financial institu-
tions, currency deposits and bank deposits, and other accounts receivable and payable related 
to cross-border trade.
Net Errors and Omissions and Official Reserves Accounts
Exhibit 3.4 illustrates the current account balance and the capital/financial account balances 
for the United States over recent years. The exhibit shows one of the basic economic and 

66
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
accounting relationships of the balance of payments: the inverse relation between the current 
and financial accounts.
This inverse relationship is not accidental. The methodology of the balance of payments, 
double-entry bookkeeping requires that the current and financial accounts be offsetting unless 
the country’s exchange rate is being highly manipulated by governmental authorities. The next 
section on China describes one very high profile case in which government policy has thwarted 
economics—the twin surpluses of China. Countries experiencing large current account deficits 
fund these deficits through equally large surpluses in the financial account, and vice versa.
Net Errors and Omissions Account. As previously noted, because current and financial 
account entries are collected and recorded separately, errors or statistical discrepancies will 
occur. The net errors and omissions account ensures that the BOP actually balances.
Official Reserves Account. The Official Reserves Account is the total reserves held by official 
monetary authorities within a country. These reserves are normally composed of the major 
currencies used in international trade and financial transactions (so-called “hard currencies” 
like the U.S. dollar, European euro, and Japanese yen; gold; and special drawing rights, SDRs).
The significance of official reserves depends generally on whether a country is operating 
under a fixed exchange rate regime or a floating exchange rate system. If a country’s currency 
is fixed, the government of the country officially declares that the currency is convertible 
into a fixed amount of some other currency. For example, the Chinese yuan was fixed to the 
U.S. ­dollar for many years. It was the Chinese government’s responsibility to maintain this 
fixed rate, also called parity rate. If for some reason there was an excess supply of yuan on 
–1,000
–800
–600
–400
–200
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
Source: Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook, International Monetary Fund, December 2013, p. 1,032.
Current account
Financial/capital account
Billions of U.S. Dollars
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Exhibit 3.4
Current and Financial/Capital Account Balances for the United States

67
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
the currency market, to prevent the value of the yuan from falling, the Chinese government 
would have to support the yuan’s value by purchasing yuan on the open market (by spending 
its hard currency reserves) until the excess supply was eliminated. Under a floating rate sys-
tem, the Chinese government possesses no such responsibility and the role of official reserves 
is diminished. But as described in the following section, the Chinese government’s foreign 
exchange reserves are now the largest in the world, and if need be, it probably possesses suf-
ficient reserves to manage the yuan’s value for years to come.
Breaking the Rules: China’s Twin Surpluses
Exhibit 3.5 documents one of the more astounding BOP behaviors seen globally in many 
years—the twin surplus balances enjoyed by China in recent years. China’s surpluses in both 
the current and financial accounts—termed the twin surplus in the business press—are highly 
unusual. Ordinarily, for example, in the cases of the United States, Germany, and Great Brit-
ain, a country will demonstrate an inverse relationship between the two accounts. This inverse 
relationship is not accidental, and typically illustrates that most large, mature, industrial coun-
tries “finance” their current account deficits through equally large surpluses in the financial 
account. For some countries like Japan, it is the inverse; a current account surplus is matched 
against a financial account deficit.
China, however, has experienced a massive current account surplus and a sometimes 
­sizable financial account surplus simultaneously. This is rare, and an indicator of just how 
exceptional the growth of the Chinese economy has been. Although current account surpluses 
of this magnitude would ordinarily create a financial account deficit, the positive prospects 
of the Chinese economy have drawn such massive capital inflows into China in recent years 
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
–50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Source: Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook, International Monetary Fund, December 2013.
Current account
Financial/capital account
Billions of U.S. Dollars
Exhibit 3.5
China’s Twin Surplus, 1998–2013

68
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
that the financial account too is in surplus. Note that the financial account surplus fell sizably 
in 2012, only to rise to a record level in 2013—as a result of continuing deregulation of capital 
inflows into the country’s economy.
The rise of the Chinese economy has been accompanied by a rise in its current account sur-
plus, and subsequently, its accumulation of foreign exchange reserves. China’s foreign exchange 
reserves increased by a factor of 16 between 2001 and 2013—rising from $200 billion to nearly 
$3.7 trillion. There is no real precedent for this build-up in foreign exchange reserves in global 
financial history. These reserves allow the Chinese government to manage the value of the 
Chinese yuan and its impact on Chinese competitiveness in the world economy. The magnitude 
of these reserves will allow the Chinese government to maintain a relatively stable managed 
fixed rate of the yuan against other major currencies like the U.S. dollar as long as it chooses.
BOP Impacts on Key Macroeconomic Rates
A country’s balance of payments both impacts and is impacted by the three macroeconomic 
rates of international finance: exchange rates, interest rates, and inflation rates.
The BOP and Exchange Rates
A country’s BOP can have a significant impact on the level of its exchange rate and vice versa, 
depending on that country’s exchange rate regime. The relationship between the BOP and 
exchange rates can be illustrated by using a simplified equation that summarizes BOP data:
Current 
Account 
Balance
Capital 
Account 
Balance
Financial 
Account 
Balance
Reserve 
Balance
Balance of 
Payments
(X - M  )
+
(CI - CO)
+
(FI - FO)
+
FXB
=
BOP
 X = exports of goods and services,
 M = imports of goods and services,
 CI = capital inflows,
 CO = capital outflows,
 FI = financial inflows,
 FO = financial outflows,
 FXB = official monetary reserves such as foreign exchange and gold.
The effect of an imbalance in the BOP of a country works somewhat differently depend-
ing on whether that country has fixed exchange rates, floating exchange rates, or a managed 
exchange rate system.
Fixed Exchange Rate Countries. Under a fixed exchange rate system, the government bears 
the responsibility to ensure that the BOP is near zero. If the sum of the current and capital 
accounts do not approximate zero, the government is expected to intervene in the foreign 
exchange market by buying or selling official foreign exchange reserves. If the sum of the first 
two accounts is greater than zero, a surplus demand for the domestic currency exists in the 
world. To preserve the fixed exchange rate, the government must then intervene in the foreign 
exchange market and sell domestic currency for foreign currencies or gold in order to bring 
the BOP back to near zero.
If the sum of the current and capital accounts is negative, an excess supply of the domestic 
currency exists in world markets. Then the government must intervene by buying the domes-
tic currency with its reserves of foreign currencies and gold. It is obviously important for a 

69
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
government to maintain significant foreign exchange reserve balances, sufficient to allow it to 
intervene effectively. If the country runs out of foreign exchange reserves, it will be unable to 
buy back its domestic currency and will be forced to devalue its currency.
Floating Exchange Rate Countries. Under a floating exchange rate system, the government 
of a country has no responsibility to peg its foreign exchange rate. The fact that the current and 
capital account balances do not sum to zero will automatically—in theory—alter the exchange 
rate in the direction necessary to obtain a BOP near zero. For example, a country running a 
sizable current account deficit and a capital and financial accounts balance of zero will have 
a net BOP deficit. An excess supply of the domestic currency will appear on world markets. 
Like all goods in excess supply, the market will rid itself of the imbalance by lowering the 
price. Thus, the domestic currency will fall in value, and the BOP will move back toward zero.
Exchange rate markets do not always follow this theory, particularly in the short to inter-
mediate term. This delay is known as the J-curve (detailed in an upcoming section). The deficit 
gets worse in the short run, but moves back toward equilibrium in the long run.
Managed Floats. Although still relying on market conditions for day-to-day exchange rate 
determination, countries operating with managed floats often find it necessary to take action 
to maintain their desired exchange rate values. They often seek to alter the market’s valuation 
of their currency by influencing the motivations of market activity, rather than through direct 
intervention in the foreign exchange markets.
The primary action taken by these governments is to change relative interest rates, thus 
influencing the economic fundamentals of exchange rate determination. In the context of the 
equation presented earlier, a change in domestic interest rates is an attempt to alter the capital 
account balance (CI - CO), especially the short-term portfolio component of these capital 
flows, in order to restore an imbalance caused by the deficit in the current account.
The power of interest rate changes on international capital and exchange rate movements 
can be substantial. A country with a managed float that wishes to defend its currency may 
choose to raise domestic interest rates to attract additional capital from abroad. This step will 
alter market forces and create additional market demand for the domestic currency. In this 
process, the government signals to the markets that it intends to take measures to preserve the 
currency’s value within certain ranges. However, process also raises the cost of local borrowing 
for businesses, so the policy is seldom without domestic critics.
The BOP and Interest Rates
Apart from the use of interest rates to intervene in the foreign exchange market, the overall 
level of a country’s interest rates compared to other countries has an impact on the finan-
cial account of the balance of payments. Relatively low real interest rates should normally 
stimulate an outflow of capital seeking higher interest rates in other country currencies. How-
ever, in the case of the United States, the opposite effect has occurred. Despite relatively 
low real interest rates and large BOP deficits on the current account, the U.S. BOP financial 
account has experienced offsetting financial inflows due to relatively attractive U.S. growth 
rate prospects, high levels of productive innovation, and perceived political safety. Thus, the 
financial account inflows have helped the United States to maintain its lower interest rates 
and to finance its exceptionally large fiscal deficit. However, it is beginning to appear that the 
favorable inflow on the financial account is diminishing while the U.S. balance on the current 
account is worsening.
The BOP and Inflation Rates
Imports have the potential to lower a country’s inflation rate. In particular, imports of 
lower-priced goods and services place a limit on what domestic competitors can charge for 

70
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
comparable goods and services. Thus, foreign competition substitutes for domestic competition 
to maintain a lower rate of inflation than might have been the case without imports.
On the other hand, to the extent that lower-priced imports substitute for domestic produc-
tion and employment, gross domestic product will be lower and the balance on the current 
account will be more negative.
Trade Balances and Exchange Rates
A country’s import and export of goods and services is affected by changes in exchange rates. 
The transmission mechanism is in principle quite simple: changes in exchange rates change rel-
ative prices of imports and exports, and changing prices in turn result in changes in quantities 
demanded through the price elasticity of demand. Although the theory seems ­straightforward, 
real global business is more complex.
Trade and Devaluation
Countries occasionally devalue their own currencies as a result of persistent and sizable trade 
deficits. Many countries in the not-too-distant past have intentionally devalued their currencies 
in an effort to make their exports more price-competitive on world markets. These competi-
tive devaluations are often considered self-destructive, however, as they also make imports 
relatively more expensive. So what is the logic and likely results of intentionally devaluing the 
domestic currency to improve the trade balance?
The J-Curve Adjustment Path
International economic analysis characterizes the trade balance adjustment process as occur-
ring in three stages: (1) the currency contract period; (2) the pass-through period; and (3) the 
quantity adjustment period. These three stages are illustrated in Exhibit 3.6. Assuming that 
the trade balance is already in deficit prior to the devaluation, a devaluation at time t1 results 
initially in a further deterioration in the trade balance before an eventual improvement. The 
path of adjustment, as shown, takes on the shape of a flattened “j.”
In the first period, the currency contract period, a sudden unexpected devaluation of the 
domestic currency has a somewhat uncertain impact, simply because all of the contracts for 
exports and imports are already in effect. Firms operating under these agreements are required 
to fulfill their obligations, regardless of whether they profit or suffer losses. Assume that the 
United States experienced a sudden fall in the value of the U.S. dollar. Most exports were 
priced in U.S. dollars but most imports were contracts denominated in foreign currency. The 
result of a sudden depreciation would be an increase in the size of the trade deficit at time t1 
because the cost to U.S. importers of paying their import bills would rise as they spent more 
dollars to buy the foreign currency they needed, while the revenues earned by U.S. exporters 
would remain unchanged. There is little reason, however, to believe that most U.S. imports are 
denominated in foreign currency and most exports in dollars.
The second period of the trade balance adjustment process is termed the pass-through 
period. As exchange rates change, importers and exporters eventually must pass these exchange 
rate changes through to their own product prices. For example, a foreign producer selling to the 
U.S. market after a major fall in the value of the U.S. dollar will have to cover its own domestic 
costs of production. This need will require the firm to charge higher dollar prices in order to 
earn its own local currency in large enough quantities. The firm must raise its prices in the U.S. 
market. U.S. import prices then rise, eventually passing the full exchange rate changes through 
to prices. Similarly, the U.S. export prices are now cheaper compared to foreign competitors’ 
because the dollar is cheaper. Unfortunately for U.S. exporters, many of the inputs for their 
final products may actually be imported, dampening the positive impact of the fall of the dollar.

71
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
The third and final period, the quantity adjustment period, achieves the balance of trade 
adjustment that is expected from a domestic currency devaluation or depreciation. As the 
import and export prices change as a result of the pass-through period, consumers both in 
the United States and in the U.S. export markets adjust their demands to the new prices. 
Imports are relatively more expensive; therefore the quantity demanded decreases. Exports 
are relatively cheaper; therefore the quantity demanded increases. The balance of trade—the 
expenditures on exports less the expenditures on imports—improves.
Unfortunately, these three adjustment periods do not occur overnight. Countries like 
the U.S. that have experienced major exchange rate changes, have also seen this adjustment 
take place over a prolonged period. Empirical studies have concluded that for industrial 
countries, the total time elapsing between time t1 and t2 can vary from 3 to 12 months. To 
complicate the process, new exchange rate changes often occur before the adjustment is 
completed.
Trade Balance Adjustment Path: The Equation
A country’s trade balance is essentially the net of import and export revenues, where each 
is a multiple of price—Px
$ and Pm
fc —the prices of exports and imports, respectively. Export 
prices are assumed to be denominated in U.S. dollars, and import prices are denominated in 
foreign currency. The quantity of exports and the quantity of imports are denoted as Qx and 
Qm, respectively. Import expenditures are then expressed in U.S. dollars by multiplying the 
foreign currency denominated expenditures by the spot exchange rate S$/fc. The U.S. trade 
balance, expressed in U.S. dollars, is then expressed as follows:
U.S. Trade Balance = Px
$ Qx) - (S$/fc PM
fc  QM)
Trade Balance
(Domestic Currency)
Time
(Months)
Initial Trade
Balance Position
(Typically in Deﬁcit)
t1
t2
Currency
Contract
Period
Exchange Rate
Pass-Through
Period
Quantity
Adjustment
Period
If export products are predominantly priced and invoiced in domestic currency, and imports are predominantly priced and invoiced 
in foreign currency, a sudden devaluation of the domestic currency can possibly result—initially—in a deterioration of the balance 
on trade. After exchange rate changes are passed through to product prices, and markets have time to respond to price changes 
by altering market demands, the trade balance will improve. The currency contract period may last from three to six months, with 
pass-through and quality adjustment following for an additional three to six months.
Trade Balance
Exhibit 3.6
Trade Adjustment to Exchange Rates: The J-Curve

72
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
The immediate impact of a devaluation of the domestic currency is to increase the value 
of the spot exchange rate S$/fc, resulting in an immediate deterioration in the trade balance 
(currency contract period). Only after a period in which the current contracts have matured, 
and new prices reflecting partial to full pass-through of the exchange rate change, will improve-
ment in the trade balance be evident (pass-through period). In the final stage, in which the 
price elasticity of demand has time to take effect (quantity adjustment period), is the actual 
trade balance expected to rise above where it started in Exhibit 3.6.
Capital Mobility
The degree to which capital moves freely cross-border is critically important to a country’s 
balance of payments. We have already seen how the U.S. has suffered a deficit in its current 
account balance over the past 20 years while running a surplus in the financial account, and 
how China has enjoyed a surplus in both the current and financial accounts over the last 
decade. But these are only two country cases, and may not reflect the challenges that chang-
ing balances in trade and capital may mean for many countries, particularly smaller ones or 
emerging markets.
Current Account versus Financial Account Capital Flows
Capital inflows can contribute significantly to an economy’s development. Capital inflows 
can increase the availability of capital for new projects, new infrastructure development, and 
productivity improvements. These, in turn, may stimulate general economic growth and job 
creation. For domestic holders of capital, the ability to invest outside the domestic economy 
may reap greater investment returns, portfolio diversification, and extend the commercial 
development of domestic enterprises.
That said, the free flow of capital in and out of an economy can potentially destabilize 
economic activity. Although the benefits of free capital flows have been known for centuries, 
so have the negatives. For this very reason, the creators of the Bretton Woods system were very 
careful to promote and require the free movement of capital for current account transactions—
foreign exchange, bank deposits, money market instruments—but they did not require such 
free transit for capital account transactions—foreign direct investment and equity investments.
Experience has shown that current account-related capital flows can be more volatile, with 
capital flowing in and out of an economy and a currency on the basis of short-term interest rate 
differentials and exchange rate expectations. This volatility is somewhat compartmentalized, 
not directly impacting real asset investments, employment, or long-term economic growth. 
Longer-term capital flows reflect more fundamental economic expectations, including growth 
prospects and perceptions of political stability.
The complexity of issues, however, is apparent when you consider the plight of many 
emerging market countries. Recall the impossible trinity from Chapter 2—the theoretical 
structure that states that no country can maintain a fixed exchange rate, allow complete capi-
tal mobility (both in and out of the country), and conduct independent monetary policy—
simultaneously. Many emerging market countries have continued to develop by maintaining 
a near-fixed (soft peg) exchange rate regime—a strictly independent monetary policy—while 
restricting capital inflows and outflows. With the growth of current account business activity 
(exports and imports of goods and services), more current account-related capital flows are 
deregulated. If, however, the country experiences significant volatility in these short-term 
capital movements, capital flows potentially impacting either exchange rate pegs or monetary 
policy objectives, authorities are often quick to reinstitute capital controls.
The growth in capital openness over the past 30 years resulted in a significant increase in 
political pressures for more countries to open up more of their financial account sectors to 

73
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
international capital. But the devastation of the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997/1998 brought 
much of that to a halt. Smaller economies, no matter how successful their growth and devel-
opment may have been under export-oriented trade strategies, found themselves still sub-
ject to sudden and destructive capital outflows in times of economic crisis and financial 
contagion.
Historical Patterns of Capital Mobility
Before leaving our discussion of the balance of payments, we need to gain additional insights 
into the history of capital mobility and the contribution of capital outflows—capital flight—to 
balance of payments crises. Has capital always been free to move in and out of a country? 
Definitely not. The ability of foreign investors to own property, buy businesses, or purchase 
stocks and bonds in other countries has been controversial.
Exhibit 3.7, first introduced in Chapter 2, provides a way of categorizing historical eras of 
capital mobility over the last 150 years. The exhibit divides economic history into five distinct 
exchange rate eras and their associated implications for capital mobility (or lack thereof). 
These exchange rate eras obviously reflect the exchange rate regimes we discussed and 
detailed in Chapter 2, but also reflect the evolution of political economy beliefs and policies 
of both industrialized and emerging market nations over this period.
The Gold Standard (1860–1914). Although an era of growing capital openness in which 
trade and capital began to flow more freely, it was an era dominated by industrialized nation 
economies that were dependent on gold convertibility to maintain confidence in the system.
The Inter-War Years (1914–1945). This was an era of retrenchment in which major economic 
powers returned to policies of isolationism and protectionism, thereby restricting trade and 
nearly eliminating capital mobility. The devastating results included financial crisis, a global 
depression, and rising international political and economic disputes that drove nations into a 
second world war.
1860
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020
Classical Gold
Standard
Inter-War
Years
Fixed
Exchange
Rates
Floating
Exchange
Rates
Emerging Era
1870s
1914
1923
1938 1944
1973
1997
World War I
World War II
Impact
on
Trade
Impact
on
Economies
Increased world
trade with limited
capital ﬂows
Trade dominated
capital ﬂows
Protectionism &
nationalism
Increased barriers
to trade &
capital ﬂows
Expanded open
economies
Capital ﬂows
begin to
dominate trade
Capital ﬂows
dominate trade
Selected emerging
nations open
capital markets
Industrial
economies
increasingly
open; emerging
nations
open slowly
Capital ﬂows
drive economic
development
Exhibit 3.7
The Evolution of the Global Monetary System

74
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
The Bretton Woods Era (1945–1971). The dollar-based fixed exchange rate system under 
­Bretton Woods gave rise to a long period of economic recovery and growing openness of both 
international trade and capital flows in and out of countries. Many researchers (for example 
­Obstfeld and Taylor, 2001) believe it was the rapid growth in the speed and volume of capital 
flows that ultimately led to the failure of Bretton Woods—global capital could no longer be held 
in check.
The Floating Era (1971–1997). The Floating Era, saw the rise of a growing schism between 
the industrialized and emerging market nations. The industrialized nations (primary curren-
cies) moved to—or were driven to—floating exchange rates by capital mobility. The emerging 
markets (secondary currencies), in an attempt to both promote economic development and 
maintain control over their economies and currencies, opened trade but maintained restric-
tions on capital flows. Despite these restrictions, the era ended with the onslaught of the Asian 
Financial Crisis in 1997.
The Emerging Era (1997–Present). The emerging economies, led by China and India, 
attempt to gradually open their markets to global capital. But, as the impossible trinity taught 
the industrial nations in previous years, the increasing mobility of capital now requires that 
they give up either the ability to manage their currency values or to conduct independent 
monetary policies. The most challenging dimension in this current era is that a number 
of emerging market currencies are now being buffered by the magnitude of non-current 
account capital flows—portfolio capital or “hot money” flows as it has been termed—and 
their currencies now suffer larger swings in appreciation or depreciation as capital flows 
grow in magnitude.
The 2008–2014 period reinforced what some call the double-edged sword of global capital 
movements. The credit crisis of 2008–2009, beginning in the United States, quickly spread to the 
global economy, pulling and pushing down industrial and emerging market economies alike. But 
in the post credit crisis period, global capital now flowed toward the emerging markets. Although 
funding and fueling their rapid economic recoveries, it came—in the words of one journalist—
“with luggage.” The increasing pressure on emerging market currencies to appreciate is partially 
undermining their export competitiveness. But then, just as suddenly as the capital came, it went. 
In late 2013, the U.S. Federal Reserve announced that it would be slowing money supply growth 
and allowing U.S. interest rates to rise. Capital once again moved; this time out of the emerging 
markets into the more traditional industrial countries like the U.S. and Europe.
Capital Controls
A capital control is any restriction that limits or alters the rate or direction of capital movement 
into or out of a country. Capital controls may take many forms, sometimes dictating which 
parties may undertake which types of capital transactions for which purposes—the who, what, 
when, where, and why of investment.
It is in many ways the bias of the journalistic and academic press that believes that capital 
has been able to move freely across boundaries. Free movement of capital in and out of a coun-
try is more the exception than the rule. The United States has been relatively open to capital 
inflows and outflows for many years, while China has been one of the most closed over that 
same period. When it comes to moving capital, the world is full of requirements, restrictions, 
taxes, and documentation approvals.
There is a spectrum of motivations for capital controls, with most associated with either 
insulating the domestic monetary and financial economy from outside markets or political 
motivations over ownership and access interests. As illustrated in Exhibit 3.8, capital controls 
are just as likely to occur over capital inflows as they are over capital outflows. Although there 

75
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
Exhibit 3.8
Purposes of Capital Controls
Control Purpose
Method
Capital Flow 
Controlled
Example
General Revenue/
Finance War Effort
Controls on capital outflows permit a country to 
run higher inflation with a given fixed-exchange 
rate and also hold down domestic interest rates.
Outflows
Most belligerents in 
WWI and WWII
Financial Repression/
Credit Allocation
Governments that use the financial system to 
reward favored industries or to raise revenue, may 
use capital controls to prevent capital from going 
abroad to seek higher returns.
Outflows
Common in developing 
countries
Correct a Balance of 
Payments Deficit
Controls on outflows reduce demand for foreign 
assets without contractionary monetary policy or 
devaluation. This allows a higher rate of inflation 
than otherwise would be possible.
Outflows
U.S. interest 
equalization tax 
1963–1974
Correct a Balance of 
Payments Surplus
Controls on inflows reduce foreign demand for 
domestic assets without expansionary monetary 
policy or revaluation. This allows a lower rate of 
inflation than would otherwise be possible.
Inflows
German Bardepot 
Scheme 1972–1974
Prevent Potentially 
Volatile Inflows
Restricting inflows enhances macroeconomic 
stability by reducing the pool of capital that can 
leave a country during a crisis.
Inflows
Chilean encaje 
1991–1998
Prevent Financial 
Destabilization
Capital controls can restrict or change the 
composition of international capital flows that can 
exacerbate distorted incentives in the domestic 
financial system.
Inflows
Chilean encaje 
1991–1998
Prevent Real 
Appreciation
Restricting inflows prevents the necessity of 
monetary expansion and greater domestic inflation 
that would cause a real appreciation of the 
currency.
Inflows
Chilean encaje 
1991–1998
Restrict Foreign 
Ownership of Domestic 
Assets
Foreign ownership of certain domestic assets—
especially natural resources—can generate 
resentment.
Inflows
Article 27 of the 
Mexican Constitution
Preserve Savings for 
Domestic Use
The benefits of investing in the domestic economy 
may not fully accrue to savers so the economy as 
a whole can be made better off by restricting the 
outflow of capital.
Outflows
—
Protect Domestic 
Financial Firms
Controls that temporarily segregate domestic 
financial sectors from the rest of the world may 
permit domestic firms to attain economies of scale 
to compete in world markets.
Inflows and 
Outflows
—
Source: “An Introduction to Capital Controls,” Christopher J. Neely, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, November/December 1999, p. 16.
is a tendency for a negative connotation to accompany capital controls (possibly the bias of 
the word “control” itself), the impossible trinity requires that capital flows be controlled if a 
country wishes to maintain a fixed exchange rate and an independent monetary policy.
Capital controls may take a variety of forms that mirror restrictions on trade. They may 
simply be a tax on a specific transaction, they may limit the quantity or magnitude of specific 
capital transactions, or they may prohibit transactions altogether. The controls themselves have 
tended to follow the basic dichotomy of the balance of payments current account transactions 
versus financial account transactions.

76
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
In some cases capital controls are intended to stop or thwart capital outflows and cur-
rency devaluation or depreciation. The case of Malaysia during the Asian Crisis of 1997–1998 
is one example. As the Malaysian currency came under attack and capital started to leave the 
­Malaysian economy, the government imposed capital controls to stop short-term capital move-
ments, in or out, but not hinder nor restrict long-term inward investment. All trade-related 
requests for access to foreign exchange were granted, allowing current account-related capital 
flows to continue. But access to foreign exchange for inward or outward money market or 
capital market investments were restricted. Foreign residents wishing to invest in Malaysian 
assets—real assets not financial assets—had open access.
Capital controls can be implemented in the opposite case, in which the primary fear is that 
large rapid capital inflows will both cause currency appreciation (and therefore harm export 
competitiveness) and complicate monetary policy (capital inflows flooding money markets 
and bank deposits). Chile in the 1990s provides an example. Newfound political and economic 
soundness started attracting international capital. The Chilean government responded with its 
encaje program, which imposed taxes and restrictions on short-term (less than one year) capital 
inflows, as well as restrictions on the ability of domestic financial institutions to extend credits 
or loans in foreign currency. Although credited with achieving its goals of maintaining domestic 
monetary policy and preventing a rapid appreciation in the Chilean peso, this program came 
at substantial cost to Chilean firms, particularly smaller ones.
A similar use of capital controls to prevent domestic currency appreciation is the so-called 
case of Dutch Disease. With the rapid growth of the natural gas industry in the Netherlands in 
the 1970s, there was growing fear that massive capital inflows would drive up the demand for 
the Dutch guilder and cause a substantial currency appreciation. A more expensive guilder 
would harm other Dutch manufacturing industries, causing them to decline relative to the 
natural resource industry. This is a challenge faced by a number of resource-rich economies 
of relatively modest size and with relatively small export sectors in recent years, including oil 
and gas development in Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Nigeria, to name but a few.
An extreme problem that has raised its head a number of times in international finan-
cial history is capital flight, one of the problems that capital controls are designed to control. 
Although defining capital flight is a bit difficult, the most common definition is the rapid 
outflow of capital in opposition to or in fear of domestic political and economic conditions 
and policies. Although it is not limited to heavily indebted countries, the rapid and sometimes 
illegal transfer of convertible currencies out of a country poses significant economic and politi-
cal problems. Many heavily indebted countries have suffered significant capital flight, com-
pounding their problems of debt service.
There are a number of mechanisms used for moving money from one country to another, 
some legal, some not. Transfers via the usual international payments mechanisms (regular bank 
transfers) are obviously the easiest and lowest cost, and are legal. Most economically healthy 
countries allow free exchange of their currencies, but of course for such countries capital flight 
is not a problem. The opposite, transfer of physical currency by bearer (the proverbial smug-
gling out of cash in the false bottom of a suitcase) is more costly and, for transfers out of many 
countries, illegal. Such transfers may be deemed illegal for balance of payments reasons or to 
make difficult the movement of money from the drug trade or other illegal activities.
And there are other more creative solutions. One is to move cash via collectibles or pre-
cious metals, which are then transferred across borders. Money laundering is the cross-border 
purchase of assets that are then managed in a way that hides the movement of money and its 
ownership. And finally, false invoicing of international trade transactions occurs when capital 
is moved through the under-invoicing of exports or the over-invoicing of imports, where the 
difference between the invoiced amount and the actual agreed upon payment is deposited in 
banking institutions in a country of choice.

77
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
Globalization of Capital Flows
Notwithstanding these benefits, many EMEs [emerging market economies] are con-
cerned that the recent surge in capital inflows could cause problems for their economies. 
Many of the flows are perceived to be temporary, reflecting interest rate differentials, 
which may be at least partially reversed when policy interest rates in advanced economies 
return to more normal levels. Against this backdrop, capital controls are again in the news.
A concern has been that massive inflows can lead to exchange rate overshooting 
(or merely strong appreciations that significantly complicate economic management) 
or inflate asset price bubbles, which can amplify financial fragility and crisis risk. More 
broadly, following the crisis, policymakers are again reconsidering the view that unfet-
tered capital flows are a fundamentally benign phenomenon and that all financial flows 
are the result of rational investing/borrowing/lending decisions. Concerns that foreign 
investors may be subject to herd behavior, and suffer from excessive optimism, have 
grown stronger; and even when flows are fundamentally sound, it is recognized that 
they may contribute to collateral damage, including bubbles and asset booms and busts.
—“Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls,” Jonathan D. Ostry, Atish R. Ghosh, 
Karl Habermeier, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Dennis B.S. Reinhardt, 
IMF Staff Position Note, SPN/10/04, February 19, 2010, p. 3.
Traditionally, the primary concern over capital inflows is that they are short-term in duration, 
may flow out with short notice, and are characteristics of the politically and economically 
unstable emerging markets. But as described in the preceding quote, two of the largest capital 
flow crises in recent years have occurred within the largest, most highly developed, mature 
capital markets—the United States and Western Europe.
In both the 2008 global credit crisis, which had the United States as its core, and the ensu-
ing European sovereign debt crisis, crisis befell markets that have long been considered some 
of the most mature, the most sophisticated, and the “safest.”
Summary Points
■
■
The BOP is the summary statement—a cash flow state-
ment—of all international transactions between one 
country and all other countries over a period of time, 
typically a year.
■
■
The two sub-accounts of the BOP that receive the 
most attention are the current account and the finan-
cial account. These accounts summarize the current 
trade and international capital flows of the country, 
respectively.
■
■
The current account and financial account are typically 
inverse on balance, one in surplus and the other in defi-
cit. China, however, has been consistently enjoying a 
surplus of both.
■
■
Monitoring the various sub-accounts of a country’s BOP 
activity is helpful to decision-makers and policymakers, 
on all levels of government and industry, in detecting 
the underlying trends and movements of fundamental 
economic forces driving a country’s international eco-
nomic activity.
■
■
Changes in exchange rates affect relative prices of 
imports and exports, and changing prices in turn result 
in changes in quantities demanded through the price 
elasticity of demand.
■
■
A devaluation results initially in a further deterioration of 
the trade balance before an eventual improvement—the 
path of adjustment taking on the shape of a flattened “j.”
■
■
The ability of capital to move instantaneously and mas-
sively cross-border has been one of the major factors in 
the severity of recent currency crises. In cases such as 
Malaysia in 1997 and Argentina in 2001, the national 
governments concluded that they had no choice but to 
impose drastic restrictions on the ability of capital to flow.
■
■
Although not limited to heavily indebted countries, 
the rapid and sometimes illegal transfer of convertible 
currencies out of a country poses significant economic 
problems. Many heavily indebted countries have suf-
fered significant capital flight, which has compounded 
their problems of debt service.

78
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
One area within the balance of payments that has received 
intense interest in the past decade is that of remittances. 
The term remittance is a bit tricky. According to the Inter-
national Monetary Fund (IMF), remittances are interna-
tional transfers of funds sent by migrant workers from 
the country where they are working to people, typically 
­family members, in the country from which they originated. 
According to the IMF, a migrant is a person who comes to 
a country and stays, or intends to stay, for a year or more. 
As illustrated by Exhibit A, it is estimated that nearly 
$600 ­billion was remitted across borders in 2014.
Remittances make up a very small, often negligible 
cash outflow from sending countries like the United States. 
They do, however, represent a more significant volume, 
for example as a percent of GDP, for smaller receiving 
countries, typically developing countries, sometimes more 
than 25%. In many cases, this is greater than all devel-
opment capital and aid flowing to these same countries. 
And although the historical record on global remittances 
is short, as illustrated in Exhibit A, it has shown dramatic 
growth in the post-2000 period. Its growth has been rapid 
and dramatic, falling back only temporarily with the global 
financial crisis of 2008–2009, before returning to its rapid 
growth path once again from 2010 on.
Remittances largely reflect the income that is earned 
by migrant or guest workers in one country (source coun-
try) and then returned to families or related parties in 
their home countries (receiving countries). Therefore it 
is, not surprising that although there are more migrant 
worker flows between developing countries, the high-
income developed economies remain the main source 
of remittances. The global economic recession of 2009 
resulted in reduced economic activities like construction 
and manufacturing in the major source countries; as a 
result, remittance cash flows fell in 2009 but rebounded 
slightly in 2010.
Most remittances occur as frequent small payments 
made through wire transfers or a variety of informal 
Global Remittances1
Mini-Case
0
100,000
200,000
300,000
400,000
600,000
500,000
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2014
2010
2012
Exhibit A
Global Remittance Inflows, 1970–2014 (millions of U.S. dollars)
1Copyright 2015 © Michael H. Moffett. All rights reserved. This case was prepared from public sources for the purpose of classroom 
discussion only, and not to indicate effective or ineffective management.

79
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
channels (some even carried by hand). The United States 
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), which is respon-
sible for the compilation and reporting of U.S. balance of 
payments statistics, classifies migrant remittances as “cur-
rent transfers” in the current account. Wider definitions of 
remittances may also include capital assets that migrants 
take with them to host countries and similar assets that 
migrants bring back with them to their home countries. 
These values, when compiled, are generally reported under 
the capital account of the balance of payments. However, 
discerning exactly who is a “migrant,” is also an area of 
some debate. Transfers back to their home country made 
by individuals who may be working in a foreign country 
(for example, an expat working for a multinational orga-
nization) but who are not considered “residents” of that 
country, may also be considered global remittances under 
current transfers in the current account.
Remittance Prices
Given the development impact of remittance flows, we 
will facilitate a more efficient transfer and improved use 
of remittances and enhance cooperation between national 
and international organizations, in order to implement 
the recommendations of the 2007 Berlin G8 Conference 
and of the Global Remittances Working Group estab-
lished in 2009 and coordinated by the World Bank. We 
will aim to make financial services more accessible to 
migrants and to those who receive remittances in the 
developing world. We will work to achieve in particular 
the objective of a reduction of the global average costs of 
transferring remittances from the present 10% to 5% in 
five years through enhanced information, transparency, 
competition and cooperation with partners, generating a 
significant net increase in income for migrants and their 
families in the developing world.
—The G8 Final Declaration on Responsible 
Leadership for a Sustainable Future, paragraph 134.
A number of organizations have devoted significant 
effort in the past five years to better understanding the 
costs borne by migrants in transferring funds back to their 
home countries. The primary concern has been excessive 
remittance charges—the imposition of what many consider 
exploitive charges related to the transfer of these frequent 
small payments.
The G8 countries launched an initiative in 2008 enti-
tled “5 * 5”, to reduce transfer costs from a global aver-
age of 10% to 5% in five years (by 2014). The World Bank 
supported this initiative by creating Remittance Prices 
Worldwide (RPW), a global database to monitor remit-
tance price activity across geographic regions.2 It was 
hoped that, through greater transparency and access to 
transfer cost information, market forces would drive these 
costs down. Although the global average cost had fallen 
to a low of 7.90% in the fall 2014, the program was still 
clearly far from its goal of 5%. Funds remitted from the 
G8 countries themselves fell to 7.49% in 2014, 7.98% for 
the G20 countries in the same period. This was particularly 
relevant given that these are the source countries of a large 
proportion of all funds remitted.
Little was known of global remittance costs until the 
World Bank began collecting data in the RPW database. 
The database collects data on the average cost of transac-
tions conducted along a variety of country corridors glob-
ally (country pairs). Exhibit B provides one sample of what 
these cost surveys look like. This corridor transaction, the 
transfer of ZAR 1370 (South African Rand, equivalent to 
about USD 200 at that time) from South Africa to Malawi 
was the highest cost corridor in the RPW.
Remittance costs shown in Exhibit B are of two types: 
(1) a transaction fee, which in this case ranges between 
ZAR 43 and 390; and (2) an exchange rate margin, which 
is an added cost over and above the organization’s own 
cost of currency. The resulting total cost per transaction can 
be seen to rise as high as 30.6% for this specific corridor. 
Given that most transfers are by migrant or guest work-
ers back to their home countries and families, and they 
are members usually of the lowest income groups, these 
charges—30%—are seen as exploitive.
It should also be noted that these are charges imposed 
upon the sender, at the origin. Other fees or charges may 
occur to the receiver at the point of destination. It is also 
obvious from the survey data in Exhibit B that fees and 
charges may differ dramatically across institutions. Hence 
the objective of the program—to provide more information 
that is publicly available to people remitting funds thereby 
adding transparency to the process—is clear.
Other results from the RPW cost survey initiative 
include the following.
■
■
China is the most expensive country in the G20 to 
send money to, while South Africa continues to be the 
mostly costly G20 country to send money from.
■
■
South Asia is the least costly region to send money 
to, while Sub-Saharan Africa continues to be the most 
expensive region to send money to globally.
2Latest corridor cost surveys are available at the RPW Web site at http://remittanceprices.worldbank.org.

80
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
Product Types and Innovation
RPW tracks a number of different data dimensions to 
this growing industry, including costs by service provider 
types—commercial banks, money transfer operators 
(MTOs), and post offices—and product types classified by 
cash/account transactions. According to the World Bank 
commercial banks continue to be the most costly, with 
MTOs on average—although it does differ dramatically 
across region and corridors—being the cheapest.
Exhibit C provides a breakdown of the types of 
transactions conducted in the global remittance mar-
ket in 2013. Not surprisingly, nearly 50% of the remit-
tances are still cash-to-cash, reflecting both the source 
■
■
The five highest cost corridors (always available on the 
RPW Web site) continue to be intra-Africa.
■
■
In 2013, India received foreign exchange remittances 
worth $70 billion from its migratory workforce to 
retain the top spot in the world amid a broad slow-
down caused by regulatory hindrances on both move-
ment of people and capital.
■
■
The top 10 remittance recipient nations in 2013 
following India were China ($60 billion), the 
­Philippines ($25 billion), Mexico ($22 billion), Nigeria 
($21 ­billion), Egypt ($17 billion), Pakistan ($15 ­billion), 
­Bangladesh ($14 billion), Vietnam ($11 ­billion), and 
Ukraine ($10 billion).
Exhibit B
Remittance Price Comparison for Transfer from South Africa to Malawi
ZAR 1,370.00
Firm
Firm 
Type
Product
Fee
Exchange 
Rate 
Margin 
(%)
Total 
Cost 
Percent 
(%)
Total Cost 
(currency)
Net Transfer 
(currency)
MoneyGram
MTO
Branch
149.60
2.10
13.02
178.37
1,191.63
Mukuru
MTO
Branch
123.30
6.76
15.76
215.91
1,154.09
Mukuru
MTO
Branch, call-center
123.30
6.76
15.76
215.91
1,154.09
Western Union
MTO
Branch, call-center
194.84
1.70
15.92
218.13
1,151.87
Nedbank
Bank
Branch, call-center
228.00
6.06
22.70
311.02
1,058.98
ABSA
Bank
Branch, call-center
193.80
9.39
23.54
322.44
1,047.56
Standard
Bank
Bank Branch, call-center
235.00
10.35
27.50
376.80
993.21
Bidvest
Bank
Bank Branch, call-center
356.00
2.10
28.09
384.77
985.23
Bank of Athens
Bank
Branch, call-center
390.00
1.96
30.43
416.85
953.15
FNB of South 
Africa
MTO
Branch, call-center
235.00
19.45
36.60
501.47
868.54
South African 
Post Office*
Post
Branch
43.10
0.00
  3.15
43.10
1,326.90
Bank Average
280.56
5.97
26.45
362.38
1,007.62
Money Transfer 
Average
165.21
7.35
19.41
265.96
1,104.04
Post Office 
Average
43.10
0.00
  3.15
43.10
1,326.90
Total Average
206.54
6.06
21.13
289.52
1,080.48
MTO: Money transfer operator.
Fee: Currency fee charged customer per transaction of ZAR 1370 (South African Rand), equal to USD 200.00.
Exchange Rate Margin: Additional margin charged customer over and above the interbank exchange rate (percentage difference).
Total Cost (%): Total cost to customer of a single transaction including the transaction fee and exchange rate margin.
Total Cost (currency): Total cost in ZAR of a single ZAR 1370.00 transaction * total cost in percent.
Net Transfer (currency): Net remittance after total costs (ZAR1370.00—total cost in ZAR).
* The South African Post Office is not transparent; it does not disclose the exchange rate used prior to executing the transaction, hence it is not zero.
Source: World Bank, “Sending money from South Africa to Malawi,” remittanceprices/worldbank.org/en/corridor, data collected by World Bank on 
­November 11, 2014, and author calculations.

81
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
and use of the funds being remitted. Online services have 
been growing, and appear to be some of the lowest cost. 
Account-to-account services are by far the most expen-
sive, although arguably they represent the most organiza-
tionally formal transactions (bank-to-bank accounts held 
by customers).
This global segment, however, should soon be fruitful 
ground for product innovation, such as the use of Bit-
coin, the cryptocurrency that has gained increasing use 
globally. A number of companies are now attempting 
to build cross-border remittance platforms using digital 
currencies like Bitcoin, yet no single company or plat-
form seems to have yet established dominance. One of 
the continuing barriers is regulatory, as many govern-
ments restrict access to financial service linkages. As a 
result, some platforms, like HelloBit, are attempting to 
form sub-platforms that use already existing regulatory 
access, but allow the use of ­Bitcoin rather than traditional 
national currencies.
Growing Controversies
With the growth in global remittances has come a growing 
debate as to what role they do or should play in a coun-
try’s balance of payments, and more importantly, economic 
development. In some cases, like India, there is growing 
resistance from the central bank and other banking insti-
tutions to allow online payment services like PayPal to 
process remittances. In other countries, like ­Honduras, 
Guatemala, and Mexico, there is growing debate on 
whether the remittances flow to families, or are actually 
payments made to a variety of Central American human-
trafficking smugglers.
In Mexico for example, remittances now make up the sec-
ond largest source of foreign exchange earnings, second only 
to oil exports. The Mexican government has increasingly 
viewed remittances as an integral component of its balance 
of payments, and in some ways, a “plug” to replace declining 
export competition and dropping foreign direct investment. 
But there is also growing evidence that remittances flow 
to those who need it most, the lowest income component 
of the Mexican population, and therefore mitigate poverty 
and support consumer spending. Former President Vicente 
Fox was quoted as saying that Mexico’s workers in other 
countries remitting income home to ­Mexico are “heroes.” 
Mexico’s own statistical agencies also disagree on the size 
of the funds remittances received, as well as to whom the 
income is returning (family or non-family interests).
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 Where are remittances across borders included within 
the balance of payments? Are they current or financial 
account components?
2.	 Under what conditions—for example, for which coun-
tries currently—are remittances significant contribu-
tors to the economy and overall balance of payments?
3.	 Why is the cost of remittances the subject of such 
intense international scrutiny?
4.	 What potential do new digital currencies—­
cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin—have for cross-border 
remittances?
Exhibit C
Remittance Product Use and Cost
Product Types
Percent of 
Transactions
Average 
Cost
Cash to cash
45%
7.0%
Account to account (to any bank)
19%
12.5%
Online
17%
5.9%
Cash to account
8%
5.6%
Account to cash
4%
7.8%
Account to account (within same bank)
2%
7.9%
Mobile
1%
6.5%
Prepaid card
1%
8.4%
Other
3%
9.5%
100%
Source: Remittance Prices Worldwide, Issue No. 11, September 2014, Figures 11 and 12, p. 7.

82
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Balance of Payments Defined. What is the balance of 
payments?
2.	 BOP Data. What institution provides the primary 
source of similar statistics for balance of payments and 
economic performance worldwide?
3.	 Importance of BOP. Business managers and investors 
need BOP data to anticipate changes in host-country 
economic policies that might be driven by BOP events. 
From the perspective of business managers and inves-
tors, list three specific signals that a country’s BOP 
data can provide.
4.	 Flow Statement. What does it mean to describe the 
balance of payments as a flow statement?
5.	 Economic Activity. What are the two main types of 
economic activity measured by a country’s BOP?
6.	 Balance. Why does the BOP always “balance”?
7.	 BOP Accounting. If the BOP were viewed as an 
accounting statement, would it be a balance sheet of 
the country’s wealth, an income statement of the coun-
try’s earnings, or a funds flow statement of money into 
and out of the country?
8.	 Current Account. What are the main component 
accounts of the current account? Give one debit and 
one credit example for each component account for 
the United States.
9.	 Real versus Financial Assets. What is the difference 
between a real asset and a financial asset?
10.	 Direct versus Portfolio Investments. What is the differ-
ence between a direct foreign investment and a port-
folio foreign investment? Give an example of each. 
Which type of investment is a multinational industrial 
company more likely to make?
11.	 Net International Investment Position. What is a 
country’s net international investment position and 
how does it differ from the balance of payments?
12.	 The Financial Account. What are the primary sub-
components of the financial account? Analytically, 
what would cause net deficits or surpluses in these 
individual components?
13.	 Classifying Transactions. Classify each of the follow-
ing as a transaction reported in a sub-component of 
the current account or of the capital and financial 
accounts of the two countries involved:
a.	 A U.S. food chain imports wine from Chile.
b.	 A U.S. resident purchases a euro-denominated 
bond from a German company.
c.	 Singaporean parents pay for their daughter to 
study at a U.S. university.
d.	 A U.S. university gives a tuition grant to a foreign 
student from Singapore.
e.	 A British Company imports Spanish oranges, 
paying with eurodollars on deposit in London.
f.	 The Spanish orchard deposits half its proceeds in a 
eurodollar account in London.
g.	 A London-based insurance company buys U.S. 
corporate bonds for its investment portfolio.
h.	 An American multinational enterprise buys insur-
ance from a London insurance broker.
i.	 A London insurance firm pays for losses incurred 
in the United States because of an international 
terrorist attack.
j.	 Cathay Pacific Airlines buys jet fuel at Los Angeles 
International Airport so it can fly the return seg-
ment of a flight back to Hong Kong.
k.	 A California-based mutual fund buys shares of 
stock on the Tokyo and London stock exchanges.
l.	 The U.S. army buys food for its troops in South 
Asia from local vendors.
m.	A Yale graduate gets a job with the International 
Committee of the Red Cross in Bosnia and is paid 
in Swiss francs.
n.	 The Russian government hires a Norwegian sal-
vage firm to raise a sunken submarine.
o.	 A Colombian drug cartel smuggles cocaine into the 
United States, receives a suitcase of cash, and flies 
back to Colombia with that cash.
p.	 The U.S. government pays the salary of a foreign 
service officer working in the U.S. embassy in 
Beirut.
q.	 A Norwegian shipping firm pays U.S. dollars to the 
Egyptian government for passage of a ship through 
the Suez Canal.
r.	 A German automobile firm pays the salary of its 
executive working for a subsidiary in Detroit.
s.	 An American tourist pays for a hotel in Paris with 
his American Express card.
t.	 A French tourist from the provinces pays for a 
hotel in Paris with his American Express card.
u.	 A U.S. professor goes abroad for a year on a Ful-
bright grant.

83
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
14.		 The Balance. What are the main summary statements 
of the balance of payments accounts and what do they 
measure?
15.		 Twin Surpluses. Why are China’s twin surpluses—
surpluses in both the current and financial accounts—
considered unusual?
16.		 Capital Mobility—United States. The U.S. dollar 
has maintained or increased its value over the past 
20  years despite running a gradually increasing 
current account deficit. Why has this phenomenon 
occurred?
17.		 Capital Mobility—Brazil. Brazil has experienced peri-
odic depreciation of its currency over the past 20 years 
despite occasionally running a current account surplus. 
Why has this phenomenon occurred?
18.		 BOP Transactions. Identify the correct BOP account 
for each of the following transactions:
a.	 A German-based pension fund buys U.S. govern-
ment 30-year bonds for its investment portfolio.
b.	 Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS) buys jet fuel at 
Newark Airport for its flight to Copenhagen.
c.	 Hong Kong students pay tuition to the University 
of California, Berkeley.
d.	 The U.S. Air Force buys food in South Korea to 
supply its air crews.
e.	 A Japanese auto company pays the salaries of its 
executives working for its U.S. subsidiaries.
f.	 A U.S. tourist pays for a restaurant meal in 
Bangkok.
g.	 A Colombian citizen smuggles cocaine into the 
United States, receives cash, and smuggles the dol-
lars back into Colombia.
h.	 A U.K. corporation purchases a euro-denominated 
bond from an Italian MNE.
19.		 BOP and Exchange Rates. What is the relationship 
between the balance of payments and a fixed or float-
ing exchange rate regime?
20.		 J-Curve Dynamics. What is the J-Curve adjustment 
path?
21.		 Evolution of Capital Mobility. Has capital mobility 
improved steadily over the past 50 years?
22.		 Restrictions on Capital Mobility. What factors seem to 
play a role in a government’s choice to restrict capital 
mobility?
23.		 Capital Controls. Which do most countries control, 
capital inflows or capital outflows? Why?
24.		 Globalization and Capital Mobility. How does capital 
mobility typically differ between industrialized coun-
tries and emerging market countries?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
Australia’s Current Account
Use the following balance of payments data for Australia from the IMF to answer Problems 1–4.
Assumptions 
(million US$)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Goods, credit 
(exports)
64,052
63,676
65,099
70,577
87,207
107,011
124,913
142,421
189,057
154,777
213,782
271,719
257,950
254,164
Goods, debit 
(imports)
-68,865
-61,890
-70,530
-85,946 -105,238 -120,383 -134,509 -160,205 -193,972 -159,216 -196,303 -249,238 -270,136 -249,774
Services, credit 
(exports)
18,677
16,689
17,906
21,205
26,362
31,047
33,088
40,496
45,240
40,814
46,968
51,653
53,034
53,344
Services, debit 
(imports)
-18,388
-16,948
-18,107
-21,638
-27,040
-30,505
-32,219
-39,908
-48,338
-42,165
-51,313
-61,897
-65,405
-67,399
Primary 
income: credit
8,984
8,063
8,194
9,457
13,969
16,445
21,748
32,655
37,320
27,402
35,711
47,852
47,168
45,910
Primary 
income: debit
-19,516
-18,332
-19,884
-24,245
-35,057
-44,166
-54,131
-73,202
-76,719
-65,809
-84,646 -102,400 -88,255
-83,618
Secondary 
income: credit
2,622
2,242
2,310
2,767
3,145
3,333
3,698
4,402
4,431
4,997
5,813
7,510
7,271
7,206
Secondary 
income: debit
-2,669
-2,221
-2,373
-2,851
-3,414
-3,813
-4,092
-4,690
-4,805
-5,799
-7,189
-9,723
9,635
9,390
Note: The IMF has recently adjusted their line item nomenclature. Exports are all now noted as credits, imports as debits.

84
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
1.	 What is Australia’s balance on goods?
2.	 What is Australia’s balance on services?
3.	 What is Australia’s balance on goods and services?
4.	 What is Australia’s current account balance?
5.	 What is India’s balance on goods?
6.	 What is India’s balance on services?
7.	 What is India’s balance on goods and services?
8.	 What is India’s balance on goods, services, and income?
9.	 What is India’s current account balance?
China’s (Mainland) Balance of Payments
Use the following balance of payments data for China (Mainland) from the IMF to answer Problems 10–14.
India’s Current Account
Use the following balance of payments data for India from the IMF to answer Problems 5–9.
Assumptions 
(millions of 
US$)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Goods, credit 
(exports)
43,247
44,793
51,141
60,893
77,939
102,175
123,876
153,530
199,065
167,958
230,967
307,847
298,321
319,110
Goods, debit 
(imports)
-53,887
-51,212
-54,702
-68,081
-95,539 -134,692 -166,572 -208,611 -291,740 -247,908 -324,320 -428,021 -450,249 -433,760
Services, credit 
(exports)
16,684
17,337
19,478
23,902
38,281
52,527
69,440
86,552
106,054
92,889
117,068
138,528
145,525
148,649
Services, debit 
(imports)
-19,187
-20,099
-21,039
-24,878
-35,641
-47,287
-58,514
-70,175
-87,739
-80,349 -114,739 -125,041 -129,659 -126,256
Primary 
income: credit
2,521
3,524
3,188
3,491
4,690
5,646
8,199
12,650
15,593
13,733
9,961
10,147
9,899
11,230
Primary 
income: debit
-7,414
-7,666
-7,097
-8,386
-8,742
-12,296
-14,445
-19,166
-20,958
-21,272
-25,563
-26,191
-30,742
-33,013
Secondary 
income: credit
13,548
15,140
16,789
22,401
20,615
24,512
30,015
38,885
52,065
50,526
54,380
62,735
68,611
69,441
Secondary 
income: debit
-114
-407
-698
-570
-822
-869
-1,299
-1,742
-3,313
-1,764
-2,270
-2,523
-3,176
-4,626
Assumptions 
(million US$)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
A. Current 
account balance
20,518
17,401
35,422
45,875
68,659
134,082
231,844
353,183
420,569
243,257
237,810
136,097
215,392
182,807
B. Capital 
account balance
-35
-54
-50
-48
-69
4,102
4,020
3,099
3,051
3,938
4,630
5,446
4,272
3,052
C. Financial 
account balance
1,958
34,832
32,341
52,774
110,729
96,944
45,285
91,132
37,075
194,494
282,234
260,024 -36,038
323,151
D. Net errors 
and omissions
-11,748
-4,732
7,504
17,985
10,531
15,847
3,502
13,237
18,859 -41,181 -53,016 -13,768 -87,071 -77,628
E. Reserves and 
related items
-10,693 -47,447 -75,217 -116,586 -189,849 -250,975 -284,651 -460,651 -479,554 -400,508 -471,658 -387,799 -96,555 -431,382

85
The Balance of Payments    CHAPTER 3 
10.	 Is China experiencing a net capital inflow or outflow?
11.	 What is China’s total for Groups A and B?
12.	 What is China’s total for Groups A through C?
13.	 What is China’s total for Groups A through D?
14.	 Does China’s BOP balance?
Russia’s (Russian Federation’s) Balance of Payments
Use the following balance of payments data for Russia (Russian Federation) from the IMF to answer Problems 15–19.
Assumptions 
(million US$)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
A. Current 
account balance
46,839
33,935
29,116
35,410
59,512
84,602
92,316
72,193
103,935
50,384
67,452
97,274
71,282
34,141
B. Capital 
account balance
10,676
-9,378 -12,396
-993
-1,624 -12,764
291 -10,641
-104 -12,466
-41
130
-5,218
-395
C. Financial 
account balance
-34,295
-3,732
921
3,024
-5,128
1,025
3,612
97,108 -139,705 -28,162 -21,526 -76,115 -25,675 -44,983
D. Net errors 
and omissions
-9,297
-9,558
-6,078
-9,179
-5,870
-7,895
11,248
-9,732
-3,045
-6,392
-9,135
-8,651 -10,370 -10,842
E. Reserves and 
related items
-13,923 -11,266 -11,563 -28,262 -46,890 -64,968 -107,466 -148,928
38,919
-3,363 -36,750 -12,638 -30,020
22,078
15.	 Is Russia experiencing a net capital inflow?
16.	 What is Russia’s total for Groups A and B?
17.	 What is Russia’s total for Groups A through C?
18.	 What is Russia’s total for Groups A through D?
19.	 Does Russia’s BOP balance?
Euro Area Balance of Payments
Use the following balance of payments data for the Euro Area from the IMF to answer Problems 20–24.
Assumptions 
(billion US$)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
A. Current 
account balance
-81.8
-19.7
44.5
24.9
81.2
19.2
-0.3
24.9
-195.9
-12.5
12.2
16.0
171.4
305.4
B. Capital 
account balance
8.4
5.6
10.3
14.3
20.5
14.2
11.7
5.4
14.2
11.2
7.3
14.0
7.3
27.9
C. Financial 
account balance
50.9
-41.2
-15.3
-47.6
-122.9
-71.4
-28.5
-3.4
175.3
73.8
-12.2
-103.2
-213.6
-345.2
D. Net errors 
and omissions
6.4
38.8
-36.5
-24.4
5.6
15.0
19.6
-21.3
11.2
-12.6
-7.2
38.4
33.7
1.8
E. Reserves and 
related items
16.2
16.4
-3.0
32.8
15.6
23.0
-2.6
-5.7
-4.9
-59.7
-0.1
34.8
1.3
10.1
20.	 Is the Euro Area experiencing a net capital inflow?
21.	 What is the Euro Area’s total for Groups A and B?
22.	 What is the Euro Area’s total for Groups A through C?
23.	 What is the Euro Area’s total for Groups A through D?

86
CHAPTER 3    The Balance of Payments
24.	 Does the Euro Area’s BOP balance?
25.	 Trade Deficits and J-Curve Adjustment Paths. Assume 
the United States has the following import/export vol-
umes and prices. It undertakes a major “devaluation” 
of the dollar, say 18% on average against all major 
trading partner currencies. What is the pre-devaluation 
and post-devaluation trade balance?
Initial spot exchange rate ($/fc)
2.00
Price of exports, dollars ($)
20.0000
Price of imports, foreign currency (fc)
12.0000
Quantity of exports, units
100
Quantity of imports, units
120
Percentage devaluation of the dollar
18.00%
Price elasticity of demand, imports
-0.90
Internet Exercises
1.	 World Organizations and the Economic Outlook. The 
IMF, World Bank, and United Nations are only a few 
of the major world organizations that track, report, 
and aid international economic and financial devel-
opment. Using these Web sites and others that may 
be linked, briefly summarize the economic outlook for 
the developed and emerging nations of the world. For 
example, Chapter 1 of the World Economic Outlook 
published annually by the World Bank is available 
through the IMF’s Web page.
International Monetary Fund
www.imf.org/
United Nations
www.unsystem.org/
The World Bank Group
www.worldbank.org/
Europa (EU) Homepage
europa.eu/
Bank for International 
Settlements
www.bis.org/
2.	 St. Louis Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis provides a large amount of recent open-
economy macroeconomic data online. Use the fol-
lowing addresses to track down recent BOP and GDP 
data.
Recent 
international 
economic data
research.stlouisfed.org/
publications/iet/
Balance of 
payments statistics
research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/
categories/125
3.	 U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Use the follow-
ing Bureau of Economic Analysis (U.S. government) 
and the Ministry of Finance (Japanese government) 
Web sites to find the most recent balance of payments 
­statistics for both countries.
Bureau of Economic 
Analysis
www.bea.gov/international/
Ministry of Finance
www.mof.go.jp/
4.	 World Trade Organization and Doha. Visit the 
WTO’s Web site and find the most recent evidence 
presented by the WTO on the progress of talks on 
issues including international trade in services and 
international recognition of intellectual property at 
the WTO.
World Trade Organization
www.wto.org
5.	 Global Remittances Worldwide. The World Bank’s 
Web site on global remittances is a valuable source 
for new and developing studies and statistics on cross-
border remittance activity.
World Bank
http://remittanceprices.worldbank.org/

Chapter	 4
Financial Goals and 
Corporate Governance
Yogi Berra never went to Harvard Business School, but he did understand 
one important principle. To quote Yogi, “In theory there is no difference 
between theory and practice. In practice, there is.”
—Peter Rose, CEO and Chairman, Expeditors International, 8k, November 20, 2006, p. 4.
This chapter examines how legal, cultural, political, and institutional differences affect a 
firm’s choice of financial goals and corporate governance. The owner of a commercial enter-
prise, and his or her specific personal and professional interests, has a significant impact on 
the goals of the corporation and its governance. We therefore examine business ownership, 
goals, and corporate governance in turn. We then explore how governance failures have led 
to different approaches around the world to improve governance, by both regulatory and 
other means. The chapter concludes with the Mini-Case, Luxury Wars—LVMH vs. Hermès, 
the recent struggle by Hermès of France to remain family controlled.
Who Owns the Business?
We begin our discussion of corporate financial goals by asking two basic questions: (1) Who 
owns the business? and (2) Do the owners of the business manage the business themselves? 
In global business today the ownership and control of organizations varies dramatically 
across countries and cultures. To understand how and why those businesses operate, one 
must first understand the many different ownership structures.
Learning Objectives
■
■
Examine the different ownership structures for businesses globally and how this 
impacts the separation between ownership and management—the agency problem
■
■
Explore the different goals of management—stockholder wealth maximization ver-
sus stakeholder capitalism
■
■
Analyze how financial management differs between the public traded and the pri-
vately held firm
■
■
Evaluate the multitude of goals, structures, and trends in corporate governance 
globally
87

88
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
Types of Ownership
The terminology associated with the ownership of a business can be confusing. A business 
owned by a government, the state, is a public enterprise. A business that is owned by a private 
individual, a private company, or simply a non-government entity, is a private enterprise.
A second distinction on ownership clouds the terminology. A business owned by a private 
party, or a small group of private individuals, a private enterprise, is termed privately held. If 
those owners, however, wish to sell a portion of their ownership in the business in the capital 
markets, for example by listing and trading the company’s shares on a stock exchange, the 
firm’s shares are then publicly traded. It is therefore important to understand that shares in 
a publicly traded firm can be purchased and owned by private parties. Exhibit 4.1 provides a 
brief overview of these ownership distinctions.
Ownership can be held by a variety of different groups or organizations as well. A busi-
ness may be owned by a single person (sole proprietorship), two or more people (part-
nership), a family (family-owned business), two other companies (joint venture), thousands 
of individuals (publicly traded company), a government (state-owned enterprise), or some 
combination.
The following three multinational enterprises are examples of how ownership differs in 
global business, as well as how it may evolve within any single enterprise over time.
■
■
Petróleo Brasileiro S.A., or Petrobras, is the national oil company of Brazil. Founded 
in 1953, it was originally 100% owned by the Brazilian government, and was there-
fore a state-owned enterprise. Over time, however, it sold portions of its ownership 
to the public, becoming publicly traded on the Sao Paulo stock exchange. Today the 
Brazilian government owns approximately 64% of the shares of Petrobras, with the 
remaining 36% in the hands of private investors—shareholders—all over the world.
Owned by the state
Public enterprises can be
operated for proﬁt or
not-for-proﬁt
A public enterprise is owned by
a government or the state
A public enterprise is owned by
a private individual or organization
A business is an organization
involved in the trade of goods,
services, or both to consumers
Businesses may be owned in
whole or in part by families,
and may be operated for proﬁt
or not-for-proﬁt
Both public and private enterprises may
have a portion of their ownership publicly
traded. (The public shares, however,
often represent less than 50% ownership.)
Publicly traded shares
Privately held
Private
Enterprise
Public
Enterprise
Business, Firm, Company, or Enterprise
Exhibit 4.1
Business Ownership

89
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
■
■
Apple was founded in 1976 as a partnership of Steve Jobs, Steve Wozniak, and 
­Ronald Wayne. On January 3, 1977,  Apple was incorporated in the United States, with 
Ronald Wayne selling his ownership interest to his two partners. In 1980 Apple sold 
shares to the public for the first time in an initial public offering (IPO), with its shares 
listed (traded) on the NASDAQ Stock Market. Today Apple has roughly 900 million 
shares outstanding, and is considered “widely held” as no single investor holds 5% 
of its shares. In recent years Apple has periodically been the world’s most valuable 
publicly traded company, as calculated by market capitalization (shares outstanding 
multiplied by the share price).
■
■
Hermès International is a French multinational producer of luxury goods. Founded 
by Thierry Hermès in 1837, it has been owned and operated by the Hermès family 
for most of its history, making it a family-owned business. In 1993 the company “went 
public” for the first time, selling 27% of its interest to the general public. The family, 
however, retained 73% and therefore the control of the company. (The Mini-Case 
at the end of this chapter details the battle fought by the family in 2010 to retain its 
control.)
Once the ownership of the business is established, it is then easier to understand where 
control lies, as ownership and control are separate concepts. Petrobras is a publicly traded 
Brazilian business that is controlled by the Brazilian government. Hermès International is a 
publicly traded family-controlled French-based business. Apple is a publicly traded and widely 
held business, so control rests with its Board of Directors and the senior leadership team hired 
by the Board to run the company. Individual investors who hold shares in Apple may vote 
on issues presented to them on an annual basis, so they have a degree of high-level influence, 
but the daily strategy, tactics, operations, and governance of Apple is under the control of the 
senior management team and the Board.
Any business, whether initially owned by the state, a family, or a private individual or 
institution, may choose to have a portion of its ownership traded as shares in the public mar-
ketplace, as noted in Exhibit 4.1. (Note that we say a portion, as a 100% publicly traded firm 
can no longer be either state-owned or privately held by definition.) For example many SOEs 
are also publicly traded. China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC), the state-owned 
parent company of PetroChina, is one example, having shares traded on stock exchanges in 
Shanghai, Hong Kong, and New York, yet majority ownership and control still rests with the 
government of China.
If a firm’s ownership decides to sell a portion of ownership to the public market, it con-
ducts an initial public offering, or IPO. Typically only a relatively small percentage of the 
company is initially sold to the public, anywhere from 10% to 20%, resulting in a company that 
may still be controlled by a small number of private investors, a family, or a government, but 
now with a portion of its ownership traded publicly. Over time, a company may sell more and 
more of its equity interest into the public marketplace, eventually becoming totally publicly 
traded. Alternatively, a private owner or family may choose to retain a major share, but may 
not retain control. It is also possible for the controlling interest in a firm to reverse its pubic 
share position, reducing the number of shares outstanding by repurchasing shares.
The acquisition of one firm by another demonstrates yet another way ownership and 
control can change. For example, in 2005 a very large private firm, Koch Industries (U.S.), pur-
chased all outstanding shares of Georgia-Pacific (U.S.), a very large publicly traded company. 
Koch took Georgia-Pacific private.
Even if a firm is publicly traded, it may still be controlled by a single investor or by a small 
group of investors, including major institutional investors. This means that the control of a 
publicly traded company is much like that of a privately held company, reflecting the interests 

90
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
and goals of the controlling individual investor or family. A continuing characteristic of many 
emerging markets is the dominance of family-controlled firms, although many are simultane-
ously publicly traded. Many family-controlled firms may outperform publicly traded firms.
As discussed later in this chapter, there is another significant implication of an initial sale 
of shares to the public: The firm becomes subject to many of the increased legal, regulatory, and 
reporting requirements related to the sale and trading of securities. In the U.S., for example, 
going public means the firm must disclose a sizable degree of financial and operational detail, 
publish this information at least quarterly, comply with Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC) rules and regulations, and comply with all the specific operating and reporting require-
ments of the specific exchange on which its shares are traded.
Separation of Ownership from Management
One of the most challenging issues in the financial management of the enterprise is the pos-
sible separation of ownership from management. Hired or professional management may be 
present under any ownership structure, however it is most often observed in SOEs and widely 
held publicly traded companies. This separation of ownership from management raises the 
possibility that the two entities may have different business and financial objectives. This is the 
so-called principal agent problem or simply the agency problem. There are several strategies 
available for aligning shareholder and management interests, the most common of which is 
for senior management to own shares or share options. What is then good for the managers’ 
own personal wealth is similar to that of general shareholders.
The United States and United Kingdom are two country markets characterized by wide-
spread ownership of shares. Management may own some small portion of stock in their firms, 
but largely management is a hired agent that is expected to represent the interests of share-
holders. In contrast, many firms in many other global markets are characterized by controlling 
shareholders, such as government, institutions (e.g., banks in Germany), family (e.g., in France, 
Italy, and throughout Asia and Latin America), and consortiums of interests (e.g., keiretsus 
in Japan and chaebols in South Korea). A business that is owned and managed by the same 
entity does not suffer the agency problem.
In many of these cases, control is enhanced by ownership of shares with dual voting 
rights, interlocking directorates, staggered election of the board of directors, takeover safe-
guards, and other techniques that are not used in the Anglo-American markets. However, 
the recent emergence of huge equity funds and hedge funds in the United States and the 
United ­Kingdom has led to the privatization of some very prominent publicly traded firms 
around the world.
The Goal of Management
As companies become more deeply committed to multinational operations, a new constraint 
develops—one that springs from divergent worldwide opinions and practices as to just what 
the firms’ overall goal should be from the perspective of top management, as well as the role 
of corporate governance.
What do investors want? First, of course, investors want performance: strong predict-
able earnings and sustainable growth. Second, they want transparency, accountability, 
open communications and effective corporate governance. Companies that fail to move 
toward international standards in each of these areas will fail to attract and retain inter-
national capital.
—“The Brave New World of Corporate Governance,” LatinFinance, May 2001.

91
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
An introductory course in finance is usually taught based on the assumption that maximiz-
ing shareholder wealth is the goal of management. In fact, every business student memorizes the 
concept of maximizing shareholder wealth sometime during his or her college education. Maxi-
mizing shareholder wealth, however, has at least two major challenges: (1) It is not necessarily 
the accepted goal of management across countries to maximize the wealth of ­shareholders—
other stakeholders may have substantial influence; and (2) It is extremely difficult to carry out. 
Creating shareholder wealth is—like so many lofty goals—much easier said than done.
Although the idea of maximizing shareholder wealth is probably realistic both in theory 
and in practice in the Anglo-American markets, it is not always exclusive elsewhere. Some 
basic differences in corporate and investor philosophies exist between the Anglo-American 
markets and those in the rest of the world.
The Shareholder Wealth Maximization Model
The Anglo-American markets have a philosophy that a firm’s objective should follow the 
shareholder wealth maximization model (SWM). More specifically, the firm should strive to 
maximize the return to shareholders, as measured by the sum of capital gains and dividends, 
for a given level of risk. Alternatively, the firm should minimize the risk to shareholders for a 
given rate of return.
The SWM theoretical model assumes, as a universal truth, that the stock market is effi-
cient. This means that the share price is always correct because it captures all the expectations 
of return and risk as perceived by investors. It quickly incorporates new information into 
the share price. Share prices, in turn, are deemed the best allocators of capital in the macro 
economy.
The SWM model also treats its definition of risk as a universal truth. Risk is defined as the 
added probability of varying returns that the firm’s shares bring to a diversified portfolio. The 
operational risk, the risk associated with the business line of the individual firm, can be elimi-
nated through portfolio diversification by investors. Therefore the unsystematic risk, the risk of 
the individual security, should not be a prime concern for management unless it increases the 
possibility of bankruptcy. On the other hand, systematic risk, the risk of the market in general, 
cannot be eliminated through portfolio diversification and is risk that the share price will be 
a function of the stock market.
Agency Theory. The field of agency theory is the study of how shareholders can motivate 
management to accept the prescriptions of the SWM model.1 For example, liberal use of stock 
options should encourage management to think like shareholders. Whether these inducements 
succeed is open to debate. However, if management deviates from the SWM objectives of 
working to maximize shareholder returns, then it is the responsibility of the board to replace 
management. In cases where the board is too weak or ingrown to take this action, the disci-
pline of equity markets could do it through a takeover. This discipline is made possible by the 
­one-share-one-vote rule that exists in most Anglo-American markets.
Long-Term versus Short-Term Value Maximization. During the 1990s, the economic boom 
and rising stock prices in most of the world’s markets exposed a flaw in the SWM model, espe-
cially in the United States. Instead of seeking long-term value maximization, several large U.S. 
corporations sought short-term value maximization (e.g., the continuing debate about meeting 
the market’s expected quarterly earnings). This strategy was partly motivated by the overly 
generous use of stock options to motivate top management.
1Michael Jensen and W. Meckling, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs, and Ownership 
­Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, No. 3, 1976, and Michael C. Jensen, “Agency Cost of Free Cash Flow, 
Corporate Finance and Takeovers, American Economic Review, 76, 1986, pp. 323–329.

92
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
This short-term focus sometimes created distorted managerial incentives. In order to maxi-
mize growth in short-term earnings and to meet inflated expectations by investors, firms such 
as Enron, Global Crossing, Health South, Adelphia, Tyco, Parmalat, and WorldCom under-
took risky, deceptive, and sometimes dishonest practices for the recording of earnings and/
or obfuscation of liabilities, which ultimately led to their demise. It also led to highly visible 
prosecutions of their CEOs, CFOs, accounting firms, legal advisers, and other related parties.
This, sometimes destructive, short-term focus on the part of both management and inves-
tors has been correctly labeled impatient capitalism. This point of debate is also sometimes 
referred to as the firm’s investment horizon in reference to how long it takes the firm’s actions, 
its investments and operations, to result in earnings. In contrast to impatient capitalism is 
patient capitalism, which focuses on long-term shareholder wealth maximization. Legendary 
investor Warren Buffett, through his investment vehicle Berkshire Hathaway, represents one 
of the best of the patient capitalists. Buffett has become a billionaire by focusing his portfolio 
on mainstream firms that grow slowly but steadily with the economy, such as Coca Cola.
The Stakeholder Capitalism Model
In the non-Anglo-American markets, controlling shareholders also strive to maximize long-
term returns to equity. However, they are more constrained by other powerful stakeholders. 
In particular, outside the Anglo-American markets, labor unions are more powerful and gov-
ernments interfere more in the marketplace to protect important stakeholder groups, such as 
local communities, the environment, and employment. In addition, banks and other financial 
institutions are more important creditors than securities markets. This model has been labeled 
the stakeholder capitalism model (SCM).
Market Efficiency. The SCM model does not assume that equity markets are either efficient 
or inefficient. It does not really matter because the firm’s financial goals are not exclusively 
shareholder-oriented since they are constrained by the other stakeholders. In any case, the 
SCM model assumes that long-term “loyal” shareholders, typically controlling shareholders, 
should influence corporate strategy rather than the transient portfolio investor.
Risk. The SCM model assumes that total risk, that is, operating risk, does count. It is a specific 
corporate objective to generate growing earnings and dividends over the long run with as much 
certainty as possible, given the firm’s mission statement and goals. Risk is measured more by 
product market variability than by short-term variation in earnings and share price.
Single versus Multiple Goals. Although the SCM model typically avoids a flaw of the SWM 
model, namely, impatient capital that is short-run oriented, it has its own flaw. Trying to meet 
the desires of multiple stakeholders leaves management without a clear signal about the trade-
offs. Instead, management tries to influence the tradeoffs through written and oral disclosures 
and complex compensation systems.
The Scorecard. In contrast to the SCM model, the SWM model requires a single goal of 
value maximization with a well-defined scorecard. According to the theoretical model of SWM 
described by Michael Jensen, the objective of management is to maximize the total market 
value of the firm.2 This means that corporate leadership should be willing to spend or invest 
more if each additional dollar creates more than one dollar in the market value of the com-
pany’s equity, debt, or any other contingent claims on the firm.
Although both models have their strengths and weaknesses, in recent years two trends 
have led to an increasing focus on the shareholder wealth form (SWM). First, as more of 
2Michael C. Jensen, “Value Maximization, Stakeholder Theory, and the Corporate Objective Function,” Journal of 
Applied Corporate Finance, Fall 2001, Volume 14, No. 3, pp. 8–21, p. 12.

93
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
the non-Anglo-American markets have increasingly privatized their industries, a shareholder 
wealth focus is seemingly needed to attract international capital from outside investors, many 
of which are from other countries. Second, and still quite controversial, many analysts believe 
that shareholder-based MNEs are increasingly dominating their global industry segments. 
Nothing attracts followers like success.
Operational Goals
It is one thing to state that the objective of leadership is to maximize shareholder value, but it 
is another to actually do it. The management objective of maximizing profit is not as simple as 
it sounds, because the measure of profit used by ownership/management differs between the 
privately held firm and the publicly traded firm. In other words, is management attempting to 
maximize current income, capital appreciation, or both?
The return to a shareholder in a publicly traded firm combines current income in the form 
of dividends and capital gains from the appreciation of share price:
Shareholder Return = D2
P1
+ P2 - P1
P1
where the initial price, P1, is the beginning price, the initial investment by the shareholder, 
P2, is the price of the share at the end of period, and D2 is the dividend paid at the end of 
the period. The shareholder theoretically receives income from both components. For exam-
ple, in the United States in the 1990s a diversified investor may have received an average 
annual return of 14%, 2% from dividends and 12% from capital gains. This “split” between 
dividend and capital gain returns, however, differs dramatically across the world’s major 
markets over time.
Management generally believes it has the most direct influence over the first component—
the dividend yield. Management makes strategic and operational decisions that grow sales and 
generate profits. Then it distributes those profits to ownership in the form of dividends. Capital 
gains—the change in the share price as traded in the equity markets—is much more complex, 
and reflects many forces that are not in the direct control of management. Despite growing 
market share, profits, or any other traditional measure of business success, the market may not 
reward these actions directly with share price appreciation. Many top executives believe that 
stock markets move in mysterious ways and are not always consistent in their valuations. In 
the end, leadership in the publicly traded firm typically concludes that it is its own growth—
growth in top-line sales and bottom-line profits—that is its great hope for driving share price 
upward. This can, however, change over time with continued success as seen in Global Finance 
in Practice 4.1.
In March 2012, Apple announced it would end a 17-year period 
of no dividend payments. This was followed by a similarly 
shocking announcement in April 2013 that it would raise nearly 
$17 billion in debt, although the company had an enormous 
cash balance. Both financial policy changes were surprising to 
the market and uncommon in the tech sector. So why?
One way to understand the financial policy change is to 
consider whether Apple had grown and evolved from a growth 
firm to a value firm. Growth firms are small- to medium-sized 
firms in the relatively rapid growth stages of their businesses. 
Their value is growing rapidly in the public markets, their share 
prices rising creating substantial capital gains for their share-
holders. At the same time, since they are in such rapid growth 
stages they need all the capital they can get their hands on, 
so arguably, they need the dividend cash flow more than their 
shareholders. Although they could raise debt during this stage, 
Global Finance in Practice 4.1
Why Did Apple Start Paying a Dividend and Raising Debt?

94
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
A privately held firm has a much simpler shareholder return objective function: maximize 
current and sustainable financial income to its owners. The privately held firm does not have 
a share price (it does have a value, but this is not a definitive market-determined value in the 
way in which we believe markets work). It therefore simply focuses on generating current 
financial income, dividend income (as well as salaries and other forms of income provided 
owners), to generate the returns to its ownership. If the privately held ownership is a family, 
the family may also place a great emphasis on the ability to sustain those earnings over time 
while maintaining a slower rate of growth, which can be managed by the family itself. Without 
a share price, “growth” is not of the same strategic importance in the privately held firm. It 
is therefore critical that ownership and ownership’s specific financial interests be understood 
from the very start if we are to understand the strategic and financial goals and objectives of 
management.
The privately held firm may also be less aggressive (take fewer risks) than the publicly 
traded firm. Without a public share price, and therefore the ability of outside investors to 
speculate on the risks and returns associated with company business developments, the pri-
vately held firm—its owners and operators—may choose to take fewer risks. This may mean 
that it will not attempt to grow sales and profits as rapidly, and therefore may not require the 
capital (equity and debt) needed for rapid growth. A recent study by McKinsey found that 
privately held firms consistently used significantly lower levels of debt (averaging 5% less 
debt-to-equity) than publicly traded firms. Interestingly, these same private firms also enjoyed 
a lower cost of debt, roughly 30 basis points lower based on corporate bond issuances.3
Exhibit 4.2 provides an overview of the variety of distinctive financial and managerial 
differences between state-owned, publicly traded, and privately held firms.
Operational Goals for MNEs. The MNE must be guided by operational goals suitable for 
­various levels of the firm. Even if the firm’s goal is to maximize shareholder value, the man-
ner in which investors value the firm is not always obvious to the firm’s top management. 
­Therefore, most firms hope to receive a favorable investor response to the achievement of 
operational goals that can be controlled by the way in which the firm performs, and then 
hope—if we can use that term—that the market will reward their results. The MNE must 
determine the proper balance between three common operational financial objectives:
1.	 Maximization of consolidated after-tax income
2.	 Minimization of the firm’s effective global tax burden
debt is often seen as an obligation that slows the ability of 
corporate leadership to respond quickly to changing customer 
and technology market needs.
Value firms are large, more mature businesses, which 
find it increasingly difficult to create material value changes 
in their business. Once an ExxonMobil or Microsoft gets so 
large, major new business developments and successes can 
rarely change the company’s financial earnings and results 
significantly. Share price movements become slower, and 
more subtle, over time. Yet the companies continue to gener-
ate massive amounts of cash flow and earnings. In this case, 
shareholders—often in the persona of activist investors like 
Carl Icahn—pressure management to take on more and more 
debt and pay out greater and greater dividends. The debt 
requires corporate management to stay sharp in keeping up 
debt service obligations while the dividend distributions pro-
vide added and sometimes significant returns to shareholders 
who are seeing capital appreciation slowing or stagnating.
In Apple’s case, there is an additional issue driving its 
financial policy change: U.S. taxes. Although the company 
held massive cash balances, this cash was largely offshore—­
outside the United States—and would result in major increased 
tax payments if the cash was repatriated to the U.S. in order 
to pay the newly declared cash dividends.
3“The five attributes of enduring family businesses,” Christian Caspar, Ana Karina Dias, and Heinz-Peter Elstrodt, 
McKinsey Quarterly, January 2010, p. 6.

95
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
3.	 Correct positioning of the firm’s income, cash flows, and available funds as to country 
and currency
These goals are frequently incompatible, in that the pursuit of one may result in a less 
desirable outcome of another. Management must make decisions daily in business about the 
proper tradeoffs between goals (which is why companies are managed by people and not 
computers).
Consolidated Profits. The primary operational goal of the MNE is to maximize consolidated 
profits, after-tax. Consolidated profits are the profits of all the individual units of the firm, 
originating in many different currencies, and expressed in the currency of the parent company. 
This is not to say that management is not striving to maximize the present value of all future 
cash flows. It is simply the case that most of the day-to-day decision-making in global man-
agement is about current earnings. The leaders of the MNE, the management team who are 
implementing the firm’s strategy, must think far beyond current earnings.
For example, foreign subsidiaries have their own set of traditional financial statements: 
(1) a statement of income, summarizing the revenues and expenses experienced by the unit 
over the year; (2) a balance sheet, summarizing the assets employed in generating the unit’s 
revenues, and the financing of those assets; and (3) a statement of cash flows, summarizing 
those activities of the unit that generate and then use cash flows over the year. These financial 
statements are expressed initially in the local currency of the unit for tax and reporting pur-
poses to the local government, but they must also be consolidated with the parent company’s 
financial statements for reporting to shareholders.
Public/Private Hybrids. The global business environment is, as one analyst termed it, “a messy 
place,” and the ownership of companies of all kinds, including MNEs, is not necessarily purely 
public or purely private. One recent study of global business found that fully one-third of all 
companies in the S&P 500 were technically family businesses. And this was not just the case 
Exhibit 4.2
Public versus Private Ownership
Organizational 
Characteristic
State-Owned
Publicly Traded
Privately Held
Entrepreneurial
No
No; stick to core 
competencies
Yes; do anything the 
owners wish
Long-term or short-term 
focus
Long-term focus;  
political cycles
Short-term focus on 
quarterly earnings
Long-term focus
Focused on profitable growth
No
Yes; growth in earnings  
is critical
No; needs defined by 
owners earnings need
Adequately financed
Country-specific
Good access to capital and 
capital markets
Limited in the past but 
increasingly available
Quality of leadership
Highly variable
Professional; hiring from 
both inside and outside
Highly variable; family- 
run firms are lacking
Role of earnings (Profits)
Earnings may constitute 
funding for government
Earnings to signal the 
equity markets
Earnings to support 
owners and family
Leadership are owners
Caretakers, not owners
Minimal interests; some 
have stock options
Yes; ownership and 
mgmt often one and  
the same

96
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
for the U.S.; roughly 40% of the largest firms in France and Germany were heavily influenced 
by family ownership and leadership.
In other words, the firm may be publicly traded, but a family still wields substantial power 
over the strategic and operational decisions of the firm. This may prove to be a good thing. 
As illustrated in Exhibit 4.3, the financial performance of publicly traded family-controlled 
businesses (as measured by total returns to shareholders) in five different regions of the globe 
were superior to their nonfamily publicly traded counterparts.
Why do family-influenced businesses seemingly perform better than others? According 
to Credit Suisse, there are three key catalysts for the performance of stocks with signifi-
cant family influence (SSFI): (1) management with a longer-term focus; (2) better alignment 
between management and shareholder interests; and (3) stronger focus on the core business 
of the firm.
Publicly Traded versus Privately Held: The Global Shift
Is the future of the publicly traded firm really at risk, or is it just that U.S.-based publicly traded 
shares are on the decline? Exhibit 4.4 provides a broad overview of global equity listings, sepa-
rating the number of listings between those on U.S. exchanges and all others.
Exhibit 4.4, based on listings data from the World Federation of Exchanges, raises a num-
ber of questions about trends and tendencies across the global equity markets:
10-year average total returns to shareholders by region 
Source: Authors' presentation based on data presented in “The Five Attributes of Enduring Family Businesses,” Christian Caspar, Ana Karina Dias, and 
Heinz-Peter Elstrodt, McKinsey Quarterly, January 2010, p. 7. Index of public companies by region: France, SBF120; Western Europe, MSCI Europe; 
United States, S&P500; Germany, HDAX. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
France
Western Europe
United States
Germany
Percent
Family businesses
Public company indexes
Exhibit 4.3
The Superior Performance of Family

97
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
■
■
Global equity listings grew significantly over the past 20 years, but they peaked in 
2008. And although the true residual impact of the 2008–2009 global financial crisis 
is yet unknown, it is clear that the crisis, amid other factors, has seemingly slowed the 
growth of public share listings.
■
■
The U.S. share of global equity listings has declined dramatically and steadily since 
the mid-1990s. At the end of 2010, of the 45,508 equities listed on 54 stock exchanges 
globally, U.S. listings comprised 11.0% of the total. That was a dramatic decline from 
1996 when the U.S. comprised 33.3%.
■
■
U.S. public share listings fell by 3,767 (from 8,783 in 1996 to 5,016 in 2010), 42.9% over 
the 14-year period since its peak. Clearly, the attraction of being a publicly traded 
firm on a U.S. equity exchange had declined dramatically.
Listings Measurement
New listings on a stock exchange are the net result of listing additions, new companies joining 
the exchange, reduced by delistings, companies exiting the exchange.
Listing Additions. Stock exchange listing additions arise from four sources: (1) initial public 
offerings (IPOs); (2) movements of share listings from one exchange to another; (3) spinouts 
from larger firms; and (4) new listings from smaller non-exchanges such as bulletin boards. 
Since movements between exchanges typically are a zero sum within a country, and spinouts 
and bulletin board movements are few in number, real growth in listings comes from IPOs.
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
45,000
50,000
U.S. listings
peaked in 1996
U.S. Listings
Non-U.S. Listings
Global Non-U.S. listings
peaked in 2008
Global listings
peaked in 2007
Source: Derived by authors from statistics collected by the World Federation of Exchanges (WFE), www.world-exchanges.org.
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Exhibit 4.4
Global Equity Share Listings

98
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
Delistings. Delisted shares fall into three categories: (1) forced delistings, in which the equity 
no longer meets exchange requirements on share price or financial valuation; (2) mergers, in 
which two firms combine eliminating a listing; and (3) acquisitions, where the purchase results 
in the reduction of a listing. Companies entering into bankruptcy, or being major acquisition 
targets, make up a great proportion of delisting activity. Companies that are delisted are not 
necessarily bankrupt, and may continue trading over the counter.
Possible Causes in the Decline of Publicly Traded Shares
The decline of share listings in the United States has led to considerable debate over whether 
these trends represent a fundamental global business shift away from the publicly traded 
corporate form, or something that is more U.S.-centric combined with the economic times.
The U.S. market itself may reflect a host of country specific factors. The cost and anti-
competitive effects of Sarbanes-Oxley are now well known. Compliance with it and a variety 
of additional restrictions and requirements on public issuances in the U.S. have reduced the 
attractiveness of public listings. This, combined with the continued development and growth 
of the private equity markets, where companies may find other forms of equity capital with-
out a public listing, are likely major contributors to the fall in U.S. listings. Global Finance in 
Practice 4.2 discusses one public to private flip, that of Dell Computer.
One recent study argued that it was not really the increasingly burdensome U.S. regulatory 
environment that was to blame, but rather a proliferation of factors that caused the decline in 
market making, sales, and research support for small- and medium-sized equities. Beginning 
with the introduction of online brokerage in 1996 and online trading rules in 1997, more and 
more equity trading in the United States shifted to ECNs, electronic communication net-
works, which allowed all market participants to trade directly with the exchange order books, 
and not through brokers or brokerage houses. Although this increased competition reduced 
In November 2013, Dell Computer, one of the true publicly 
traded equity stars of the 1990s, went private. Dell’s founder, 
Michael Dell, together with the capital of the hedge fund Sil-
ver Lake Partners and nearly $15 billion in debt, engineered 
a $24.4 billion purchase of Dell, taking it private. But why? 
What could Michael Dell and his team do differently as a 
private firm that they could not accomplish as a publicly 
traded firm?
Strategically, Michael Dell had been trying to transform 
Dell Computer from a PC company to an enterprise company 
for nearly five years. The equity markets, however, still saw 
Dell as only a PC company, and as a PC company, it was fail-
ing. At one time the market leader of the PC industry, it had 
fallen to third and was continuing to slide. From Michael Dell’s 
perspective, the publicly traded markets were too impatient, 
too short-term in focus, too simplistic in their understanding of 
strategic change, to allow Dell to successfully transform itself. 
Michael Dell believed that Dell needed to take more risk, to 
make long-term investments that would create a new long-
term future, but would require sacrificing short-term financial 
returns. But he had run head-on into a number of activist 
investors like Carl Icahn, who had taken positions in the com-
pany and demanded the firm raise debt for greater dividend 
distributions, not for longer-term investments in support of a 
new corporate strategic future.
As Michael Dell noted in a Wall Street Journal opinion 
piece one year after taking the company private: Sharehold-
ers increasingly demanded short-term results to drive returns; 
innovation and investment too often suffered as a result. 
Shareholder and customer interests decoupled.* Time will 
tell whether a longer-term perspective will result in a newly 
­transformed and competitive Dell.
Global Finance in Practice 4.2
Why Did Dell Go Private?
*“Going Private Is Paying Off for Dell: A year later, we’re able to focus on customers and the long term, rather than activist investors,” 
by Michael Dell, Wall Street Journal, Nov. 24, 2014.

99
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
transaction costs dramatically, it also undermined the profitability of the retail brokerage 
houses, which had always supported research, market making, and sales and promotion of the 
small- to medium-sized equities. Without this financial support, the smaller stocks were no 
longer ­covered and promoted by the major equity houses. Without that research, marketing, 
promotion and coverage, their trading volumes and values fell.
Corporate Governance
Corporate governance is the system of rules, practices, and processes by which an organization 
is directed and controlled. Although the governance structure of any company—domestic, 
international, or multinational—is fundamental to its very existence, this subject has become 
the lightning rod of political and business debate in the past few years as failures in governance 
in a variety of forms has led to corporate fraud and failure. Abuses and failures in corporate 
governance have dominated global business news in recent years. Beginning with the account-
ing fraud and questionable ethics of business conduct at Enron culminating in its bankruptcy 
in the fall of 2001, failures in corporate governance have raised issues about the ethics and 
culture of business conduct.
The Goal of Corporate Governance
The single overriding objective of corporate governance in the Anglo-American markets is the 
optimization over time of the returns to shareholders. In order to achieve this, good govern-
ance practices should focus the attention of the board of directors of the corporation on this 
objective by developing and implementing a strategy for the corporation that ensures corpo-
rate growth and equity value creation. At the same time, it should ensure an effective relation-
ship with stakeholders. A variety of organizations, including the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD), have continued to refine their recommendations 
regarding five primary areas of governance:
1.	 Shareholder rights. Shareholders are the owners of the firm, and their interests should 
take precedence over other stakeholders.
2.	 Board responsibilities. The board of the company is recognized as the individual 
entity with final full legal responsibility for the firm, including proper oversight of 
management.
3.	 Equitable treatment of shareholders. Equitable treatment is specifically targeted 
toward domestic versus foreign residents as shareholders, as well as majority and 
minority interests.
4.	 Stakeholder rights. Governance practices should formally acknowledge the interests 
of other stakeholders—employees, creditors, community, and government.
5.	 Transparency and disclosure. Public and equitable reporting of firm operating and 
financial results and parameters should be done in a timely manner, and should be 
made available to all interests equitably.
These principles obviously focus on several key areas—shareholder rights and roles, disclosure 
and transparency, and the responsibilities of boards, which we will discuss in more detail.
The Structure of Corporate Governance
Our first challenge is to understand what people mean when they use the expression “corpo-
rate governance.” Exhibit 4.5 provides an overview of the various parties and their responsi-
bilities associated with the governance of the modern corporation. The modern corporation’s 
actions and behaviors are directed and controlled by both internal and external forces.

100
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
The internal forces, the officers of the corporation (such as the chief executive officer or 
CEO) and the board of directors of the corporation (including the chairman of the board), are 
those directly responsible for determining both the strategic direction and the execution of 
the company’s future. But they are not acting within a vacuum; the internal forces are subject 
to the constant prying eyes of the external forces in the marketplace, that question the validity 
and soundness of the decisions and performance of internal forces. External forces include the 
equity market (stock exchanges) on which the company’s shares are traded, the investment 
banking analysts who cover and critique the company shares, the creditors of the companies, 
the credit rating agencies that assign credit ratings to the company’s debt or equity securities, 
the auditors and legal advisers who testify to the fairness and legality of the company’s finan-
cial statements, and the multitude of regulators who oversee the company’s actions—all in an 
attempt to assure the validity of information presented to investors.
Board of Directors. The legal body that is accountable for the governance of the corporation 
is its board of directors. The board is composed of both employees of the organization (inside 
members) and senior and influential nonemployees (outside members). Areas of debate sur-
rounding boards include the following: (1) the proper balance between inside and outside 
members; (2) the means by which board members are compensated; and (3) the actual ability 
of a board to monitor and manage a corporation adequately when board members are spend-
ing few days a year in board activities. Outside members, often the current or retired chief 
executives of other major companies, may bring with them a healthy sense of distance and 
impartiality, which, although refreshing, may also result in limited understanding of the true 
issues and events within the company.
Equity Markets
Analysts and other market agents evaluate the
performance of the ﬁrm on a daily basis
Board of Directors
Chairman of the Board and members
are accountable for the organization
Management
Chief Executive Oﬃcer (CEO) and
his team run the company
Debt Markets
Ratings agencies and other analysts review the
ability of the ﬁrm to service debt
Auditors and Legal Advisers
Provide an external opinion as to the legality and
fairness of presentation and conformity to
standards of ﬁnancial statements
Regulators
SEC, the NYSE, or other regulatory bodies by country
The Corporation
(internal)
The Marketplace
(external)
Corporate governance represents the relationship
among stakeholders that is used to determine and
control the strategic direction and performance
of the organization.
Exhibit 4.5
The Structure of Corporate Governance

101
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
Management. The senior officers of the corporation—the chief executive officer (CEO), the 
chief financial officer (CFO), and the chief operating officer (COO)—are not only the most 
knowledgeable of the business, but also the creators and directors of its strategic and opera-
tional direction. The management of the firm is, according to theory, acting as a contractor—as 
an agent—of shareholders to pursue value creation. These officers are positively motivated 
by salary, bonuses, and stock options and negatively motivated by the risk of losing their jobs. 
They may, however, have biases of self-enrichment or personal agendas, which the board 
and other corporate stakeholders are responsible for overseeing and policing. Interestingly, 
in more than 80% of the companies in the Fortune 500, the CEO is also the chairman of the 
board. This is, in the opinion of many, a conflict of interest and not in the best interests of the 
company and its shareholders.
Equity Markets. The publicly traded company, regardless of country of residence, is highly sus-
ceptible to the changing opinion of the marketplace. The equity markets themselves, whether 
they are the New York Stock Exchange or the Mexico City Bolsa, should reflect the market’s 
constant evaluation of the promise and performance of the individual company. The analysts 
are experts employed by the many investment banking firms that also trade in the client 
company shares. These analysts are expected (sometimes naively) to evaluate the strategies, 
plans for execution of the strategies, and financial performance of the firms on a real-time 
basis, and they depend on the financial statements and other public disclosures of the firm for 
their information.
Debt Markets. Although the debt markets (banks and other financial institutions providing 
loans and various forms of securitized debt like corporate bonds) are not specifically interested 
in building shareholder value, they are indeed interested in the financial health of the company. 
Their interest, specifically, is in the company’s ability to repay its debt in a timely manner. Like 
equity markets, they must rely on the financial statements and other disclosures (public and 
private in this case) of the companies with which they work.
Auditors and Legal Advisers. Auditors and legal advisers are responsible for providing an 
external professional opinion as to the fairness, legality, and accuracy of corporate financial 
statements. In this process, they attempt to determine whether the firm’s financial records and 
practices follow what in the United States is termed generally accepted accounting principles 
(GAAP) in regard to accounting procedures. But auditors and legal advisers are hired by 
the very firms they are auditing, putting them in the rather unique position of policing their 
employers.
Regulators. Publicly traded firms in the United States and elsewhere are subject to the regu-
latory oversight of both governmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations. In 
the United States, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is a careful watchdog of 
the publicly traded equity markets, both of the behavior of the companies themselves in those 
markets and of the various investors participating in those markets. The SEC and other simi-
lar authorities outside of the United States require a regular and orderly disclosure process 
of corporate performance so that all investors may evaluate the company’s investment value 
with adequate, accurate, and fairly distributed information. This regulatory oversight is often 
focused on when and what information is released by the company, and to whom.
A publicly traded firm in the United States is also subject to the rules and regulations of 
the exchange upon which they are traded (New York Stock Exchange/Euronext, American 
Stock Exchange, and NASDAQ are the largest). These organizations, typically categorized as 
self-regulatory in nature, construct and enforce standards of conduct for both their member 
companies and themselves in the conduct of share trading.

102
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
Comparative Corporate Governance
The origins of the need for a corporate governance process arise from the separation of own-
ership from management, and from the varying views by culture of who the stakeholders are 
and of their significance.4 This assures that governance practices will differ across countries 
and cultures. As seen in Exhibit 4.6, corporate governance regimes may be classified by the 
evolution of business ownership over time.
Market-based regimes—like those of the United States, Canada, and the United 
­Kingdom—are characterized by relatively efficient capital markets in which the ownership 
of publicly traded companies is widely dispersed. Family-based regimes, like those charac-
terized in many of the emerging markets, Asian markets, and Latin American markets, not 
only started with strong concentrations of family ownership (as opposed to partnerships or 
small investment groups that are not family-based), but have also continued to be largely 
controlled by families even after going public. Bank-based and government-based regimes are 
those ­reflecting markets in which government ownership of property and industry has been a 
constant over time, resulting in only marginal public ownership of enterprise, and even then, 
subject to significant restrictions on business practices.
All exchange rate regimes are therefore a function of at least four major factors in the 
evolution of corporate governance principles and practices globally: 1) the financial market 
development; 2) the degree of separation between management and ownership; 3) the concept 
of disclosure and transparency; and 4) the historical development of the legal system.
Financial Market Development. The depth and breadth of capital markets is critical to the 
evolution of corporate governance practices. Country markets that have had relatively slow 
growth, as in the emerging markets, or have industrialized rapidly utilizing neighboring capital 
markets (for example, Western Europe), may not form large public equity market systems. 
Without significant public trading of ownership shares, high concentrations of ownership are 
preserved and few disciplined processes of governance are developed.
Separation of Management and Ownership. In countries and cultures where the ownership 
of the firm has continued to be an integral part of management, agency issues and failures 
have been less problematic. In countries like the United States, in which ownership has become 
Exhibit 4.6
Comparative Corporate Governance Regimes
Regime Basis
Characteristics
Examples
Market-based
Efficient equity markets; Dispersed ownership
United States, United Kingdom, Canada, 
Australia
Family-based
Management and ownership is combined; 
Family/majority and minority shareholders
Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, 
Singapore, Taiwan,
Bank-based
Government influence in bank lending;  
Lack of transparency; Family control
Korea, Germany
Government-affiliated
State ownership of enterprise; Lack of 
transparency; No minority influence
China, Russia
Source: Based on “Corporate Governance in Emerging Markets: An Asian Perspective,” by J. Tsui and T. Shieh, in International Finance and 
­Accounting Handbook, Third Edition, Frederick D.S. Choi, editor, Wiley, 2004, pp. 24.4–24.6.
4For a summary of comparative corporate governance see R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes and A. Schleifer, 
­“Corporate Ownership Around the World,” Journal of Finance, 54, 1999, pp. 471–517. See also A. Schleifer and 
R. Vishny, “A Survey of Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance, 52, 1997, pp. 737–783, and the Journal of 
Applied Corporate Finance, Vol. 19, No. 1, Winter 2007.

103
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
largely separated from management (and widely dispersed), aligning the goals of management 
and ownership is much more difficult.
Disclosure and Transparency. The extent of disclosure regarding the operations and financial 
results of a company vary dramatically across countries. Disclosure practices reflect a wide 
range of cultural and social forces, including the degree to which ownership is public, the 
degree to which government feels the need to protect investor’s rights versus ownership rights, 
and the extent to which family-based and government-based business remains central to the 
culture. Transparency, a parallel concept to disclosure, reflects the visibility of decision-making 
processes within the business organization.
Historical Development of the Legal System. Investor protection is typically better in coun-
tries where English common law is the basis of the legal system, compared to the codified civil 
law that is typical in France and Germany (the so-called Code Napoleon). English common 
law is typically the basis of the legal systems in the United Kingdom and former colonies of 
the United Kingdom, including the United States and Canada. The Code Napoleon is typi-
cally the basis of the legal systems in former French colonies and the European countries that 
Napoleon once ruled, such as Belgium, Spain, and Italy. In countries with weak investor pro-
tection, controlling shareholder ownership is often a substitute for a lack of legal protection. 
Note that we have not mentioned ethics. All of the principles and practices described so far 
have assumed that the individuals in roles of responsibility and leadership pursue them truly 
and fairly. That, however, has not always been the case.
Family Ownership and Corporate Governance
Although much of the discussion about corporate governance concentrates on the market-
based regimes (see Exhibit 4.6), family-based regimes are arguably more common and more 
important worldwide. For example, in a study of 5,232 corporations in 13 Western European 
countries, family-controlled firms represented 44% of the sample compared to 37% that were 
widely held.5 Global Finance in Practice 4.3 highlights some of the history of family power, the 
family cartel that controlled Italy for nearly 60 years.
5Mara Faccio and Larry H.P. Lang, “The Ultimate Ownership of Western European Corporations,” Journal of 
Financial Economics, 65 (2002), p. 365. See also: Torben Pedersen and Steen Thomsen, “European Patterns of 
­Corporate Ownership,” Journal of International Business Studies, Vol. 28, No. 4, Fourth Quarter, 1997, pp. 759–778.
Italy, in the years following World War II, was a country teeter-
ing on collapse. In an effort to stabilize industrial activity, the 
powerful families of the north—the Agnellis (of Fiat fame), the 
Pesentis, the Pirellis, the Ligrestis, and later the Benettons—
formed salotto buono—“the fine drawing room”—to control 
Italian finance, industry, and media, through relatively small 
stakes. At the core of the relationship was that each family 
business held significant ownership and control in the other in 
an interlocking or cross-shareholding structure that assured 
that no outsiders could gain ownership or influence.
The creator of salotto buono was Enrico Cuccia, the 
founder of Mediobanca, the Milan-based investment bank. 
One man in particular, Cesare Geronzi, rose to the top of Italian 
finance. And every step of the way, he took three scarlet chairs 
with him. The chairs sat in his waiting room at Mediobanca and 
eventually Generali, Italy’s largest financial group. Geronzi rose 
to the pinnacle of power despite twice being the target of major 
financial and accounting fraud cases, including Parmalat. Over 
the following half-century anyone wishing to gain influence had 
to pass through the “three chairs,” the salatto buono.
But, alas, the global financial crisis of 2008–2009 broke 
down many of the world’s last bastions of private power. One 
such casualty was salotto buono, as more and more of its 
vested families fell further into debt and bankruptcy.
Global Finance in Practice 4.3
Italian Cross—Shareholding and the End of the Salatto Buono

104
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
Failures in Corporate Governance
Failures in corporate governance have become increasingly visible in recent years. The Enron 
scandal in the United States is well known. In addition to Enron, other firms that have revealed 
major accounting and disclosure failures, as well as executive looting, are WorldCom, Par-
malat, Tyco, Adelphia, and HealthSouth. In each case, prestigious auditing firms, such as Arthur 
Andersen, missed the violations or minimized them possibly because of lucrative consulting 
relationships or other conflicts of interest. Moreover, security analysts and banks urged inves-
tors to buy the shares and debt issues of these and other firms that they knew to be highly 
risky or even close to bankruptcy. Even more egregious, most of the top executives who were 
responsible for the mismanagement that destroyed their firms walked away (initially) with 
huge gains on shares sold before the downfall, and even overly generous severance packages.
Good Governance and Corporate Reputation
Does good corporate governance matter? This is actually a difficult question, and the realistic 
answer has been largely dependent on outcomes historically. For example, as long as Enron’s 
share price continued to rise, questions over transparency, accounting propriety, and even 
financial facts were largely overlooked by all of the stakeholders of the corporation. Yet, 
eventually, the fraud, deceit, and failure of the multitude of corporate governance practices 
resulted in bankruptcy. It not only destroyed the wealth of investors, but the careers, incomes, 
and savings of so many of its own employees. Ultimately, good governance should matter.
One way in which companies may signal good governance to the investor markets is to 
adopt and publicize a fundamental set of governance policies and practices. Nearly all publicly 
traded firms have adopted this approach, as becomes obvious when visiting corporate Web 
sites. This has also led to a standardized set of common principles, as described in Exhibit 4.7, 
which might be considered a growing consensus on good governance practices. Those prac-
tices—board composition, management compensation structure and oversight, corporate 
auditing practices, and public disclosure—have been widely accepted.
Exhibit 4.7
The Growing Consensus on Good Corporate Governance
Although there are many different cultural and legal approaches used in corporate governance worldwide, there is a 
growing consensus on what constitutes good corporate governance.
■
■Composition of the Board of Directors. A board of directors should have both internal and external members. 
More importantly, it should be staffed by individuals of true experience and knowledge of not only their own rules 
and responsibilities, but of the nature and conduct of the corporate business.
■
■Management Compensation. A management compensation system should be aligned with corporate 
performance (financial and otherwise) and have significant oversight from the board and open disclosure to 
shareholders and investors.
■
■Corporate Auditing. Independent auditing of corporate financial results should be conducted on a meaningful real-
time basis. An audit process with oversight by a Board committee composed primarily of external members would 
be an additional significant improvement.
■
■Public Reporting and Disclosure. There should be timely public reporting of both financial and nonfinancial 
operating results that may be used by investors to assess the investment outlook. This should also include 
transparency and reporting around potentially significant liabilities.
A final international note of caution: The quality and credibility of all internal corporate practices on good governance are 
still subject to the quality of a country’s corporate law, its protection of both creditor and investor rights (including minority 
shareholders), and the country’s ability to provide adequate and appropriate enforcement.

105
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
In principle, the idea is that good governance (at both the country and corporate levels) is 
linked to cost of capital (lower), returns to shareholders (higher), and corporate profitability 
(higher). An added dimension of interest is the role of country governance, as it may influ-
ence the country in which international investors may choose to invest. Curiously, however, 
not only have corporate rankings been highly uncorrelated across ranking firms, but a number 
of academic studies have also indicated little linkage between a firm’s corporate governance 
ranking and its future likelihood of restating earnings, shareholder lawsuits, return on assets, 
and a variety of measures of stock price performance.
An additional way to signal good corporate governance, in non-Anglo-American firms, is 
to elect one or more Anglo-American board members. This was shown to be true for a select 
group of Norwegian and Swedish firms in a study by Oxelheim and Randøy.6 The firms had 
superior market values. The Anglo-American board members suggested a governance system 
that would show better monitoring opportunities and enhanced investor recognition.
Corporate Governance Reform
Within the United States and the United Kingdom, the main corporate governance problem 
is the one addressed by agency theory: With widespread share ownership, how can a firm 
align management’s interest with that of the shareholders? Since individual shareholders 
do not have the resources or the power to monitor management, the U.S. and U.K. mar-
kets rely on regulators to assist in the monitoring of agency issues and conflicts of interest. 
Outside the U.S. and the U.K., large controlling shareholders (including Canada) are in 
the majority. They are able to monitor management in some ways better than regulators. 
However, controlling shareholders pose a different agency problem. It is extremely difficult 
to protect the interests of minority shareholders (investors holding small numbers of share 
and therefore little voting power) against the power of controlling shareholders, whether 
the controlling shareholders are major institutions, large wealthy private investors, or even 
controlling families.
In recent years, reform in the United States and Canada has been largely regulatory. 
Reform elsewhere has been largely focused on the adoption of principles rather than stricter 
legal regulations. The principles approach is softer, less costly, and less likely to conflict with 
other existing regulations.
Sarbanes-Oxley Act. The U.S. Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) in July 2002. 
Named after its two primary congressional sponsors, SOX had four major requirements: 
(1) CEOs and CFOs of publicly traded firms must vouch for the veracity of the firm’s pub-
lished financial statements; (2) corporate boards must have audit and compensation commit-
tees drawn from independent (outside) directors; (3) companies are prohibited from making 
loans to corporate officers and directors; and (4) companies must test their internal financial 
controls against fraud.
The first provision—the so-called signature clause—has already had significant impacts 
on the way in which companies prepare their financial statements. The provision was intended 
to instill a sense of responsibility and accountability in senior management (and to therefore 
reduce management explanations of “the auditors signed off on it”). The companies them-
selves have pushed the same procedure downward in their organizations, often requiring busi-
ness unit managers and directors at lower levels to sign their financial statements. Regardless 
of the form of corporate government reform, as discussed in Global Finance in Practice 4.4, 
the definition of good governance is still under debate.
6Lars Oxelheim and Trond Randøy, “The Impact of Foreign Board Membership on Firm Value,” Journal of ­Banking 
and Finance, Vol. 27, No. 12, 2003, pp. 2,369–2,392.

106
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
The term “good governance” is, in many instances, a highly 
politically charged term. When talking to the press, many 
directors and executives argue that the pursuit of good gov-
ernance practices is good for business globally. However, 
those same officials may also argue that stringent reporting 
and disclosure requirements, like those imposed by the United 
States under Sarbanes-Oxley, harm business competition and 
growth and, ultimately, the attractiveness of listing and trading 
their securities in the United States. In the end, the devil may 
indeed be in the detail.
One size may not fit all, however. Culture has an enor-
mous impact on business conduct, and many countries are 
finding their own way without necessarily following U.S. or 
European practices. For example, a number of Japanese 
leaders note that the Japanese corporate governance system 
differs from the Western system and has evolved while pre-
serving Japanese culture and history. They argue that cultural 
background and history should not be ignored when devel-
oping and implementing global standards, regulations, and 
oversight.
Global Finance in Practice 4.4
Is Good Governance Good Business Globally?
Poor performance of management usually requires changes in management, ownership, or 
both. Exhibit 4.8 illustrates some of the alternative paths available to shareholders when they 
are dissatisfied with firm performance. Depending on the culture and accepted practices, it is 
not unusual for many investors to—for an extended time—remain quietly disgruntled regard-
ing share price performance. A more active response is to sell their shares. It is with the third 
and fourth possible actions, changing management and initiating a takeover, that management 
hears a much louder dissatisfied “voice.”
Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability
Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
—Brundtland Report, 1987, p. 54.
Popular Term
The Past
Walk-Away
Shareholder Activism
Maximum Threat
What counts is that the management of a publicly quoted company, and its board of directors, know that
the company can become the subject of a hostile takeover bid if they fail to perform. The growth of equity
and hedge funds in the United States and elsewhere in recent years has strengthened this threat as leveraged
buyouts are once again common. 
Remain Quietly Disgruntled
Sell the Shares
Change Management
Initiate a Takeover
Shareholder
Dissatisfaction
Possible Action
Exhibit 4.8
Potential Responses to Shareholder Dissatisfaction

107
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
What is the purpose of the corporation? It is increasingly accepted that the purpose of the 
corporation is to certainly create profits and value for its stakeholders, but the responsibility 
of the corporation is to do so in a way that inflicts no costs on the environment and society. As 
a result of globalization, this growing responsibility and role of the corporation in society has 
added an additional level of complexity to the modern corporation never seen before.
The discussion has been somewhat hampered to date by a lot of conflicting terms and 
labels—corporate goodness, corporate responsibility, corporate social responsibility (CSR), 
corporate philanthropy, and corporate sustainability, to list but a few. To simplify, sustainabil-
ity is often described as a goal, while responsibility is an obligation of the corporation. The 
obligation is to pursue profit, social development, and the environment—but to do so along 
sustainable principles.
Nearly two decades ago a number of large corporations began to refine their publicly 
acknowledged corporate objective as “the pursuit of the triple bottom line.” This triple bottom 
line—profitability, social responsibility, and environmental sustainability—was considered an 
enlightened development of modern capitalism. What some critics referred to as a softer and 
gentler form of market capitalism, was a growing acceptance on the part of the corporation for 
doing something more than generating a financial profit. One way to explain this development 
of an expanded view of corporate responsibilities divides the arguments along two channels, 
the economic channel and the moral channel.
The economic channel argues that by pursuing corporate sustainability objectives the 
corporation is actually still pursuing profitability, but is doing so with a more intelligent longer-
term perspective—“enlightened self-interest.” It has realized that a responsible organization 
must assure that its actions over time, whether or not required by law or markets, do not reduce 
future choices. Alternatively, the moral channel argues that since the corporation has the rights 
and responsibilities of a citizen, including the moral responsibility to act in the best interests 
of society, regardless of its impacts on profitability. And you thought the management of a 
company was simple!
Summary Points
■
■
Most commercial enterprises have their origins with 
either entrepreneurs (private enterprise) or govern-
ments (public enterprise). Regardless of origin, if they 
remain commercial in focus, they may over time choose 
to go public (in whole or in part) via an initial public 
offering (IPO).
■
■
When a firm becomes widely owned, it is typically man-
aged by hired professionals. Professional managers’ 
interests may not be aligned with the interests of own-
ers, thus creating an agency problem.
■
■
The Anglo-American markets subscribe to a philosophy 
that a firm’s objective should follow the shareholder 
wealth maximization (SWM) model. More specifically, 
the firm should strive to maximize the return to share-
holders, the sum of capital gains and dividends, for a 
given level of risk.
■
■
As do shareholders in Anglo-American markets, con-
trolling shareholders in non-Anglo-American markets 
strive to maximize long-term returns to equity. How-
ever, they also consider the interests of other stakehold-
ers, including employees, customers, suppliers, creditors, 
government, and community. This is known as stake-
holder capitalism.
■
■
The return to a shareholder in a publicly traded firm 
combines current income in the form of dividends and 
capital gains from the appreciation of share price. A pri-
vately held firm tries to maximize current and sustain-
able income since it has no share price.
■
■
The MNE must determine for itself the proper balance 
between three common operational objectives: maximi-
zation of consolidated after-tax income; minimization of 
the firm’s effective global tax burden; and correct posi-
tioning of the firm’s income, cash flows, and available 
funds as to country and currency.
■
■
The relationship between stakeholders that is used 
to determine the strategic direction and performance 

108
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
of an organization is termed corporate governance. 
Dimensions of corporate governance include 
agency theory; composition and control of boards 
of ­directors; and cultural, historical and institutional 
variables.
■
■
A number of initiatives in corporate governance prac-
tices in the United States, the United Kingdom, and 
the European Union—including board structure and 
compensation, transparency, auditing, and ­minority 
shareholder rights—are spreading to a number of 
today’s major emerging markets.
■
■
Corporate governance practices are seen, in some coun-
tries and cultures, as overly intrusive and occasionally 
are viewed as damaging to the competitive capability 
of the firm. The result is an increasing reluctance to go 
public in selective markets.
The basic rule is to be there at the right moment, at the 
right place, to seize a promising opportunity in an envi-
ronment guaranteeing sufficient longer-term growth.
—Bernard Arnault, Chairman and CEO, LVMH.
Patrick Thomas focused intently on not letting his hands 
shake as he quietly ended the call. He had been riding his 
bicycle in rural Auvergne, in south-central France, when his 
cell phone buzzed. He took a long deep breath and tried to 
think. He had spent most of his professional life working 
at Hermès International, SA and had assumed the position 
of CEO in 2006 after the retirement of Jean-Louis Dumas. 
The first nonfamily CEO to run the company was now fac-
ing the biggest threat to the family-controlled company in 
its 173-year history.
The LVMH Position
The man on the other end of the phone had been none 
other than Bernard Arnault, Chairman and CEO of LVMH 
(Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton), the world’s largest luxury 
brand company, the richest man in France, and a major 
competitor. Arnault was calling to inform Thomas that 
LVMH would be announcing in two hours that they had 
acquired a 17.1% interest in Hermès. Thomas had simply 
not believed Arnault for the first few minutes, thinking 
it impossible that LVMH could have gained control of 
that significant a stake without his knowledge. Arnault 
assured Thomas it was no joke and that he looked forward 
to participating in the company’s continued success as a 
shareholder. Patrick Thomas began assessing the potential 
threat, if it was indeed a threat.
Hermès International. Hermès International, SA is 
a multibillion-dollar French company that makes and 
sells luxury goods across a number of different product 
categories including women’s and men’s apparel, watches, 
leather goods, jewelry, and perfume. Thierry Hermès, who 
was known for making the best saddles and harnesses 
in Paris, founded the company in 1837. The company’s 
reputation soared as it began to provide its high-end 
products to nobility throughout Europe, North Africa, 
Russia, Asia, and the Americas. As the years passed, the 
company began to expand its product line to include the 
finest leather bags and silk scarves on the market, all 
while passing the company down through generations and 
maintaining family control.
Despite going public in 1993, roughly 60 direct descen-
dants of Thierry Hermès, comprising the 5th and 6th gener-
ations, still controlled approximately 73% of the company. 
In 2006, the job of CEO was assumed, for the first time, by 
a nonfamily member, Patrick Thomas.
Bernard Arnault
Arnault is a shrewd man. He has reviewed his portfolio 
and sees what he is missing—a company that still pro-
duces true luxury—and he is going after it.
—Anonymous luxury brand CEO speaking 
on the LVMH announcement.
Bernard Arnault had made a very profitable career out 
of his penchant for taking over vulnerable family-owned 
businesses (earning him the colorful nickname of “the wolf 
in cashmere”). Born in Roubaix, France, to an upper class 
Luxury Wars—LVMH vs. Hermès7
Mini-Case
7Copyright 2011 © Thunderbird School of Global Management. All rights reserved. This case was prepared by Joe Kleinberg, MBA 
2011 and Peter Macy, MBA 2011, under the direction of Professor Michael Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only, and 
not to indicate either effective or ineffective management.

109
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
Autorité des Marchés Financiers (AMF). Arnault’s 
announcement of LVMH’s ownership stake in Hermès 
came as a shock to both the fashion industry and the 
family shareholders of Hermès. Exhibit A is Hermès public 
response to LVMH’s initiative. The French stock market 
regulator, the Autorité des Marchés Financiers (AMF), 
required any investor gaining a 5% or greater stake in a 
publicly traded company to file their ownership percentage 
publicly, as well as a document of intent. But no such notice 
had yet been filed.
In the days following the October 23 press release, 
LVMH confirmed that the company had complied with all 
current rules and regulations in the transactions, and that 
it would file all the necessary documentation within the 
allotted time. The AMF announced that it would investi-
gate LVMH’s acquisition of the Hermès stock. This, how-
ever, was little consolation to Thomas and the Hermès 
family. Even if violations were found, the only penalty 
LVMH could suffer would be the loss of voting rights for 
two years.
Equity Swaps. LVMH had, it turns out, acquired its large 
ownership position under the radar of the Hermès family, 
company management, and industry analysts, through the 
use of equity swaps. Equity swaps are derivative contracts 
where two parties agree to swap future cash flows at a 
preset date. The cash flows are referred to as “legs” of the 
family, Arnault excelled as a student and graduated from 
France’s prestigious engineering school, Ecole Polytech-
nique, before working as an engineer and taking over his 
family’s construction business. When the French govern-
ment began looking for someone to acquire the bankrupt 
company, Boussac (and its luxury line, Christian Dior), 
Arnault promptly bought the company. It proved the first 
step in building what would eventually become the luxury 
titan, LVMH, and propelling Arnault to the title of France’s 
wealthiest man.
From that point on, Arnault began assembling what his 
competitors referred to as “the evil empire,” by preying 
on susceptible family-owned companies with premium 
names. His takeover of Louis Vuitton was said to have 
gotten so personal and vicious that, after the last board 
meeting, the Vuitton family packed their belongings and 
left the building in tears. In addition to Louis Vuitton, 
Arnault had spent the last three decades forcibly acquiring 
such family-owned luxury brands as Krug (champagne), 
Pucci ­(fashion), Chateau d’Yquem (vineyard), and Celine 
­(fashion), among others.
Arnault’s only failure had been his attempted take-
over of Gucci in 1999, when he was beaten by Francois 
Pinault, whose company PPR served as the white knight 
for Gucci and stole the deal out from under Arnault. It 
marked the one time in LVMH’s history that it had failed 
in a takeover bid.
Exhibit A
Hermès Response via Press Release: October 24, 2010
Hermès has been informed that LVMH has acquired a 17% stake in the Company. In 1993, the shareholders of Hermès 
International, all descendants from Emile Hermès, decided to enlist the Company on the Paris stock exchange. This decision 
was made with two objectives in mind: 1) support the long term development of the Company; 2) make shares easier to 
trade for the shareholders.
Over the last 10 years, the Hermès group has delivered an average annual growth rate of 10% of its net result and 
currently holds a very strong financial position with over M€ 700 of free cash. Today, Hermès Family shareholders have 
a strong majority control of nearly 3/4 of the shares. They are fully united around a common business vision. Their long 
term control of Hermès International is guaranteed by its financial status as limited partnership by shares and the family 
shareholders have confirmed that they are not contemplating any significant selling of shares. The public listing of shares, 
allows investors who want to become minority shareholders to do so. As a Family Company Hermès has treated and will 
always treat its shareholders with utmost respect.
The Executive Management, 
Sunday October 24th, 2010
Source: Hermes.com.

110
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
have had to publicly acknowledge its potential equity posi-
tion in Hermès.
The design of the contracts prevented LVMH from 
actually holding the shares until October 2010, when they 
publicly announced their ownership stake in Hermès. Dur-
ing this period Hermès share price floated between €60 
and €102. This explained how LVMH was able to acquire 
its shares in Hermès at an average price of €80 per share, 
nearly a 54% discount on the closing price of €176.2 on 
Friday, October 22.
LVMH could have actually held its swap contracts 
longer and postponed settlement and disclosure, but 
the rapid rise in Hermès share price over the previous 
months forced the decision (which many analysts attrib-
uted to market speculations of an LVMH takeover plot). 
If LVMH had postponed settlement, it would have had 
to account for €2 billion in paper profit, earned on the 
contracts when publishing their year-end accounts in 
­February 2011.
The Battle Goes Public
Although the original press release by LVMH made it 
clear that the company had no greater designs on con-
trolling Hermès, Hermès management did not believe it, 
and moved quickly. After a quick conference call amongst 
Hermès leadership, Hermès CEO Thomas and Execu-
tive Chairman Puech gave an interview with Le Figaro on 
October 27.
It’s clear his [Mr. Arnault] intention is to take over the 
company and the family will resist that.
—Patrick Thomas, CEO Hermès, Le Figaro, 
October 27, 2010.
We would like to convince him [Mr. Arnault] that this is 
not the right way to operate and that it’s not friendly. If 
he entered in a friendly way, then we would like him to 
leave in a friendly way.
—Mr. Puech, Executive Chairman of Emile 
Hermès SARL, Le Figaro, October 27, 2010.
Arnault wasted no time in responding in an inter-
view given to the same newspaper the following day: 
I do not see how the head of a listed company can be 
qualified to ask a shareholder to sell his shares. On the 
contrary he is supposed to defend the interests of all 
shareholders.
—Bernard Arnault, CEO LVMH, Le Figaro, 
October 28, 2010.
swap. In most equity swaps, one leg is tied to a floating rate 
like LIBOR (the floating leg), and the other leg is tied to 
the performance of a stock or stock index (the equity leg). 
Under current French law, a company must acknowledge 
when they attain a 5% or more equity stake in another 
company, or the rights to purchase a 5% or more stake via 
derivatives like equity swaps.
But there was a loophole. The swaps could be struc-
tured so that their value was tied to the equity instrument 
only; at closeout the contract may be settled in cash, not 
shares. Using this structure, the swap holder is not required 
to file with the AMF, since they will never actually own 
the stock.
The LVMH Purchase. It was widely known that Arnault 
had long coveted Hermès as a brand. In fact, Mr. Arnault 
had previously owned 15% of Hermès when he first took 
over LVMH in the 1990s. At the time, Mr. Arnault had his 
hands full with reorganizing and redirecting LVMH after 
his takeover of the company, so he agreed to sell the shares 
to then Hermès CEO Jean-Louis Dumas when Dumas 
wanted to take the company public.
But things had changed for LVMH and Arnault since 
then. Mr. Arnault had grown his company to the largest 
luxury conglomerate in the world, with over $55 billion in 
annual sales. He accomplished this through organic growth 
of brands and strategic purchases. Known for his patience 
and shrewd business acumen, when he saw an opportunity 
to target a long coveted prize, he took advantage.
The attack on Hermès shares was one of Arnault’s most 
closely kept secrets, with only three people in his empire 
aware of the equity swap contracts. Arnault began making 
his move in 2008 when three blocks of Hermès shares—
totaling 12.8 million shares—were quietly placed on the 
market by three separate French banks. The origins of these 
shares were unknown, but many suspected they had come 
from Hermès family members.
It is believed that Arnault was contacted by the banks 
and was given 24 hours to decide whether he would like to 
purchase them or not. Arnault was hesitant to take such a 
large ownership stake in Hermès, particularly one requir-
ing registration with the AMF. Arnault and the banks then 
developed the strategy whereby he would hold rights to 
the shares via equity swaps, but only as long as he put up 
the cash. At contract maturity, LVMH would realize the 
profit/loss on any movement in the share price. As part of 
the agreement with the banks, however, LVMH would have 
the option to take the shares instead. Had the contracts 
required share settlement, under French law LVMH would 

111
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
At this time, Godé explained, “the Board had to choose 
between receiving a considerable amount on the equity 
swaps or take a minority participation in this promising 
group but where our power would be very limited as the 
family controlled everything. There was an intense debate 
and finally the Board chose to have share payments.” Godé 
completed the interview by stating that LVMH was sur-
prised by the strong negative response from Hermès, espe-
cially considering that LVMH had owned a 15% stake in 
the company in the early 1990s.
Evolution of Hermès International and Its Control. 
Hermès was structured as a Société en Commandite, the 
French version of a limited partnership in the United States. 
In the case of Hermès, this structure concentrates power in the 
hands of a ruling committee, which is controlled by the family.
In addition to the Société en Commandite structure 
of the company, former Hermès CEO Jean-Louis Dumas 
established a partner company, Hermès SARL, in 1989. 
This company represented the interests of family share-
holders (only direct Hermès descendants could be own-
ers), and was the sole authority to appoint management 
and set company strategy. This unusual structure provided 
the ­Hermès family with the ability to retain decision-­
making power even if only one family member remained 
as a shareholder. The structure had been adopted as pro-
tection against a hostile takeover after Dumas saw the way 
Bernard Arnault had dealt with the Vuitton family when he 
acquired their company.
In a further attempt to placate family members and 
minimize family infighting, Dumas listed 25% of ­Hermès 
SA on the French stock market in 1993. This was done 
to provide family members with a means to value their 
stake in the company as well as partially cash out if they 
felt their family dividends were not enough (several fam-
ily members were known to live large, and Dumas feared 
their lifestyles might exceed their means). Dumas 
believed—at least at that time—that his two-tier structure 
would insulate ­Hermès from a potential hostile takeover.
However, analysts were now speculating that Hermès 
SARL might only provide protection through the 6th 
generation, and that with just a 0.1% stake in the com-
pany being worth approximately €18 million at current 
market prices, there was reason to fear some family mem-
bers “defecting.” This concern was made all the more real 
when it became known through AMF filings that Laurent 
Mommeja, brother to Hermès supervisory board member 
­Renaud fe, sold €1.8 million worth of shares on October 25 
at a share price of €189 per share.
Pierre Godé, Vice President LVMH. On November 10, 
after much speculation regarding LVMH’s intent, Pierre 
Godé, an LVMH Vice President, gave an interview with Les 
Echos newspaper (itself owned by LVMH) to discuss how 
and why the transactions took place the way they did, as 
well as to dispel media speculation about a potential hostile 
takeover attempt from LVMH. In the interview, Godé was 
questioned about why LVMH chose to purchase the equity 
swap contracts against Hermès in the first place, and why 
LVMH chose to close those contracts in Hermès shares 
rather than in cash.
Godé confided that LVMH had begun looking at ­Hermès 
in 2007 when the financial crisis started and the stock 
exchange began to fall. LVMH was looking for financial 
investments in the luxury industry—as that is where their 
expertise lies—and concluded that Hermès would weather 
the financial crisis better than other potential investments. 
It was for this reason alone that LVMH chose to purchase 
equity swaps with Hermès shares as the equity leg.
Godé argued that equity swaps with cash payment and 
settlement were trendy at that time, and virtually every 
bank offered this derivative. Even though LVMH already 
had just under a 5% stake of Hermès stock at the time 
the derivatives were being set up, Godé stated that LVMH 
never even considered the possibility of closing out the 
swaps in shares. For one thing, it was something they could 
not do contractually (according to Godé), nor did LVMH 
want to ask the banks for equity settlements. But by 2010, 
the situation had changed, prompting LVMH to reassess 
their Hermès equity swap contracts. The contracts them-
selves were running out, and LVMH had a premium of 
nearly €1 billion on them. According to Godé, the banks 
that had covered their contracts with LVMH were now 
tempted to sell the shares, which represented 12% of Her-
mès’ capital.
Godé explained that selling the shares, in and of itself, 
did not concern LVMH. What LVMH did worry about 
however, was where the shares might end up. Godé 
stressed that at that time there were rumors that both 
a “powerful group from another industry” and Chinese 
investment funds were interested in the Hermès shares. 
LVMH management felt the rising share price of Her-
mès lent support to these rumors. Additionally, the mar-
ket had been improving and LVMH had the financial 
means to be able to pay for the contracts and settle in 
shares. As a result, LVMH spoke with the banks to assess 
their position, and after, several weeks of talks, LVMH 
reached an agreement with the banks in October for part 
of the shares.

CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 Hermès International was a family-owned business for 
many years. Why did it then list its shares on a public 
market? What risks and rewards come from a public 
listing?
2.	 Bernard Arnault and LVMH acquired a large position 
in Hermès shares without anyone knowing. How did 
they do it and how did they avoid the French regula-
tions requiring disclosure of such positions?
3.	 The Hermès family defended themselves by forming a 
holding company of their family shares. How will this 
work and how long do you think it will last?
After considerable debate, the Hermès family decided 
to consolidate their shares into a trust in the form of a hold-
ing company that would ensure their 73% ownership stake 
would always vote as one voice and ultimately secure the 
family’s continued control of the company. On December 
21, LVMH announced that it had raised its total stake in 
Hermès to 20.21% and that it had filed all required docu-
ments with AMF upon passing the 20% threshold. LVMH 
also reiterated that it had no intention of taking control of 
Hermès or making a public offer for its shares. Under French 
law, once LVMH reached one-third share ownership it 
would have to make a public tender for all remaining shares.
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Business Ownership. What are the predominant own-
ership forms in global business?
2.	 Business Control. How does ownership alter the control 
of a business organization? Is the control of a private 
firm that different from a publicly traded company?
3.	 Separation of Ownership and Management. Why is 
the separation of ownership from management so 
critical to the understanding of how businesses are 
structured and led?
4.	 Corporate Goals: Shareholder Wealth Maximization. 
Explain the assumptions and objectives of the share-
holder wealth maximization model.
5.	 Corporate Goals: Stakeholder Capitalism Maximiza-
tion (SCM). Explain the assumptions and objectives 
of the stakeholder capitalization model.
6.	 Management’s Time Horizon. Do shareholder wealth 
maximization and stakeholder capitalism have the 
same time-horizon for the strategic, managerial, and 
financial objectives of the firm? How do they differ?
7.	 Operational Goals. What should be the primary oper-
ational goal or goals of an MNE?
8.	 Financial Returns. How do shareholders in a pub-
licly traded firm actually reap cash flow returns from 
their ownership? Who has control over which of these 
returns?
9.	 Dividend Returns. Are dividends really all that 
important to investors in publicly traded companies? 
Aren’t capital gains really the point or objective of the 
investor?
10.	 Ownership Hybrids. What is a hybrid? How may it be 
managed differently?
11.	 Corporate Governance. Define corporate governance 
and the various stakeholders involved in corporate 
governance. What is the difference between internal 
and external governance?
12.	 Governance Regimes. What are the four major types 
of governance regimes and how do they differ?
13.	 Governance Development Drivers. What are the 
primary drivers of corporate governance across the 
globe? Is the relative weight or importance of some 
drivers increasing over others?
14.	 Good Governance Value. Does good governance 
have a “value” in the marketplace? Do investors really 
reward good governance, or does good governance 
just attract a specific segment of investors?
112
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance

113
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
c.	 What would be the total return Spencer would earn 
on his shares if he sold them at these rates?
3.	 Vaniteux’s Returns (B). Spencer Grant chooses not to 
sell his shares at the time described in Problem 2. He 
waits, expecting the share price to rise further after 
the announcement of quarterly earnings. His expec-
tations are correct, and the share price rises to €31.14 
per share after the announcement. He now wishes to 
recalculate his returns. The current spot exchange rate 
is $1.3110/€.
4.	 Vaniteux’s Returns (C). Using the same prices and 
exchange rates as in Problem 3, Vaniteux (B), what 
would be the total return on the Vaniteux investment 
by Laurent Vuagnoux, a Paris-based investor?
5.	 Microsoft’s Dividend. In January 2003, Microsoft 
announced that it would begin paying a dividend of 
$0.16 per share. Given the following share prices for 
Microsoft stock in the recent past, how would a con-
stant dividend of $0.16 per share per year have changed 
the company’s average annual return to its sharehold-
ers over this period?
First
Trading Day
Closing
Share Price
First
Trading Day
Closing
Share Price
1998 (Jan 2)
$131.13
2001 (Jan 2)
$43.38
1999 (Jan 4)
$141.00
2002 (Jan 2)
$67.04
2000 (Jan 3)
$116.56
2003 (Jan 2)
$53.72
6.	 Carty’s Choices. Brian Carty, a prominent investor, 
is evaluating investment alternatives. If he believes 
an individual equity will rise in price from $59 to 
$71 in the coming one-year period, and the share is 
expected to pay a dividend of $1.75 per share, and he 
expects at least a 15% rate of return on an investment 
of this type, should he invest in this particular equity?
7.	 Fashion Acquisitions. During the 1960s, many con-
glomerates were created by firms that were enjoy-
ing a high price/earnings ratio (P/E). These firms 
then used their highly valued stock to acquire other 
firms that had lower P/E ratios, usually in unrelated 
domestic industries. Conglomerates went out of 
fashion during the 1980s when they lost their high 
P/E ratios, thus making it more difficult to find other 
firms with lower P/E ratios to acquire.
15.	 Shareholder Dissatisfaction. If shareholders are 
unhappy with the current leadership of a firm—its actual 
management and control—what are their choices?
16.	 Emerging Markets Corporate Governance Failures. It 
has been claimed that failures in corporate governance 
have hampered the growth and profitability of some 
prominent firms located in emerging markets. What 
are some typical causes of these failures in corporate 
governance?
17.	 Emerging Markets Corporate Governance Improve-
ments. In recent years emerging market MNEs have 
improved their corporate governance policies and 
become more shareholder-friendly. What do you think 
is driving this phenomenon?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
Use the following formula to answer problems on share-
holder returns, where Pt is the share price at time t, and Dt 
is the dividend paid at time t.
Shareholder Return = D2
P1
+ P2 - P1
P1
1.	 Emaline Returns. If the share price of Emaline, a New 
Orleans-based shipping firm, rises from $12 to $15 
over a one-year period, what is the rate of return to 
the shareholder given each of the following:
a.	 The company paid no dividends
b.	 The company paid a dividend of $1 per share
c.	 The company paid the dividend and the total return 
to the shareholder is separated into the dividend 
yield and the capital gain
2.	 Vaniteux’s Returns (A). Spencer Grant is a New 
York-based investor. He has been closely following 
his investment in 100 shares of Vaniteux, a French 
firm that went public in February 2010. When he pur-
chased his 100 shares at €17.25 per share, the euro 
was trading at $1.360/€. Currently, the share is trad-
ing at €28.33 per share, and the dollar has fallen to 
$1.4170/€.
a.	 If Spencer sells his shares today, what percentage 
change in the share price would he receive?
b.	 What is the percentage change in the value of the 
euro versus the dollar over this same period?

114
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
During the 1990s, the same acquisition strategy 
was possible for firms located in countries where high 
P/E ratios were common compared to firms in other 
countries where low P/E ratios were common. Con-
sider the hypothetical firms in the pharmaceutical 
industry shown in the table at the top of the page.
Modern American wants to acquire ModoUnico. 
It offers 5,500,000 shares of Modern American, with a 
current market value of $220,000,000 and a 10% pre-
mium on ModoUnico’s shares, for all of ModoUnico’s 
shares.
a.	 How many shares would Modern American 
have  outstanding after the acquisition of 
ModoUnico?
b.	 What would be the consolidated earnings of the 
combined Modern American and ModoUnico?
c.	 Assuming the market continues to capitalize 
Modern American’s earnings at a P/E ratio of 40, 
what would be the new market value of Modern 
American?
d.	 What would be the new earnings per share of Mod-
ern American?
e.	 What would be the new market of a share of Mod-
ern American?
f.	 How much would Modern American’s stock price 
increase?
g.	 Assume that the market takes a negative view of 
the acquisition and lowers Modern American’s 
P/E ratio to 30. What would be the new market 
price per share of stock? What would be its per-
centage loss?
8.	 Corporate Governance: Overstating Earnings. A 
number of firms, especially in the United States, have 
had to lower their previously reported earnings due 
to accounting errors or fraud. Assume that Modern 
American (Problem 7) had to lower its earnings to 
$5,000,000 from the previously reported $10,000,000. 
What might be its new market value prior to the acqui-
sition? Could it still do the acquisition?
9.	 Yehti Manufacturing (A). Dual classes of com-
mon stock are common in a number of countries. 
Assume that Yehti Manufacturing has the following 
capital structure at book value. The A-shares have 
ten votes per share and the B-shares have one vote 
per share.
Yehti Manufacturing
Local Currency 
(millions)
Long-term debt
200
Retained earnings
300
Paid-in common stock: 1 million 
A-shares
100
Paid-in common stock: 4 million 
B-shares
400
Total long-term capital
1,000
a.	 What proportion of the total long-term capital has 
been raised by A-shares?
b.	 What proportion of voting rights is represented by 
A-shares?
c.	 What proportion of the dividends should the 
A-shares receive?
10.	 Yehti Manufacturing (B). Assume all of the same 
debt and equity values for Yehti Manufacturing in 
­Problem 9, with the sole exception that both A-shares 
and B-shares have the same voting rights—one vote 
per share.
a.	 What proportion of the total long-term capital has 
been raised by A-shares?
b.	 What proportion of voting rights is represented by 
A-shares?
c.	 What proportion of the dividends should the 
A-shares receive?
11.	 Lantau Beer (A): European Sales. Lantau Beer is a 
Hong Kong-based brewery and files all of its financial 
statements in Hong Kong dollars (HK$). The compa-
ny’s European sales director, Phillipp Bosse, has been 
criticized for his performance. He disagrees, arguing 
that sales in Europe have grown steadily in recent 
years. Who is correct?
Problem 7.
Company
P/E Ratio
Number  
of Shares
Market Value  
per Share
Earnings
EPS
Total Market 
Value
ModoUnico
20
10,000,000
$20.00
$10,000,000
$1.00
$200,000,000
Modern American
40
10,000,000
$40.00
$10,000,000
$1.00
$400,000,000

115
Financial Goals and Corporate Governance    CHAPTER 4 
Problem 12.
2010
2011
2012
Annual yen 
payments on debt 
agreement (¥)
12,000,000 12,000,000
12,000,000
Average exchange 
rate, ¥/HK$
12.3
12.1
11.4
Annual yen debt 
service, HK$
_______
_______
_______
13.	 Mattel’s Global Performance. Mattel (U.S.) achieved 
significant sales growth in its major international 
regions between 2001 and 2004. In its filings with the 
United States Security and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), it reported both the amount of regional sales 
and the percentage change in those sales resulting 
from exchange rate changes.
a.	 What was the percentage change in sales, in U.S. 
dollars, by region?
b.	 What was the percentage change in sales, by region, 
net of currency change impacts?
c.	 What impact did currency changes have on the 
level and growth of consolidated sales between 
2001 and 2004?
Problem 11.
2010
2011
2012
Total net sales, HK$
171,275
187,500
244,900
Percent of total 
sales from Europe
48%
44%
39%
Total European 
sales, HK$
_______
_______
_______
Average exchange 
rate, HK$/€
11.5
11.7
10.3
Total European 
sales, euros
_______
_______
_______
Growth rate of 
European sales
_______
_______
_______
12.	 Lantau Beer (B): Japanese Yen Debt. Lantau Beer 
of Hong Kong borrowed Japanese yen under a long-
term loan agreement several years ago. The company’s 
new CFO believes, however, that what was originally 
thought to have been relatively “cheap debt” is no lon-
ger true. What do you think?
Problem 13.
Mattel’s Global Sales
(thousands of US$)
2001 Sales ($)
2002 Sales ($)
2003 Sales ($)
2004 Sales ($)
Europe
$ 933,450
$ 1,126,177
$ 1,356,131
$ 1,410,525
Latin America
471,301
466,349
462,167
524,481
Canada
155,791
161,469
185,831
197,655
Asia Pacific
119,749
136,944
171,580
203,575
  Total International
$ 1,680,291
$ 1,890,939
$ 2,175,709
$ 2,336,236
United States
3,392,284
3,422,405
3,203,814
3,209,862
Sales Adjustments
(384,651)
(428,004)
(419,423)
(443,312)
  Total Net Sales
$ 4,687,924
$ 4,885,340
$ 4,960,100
$ 5,102,786
Impact of Change in Currency Rates
Region
2001–2002
2002–2003
2003–2004
Europe
7.0%
15.0%
8.0%
Latin America
-9.0%
-6.0%
-2.0%
Canada
0.0%
11.0%
5.0%
Asia Pacific
3.0%
13.0%
6.0%
Source: Mattel, Annual Report, 2002, 2003, 2004.

116
CHAPTER 4    Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
14.	 Chinese Sourcing and the Yuan. Harrison Equipment 
of Denver, Colorado, purchases all of its hydraulic 
tubing from manufacturers in mainland China. The 
company has recently completed a corporate-wide ini-
tiative in six sigma/lean manufacturing. Completed oil 
field hydraulic system costs were reduced 4% over a 
one-year period, from $880,000 to $844,800. The com-
pany is now worried that all of the hydraulic tubing 
that goes into the systems (making up 20% of their 
total costs) will be hit by the potential revaluation of 
the Chinese yuan—if some in Washington get their 
way. How would a 12% revaluation of the yuan against 
the dollar impact total system costs?
15.	 S&P Equity Returns History. The U.S. equity markets 
have delivered very different returns over the past 90 
years. Use the following data arranged by decade to 
answer the following questions about these U.S. equity 
investment returns.
a.	 Which period shown had the highest total returns? 
The lowest?
b.	 Which decade had the highest dividend returns? 
When were dividends clearly not a priority for pub-
licly traded companies?
c.	 The 1990s was a boom period for U.S. equity 
returns. How did firms react in terms of their divi-
dend distributions?
d.	 How has the 2000s period fared? How do you 
think publicly traded companies have started 
changing their dividend distribution habits as a 
result?
Problem 15.
S&P 500 Equity Returns, 1926–2014 (average annual return, percent)
1926 to
Period
1930s
1940s
1950s
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000s
2014
Capital appreciation
-5.3%
3.0%
13.6%
4.4%
1.6%
12.6%
15.3%
-2.7%
5.9%
Dividend yield
5.4%
6.0%
5.1%
3.3%
4.2%
4.4%
2.5%
1.8%
4.0%
Total return
0.1%
9.0%
18.7%
7.7%
5.8%
17.0%
17.8%
-0.9%
9.9%
Source: Data drawn from “JP Morgan Guide to the Markets, 2015,” JP Morgan Asset Management.
Internet Exercises
1.	 Multinational Firms and Global Assets/Income. The 
differences among MNEs is striking. Using a sample of 
firms such as the following, pull from their individual 
Web pages the proportions of their incomes that are 
earned outside their countries of incorporation. (Note 
how Nestlé calls itself a “transnational company.”)
Walt Disney
disney.go.com
Nestlé S.A.
www.nestle.com
Intel
www.intel.com
Mitsubishi
www.mitsubishi.com
Nokia
www.nokia.com
Royal Dutch/Shell
www.shell.com
Also note the way in which international business is 
now conducted via the Internet. Several of the home 
pages listed allow the user to choose the language of 
the presentation viewed.
2.	 Corporate Governance. There is no hotter topic 
in business today than corporate governance. Use 
the following site to view recent research, cur-
rent events and news items, and other information 
related to the relationships between a business and 
its stakeholders.
Corporate Governance Net
www.corpgov.net
3.	 Fortune Global 500. Fortune magazine is relatively 
famous for its listing of the Fortune 500 firms in the 
global marketplace. Use Fortune’s Web site to find the 
most recent listing of the global firms in this distin-
guished club.
Fortune
www.fortune.com/fortune
4.	 Financial Times. The Financial Times, based in 
­London—the global center of international finance—
has a Web site with a wealth of information. After 
going to the home page, go to “Markets” and then to 
the “Markets Data” page. Examine the recent stock 
market activity around the globe. Note the similarity 
in movement on a daily basis among the world’s major 
equity markets.
Financial Times
www.ft.com

117
Part  2 
Foreign Exchange 
Theory and 
Markets
Chapter 5
The Foreign Exchange Market
Chapter 6
International Parity Conditions
Chapter 7
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
Chapter 8
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
Chapter 9
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination

Chapter	 5
The Foreign Exchange 
Market
The best way to destroy the capitalist system is to debauch the currency. By 
a continuing process of inflation, governments can confiscate, secretly and 
unobserved, an important part of the wealth of their citizens.
—John Maynard Keynes.
The foreign exchange market provides the physical and institutional structure through which 
the money of one country is exchanged for that of another country—the rate of exchange 
between currencies is determined and foreign exchange transactions are physically com-
pleted. Foreign exchange means the money of a foreign country; that is, foreign currency 
bank balances, banknotes, checks, and drafts. A foreign exchange transaction is an agreement 
between a buyer and seller that a fixed amount of one currency will be delivered for some 
other currency at a specified rate. This chapter describes the following features of the foreign 
exchange market:
■
■
Its three main functions
■
■
Its participants
■
■
Its immense daily transaction volume
■
■
Its geographic extent
■
■
Types of transactions, including spot, forward, and swap transactions
■
■
Exchange rate quotation practices
The chapter concludes with the Mini-Case, The Venezuelan Bolivar Black Market, which 
describes a businessman’s challenge in accessing hard currency in a restricted exchange 
market.
Learning Objectives
■
■
Explore the multitude of functions of the foreign exchange market
■
■
Detail how the structure of the global currency market has been changing
■
■
Describe the financial and operational transactions conducted in the foreign 
exchange market
■
■
Examine how the size of the global currency market has changed with global 
economics
■
■
Learn the forms of currency quotations used by currency dealers, financial 
­institutions, and agents of all kinds when conducting foreign exchange transactions
118

119
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
Functions of the Foreign Exchange Market
Money is an object that is accepted as payment for goods, services, and in some cases, past 
debt. There are typically three functions of money: as a unit of account, as a store of value, and 
as a medium of exchange. The foreign exchange market is the mechanism by which partici-
pants transfer purchasing power between countries by exchanging money, obtain or provide 
credit for international trade transactions, and minimize exposure to the risks of exchange 
rate changes.
■
■
The transfer of purchasing power is necessary because international trade and capital 
transactions normally involve parties living in countries with different national cur-
rencies. Usually each party wants to deal in its own currency, but the trade or capital 
transaction can be invoiced in only one currency. Hence, one party must deal in a 
foreign currency.
■
■
Because the movement of goods between countries takes time, inventory in transit 
must be financed. The foreign exchange market provides a source of credit. Special-
ized instruments, such as bankers’ acceptances and letters of credit are available to 
finance international trade.
■
■
The foreign exchange market provides “hedging” facilities for transferring foreign 
exchange risk to someone else who is more willing to carry risk.
Structure of the Foreign Exchange Market
The foreign exchange market has, like all markets, evolved dramatically over time. Beginning 
with money changing hands in stalls on the streets of Florence and Venice, to the trading rooms 
in London and New York in the twentieth century, the market is based on supply and demand, 
market information and expectations, and negotiating strength.
The global foreign exchange market today is undergoing seismic change. That change 
involves every dimension of the market—the time, the place, the participants, the purpose, and 
the instruments. The forces driving change in the foreign exchange market are fundamental: 
electronic trading platforms, algorithmic trading programs and routines, and the increasing role 
of currencies as an asset class. These forces and other facilitators have combined to expand the 
depth, breadth, and reach of the foreign exchange market.
Time of Day and Currency Trading
The foreign exchange market spans the globe, with prices moving and currencies trading—
somewhere—every hour of every business day. As illustrated in Exhibit 5.1, the world’s trad-
ing day starts each morning in Sydney and Tokyo; moves west to Hong Kong and Singapore; 
passes on to the Middle East; shifts to the main European markets of Frankfurt, Zurich, and 
London; jumps the Atlantic to New York; continues west to Chicago; and ends in San Francisco 
and Los Angeles. Many large international banks operate foreign exchange trading rooms in 
each major geographic trading center in order to serve both their customers and themselves 
(so-called proprietary trading) on a 24-hour-a-day basis.
Although global currency trading is indeed a 24-hour-a-day process, there are segments of 
the 24-hour day that are busier than others. Historically, the major financial centers of the 19th 
and 20th centuries dominated—London and New York. But as is the case with much of global 
commerce today, the Far East, represented by Tokyo and Hong Kong, are now threatening 
that dominance. When these city-based trading centers overlap, the global currency markets 
exhibit the greatest depth and liquidity.

120
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
Trading Platforms and Processes
Currency trading is conducted in a variety of ways including individual-to-individual personal 
transactions, on official trading floors by open bidding, and increasingly by electronic plat-
forms. Although continuous trading is indeed possible and increasingly prevalent, a “closing 
price” is often needed for a variety of record keeping and contractual purposes. These closing 
prices are often published as the official price, or “fixing,” for the day, and certain commercial 
and investment transactions are based on this official price. Business firms in countries with 
exchange controls, like mainland China, often must surrender foreign exchange earned from 
exports to the central bank at the daily fixing price.
Currency traders are connected by highly sophisticated telecommunications networks, 
with which dealers and brokers exchange currency quotes instantaneously. A growing part 
of the industry is automated trading, electronic platforms in which corporate buyers and sell-
ers trade currencies through Internet-based systems provided or hosted by major trading 
institutions. Although some of the largest currency transactions are still handled by humans 
via telephone, the use of computer trading has grown dramatically in recent years. The larg-
est traditional providers of foreign exchange rate information and trading systems—Reuters, 
Telerate, EBS, and Bloomberg—are still substantial, but there has been a host of new service 
providers flooding the foreign exchange markets in recent years. But, despite all of the technol-
ogy, the human element is still present as described in Global Finance in Practice 5.1.
Market Participants
One of the biggest changes in the foreign exchange market in the past decade has been its shift 
from a two-tier market (the interbank or wholesale market, and the client or retail market) 
New York
London
Singapore
Bahrain
Tokyo and Sydney
Hong Kong
HKG
London–New York Overlap
Greenwich Mean Time
The currency trading day literally extends 24 hours per day. The busiest time of the day, which used to be when London and
New York overlapped, has now started shifting “further East,” to the Tokyo–Hong Kong dominated part of the day.
Tokyo, Sydney, and Hong Kong Overlap
2400
2300
2200
2100
2000
1900
1800
1700
1600
1500
1400
1300
1200
1100
1000
0900
0800
0700
0600
0500
0400
0300
0200
0100
San Francisco
Chicago
Frankfurt
Exhibit 5.1
Global Currency Trading: The Trading Day

121
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
to a single-tier market. Electronic platforms and the development of sophisticated trading 
algorithms have facilitated market access by traders of all kinds and sizes.
Participants in the foreign exchange market can be simplistically divided into two major groups, 
those trading currency for commercial purposes, liquidity seekers, and those trading for profit, profit 
seekers. Although the foreign exchange market began as a market for liquidity purposes, facili-
tating the exchange of currency for the conduct of commercial trade and investment purposes, 
the exceptional growth in the market has been largely based on the expansion of profit-seeking 
agents. As might be expected, the profit seekers are typically much better informed about the 
market, looking to profit from its future movements, while liquidity seekers simply wish to secure 
currency for transactions. As a result, the profit seekers generally profit from the liquidity seekers.
Five broad categories of institutional participants operate in the market: (1) bank and non-
bank foreign exchange dealers; (2) individuals and firms conducting commercial or investment 
transactions; (3) speculators and arbitragers; (4) central banks and treasuries; and (5) foreign 
exchange brokers.
Bank and Nonbank Foreign Exchange Dealers
Bank and nonbank traders and dealers profit from buying foreign exchange at a bid price 
and reselling it at a slightly higher ask (also called an offer) price. Competition among deal-
ers worldwide narrows the spread between bids and offers and so contributes to making the 
foreign exchange market “efficient” in the same sense as are securities markets.
Dealers in the foreign exchange departments of large international banks often function 
as “market makers.” Such dealers stand willing at all times to buy and sell those currencies in 
which they specialize and thus maintain an “inventory” position in those currencies. They trade 
with other banks in their own monetary centers and with other centers around the world in 
order to maintain inventories within the trading limits set by bank policy. Trading limits are 
important because foreign exchange departments of many banks operate as profit centers, and 
individual dealers are compensated on a profit incentive basis.
Following the turmoil surrounding the setting of LIBOR rates in 
the interbank market, similar allegations arose over the pos-
sible manipulation of benchmarks in the foreign exchange 
markets in 2013 and 2014.
Much of the focus was on the London fix, the 4 p.m. 
daily benchmark rate used by a multitude of institutions and 
indices for marking value. Market analysts had noted steep 
spikes in trading just prior to the 4 p.m. fix, spikes that were 
not sustained in the hours and days that followed. Traders 
were alleged to be exchanging emails, using social net-
working sites, and even phone calls, to collaborate on mar-
ket movements and price quotes at key times. After-hours 
personal trading by currency traders, an area of only mar-
ginal concern before, was also under review. Moving from 
voice-trading (telephone) to electronic trading was thought 
to be one possible fix, but the currency markets had long 
been something of an enigma when it came to electronic 
trading. FICC trading—fixed income, currencies, and com-
modities—was one of the first sectors to adopt electronic 
trading in the mid-1990s, but the market had proven slow 
to change.
But change had finally come. By 2014, nearly 75% of all 
currency trading was electronic. The logic of the fix was sim-
ple: computer algorithms were less likely to pursue fraudulent 
trading for fixing. And research had shown strong evidence 
that electronic trading was more stabilizing than voice-trading, 
as most of the algorithmic codes were based on reversion to 
the mean—to the market averages—over time.
But as is the case with many technological fixes, the fix 
did not eliminate the problem, it had possibly just changed 
it. E-trading might still facilitate market manipulation, just of a 
more sophisticated kind. For example, there was a rumor of 
software in development that could detect mouse movements 
by other currency traders on some of the largest electronic 
platforms, allowing one computer (human attached) to detect 
the trader’s mouse hovering over the bid or ask button prior to 
execution. Alas, it appeared there would always be the human 
element in trading, for better or for worse.
Global Finance in Practice 5.1
FX Market Manipulation: Fixing the Fix

122
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
Currency trading is quite profitable for many institutions. Many of the major currency-
trading banks in the United States derive on average between 10% and 20% of their annual 
net income from currency trading. Currency trading is also very profitable for the bank’s 
traders who typically earn a bonus based on the profitability to the bank of their individual 
trading activities.
Small- to medium-size banks and institutions are likely to participate but not to be market 
makers in the interbank market. Instead of maintaining significant inventory positions, they 
often buy from and sell to larger institutions in order to offset retail transactions with their own 
customers or to seek short-term profits for their own accounts. Global Finance in Practice 5.2 
provides some insight into one “newbie’s” experience on a currency trading desk.
Individuals and Firms Conducting Commercial and Investment Transactions
Importers and exporters, international portfolio investors, multinational corporations, tourists, 
and others use the foreign exchange market to facilitate execution of commercial or invest-
ment transactions. Their use of the foreign exchange market is necessary, but incidental, to their 
underlying commercial or investment purpose. Some of these participants use the market to 
hedge foreign exchange risk as well.
Speculators and Arbitragers
Speculators and arbitragers seek to profit from trading within the market itself. True profit 
seekers, they operate in their own interest, without a need or obligation to serve clients or to 
ensure a continuous market. Whereas dealers seek profit from the spread between bids and 
offers in addition to what they might gain from changes in exchange rates, speculators seek 
For my internship I was working for the Treasury Front and 
Back Office of a major investment bank’s New York branch on 
Wall Street. I was, for the first half of my internship, responsible 
for the timely input and verification of all foreign exchange, 
money market, securities, and derivative products. The sec-
ond half was more interesting. I received training in currency 
trading.
I started on the spot desk, worked there for two weeks, 
and then moved to the swap desk for the remaining three weeks 
of my internship. From the first day I knew I would have to stay 
on my toes. The first two weeks of my training I was assigned 
to the spot desk where my supervisor was a senior trader who 
was very young (only 23 years old) and extremely ambitious.
On the very first day, about 11 a.m., she bet on the rise 
of the Japanese yen after the elections of the new Japanese 
Prime Minister. She had a long position on the yen and was 
short on the dollar. Unfortunately she lost $700,000 in less 
than 10 minutes. It is still unclear to me why she made such 
a bet. The Wall Street Journal and the Financial Times (both 
papers were used heavily in the trading room) were very nega-
tive regarding the new Prime Minister’s ability to reverse the 
financial crisis in Japan. It was clear that her position was 
based purely on emotions, instinct, savvy—anything but 
fundamentals.
To understand the impact of a $700,000 loss, you must 
understand that every trader on a spot desk has to make 
eight times his or her wage in commission. Let’s say that my 
supervisor was making $80,000 a year. She would then need 
to make $640,000 in commission on spreads during that year 
to keep her job. A loss of $700,000 put her in a very bad 
­position, and she knew it. But to her credit, she remained quite 
confident and did not appear shaken.
But after my first day I was pretty shaken. I understood 
after this experience that being a trader was not my cup of tea. 
It is not because of the stress of the job—and it is obviously very 
stressful. It was more that most of the skills of the job had noth-
ing to do with what I had been learning in school for many years. 
And when I saw and experienced how hard these people par-
tied up and down the streets of New York many nights—then 
trading hundreds of millions of dollars in minutes the ­following 
day—well, I just did not see this as my career track.
Source: Reminiscences of an anonymous intern.
Global Finance in Practice 5.2
My First Day of Foreign Exchange Trading

123
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
all of their profit from exchange rate changes. Arbitragers try to profit from simultaneous 
exchange rate differences in different markets.
Traders employed by those banks conduct a large proportion of speculation and arbitrage 
on behalf of major banks. Thus, banks act both as exchange dealers and as speculators and 
arbitragers. (Banks seldom admit to speculating, instead characterizing themselves as “taking 
an aggressive position.”)
Central Banks and Treasuries
Central banks and treasuries use the market to acquire or spend their country’s foreign 
exchange reserves as well as to influence the price at which their own currency is traded, 
a practice known as foreign exchange intervention. They may act to support the value of their 
own currency because of national policies or because of commitments to other countries under 
exchange rate relationships or regional currency agreements. Consequently, the motive is not 
to earn a profit as such, but rather to influence the foreign exchange value of their currency in a 
manner that will benefit the interests of their citizens. In many instances, they do their job best 
when they willingly take a loss on their foreign exchange transactions. As willing loss takers, 
central banks and treasuries differ in motive and behavior from all other market participants.
Foreign Exchange Brokers
Foreign exchange brokers are agents who facilitate trading between dealers without them-
selves becoming principals in the transaction. They charge a small commission for this service. 
They maintain instant access to hundreds of dealers worldwide via open telephone lines. At 
times, a broker may maintain a dozen or more such lines to a single client bank, with separate 
lines for different currencies and for spot and forward markets.
It is a broker’s business to know at any moment exactly which dealers want to buy or sell 
any currency. This knowledge enables the broker to find an opposite party for a client without 
revealing the identity of either party until after a transaction has been agreed upon. Dealers 
use brokers to expedite the transaction and to remain anonymous, since the identity of par-
ticipants may influence short-term quotes.
Continuous Linked Settlement
In 2002, the Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS) system was introduced. The CLS system elimi-
nates losses if either party of a foreign exchange transaction is unable to settle with the other party. 
It links the number of settlement systems, which operate on a real-time basis, and is expected to 
eventually result in same-day settlement, replacing the traditional two-day transaction period.
The CLS system should help counteract fraud in the foreign exchange markets as well. In 
the United States, the responsibility for regulating foreign exchange trading is assigned to the 
U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC).
Transactions in the Foreign Exchange Market
Transactions in the foreign exchange market can be executed on a spot, forward, or swap basis. 
A broader definition of the market, one including major derivatives, would include foreign 
currency options, futures, and swaps.
Spot Transactions
A spot transaction in the interbank market is the purchase of foreign exchange with delivery 
and payment between banks taking place normally on the second following business day. The 
Canadian dollar settles with the U.S. dollar on the first following business day. Exhibit 5.2 

124
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
provides a time-map of the three major types of over-the-counter currency transactions typi-
cally executed in the global foreign exchange market: spot transactions, forward transactions, 
and swap transactions. Although there are a number of deviations on these types, some of 
which are described in the section that follows, all transactions are defined by their future date 
for delivery. (Note that we are not including futures transactions here; they parallel the time 
footprint of forwards, but are not executed over-the-counter.)
The date of settlement is referred to as the value date. On the value date, most dollar 
transactions in the world are settled through the computerized Clearing House Interbank Pay-
ments System (CHIPS) in New York, which calculates net balances owed by any one bank to 
another and which facilitates payment of those balances by 6:00 p.m. that same day in Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York funds. Other central banks and settlement services providers oper-
ate similarly in other currencies around the world.
A typical spot transaction in the interbank market might involve a U.S. bank contracting 
on a Monday for the transfer of £10,000,000 to the account of a London bank. If the spot 
exchange rate were $1.8420 to each British pound (£), the U.S. bank would transfer £10,000,000 
to the London bank on Wednesday, and the London bank would transfer $18,420,000 to the 
U.S. bank at the same time. A spot transaction between a bank and its commercial customer 
would not necessarily involve a wait of two days for settlement.
Outright Forward Transactions
A forward transaction (or more formally, an outright forward transaction) requires delivery at a 
future value date of a specified amount of one currency for a specified amount of another cur-
rency. The exchange rate is established at the time of the agreement, but payment and delivery 
are not required until maturity. Forward exchange rates are normally quoted for value dates 
Spot
Swap Transactions
(spot against forward, forward-forward swaps,
nondeliverable forwards)
Today
Tomorrow
Day after
tomorrow
Two or more days after tomorrow
Later
Overnight
Forward or
Outright Forward
Foreign exchange operations are deﬁned by the timing—the future date—set for delivery. There are
in principle three major categories of over-the-counter transactions categorized by future delivery:
spot (which may be overnight), forward (including outright forward), and swap transactions.
Exhibit 5.2
Foreign Exchange Transactions and Settlement

125
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
of one, two, three, six, and twelve months. Although the heaviest demand is for maturities of 
one year or less, forwards today are often quoted as far as 20 years into the future. According 
to the IMF, in 2014 there were 127 countries with forward markets.
Payment on forward contracts is on the second business day after the even-month anni-
versary of the trade. Thus, a two-month forward transaction entered into on March 18 will be 
for a value date of May 20, or the next business day if May 20 falls on a weekend or holiday.
Note that as a matter of terminology we can speak of “buying forward” or “selling for-
ward” to describe the same transaction. A contract to deliver dollars for euros in six months is 
both “buying euros forward for dollars” and “selling dollars forward for euros.”
Swap Transactions
A swap transaction in the interbank market is the simultaneous purchase and sale of a given 
amount of foreign exchange for two different value dates. Both purchase and sale are con-
ducted with the same counterparty. There are several types of swap transactions.
Spot Against Forward. The most common type of swap is a spot against forward. The dealer 
buys a currency in the spot market (at the spot rate) and simultaneously sells the same amount 
back to the same bank in the forward market (at the forward exchange rate). Since this is 
executed as a single transaction with just one counterparty, the dealer incurs no unexpected 
foreign exchange risk. Swap transactions and outright forwards combined made up more than 
half of all foreign exchange market activity in recent years.
Forward-Forward Swaps. A more sophisticated swap transaction is called a forward-forward 
swap. For example, a dealer sells £20,000,000 forward for dollars for delivery in, say, two 
months at $1.8420/£ and simultaneously buys £20,000,000 forward for delivery in three months 
at $1.8400/£. The difference between the buying price and the selling price is equivalent to the 
interest rate differential, which is the interest rate parity described in Chapter 6, between the 
two currencies. Thus, a swap can be viewed as a technique for borrowing another currency on 
a fully collateralized basis.
Nondeliverable Forwards (NDFs). Created in the early 1990s, the nondeliverable forward 
(NDF), is now a relatively common derivative offered by the largest providers of foreign 
exchange derivatives. NDFs possess the same characteristics and documentation requirements as 
traditional forward contracts, except that they are settled only in U.S. dollars; the foreign currency 
being sold forward or bought forward is not delivered. The dollar-settlement feature reflects the 
fact that NDFs are contracted offshore, for example in New York for a Mexican investor, and so 
are beyond the reach and regulatory frameworks of the home country governments (Mexico in 
this case). NDFs are traded internationally using standards set by the International Swaps and 
Derivatives Association (ISDA). Although originally envisioned to be a method of currency 
hedging, it is now estimated that more than 70% of all NDF trading is for speculation purposes.
NDFs are used primarily for emerging market currencies or currencies subject to signifi-
cant exchange controls, like Venezuela. Emerging market currencies often do not have open 
spot market currency trading, liquid money markets, or quoted Eurocurrency interest rates. 
Although most NDF trading focused on Latin America in the 1990s, many Asian currencies—
including the Chinese renminbi—have been very widely traded in recent years. In general, 
NDF markets normally develop for country currencies having large cross-border capital move-
ments, but still being subject to convertibility restrictions.
Pricing of NDFs reflects basic interest differentials, as with regular forwards, plus some 
additional premium charged by the bank for dollar settlement. If, however, there is no acces-
sible or developed money market for interest rate setting, the pricing of the NDF takes on a 
much more speculative element. Without true interest rates, traders may price NDFs based on 
what they believe spot rates may be in the future.

126
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
NDFs are traded and settled outside the country of the subject currency, and therefore 
are beyond the control of the country’s government. In the past, this has created a difficult 
situation, in which the NDF market serves as something of a gray market in the trading of 
that currency. For example, in late 2001, Argentina was under increasing pressure to abandon 
its fixed exchange rate regime of one peso equaling one U.S. dollar. The NDF market began 
quoting rates of ARS1.05/USD and ARS1.10/USD, in effect a devalued peso, for NDFs settling 
within the next year. This led to increasing speculative pressure against the peso (to the ire of 
the Argentine government).
NDFs, however, have proven to be something of an imperfect replacement for traditional 
forward contracts. The problems with the NDF typically involve its “fixing of spot rate on the 
fixing date,” the spot rate at the end of the contract used to calculate the settlement. In times of 
financial crisis, for example with the Venezuelan bolivar in 2003, the government of the subject 
currency may suspend foreign exchange trading in the spot market for an extended period. With-
out an official fixing rate, the NDF cannot be settled. In the case of Venezuela, the problem was 
compounded when a new official “devalued bolivar” was announced, but was still not traded.
Size of the Foreign Exchange Market
The Bank for International Settlements (BIS), in conjunction with central banks around the 
world, conducts a survey of currency trading activity every three years. The most recent sur-
vey, conducted in April 2013, estimated daily global net turnover in the foreign exchange mar-
ket to be $5.3 trillion. The BIS data for surveys between 1989 and 2013 is shown in Exhibit 5.3.
Source: Bank for International Settlements, “Triennial Central Bank Survey: Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity in April 2013:
Preliminary Results,” December 2013, www.bis.org.  
0
1,000
Average daily turnover in April, billions of U.S. dollars
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
$3,972
(+19%)
$5,345
(+35%)
$3,324
(+74%)
$1,239
(–19%)
$820
(+39%)
$590
$1,190
(+45%)
$1,527
(+28%)
$1,913
(+54%)
Spot
FX Swaps
Outright Forwards
Options and other
Exhibit 5.3
Global Foreign Exchange Market Turnover, 1989–2013

127
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
Global foreign exchange turnover in Exhibit 5.3 is divided into the three categories of 
currency instruments discussed previously (spot transactions, forward transactions, and swap 
transactions) plus a fourth category of options and other variable-value foreign exchange 
derivatives. Growth has been dramatic; since 1989, the foreign exchange market has grown at 
an average annual rate of 9.6% per year.
As of 2013 (daily trading in April), trading in the foreign exchange market was at an all-
time high of $5.3 trillion per day. Although the global recession in 2000–2001 clearly damp-
ened market activity, the global financial crisis of 2008–2009 did not. According to the BIS, the 
organization that collects and deciphers this data, the primary driver of rapid foreign exchange 
growth in recent years is the increasing profit seeker activity facilitated by electronic trading 
and access to the greater market.
Geographical Distribution
Exhibit 5.4 shows the proportionate share of foreign exchange trading for the most important 
national markets in the world between 1992 and 2013. (Note that although the data is collected 
and reported on a national basis, the “United States” and “United Kingdom” should largely 
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
1,000
Billions of U.S. dollars
Average daily turnover in April
500
0
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
United Kingdom
Switzerland
United States
Japan
Hong Kong
Singapore
Austraila
Denmark
Germany
France
Source: Bank for International Settlements, “Triennial Central Bank Survey: Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity in April 2013:
Preliminary Results,” December 2013, www.bis.org. 
Exhibit 5.4
Top 10 Geographic Trading Centers in the Foreign Exchange Market, 1992–2013

128
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
be interpreted as “New York” and “London,” respectively, because the majority of foreign 
exchange trading takes place in each country’s major financial city.)
The United Kingdom (London) continues to be the world’s major foreign exchange 
market in traditional foreign exchange market activity with 40.9% of the global market. The 
United Kingdom is followed by the United States with 18.9%, Singapore with 5.7%, Japan 
(Tokyo) with 5.6%, Switzerland with 3.2%, and Hong Kong now reaching 4.1% of global trad-
ing. Indeed, the United Kingdom and United States together make up nearly 60% of daily 
currency trading. The relative growth of currency trading in Asia versus Europe over the past 
15 years is pronounced, as the growth of the Asian economies and markets has combined with 
the introduction of the euro to shift currency exchange activity.
Currency Composition
The currency composition of trading, as shown in Exhibit 5.5, also indicates significant global 
shifts. Because all currencies are traded against some other currency pairs, all percentages 
shown in Exhibit 5.5 are for that currency versus another. The dollar continues to dominate 
Exhibit 5.5
Daily FX Trading by Currency Pair (percent of total)
Currency Pair
Versus Dollar
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
USD/EUR
Euro
30.0
28.0
26.8
27.7
24.1
USD/JPY
Japanese yen
20.2
17.0
13.2
14.3
18.3
USD/GBP
British pound
10.4
13.4
11.6
9.1
8.8
USD/AUD
Australian dollar
4.1
5.5
5.6
6.3
6.8
USD/CAD
Canadian dollar
4.3
4.0
3.8
4.6
3.7
USD/CHF
Swiss franc
4.8
4.3
4.5
4.2
3.4
  Subtotal
73.8
72.2
65.5
66.2
65.1
USD/MXN
Mexican peso
—
—
—
—
2.4
USD/CNY
Chinese renminbi
—
—
—
0.8
2.1
USD/NZD
New Zealand dollar
—
—
—
—
1.5
USD/RUB
Russian ruble
—
—
—
—
1.5
  Subtotal
73.8
72.2
65.5
67.0
72.6
Other/USD
USD versus others
16.0
15.9
16.7
18.8
13.3
Dollar Total
89.8
88.1
82.2
85.8
85.9
Currency Pair
Versus Euro
EUR/JPY
Japanese yen
2.9
3.2
2.6
2.8
2.8
EUR/GBP
British pound
2.1
2.4
2.1
2.7
1.9
EUR/CHF
Swiss franc
1.1
1.6
1.9
1.8
1.3
EUR/SEK
Swedish krona
—
—
0.7
0.9
0.5
Other
Other versus other
4.1
4.7
11.2
6.9
8.1
Non-dollar total
10.2
11.9
17.8
14.2
14.1
Global Total
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Source: Constructed by authors based on data presented in Table 3, p. 11, of Triennial Central Bank Survey, Foreign exchange turnover in April 2013: 
preliminary global results, Bank for International Settlements, Monetary and Economic Department, September 2013.

129
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
global trading, ultimately involved in 85.9% of all currency trading. The USD/EUR makes up 
24.1% of trading, followed by the USD/JPY with 18.3%, the USD/GBP with 8.8%, and the 
USD/AUD at 6.8%. According to the BIS, the “big three” (dollar, euro, and yen) continue to 
dominate global currency trades, totaling roughly 92% of all trading surveyed.
There is, however, growing awareness of the rapid development of several major emerging 
market currencies, namely the Mexican peso, the Chinese renminbi, and the Russian ruble. It 
may not be long before several of these (most analysts are betting on the renminbi) become 
prominent currencies in the global market.
Foreign Exchange Rates and Quotations
A foreign exchange rate is the price of one currency expressed in terms of another currency. 
A foreign exchange quotation (or quote) is a statement of willingness to buy or sell at an 
announced rate. As we delve into the terminology of currency trading, keep in mind basic 
pricing, say the pricing of an orange. If the price is $1.20/orange, the “price” is $1.20, the “unit” 
is the orange.
Currency Symbols
Quotations may be designated by traditional currency symbols or by ISO codes. ISO—the 
International Organization for Standardization—is the world’s largest developer of voluntary 
standards. ISO 4217 is the International Standard for currency codes, most recently updated 
in ISO 4217:2008.
The ISO codes were developed for use in electronic communications. Both traditional 
symbols and currency codes are given in full at the end of this book, but the major ones used 
throughout this chapter are the following:
Currency
Traditional Symbol
ISO 4217 Code
U.S. dollar
$
USD
European euro
€
EUR
Great Britain pound
£
GBP
Japanese yen
¥
JPY
Mexican peso
Ps
MXN
Today, all electronic trading of currencies between institutions in the global marketplace 
uses the three-letter ISO codes. Although there are no hard and fast rules in the retail mar-
kets and in business periodicals, European and American periodicals have a tendency to use 
the traditional currency symbols, while many publications in Asia and the Middle East have 
embraced the use of ISO codes. The paper currency (banknotes) of most countries continues 
to be represented using the country’s traditional currency symbol. As illustrated in Global 
Finance in Practice 5.3, some countries like Russia are trying to return to traditional symbol use.
Exchange Rate Quotes
Foreign exchange quotations follow a number of principles, which at first may seem a bit con-
fusing or nonintuitive. Every currency exchange involves two currencies, currency 1 (CUR1) 
and currency 2 (CUR2):
CUR1 / CUR2
The currency to the left of the slash is called the base currency or the unit currency. The cur-
rency to the right of the slash is called the price currency or quote currency. The quotation 

130
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
always indicates the number of units of the price currency, CUR2, required in exchange for 
receiving one unit of the base currency, CUR1.
For example, the most commonly quoted currency exchange is that between the U.S. dollar 
and the European euro. For example, a quotation of
EUR / USD1.2174
designates the euro (EUR) as the base currency, the dollar (USD) as the price currency, 
and the exchange rate is USD 1.2174 = EUR 1.00. If you can remember that the currency 
quoted on the left of the slash is always the base currency, and always a single unit, you can 
avoid confusion. Exhibit 5.6 provides a brief overview of the multitude of terms often used 
around the world to quote currencies, through an example using the European euro and 
U.S. dollar.
Market Conventions
The international currency market, although the largest financial market in the world, is 
steeped in history and convention.
European Terms. European terms, the quoting of the quantity of a specific currency per one 
U.S. dollar, has been market practice for most of the past 60 years or more. Globally, the base 
During an era in which currencies have increasingly been iden-
tified by their 3-digit ISO codes, the Russian government has 
decided that it is time for the Russian ruble (or rouble depend-
ing on your preference) to have its own symbol.
In December 2013, the Bank of Russia had 
a contest, a popular vote, to choose among five 
different symbolic choices to be the new face of 
the currency. The winner (at left), with 61% of the 
vote, was the Russian letter R. The new symbol, in 
the words of the Governor of the Bank of Russia, 
“embodied the stability and reliability of the currency.” 
When asked if the new ruble symbol may end up being con-
fused with the Latin letter P, the Governor said it wasn’t a 
problem because the dollar sign looks like the letter S.
The ruble’s new symbol now joins that historical list 
of symbols—the $ (U.S. dollar), £ (British pound sterling), 
¥ ­(Japanese yen), and the relatively youthful € (European Union 
euro)—as a declaration of currency value. More and more 
countries of late have promoted their own currency symbols 
in a show of nationalistic pride. India adopted a new symbol 
for the rupee in 2010 ( ) and Turkey’s lira got its own new 
symbol in 2012 ( ).
Global Finance in Practice 5.3
Russian Symbolism
USD/EUR 0.8214
or
USD 1.00 = EUR 0.8214
USD is the base or unit currency
EUR is the quote or price currency
EUR/USD 1.2174
or
EUR 1.00 = USD 1.2174
EUR is the base or unit currency
USD is the quote or price currency
EUR 0.8214 / USD 
= USD 1.2714 / EUR 
1 
European terms 
Foreign currency price of one dollar (USD) 
American terms 
U.S. dollar price of one euro (EUR) 
Exhibit 5.6
Foreign Currency Quotations

131
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
currency used to quote a currency’s value has typically been the U.S. dollar. Termed European 
terms, this means that whenever a currency’s value is quoted, it is quoted in terms of number 
of units of currency to equal one U.S. dollar.
For example, if a trader in Zurich, whose home currency is the Swiss franc (CHF), were to 
request a quote from an Oslo-based trader on the Norwegian krone (NOK), the Norwegian 
trader would quote the value of the NOK against the USD, not the CHF. The result is that 
most currencies are quoted per U.S. dollar—Japanese yen per U.S. dollar, Norwegian krone per 
U.S. dollar, Mexican pesos per U.S. dollar, Brazilian real per U.S. dollar, Malaysian ringgit 
per U.S. dollar, Chinese renminbi per U.S. dollar, and so on.
American Terms. There are two major exceptions to this rule of using European terms: the 
euro and the U.K. pound sterling (the pound sterling for historical tradition). Both are nor-
mally quoted in American terms—the U.S. dollar price of one euro and the U.S. dollar price 
of one pound sterling. Additionally, Australian dollars and New Zealand dollars are normally 
quoted on American terms.
For centuries, the British pound sterling consisted of 20 shillings, each of which equaled 
12 pence. Multiplication and division with the nondecimal currency were difficult. The custom 
evolved for foreign exchange prices in London, then the undisputed financial capital of the 
world, to be stated in foreign currency units per pound. This practice remained even after 
sterling changed to decimals in 1971.
The euro was first introduced as a substitute or replacement for domestic currencies like 
the Deutsche mark and French franc. To make the transition simple for residents and users of 
these historical currencies, all quotes were made on a “domestic currency per euro” basis. This 
held true for its quotation against the U.S. dollar; hence, “U.S. dollars per euro” is the common 
quotation used today.
American terms are also used in quoting rates for most foreign currency options and 
futures, as well as in retail markets that deal with tourists and personal remittances. Again, this 
is largely a result of established practices that have been perpetuated over time, rather than 
some basic law of nature or finance.
Currency Nicknames. Foreign exchange traders may also use nicknames for major curren-
cies. “Cable” means the exchange rate between U.S. dollars and U.K. pounds sterling, the 
name dating from the time when transactions in dollars and pounds were carried out over the 
Transatlantic telegraph cable. A Canadian dollar is a “loonie,” named after the water fowl on 
Canada’s one dollar coin. “Kiwi” stands for the New Zealand dollar, “Aussie” for the Australian 
dollar, “Swissie” for Swiss francs, and “Sing dollar” for the Singapore dollar.
Direct and Indirect Quotations. A direct quote is the price of a foreign currency in domestic 
currency units. An indirect quote is the price of the domestic currency in foreign currency units.
In retail exchange in many countries (such as currency exchanged in hotels or airports), 
it is common practice to quote the home currency as the price and the foreign currency as the 
unit. A woman walking down the Avenue des Champs-Elysèes in Paris might see the follow-
ing quote:
EUR 0.8214 = USD 1.00
Since in France the home currency is the euro (the price) and the foreign currency is the dollar 
(the unit), in Paris this quotation is a direct quote on the dollar or a price quote on the dollar. 
She might say to herself, “0.8214 euros per dollar,” or “it will cost me 0.8214 euros to get one 
dollar.” These are European terms.
At the same time a man walking down Broadway in New York City may see the following 
quote in a bank window:
USD 1.2174 = EUR 1.00

132
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
Since in the U.S. the home currency is the dollar (the price) and the foreign currency is the 
euro (the unit), in New York this would be a direct quote on the euro (the home currency price 
of one unit of foreign currency) and an indirect quote on the dollar (the foreign currency price 
of one unit of home currency). The man might say to himself, “I will pay $1.2174 dollars per 
euro.” These are American terms. The two quotes are obviously equivalent (at least to four 
decimal places), one being the reciprocal of the other:
1
EUR 0.8214 / USD = USD 1.2174 / EUR
Bid and Ask Rates. Although a newspaper or magazine article will state an exchange rate as 
a single value, the market for buying and selling currencies, whether it be retail or wholesale, 
uses two different rates, one for buying and one for selling. Exhibit 5.7 provides a sample of 
how these quotations may be seen in the market for the dollar/euro.
A bid is the price (i.e., exchange rate) in one currency at which a dealer will buy another 
currency. An ask is the price (i.e., exchange rate) at which a dealer will sell the other currency. 
Dealers bid (buy) at one price and ask (sell) at a slightly higher price, making their profit from 
the spread between the prices. The bid-ask spread may be quite large for currencies that are 
traded infrequently, in small volumes, or both.
Bid and ask quotations in the foreign exchange markets are superficially complicated 
by the fact that the bid for one currency is also the offer for the opposite currency. A trader 
seeking to buy dollars with euros is simultaneously offering to sell euros for dollars. Closing 
rates for 47 currencies (plus the SDR) as quoted by The Wall Street Journal are presented in 
Exhibit 5.8.
EUR/USD
1.2170/1.2178
or
1.2170/78
Quote
Currency
Base
Currency
You can sell
1 euro for
$1.2170
“Bid”
You can buy
1 euro for
$1.2178
“Ask”
Traders may quote
only the last two
digits in a rate
In text documents of any kind, the exchange rate may be stated as mid-point
quote, the average of the bid and ask quotes, or in this case, $1.2174/€.
For example, the Wall Street Journal would quote the following currencies as follows:
Last Bid
Last Bid
Euro (EUR/USD)
1.2170
Brazilian Real (USD/BRL)
1.6827
Japanese Yen (USD/JPY)
83.16
Canadian Dollar (USD/CAD)
0.9930
U.K. Pound (GBP/USD)
1.5552
Mexican Peso (USD/MXN)
12.2365
Exhibit 5.7
Bid, Ask, and Mid-Point Quotation

133
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
Exhibit 5.8
Exchange Rates: New York Closing Snap shot
February 18, 2015
Country
Currency
Symbol
Code
USD equivalent
Currency per USD
Americas
Argentina
peso
Ps
ARS
0.1151
8.6904
Brazil
real
R$
BRL
0.3529
2.8338
Canada
dollar
C$
CAD
0.8029
1.2455
Chile
peso
$
CLP
0.001614
619.6
Colombia
peso
Col$
COP
0.0004114
2430.74
Ecuador
U.S. dollar
$
USD
1
1
Mexico
new peso
$
MXN
0.0673
14.8638
Peru
new sol
S/.
PEN
0.3241
3.0855
Uruguay
peso
$U
UYU
0.04062
24.62
Venezuela
boliviar fuerte
Bs
VND
0.15885497
6.2951
Asia-Pacific
Australia
dollar
A$
AUD
0.7812
1.2801
China
yuan
¥
CNY
0.1598
6.2564
Hong Kong
dollar
HK$
HKG
0.1289
7.7586
India
rupee
INR
0.01611
62.0568
Indonesia
rupiah
Rp
IDR
0.0000778
12857
Japan
yen
¥
JPY
0.00842
118.79
Malaysia
ringgit
RM
MYR
0.2764
3.6175
New Zealand
dollar
NZ$
NZD
0.7545
1.3254
Pakistan
rupee
Rs.
PKR
0.00986
101.45
Philippines
peso
PHP
0.0226
44.2375
Singapore
dollar
S$
SGD
0.7376
1.3558
South Korea
won
W
KRW
0.000902
1108.62
Taiwan
dollar
T$
TWD
0.03159
31.65
Thailand
baht
B
THB
0.0307
32.57
Vietnam
dong
d
VND
0.00004688
21333
Europe
Czech Republic
koruna
Kc
CZK
0.04182
23.912
Denmark
krone
Dkr
DKK
0.1531
6.5326
Euro area
euro
€
EUR
1.1398
0.8774
Hungary
forint
Ft
HUF
0.00372537
268.43
Iceland
krona
kr
ISK
0.007569
132.11
Norway
krone
NKr
NOK
0.1328
7.5279
Poland
zloty
—
PLN
0.2724
3.671
Romania
leu
L
RON
0.2562
3.9039
Russia
ruble
RUB
0.01624
61.579
Sweden
krona
SKr
SEK
0.1196
8.3619
Switzerland
franc
Fr.
CHF
1.061
0.9425
Turkey
lira
TRY
0.4093
2.4433
United Kingdom
pound
£
GBP
1.5438
0.6478
Middle East/Africa
Bahrain
dinar
—
BHD
2.6524
0.377
Egypt
pound
£
EGP
0.1312
7.6241
Israel
shekel
Shk
ILS
0.2595
3.8542
Kuwait
dinar
—
KWD
3.3835
0.2956
Saudi Arabia
riyal
SR
SAR
0.2665
3.7518
South Africa
rand
R
ZAR
0.0862
11.5995
United Arab Emirates
dirham
—
AED
0.2723
3.673
Note: SDR from the International Monetary Fund; based on exchange rates for U.S., British, and Japanese currencies.
Quotes based on trading among banks of $1 million and more, as quoted at 4 p.m. ET by Reuters. Rates are drawn from  
The Wall Street Journal online on February 19, 2015.

134
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
The Wall Street Journal gives American terms quotes under the heading “USD equivalent” 
and European terms quotes under the heading “Currency per USD.” Quotes are given on an 
outright basis for spot, with forwards of one, three, and six months provided for a few select 
currencies. Quotes are for trading among banks in amounts of $1 million or more, as quoted 
at 4 p.m. EST by Reuters. The Journal does not state whether these are bid, ask, or midrate (an 
average of the bid and ask) quotations.
The order of currencies in quotations used by traders can be confusing (at least the authors 
of this book think so). As noted by one major international banking publication: The notation 
EUR/USD is the system used by traders, although mathematically it would be more correct to 
express the exchange rate the other way around, as it shows how many USD have to be paid to 
obtain EUR 1.
This is why the currency quotes shown previously in Exhibit 5.7—like EUR/USD, USD/
JPY, or GBP/USD—are quoted and used in business and the rest of this text as $1.2170/€, 
¥83.16/$, and $1.5552/£. International finance is not for the weak of heart!
Cross Rates
Many currency pairs are only inactively traded, so their exchange rate is determined through 
their relationship to a widely traded third currency. For example, a Mexican importer needs 
Japanese yen to pay for purchases in Tokyo. Both the Mexican peso (MXN or the old peso 
symbol, Ps) and the Japanese yen (JPY or ¥) are commonly quoted against the U.S. dollar 
(USD or $). Using the following quotes from Exhibit 5.8,
Currency per USD
Japanese yen
USD/JPY
118.79
Mexican peso
USD/MXN
14.8638
the Mexican importer can buy one U.S. dollar for MXN14.8638, and with that dollar can buy 
JPY118.79. The cross rate calculation would be as follows:
Japanese Yen = 1 U.S. Dollar
Mexican Peso = 1 U.S. Dollar =
¥118.79/$
Ps14.8638/$ = ¥7.9919/Ps
The cross rate could also be calculated as the reciprocal, with the USD/MXN rate divided by 
the USD/JPY rate, yielding Ps0.1251/¥.
Cross rates often appear in various financial publications in the form of a matrix to 
simplify the math. Exhibit 5.9 calculates a number of key cross rates from the quotes pre-
sented in Exhibit 5.8, including the Mexican peso/Japanese yen calculation just described (the 
Ps0.1251/¥ rate).
Intermarket Arbitrage
Cross rates can be used to check on opportunities for intermarket arbitrage. Suppose the fol-
lowing exchange rates are quoted:
Citibank quotes U.S. dollars per euro
USD1.3297 = 1 EUR
Barclays Bank quotes U.S. dollars per pound sterling
USD1.5585 = 1 GBP
Dresdner Bank quotes euros per pound sterling
EUR1.1722 = 1 GBP
The euro-pound sterling cross rate, derived from the Citibank and Barclays Bank quotes, is
USD1.5585/GBP
USD1.3297/EUR = EUR 1.721/GBP

135
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
Note that the calculated cross rate is not the same as Dresdner Bank’s quotation of EUR1.1722/
GBP, so an opportunity exists to profit from arbitrage between the three markets. Exhibit 5.10 
shows the steps in what is called triangular arbitrage.
A market trader at Citibank New York, with USD1,000,000, can sell that sum spot to 
­Barclays Bank for British pounds sterling, and then in turn, sell these pounds to Dresdner Bank 
for euros. In the third and final simultaneous sale, the trader can sell the euros to Citibank for 
USD1,000,112.
The profit on one such “turn” is a risk-free USD112: $1,000,112 - $1,000,000. We know, 
that’s not much, but it’s digital! Such triangular arbitrage can continue until exchange rate 
equilibrium is reestablished. “Reestablished” in this case means when the calculated cross rate 
equals the actual quotation, less any tiny margin for transaction costs.
Exhibit 5.9
Key Currency Cross-Rate Calculations for February 18, 2015
Calculated
Dollar
Euro
Pound
SFranc
Peso
Yen
CdnDlr
Canada
1.2455
1.4195
1.9227
1.3215
0.0838
0.0105
—
Japan
118.786
135.384
183.368
126.033
7.9916
—
95.372
Mexico
14.8638
16.9407
22.9450
15.7706
—
0.1251
11.9340
Switzerland
0.9425
1.0742
1.4549
—
0.0634
0.0079
0.7567
U.K.
0.6478
0.7383
—
0.6873
0.0436
0.0055
0.5201
Euro
0.8774
—
1.3544
0.9309
0.0590
0.007
0.704
U.S.
—
1.1397
1.5437
1.0610
0.0673
0.0084
0.8029
Note: Cross-rates are calculated from the quotes presented in the first column “Dollar.”
Dresdner Bank
Barclays Bank, London
Citibank New York
End with USD1,000,112
Start with USD1,000,000
(1) Trader sells USD1,000,000 to Barclays
      Bank at USD1.5585/GBP
(6) Trader receives
      USD1,000,112
(2)  Trader receives GBP641,643
(3)  Trader sells GBP641,643 to
       Dresdner Bank at EUR1.1722/GBP
(5) Trader sells EUR752,133 to
     Citibank at USD1.3297/EUR
(4) Trader receives EUR752,133
     from Dresdner Bank
Exhibit 5.10
Triangular Arbitrage by a Market Trader

136
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
Percentage Change in Spot Rates
Assume that the Mexican peso has recently changed in value from USD/MXN 10.00 to 11.00. 
Your home currency is the U.S. dollar. What is the percent change in the value of the Mexican 
peso? The calculation depends upon the designated home currency.
Foreign Currency Terms. When the foreign currency price (the price, Ps) of the home cur-
rency (the unit, $) is used, Mexican pesos per U.S. dollar in this case, the formula for the percent 
change (%∆) in the foreign currency becomes
%∆= Beginning Rate - Ending Rate
Ending Rate
* 100 = Ps10.00/$ - Ps11.00/$
Ps11.00/$
* 100 = -9.09%
The Mexican peso fell in value 9.09% against the dollar. Note that it takes more pesos per 
dollar, and the calculation resulted in a negative value, both characteristics of a fall in value.
Home Currency Terms. When the home currency price (the price) for a foreign currency (the 
unit) is used—the reciprocals of the numbers above—the formula for the percent change in 
the foreign currency is:
%∆= Ending Rate - Beginning Rate
Beginning Rate
* 100 = $0.09091/Ps - $0.1000/Ps
$0.1000/Ps
* 100 = -9.09%
The calculation yields the identical percentage change, a fall in the value of the peso by 
9.09%. Although many people find the second calculation, the home currency term calculation, 
to be the more “intuitive” because it reminds them of many percentage change calculations, 
one must be careful to remember that these are exchanges of currency for currency, and the 
currency that is designated as home currency is significant.
Forward Quotations
Although spot rates are typically quoted on an outright basis (meaning all digits expressed), 
forward rates are, depending on the currency, typically quoted in terms of points or pips, the 
last digits of a currency quotation. Forward rates of one year or less maturity are termed cash 
rates; for longer than one-year they are called swap rates. A forward quotation expressed in 
points is not a foreign exchange rate as such. Rather it is the difference between the forward 
rate and the spot rate. Consequently, the spot rate itself can never be given on a points basis.
Consider the spot and forward point quotes in Exhibit 5.11. The bid and ask spot quotes 
are outright quotes, but the forwards are stated as points from the spot rate. The three-month 
points quotations for the Japanese yen in Exhibit 5.11 are bid and ask. The first number refers 
to points away from the spot bid, and the second number refers to points away from the spot 
ask. Given the outright quotes of 118.27 bid and 118.37 ask, the outright three-month forward 
rates are calculated as follows:
Bid
Ask
Outright spot
JPY118.27
JPY118.37
Plus points (3 months)
  1.43
  1.40
Outright forward
JPY116.84
JPY116.97
The forward bid and ask quotations in Exhibit 5.11 of two years and longer are called 
swap rates. As mentioned earlier, many forward exchange transactions in the interbank market 
involve a simultaneous purchase for one date and sale (reversing the transaction) for another 
date. This “swap” is a way to borrow one currency for a limited time while giving up the use 

137
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
Exhibit 5.11
Spot and Forward Quotations for the Euro and Japanese Yen
Euro: Spot and Forward ($/€)
Japanese Yen: Spot and Forward (¥/$)
Bid
Ask
Bid
Ask
Term
Points
Rate
Points
Rate
Points
Rate
Points
Rate
Spot
1.0897
1.0901
118.27
118.37
Cash
1 week
3
1.0900
4
1.0905
-10
118.17
-9
118.28
rates
1 month
17
1.0914
19
1.0920
-51
117.76
-50
117.87
2 months
35
1.0932
36
1.0937
-95
117.32
-93
117.44
3 months
53
1.0950
54
1.0955
-143
116.84
-140
116.97
4 months
72
1.0969
76
1.0977
-195
116.32
-190
116.47
5 months
90
1.0987
95
1.0996
-240
115.87
-237
116.00
6 months
112
1.1009
113
1.1014
-288
115.39
-287
115.50
9 months
175
1.1072
177
1.1078
-435
113.92
-429
114.08
1 year
242
1.1139
245
1.1146
-584
112.43
-581
112.56
Swap
2 years
481
1.1378
522
1.1423
-1150
106.77
-1129
107.08
rates
3 years
750
1.1647
810
1.1711
-1748
100.79
-1698
101.39
4 years
960
1.1857
1039
1.1940
-2185
96.42
-2115
97.22
5 years
1129
1.2026
1276
1.2177
-2592
92.35
-2490
93.47
of another currency for the same time. In other words, it is a short-term borrowing of one 
currency combined with a short-term loan of an equivalent amount of another currency. The 
two parties could, if they wanted, charge each other interest at the going rate for each of the 
currencies. However, it is easier for the party with the higher-interest currency to simply pay 
the net interest differential to the other. The swap rate expresses this net interest differential 
on a points basis rather than as an interest rate.
Forward Quotations in Percentage Terms. The percent per annum deviation of the forward 
from the spot rate is termed the forward premium. However, as with the calculation of percent-
age changes in spot rates, the forward premium—which may be either a positive (a premium) 
or negative value (a discount)—depends upon the designated home (or base) currency.
Assume the following spot rate for our discussion of foreign currency terms and home 
currency terms.
Foreign currency (price)/
home currency (unit)
Home currency (price)/
foreign currency (unit)
Spot rate
¥ 118.27/$
USD/JPY0.0084552
3-month forward
¥ 116.84/$
USD/JPY0.0085587
Foreign Currency Terms. Using the foreign currency as the price of the home currency (the 
unit), JPY/USD spot and forward rates, and 90 days forward, the forward premium on the yen 
( f JPY) is calculated as follows:
f JPY = Spot - Forward
Forward
* 360
90 * 100 = 118.27 - 116.84
116.84
* 360
90 * 100 = +4.90%

138
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
The sign is positive indicating that the Japanese yen is selling forward at a premium of 4.90% 
against the U.S. dollar.
Home Currency Terms. Using the home currency (the dollar) as the price for the foreign cur-
rency (the yen) and the reciprocals of the spot and forward rates from the previous calculation, 
the forward premium on the yen ( f JPY) is calculated as follows:
f JPY = Spot - Forward
Forward
* 360
90 * 100 =
1
116.84 -
1
118.27
1
118.27
* 360
90 * 100
such that
f JPY = Forward - Spot
Spot
* 360
90 * 100 = 0.0085587 - 0.0084552
0.0084552
* 360
90 * 100 = +4.90%
Again, the result is identical to the previous premium calculation: a positive 4.90% ­premium 
of the yen against the dollar.
Summary Points
■
■
The three functions of the foreign exchange market are 
to transfer purchasing power, provide credit, and mini-
mize foreign exchange risk.
■
■
One of the biggest changes in the foreign exchange mar-
ket in the past decade has been in its shift from a two-
tier market (the interbank or wholesale market, and the 
client or retail market) to a single-tier market.
■
■
Electronic platforms and the development of sophisti-
cated trading algorithms have facilitated market access 
by traders of all kinds and sizes.
■
■
Geographically the foreign exchange market spans the 
globe, with prices moving and currencies traded some-
where every hour of every business day.
■
■
A foreign exchange rate is the price of one currency 
expressed in terms of another currency. A foreign 
exchange quotation is a statement of willingness to buy 
or sell currency at an announced price.
■
■
Transactions within the foreign exchange market are 
executed either on a spot basis, requiring settlement 
two days after the transaction, or on a forward or swap 
basis, which requires settlement at some designated 
future date.
■
■
European terms quotations are the foreign currency 
price of a U.S. dollar. American terms quotations are 
the dollar price of a foreign currency.
■
■
Quotations can also be direct or indirect. A direct quote 
is the home currency price of a unit of foreign currency, 
while an indirect quote is the foreign currency price of 
a unit of home currency.
■
■
Direct and indirect are not synonyms for American 
and European terms, because the home currency will 
change depending on who is doing the calculation, while 
­European terms are always the foreign currency price 
of a dollar.
■
■
A cross rate is an exchange rate between two currencies, 
calculated from their common relationships with a third 
currency. When cross rates differ from the direct rates 
between two currencies, intermarket arbitrage is possible.

139
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
Santiago), the escalating capital flight caused the black mar-
ket value of the bolivar to plummet to Bs2500/$ in weeks. As 
markets collapsed and exchange values fell, the Venezuelan 
inflation rate soared to more than 30% per annum.
Capital Controls and CADIVI
To combat the downward pressures on the bolivar, the 
Venezuelan government announced on February 5th, 2003, 
the passage of the 2003 Exchange Regulations Decree. The 
Decree took the following actions:
1.	 Set the official exchange rate at Bs1596/$ for purchase 
(bid) and Bs1600/$ for sale (ask);
2.	 Established the Comisin de Administracin de Divi-
sas (CADIVI) to control the distribution of foreign 
exchange; and
3.	 Implemented strict price controls to stem inflation trig-
gered by the weaker bolivar and the exchange control-
induced contraction of imports.
CADIVI was both the official means and the cheap-
est means by which Venezuelan citizens could obtain for-
eign currency. In order to receive an authorization from 
CADIVI to obtain dollars, an applicant was required to 
complete a series of forms. The applicant was then required 
to prove that they had paid taxes the previous three years, 
provide proof of business and asset ownership and lease 
agreements for company property, and document the cur-
rent payment of Social Security.
Unofficially, however, there was an additional unstated 
requirement for permission to obtain foreign currency: 
authorizations would be reserved for Chávez support-
ers. In August 2003 an anti-Chávez petition had gained 
widespread circulation. One million signatures had been 
collected. Although the government ruled that the peti-
tion was invalid, it had used the list of signatures to cre-
ate a database of names and social security numbers that 
CADIVI utilized to cross-check identities on hard currency 
requests. President Chávez was quoted as saying “Not one 
more dollar for the putschits; the bolivars belong to the 
people.”2
The Venezuelan Bolivar Black Market1
It’s late afternoon on March 10th, 2004, and Santiago opens 
the window of his office in Caracas, Venezuela. Immedi-
ately he is hit with the sounds rising from the plaza—cars 
honking, protesters banging their pots and pans, street ven-
dors hawking their goods. Since the imposition of a new set 
of economic policies by President Hugo Chávez in 2002, 
such sights and sounds had become a fixture of city life in 
Caracas. Santiago sighed as he yearned for the simplicity 
of life in the old Caracas.
Santiago’s once-thriving pharmaceutical distribution 
business had hit hard times. Since capital controls were 
implemented in February of 2003, dollars had been hard to 
come by. He had been forced to pursue various ­methods—
methods that were more expensive and not always legal—
to obtain dollars, causing his margins to decrease by 50%. 
Adding to the strain, the Venezuelan currency, the boli-
var (Bs), had been recently devalued (repeatedly). This 
had instantly squeezed his margins as his costs had risen 
directly with the exchange rate. He could not find anyone 
to sell him dollars. His customers needed supplies and they 
needed them quickly, but how was he going to come up 
with the $30,000—the hard currency—to pay for his most 
recent order?
Political Chaos
Hugo Chávez’s tenure as President of Venezuela had been 
tumultuous at best since his election in 1998. After repeated 
recalls, resignations, coups, and reappointments, the politi-
cal turmoil had taken its toll on the Venezuelan economy as 
a whole, and its currency in particular. The short-lived suc-
cess of the anti-Chávez coup in 2001, and his nearly imme-
diate return to office, had set the stage for a retrenchment 
of his isolationist economic and financial policies.
On January 21st, 2003, the bolivar closed at a record low—
Bs1853/$. The next day President Hugo Chávez suspended 
the sale of dollars for two weeks. Nearly instantaneously, 
an unofficial or black market for the exchange of Venezu-
elan bolivars for foreign currencies (primarily U.S. dollars) 
sprouted. As investors of all kinds sought ways to exit the Ven-
ezuelan market, or simply obtain the hard-currency needed 
to continue to conduct their businesses (as was the case for 
1Copyright © 2004 Thunderbird School of Global Management. All rights reserved. This case was prepared by Nina Camera, Thanh 
Nguyen, and Jay Ward under the direction of Professor Michael H. Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only and not to indi-
cate either effective or ineffective management. Names of principals involved in the case have been changed to preserve confidentiality.
2“Venezuela Girds for Exchange Controls,” The Wall Street Journal (Eastern edition), February 5, 2003, p. A14.
Mini-Case

140
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
Caracas. The implied gray market exchange rate was then 
calculated as follows:
Implicit Gray
Market Rate = 7 * Bs7945/Share
$18.84/ADR
= Bs2952/$
The official exchange rate on that same day was 
Bs1598/$. This meant that the gray market rate was quoting 
the bolivar about 46% weaker against the dollar than what 
the Venezuelan government officially declared its currency 
to be worth. Exhibit A illustrates both the official exchange 
rate and the gray market rate (calculated using CANTV 
shares) for the January 2002 to March 2004 period. The 
divergence between the official and gray market rates 
beginning in February 2003 coincided with the imposition 
of capital controls.4
The Black Market
A third method of obtaining hard currency by Venezuelans 
was through the rapidly expanding black market. The black 
market was, as is the case with black markets all over the 
world, essentially unseen and illegal. It was, however, quite 
sophisticated, using the services of a stockbroker or banker 
in Venezuela who simultaneously held U.S. dollar accounts 
offshore. The choice of a black market broker was a critical 
one; in the event of a failure to complete the transaction 
properly there was no legal recourse.
If Santiago wished to purchase dollars on the black mar-
ket, he would deposit bolivars in his broker’s account in 
Venezuela. The agreed upon black market exchange rate 
was determined on the day of the deposit, and usually was 
within a 20% band of the gray market rate derived from the 
CANTV share price. Santiago would then be given access 
to a dollar-denominated bank account outside of Venezu-
ela in the agreed amount. The transaction took, on average, 
two business days to settle. The unofficial black market rate 
was Bs3300/$.
In early 2004 President Chávez had asked Venezuela’s 
Central Bank to give him “a little billion”—millardito—of 
its $21 billion in foreign exchange reserves. Chávez argued 
that the money was actually the people’s, and he wished 
to invest some of it in the agricultural sector. The Central 
Bank refused. Not to be thwarted in its search for funds, 
the Chávez government announced on February 9, 2004, 
another devaluation. The bolivar was devalued 17%, falling 
in official value from Bs1600/$ to Bs1920/$ (see Exhibit A). 
Santiago’s Alternatives
Santiago had little luck obtaining dollars via CADIVI to 
pay for his imports. Because he had signed the petition call-
ing for President Chávez’s removal, he had been listed in 
the CADIVI database as anti-Chávez, and now could not 
obtain permission to exchange bolivar for dollars.
The transaction in question was an invoice for $30,000 
in pharmaceutical products from his U.S.-based supplier. 
Santiago intended to resell these products to a large Ven-
ezuelan customer who would distribute the products. This 
transaction was not the first time that Santiago had been 
forced to search out alternative sources for meeting his 
U.S. dollar-obligations. Since the imposition of capital con-
trols, his search for dollars had become a weekly activity 
for Santiago. In addition to the official process—through 
CADIVI—he could also obtain dollars through the gray 
or black markets.
The Gray Market: CANTV Shares
In May 2003, three months following the implementation 
of the exchange controls, a window of opportunity had 
opened up for Venezuelans—an opportunity that allowed 
investors in the Caracas stock exchange to avoid the tight 
foreign exchange curbs. This loophole circumvented the 
government-imposed restrictions by allowing investors to 
purchase local shares of the leading telecommunications 
company CANTV on the Caracas’ bourse, and to then 
convert those shares into dollar-denominated American 
Depositary Receipts (ADRs) traded on the NYSE.
The sponsor for CANTV ADRs on the NYSE was the 
Bank of New York, the leader in ADR sponsorship and 
management in the U.S. The Bank of New York had sus-
pended trading in CANTV ADRs in February after the 
passage of the Decree, wishing to determine the legality of 
trading under the new Venezuelan currency controls. On 
May 26th, after concluding that trading was indeed legal 
under the Decree, trading resumed in CANTV shares. 
CANTV’s share price and trading volume both soared in 
the following week.3
The share price of CANTV quickly became the primary 
method of calculating the implicit gray market exchange 
rate. For example, CANTV shares closed at Bs7945/share 
on the Caracas bourse on February 6, 2004. That same day, 
CANTV ADRs closed in New York at $18.84/ADR. Each 
New York ADR was equal to seven shares of CANTV in 
3In fact CANTV’s share price continued to rise over the 2002 to 2004 period as a result of its use as an exchange rate mechanism. The 
use of CANTV ADRs as a method of obtaining dollars by Venezuelan individuals and organizations was typically described as “not 
illegal.”
4Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) announced on November 26, 2003, that it would change its standard spot rate for the 
Venezuelan bolivar to the notional rate based on the relationship between the price of CANTV Telefonos de Venezuela D in the local 
market in bolivars and the price of its ADR in U.S. dollars.

141
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
an extra 500 bolivars per dollar to expedite his request. 
Santiago noted with a smile that “the Chávistas need to 
make money too.”
The noise from the street seemed to be dying with the 
sun. It was time for Santiago to make some decisions. None 
of the alternatives were bonita, but if he was to preserve 
his business, bolivars—at some price—had to be obtained.
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 Why does a country like Venezuela impose capital 
controls?
2.	 In the case of Venezuela, what is the difference 
between the gray market and the black market?
3.	 Create a financial analysis of Santiago’s choices. Use it 
to recommend a solution to his problem.
Post Script. Although President Chávez died in 2013, and 
the Venezuelan bolivar has been devalued repeatedly and 
renamed the bolivar fuerte since the time of this case, it 
remains a currency that is overvalued by its government 
and restricted in its exchange, and therefore continues to 
lead a double life—officially and unofficially.
With all Venezuelan exports of oil being purchased in U.S. 
dollars, the devaluation of the bolivar meant that the coun-
try’s proceeds from oil exports grew by the same 17% as 
the devaluation itself.
The Chávez government argued that the devaluation 
was necessary because the bolivar was “a variable that 
cannot be kept frozen, because it prejudices exports and 
pressures the balance of payments” according to Finance 
Minister Tobias Nobriega. Analysts, however, pointed 
out that Venezuelan government actually had significant 
control over its balance of payments: oil was the primary 
export, the government maintained control over the offi-
cial access to hard currency necessary for imports, and the 
Central Bank’s foreign exchange reserves were now over 
$21 billion.
Time Was Running Out
Santiago received confirmation from CADIVI on the after-
noon of March 10th that his latest application for dollars 
was approved and that he would receive $10,000 at the 
official exchange rate of Bs1920/$. Santiago attributed his 
good fortune to the fact that he paid a CADIVI insider 
500
1,000
4-Jan-02
4-Feb-02
4-Mar-02
4-Apr-02
4-May-02
4-Jun-02
4-Jul-02
4-Aug-02
4-Sep-02
4-Oct-02
4-Nov-02
4-Dec-02
4-Jan-03
4-Feb-03
4-Mar-03
4-Apr-03
4-May-03
4-Jun-03
4-Jul-03
4-Aug-03
4-Sep-03
4-Oct-03
4-Nov-03
4-Dec-03
4-Jan-04
4-Feb-04
4-Mar-04
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
Bolivar = 1.00 USD (Friday closing rates)
Capital controls are instituted
on January 22, 2003, to stop the
capital outﬂows from Venezuela
Two weeks later, on February 5, 2003,
Venezuela announces the imposition of
strict capital controls, the formation of
the CADIVI to manage the currency,
and the ﬁxing of the bolivar at Bs1600/$
Oﬃcial Rate
Gray Market Exchange Rate
The bolivar is devalued
once again on Feb
14, 2004, from Bs1600/$
to Bs1920/$
Exhibit A
Official and Gray Market Exchange Rates for the Venezuelan Bolivar

142
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Definitions. Define the following terms:
a.	 Foreign exchange market
b.	 Foreign exchange transaction
c.	 Foreign exchange
2.	 Functions of the Foreign Exchange Market. What 
are the three major functions of the foreign exchange 
market?
3.	 Structure of the FX Market. How is the global foreign 
exchange market structured? Are digital telecommu-
nications replacing people?
4.	 Market Participants. For each of the foreign exchange 
market participants, identify their motive for buying or 
selling foreign exchange.
5.	 Foreign Exchange Transaction. Define each of the fol-
lowing types of foreign exchange transactions:
a.	 Spot
b.	 Outright forward
c.	 Forward-forward swaps
6.	 Swap Transactions. Define and differentiate the differ-
ent type of swap transactions in the foreign exchange 
markets.
7.	 Nondeliverable Forward. What is a nondeliverable 
forward and why does it exist?
8.	 Foreign Exchange Market Characteristics. With refer-
ence to foreign exchange turnover in 2013, rank the 
following:
a.	 The relative size of spot, forwards, and swaps
b.	 The five most important geographic locations for 
foreign exchange turnover
c.	 The three most important currencies of denomination
9.	 Foreign Exchange Rate Quotations. Define and give 
an example of the following:
a.	 Bid rate quote
b.	 Ask rate quote
10.	 Reciprocals. Convert the following indirect quotes to 
direct quotes and direct quotes to indirect quotes:
a.	 Euro: €1.22/$ (indirect quote)
b.	 Russia: Rbl30/$ (indirect quote)
c.	 Canada: $0.72/C$ (direct quote)
d.	 Denmark: $0.1644/DKr (direct quote)
11.	 Geography and the Foreign Exchange Market. 
Answer the following:
a.	 What is the geographical location of the foreign 
exchange market?
b.	 What are the two main types of trading systems for 
foreign exchange?
c.	 How are foreign exchange markets connected for 
trading activities?
12.	 American and European Terms. With reference to 
interbank quotations, what is the difference between 
American terms and European terms?
13.	 Direct and Indirect Quotes. Define and give an exam-
ple of the following:
a.	 Direct quote between the U.S. dollar and the 
­Mexican peso, where the United States is desig-
nated as the home country.
b.	 Indirect quote between the Japanese yen and the 
Chinese renminbi (yuan), where China is desig-
nated as the home country.
14.	 Base and Price Currency. Define base currency, unit 
currency, price currency, and quote currency.
15.	 Cross Rates and Intermarket Arbitrage. Why are 
cross currency rates of special interest when discuss-
ing intermarket arbitrage?
16.	 Percentage Change in Exchange Rates. Why do per-
centage change calculations end up being rather con-
fusing on occasion?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Isaac Díez. Isaac Díez Peris lives in Rio de Janeiro. 
While attending school in Spain he meets Juan Carlos 
Cordero from Guatemala. Over the summer holiday 
Isaac decides to visit Juan Carlos in Guatemala City 
for a couple of weeks. Isaac’s parents give him some 
spending money, R$4,500. Isaac wants to exchange it 
for Guatemalan quetzals (GTQ). He collects the fol-
lowing rates:
Spot rate on the GTQ/€ cross rate GTQ10.5799 = €1.00
Spot rate on the €/R$ cross rate
€0.4462 = R$1.00
a.	 What is the Brazilian reais/Guatemalan quetzal 
cross rate?
b.	 How many quetzals will Isaac get for his reais?
2.	 Victoria Exports. A Canadian exporter, Victoria 
Exports, will be receiving six payments of €12,000, 
ranging from now to 12 months in the future. Since 
the company keeps cash balances in both Canadian 
dollars and U.S. dollars, it can choose which currency 
to exchange the euros for at the end of the various 

143
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
periods. Which currency appears to offer the better 
rates in the forward market?
Period
Days Forward
C$/euro
US$/euro
spot
–
1.3360
1.3221
1 month
30
1.3368
1.3230
2 months
60
1.3376
1.3228
3 months
90
1.3382
1.3224
6 months
180
1.3406
1.3215
12 months
360
1.3462
1.3194
3.	 Yen Forward. Use the following spot and forward 
bid-ask rates for the Japanese yen/U.S. dollar (¥/$) 
exchange rate from September 16, 2010, to answer the 
following questions:
a.	 What is the mid-rate for each maturity?
b.	 What is the annual forward premium for all 
maturities?
c.	 Which maturities have the smallest and largest for-
ward premiums?
Period
¥/$ Bid Rate
¥/$ Ask Rate
spot
85.41
85.46
1 month
85.02
85.05
2 months
84.86
84.90
3 months
84.37
84.42
6 months
83.17
83.20
12 months
82.87
82.91
24 months
81.79
81.82
4.	 Credit Suisse Geneva. Andreas Broszio just started as 
an analyst for Credit Suisse in Geneva, Switzerland. 
He receives the following quotes for Swiss francs 
against the dollar for spot, 1 month forward, 3 months 
forward, and 6 months forward.
Spot exchange rate:
  Bid rate
SF1.2575/$
  Ask rate
SF1.2585/S
1 month forward
10 to 15
3 months forward
14 to 22
6 months forward
20 to 30
a.	 Calculate outright quotes for bid and ask and the 
number of points spread between each.
b.	 What do you notice about the spread as quotes 
evolve from spot toward 6 months?
c.	 What is the 6-month Swiss bill rate?
5.	 Munich to Moscow. On your post-graduation cel-
ebratory trip you decide to travel from Munich, Ger-
many, to Moscow, Russia. You leave Munich with 
15,000 euros in your wallet. Wanting to exchange all 
of them for Russian rubles, you obtain the following 
quotes:
Spot rate on the dollar/euro cross rate
$1.3214/€
Spot rate on the ruble/dollar cross rate
Rbl30.96/$
a.	 What is the Russian ruble/euro cross rate?
b.	 How many rubles will you obtain for your euros?
6.	 Moscow to Tokyo. After spending a week in Mos-
cow you get an email from your friend in Japan. 
He can get you a very good deal on a plane ticket 
and wants you to meet him in Tokyo next week to 
continue your post-graduation celebratory trip. You 
have 450,000 rubles left in your money pouch. In 
preparation for the trip you want to exchange your 
­Russian rubles for Japanese yen so you get the 
­following quotes:
Spot rate on the rubles/dollar cross rate
Rbl30.96/$
Spot rate on the yen/dollar cross rate
¥84.02/$
a.	 What is the Russian ruble/yen cross rate?
b.	 How many yen will you obtain for your rubles?
7.	 Asian Pacific Crisis. The Asian financial crisis that 
began in July 1997 wreaked havoc throughout the cur-
rency markets of East Asia.
a.	 Which of the following currencies had the largest 
depreciations or devaluations during the July to 
November period?
b.	 Which seemingly survived the first five months 
of the crisis with the least impact on their 
currencies?
Country and Currency
July 1997
(per US$)
Nov 1997
(per US$)
China yuan
8.40
8.40
Hong Kong dollar
7.75
7.73
Indonesia rupiah
2,400
3,600
Korea won
900
1,100
Malaysia ringgit
2.50
3.50
Philippines peso
27
34
Singapore dollar
1.43
1.60
Taiwan dollar
27.80
32.70
Thailand baht
25.0
40.0

144
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
8.	 Bloomberg Currency Cross Rates. Use the table at 
the top of the page from Bloomberg to calculate each 
of the following:
a.	 Japanese yen per U.S. dollar?
b.	 U.S. dollars per Japanese yen?
c.	 U.S. dollars per euro?
d.	 Euros per U.S. dollar?
e.	 Japanese yen per euro?
f.	 Euros per Japanese yen?
g.	 Canadian dollars per U.S. dollar?
h.	 U.S. dollars per Canadian dollar?
i.	 Australian dollars per U.S. dollar?
j.	 U.S. dollars per Australian dollar?
k.	 British pounds per U.S. dollar?
l.	 U.S. dollars per British pound?
m.	U.S. dollars per Swiss franc?
n.	 Swiss francs per U.S. dollar?
Currency
USD
EUR
JPY
GBP
CHF
CAD
AUD
HKD
HKD
7.7736
10.2976
0.0928
12.2853
7.9165
7.6987
7.6584
—
AUD
1.015
1.3446
0.0121
1.6042
1.0337
1.0053
—
0.1306
CAD
1.0097
1.3376
0.0121
1.5958
1.0283
—
0.9948
0.1299
CHF
0.9819
1.3008
0.0117
1.5519
—
0.9725
0.9674
0.1263
GBP
0.6328
0.8382
0.0076
—
0.6444
0.6267
0.6234
0.0814
JPY
83.735
110.9238
—
132.3348
85.2751
82.9281
82.4949
10.7718
EUR
0.7549
—
0.009
1.193
0.7688
0.7476
0.7437
0.0971
USD
—
1.3247
0.0119
1.5804
1.0184
0.9904
0.9852
0.1286
9.	 Dollar/Euro Forwards. Use the following spot and 
forward bid-ask rates for the U.S. dollar/euro (US$/€) 
from ­December 10, 2010, to answer the following 
questions:
a.	 What is the mid-rate for each maturity?
b.	 What is the annual forward premium for all maturi-
ties based on the mid-rates?
c.	 Which maturities have the smallest and largest for-
ward premiums based on the mid-rates?
Period
Bid Rate
Ask Rate
spot
1.3231
1.3232
1 month
1.3230
1.3231
2 months
1.3228
1.3229
3 months
1.3224
1.3227
6 months
1.3215
1.3218
12 months
1.3194
1.3198
24 months
1.3147
1.3176
10.	 Swissie Triangular Arbitrage. The following exchange 
rates are available to you. (You can buy or sell at the 
stated rates.) Assume you have an initial SF12,000,000. 
Can you make a profit via triangular arbitrage? If so, 
show the steps and calculate the amount of profit in 
Swiss francs (Swissies).
Mt. Fuji Bank
¥ 92.00/$
Mt. Rushmore Bank
SF1.02/$
Mt. Blanc Bank
¥ 90.00/SF
11.	 Aussie Dollar Forward. Use the following spot and 
forward bid-ask rates for the U.S. dollar/Australian 
dollar (US$ = A$1.00) exchange rate from December 
10, 2010, to answer the following questions:
a.	 What is the midrate for each maturity?
b.	 What is the annual forward premium for all maturities 
based on the mid-rates?
c.	 Which maturities have the smallest and largest for-
ward premiums based on the mid-rates?
Period
Bid Rate
Ask Rate
spot
0.98510
0.98540
1 month
0.98131
0.98165
2 months
0.97745
0.97786
3 months
0.97397
0.97441
6 months
0.96241
0.96295
12 months
0.93960
0.94045
24 months
0.89770
0.89900
12.	 Transatlantic Arbitrage. A corporate treasury working 
out of Vienna with operations in New York simultane-
ously calls Citibank in New York City and Barclays in 
London. The banks give the following quotes on the 
euro simultaneously.
Citibank NYC
Barclays London
$0.7551961 = €1.00
$0.7545975 = €1.00
Problem 8.

145
The Foreign Exchange Market    CHAPTER 5 
Using $1 million or its euro equivalent, show how the 
corporate treasury could make geographic arbitrage 
profit with the two different exchange rate quotes.
13.	 Venezuelan Bolivar (A). The Venezuelan government 
officially floated the Venezuelan bolivar (Bs) in Febru-
ary 2002. Within weeks, its value had moved from the 
pre-float fix of Bs778/$ to Bs1025/$.
a.	 Is this a devaluation or a depreciation?
b.	 By what percentage did the value change?
14.	 Venezuelan Bolivar (B). The Venezuelan political and 
economic crisis deepened in late 2002 and early 2003. 
On January 1, 2003, the bolivar was trading at Bs1400/$. 
By February 1, its value had fallen to Bs1950/$. Many 
currency analysts and forecasters were predicting that 
the bolivar would fall an additional 40% from its Feb-
ruary 1 value by early summer 2003.
a.	 What was the percentage change in January?
b.	 What is the forecast value for June 2003?
15.	 Indirect on the Dollar. Calculate the forward premium 
on the dollar (the dollar is the home currency) if the 
spot rate is €1.3300/$ and the 3-month forward rate is 
€1.3400/$.
16.	 Direct on the Dollar. Calculate the forward discount 
on the dollar (the dollar is the home currency) if the 
spot rate is $1.5800/£ and the 6-month forward rate is 
$1.5550/£.
17.	 Mexican Peso–European Euro Cross Rate. Calculate 
the cross rate between the Mexican peso (Ps) and the 
euro (€) from the following spot rates: Ps12.45/$ and 
€0.7550/$.
18.	 Pura Vida. Calculate the cross rate between the Costa 
Rican colón (C) and the Canadian dollar (C$) from 
the following spot rates: C500.29/$ and C$1.02/$.
19.	 Around the Horn. Assuming the following quotes, 
calculate how a market trader at Citibank with 
$1,000,000 can make an intermarket arbitrage 
profit.
Citibank quotes U.S. 
dollar per pound
$1.5900 = £1.00
National Westminster 
quotes euros per pound
€1.2000 = £1.00
Deutschebank quotes 
U.S. dollar per euro
$0.7550 = €1.00
20.	 Great Pyramids. Inspired by his recent trip to the 
Great Pyramids, Citibank trader Ruminder Dhillon 
wonders if he can make an intermarket arbitrage 
profit using Libyan dinars (LYD) and Saudi riyals 
(SAR). He has USD1,000,000 to work with so he 
gathers the following quotes. Is there an opportunity 
for an arbitrage profit?
Citibank quotes U.S. 
dollar per Libyan dinar
$1.9324 = LYD1.00
National Bank of Kuwait 
quotes Saudi riyal per 
Libyan dinar
SAR1.9405 = LYD1.00
Barclay quotes U.S. 
dollar per Saudi riyal
$0.2667 = SAR1.00
Internet Exercises
1.	 Bank for International Settlements. The Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS) publishes a wealth of 
effective exchange rate indices. Use its database and 
analyses to determine the degree to which the dollar, 
the euro, and the yen (the “big three currencies”) are 
currently overvalued or undervalued.
Bank for 
International
www.bis.org/statistics/eer/index 
.htmSettlements
2.	 Bank of Canada Exchange Rate Index (CERI). The 
Bank of Canada regularly publishes an index of the 
Canadian dollar’s value, the CERI. The CERI is a mul-
tilateral trade-weighted index of the Canadian dollar’s 
value against other major global currencies relevant to 
the Canadian economy and business landscape. Use 
the CERI from the Bank of Canada’s Web site to eval-
uate the relative strength of the loonie in recent years.
Bank of Canada 
exchange rates
www.bankofcanada.ca/rates/
exchange/ceri/
3.	 Forward Quotes. FXStreet foreign exchange services 
provides representative forward rates on a multitude 
of currencies online. Use the following Web site to 
search out forward exchange rate quotations on a 
variety of currencies.
FXStreet
www.fxstreet.com/rates-charts/
forward-rates/
4.	 Federal Reserve Statistical Release. The United States 
Federal Reserve provides daily updates of the value 
of the major currencies traded against the U.S. dollar 
on its Web site. Use the Fed’s Web site to determine 
the relative weights used by the Fed to determine the 
index of the dollar’s value.
Federal Reserve
www.federalreserve.gov/releases/
h10/update/

146
CHAPTER 5    The Foreign Exchange Market
5.	 Daily Market Commentary. Many different online 
currency trading and consulting services provide daily 
assessments of global currency market activity. Use 
the following GCI site to find the market’s current 
assessment of how the euro is trading against both the 
U.S. dollar and the Canadian dollar.
GCI Financial Ltd.
www.gcitrading.com/fxnews/
6.	 Pacific Exchange Rate Service. The Pacific Exchange 
Rate Service Web site, managed by Professor Werner 
Antweiler of the University of British Columbia, pos-
sesses a wealth of current information on currency 
exchange rates and related statistics. Use the service 
to plot the recent performance of currencies that 
have recently suffered significant devaluations or 
depreciations, such as the Argentine peso, the Ven-
ezuelan bolivar, the Turkish lira, and the Egyptian 
pound.
Pacific Exchange Rate Service
fx.sauder.ubc 
.ca/plot.html

Chapter	 6
International Parity 
Conditions
 . . . if capital freely flowed towards those countries where it could be most 
profitably employed, there could be no difference in the rate of profit, and no 
other difference in the real or labour price of commodities, than the additional 
quantity of labour required to convey them to the various markets where they 
were to be sold.
—David Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 1817, Chapter 7.
What are the determinants of exchange rates? Are changes in exchange rates predictable? 
Managers of MNEs, international portfolio investors, importers and exporters, and govern-
ment officials must deal with these fundamental questions every day. This chapter describes 
the core financial theories surrounding the determination of exchange rates. Chapter 8 will 
introduce two other major theoretical schools of thought regarding currency valuation and 
combine the three different theories in a variety of real-world applications.
The economic theories that link exchange rates, price levels, and interest rates are called 
international parity conditions. In the eyes of many, these international parity conditions 
form the core of the financial theory that is considered unique to the field of international 
finance. These theories do not always work out to be “true” when compared to what students 
and practitioners observe in the real world, but they are central to any understanding of 
how multinational business is conducted and funded in the world today. And, as is often the 
case, the mistake is not always in the theory itself, but in the way it is interpreted or applied 
in practice. This chapter concludes with a Mini-Case, Mrs. Watanabe and the Japanese Yen 
Carry Trade, which demonstrates how both the theory and practice of international parity 
conditions sometimes combine to form unusual opportunities for profit—for those who are 
willing to bear the risk!
Learning Objectives
■
■
Examine how price levels and price level changes (inflation) in countries determine 
the exchange rates at which their currencies are traded
■
■
Show how interest rates reflect inflationary forces within each country and currency
■
■
Explain how forward markets for currencies reflect expectations held by market 
participants about the future spot exchange rate
■
■
Analyze how, in equilibrium, the spot and forward currency markets are aligned with 
interest differentials and differentials in expected inflation
147

148
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
Prices and Exchange Rates
If identical products or services can be sold in two different markets, and no restrictions exist 
on the sale or transportation of product between markets, the product’s price should be the 
same in both markets. This is called the law of one price.
A primary principle of competitive markets is that prices will equalize across markets if 
frictions or costs of moving the products or services between markets do not exist. If the two 
markets are in two different countries, the product’s price may be stated in different currency 
terms, but the price of the product should still be the same. Comparing prices would require 
only a conversion from one currency to the other. For example,
P$ * S = P¥,
where the price of the product in U.S. dollars (P$), multiplied by the spot exchange rate (S, yen 
per U.S. dollar), equals the price of the product in Japanese yen (P¥). Conversely, if the prices 
of the two products were stated in local currencies, and markets were efficient at competing 
away a higher price in one market relative to the other, the exchange rate could be deduced 
from the relative local product prices:
S = P¥
P$ .
Purchasing Power Parity and the Law of One Price
If the law of one price were true for all goods and services, the purchasing power parity (PPP) 
exchange rate could be found from any individual set of prices. By comparing the prices of 
identical products denominated in different currencies, one could determine the “real” or 
PPP exchange rate that should exist if markets were efficient. This is the absolute version of 
purchasing power parity. Absolute purchasing power parity states that the spot exchange rate 
is determined by the relative prices of similar baskets of goods.
The “Big Mac Index,” as it has been christened by The Economist (see Exhibit 6.1) and 
calculated regularly since 1986, is a prime example of the law of one price. Assuming that 
the Big Mac is indeed identical in all countries listed, it serves as one form of comparison of 
whether currencies are currently trading at market rates that are close to the exchange rate 
implied by Big Macs in local currencies.
For example, using Exhibit 6.1, in China a Big Mac costs Yuan 17.2 (local currency), while 
in the United States the same Big Mac costs $4.79. The actual spot exchange rate was Yuan 
6.2115 = $1 at this time. The price of a Big Mac in China in U.S. dollar terms was therefore
Price of Big Mac in China in Yuan
Yuan/$ Spot Rate
=
Yuan17.2
Yuan6.2115/$ = $2.77.
This is the value in column 3 of Exhibit 6.1 for China. We then calculate the implied 
­purchasing power parity rate of exchange using the actual price of the Big Mac in China 
(Yuan17.2) over the price of the Big Mac in the United States in U.S. dollars ($4.79):
Price of Big Mac in China in Yuan
Price of Big Mac in the U.S. in $
= Yuan17.2
$4.79
= Yuan3.591/$.
This is the value in column 4 of Exhibit 6.1 for China. In principle, this is what the Big 
Mac Index is saying the exchange rate between the Yuan and the dollar should be according 
to the theory.

149
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
Exhibit 6.1
Selected Rates from the Big Mac Index
Country and 
Currency
(1)
Big Mac 
Price in Local 
Currency
(2)
Actual Dollar 
Exchange Rate 
January 2015
(3)
Big Mac Price 
in Dollars
(4)
Implied PPP 
of the Dollar
(5)
Under/
Overvaluation 
Against Dollar**
United States
$
4.79
—
4.56
—
—
Britain
£
2.89
1.5115*
4.37
1.6574*
-8.8%
Canada
C$
5.70
1.2286
4.64
1.190
-3.1%
China
Yuan
17.2
6.2115
2.77
3.591
-42.2%
Denmark
DK
34.5
6.4174
5.38
7.203
12.2%
Euro area
€
3.68
1.1587*
4.26
1.302*
-11.0%
India
116.3
61.615
1.89
24.269
-60.6%
Japan
¥
370
117.77
3.14
77.244
-34.4%
Mexico
Peso
49.0
14.6275
3.35
10.230
-30.1%
Norway
kr
48.0
7.6225
6.30
10.021
31.5%
Peru
Sol
10.0
3.008
3.32
2.088
-30.6%
Russia
89.0
65.227
1.36
18.580
-71.5%
Switzerland
SFr
6.50
0.86165
7.54
1.357
57.5%
Thailand
Baht
99.0
32.605
3.04
20.668
-36.6%
*These exchange rates are stated in US$ per unit of local currency, $/£ and $/€.
**Percentage under/over valuation against the dollar is calculated as (Implied – Actual)/(Actual), except for the Britain and Euro area calculations, which 
are (Actual – Implied)/(Implied).
Source: Data for columns (1) and (2) drawn from “The Big Mac Index,” The Economist, January 22, 2015.
Now comparing this implied PPP rate of exchange, Yuan 3.591/$, with the actual market 
rate of exchange at that time, Yuan6.2115/$, the degree to which the yuan is either undervalued 
(-%) or overvalued (+%) versus the U.S. dollar is calculated as follows:
Implied Rate - Actual Rate
Actual Rate
= Yuan3.591/$ - Yuan6.2115/$
Yuan6.2115/$
≈-42.2%.
In this case, the Big Mac Index indicates that the Chinese yuan is undervalued by 42.2% 
versus the U.S. dollar as indicated in column 5 for China in Exhibit 6.1. The Economist is also 
quick to note that although this indicates a sizable undervaluation of the managed value of 
the Chinese yuan versus the dollar, the theory of purchasing power parity is supposed to 
indicate where the value of currencies should go over the long-term, and not necessarily its 
value today.
It is important to understand why the Big Mac may be a good candidate for the application 
of the law of one price and measurement of under or overvaluation. First, the product itself 
is nearly identical in each market. This is the result of product consistency, process excellence, 
and McDonald’s brand image and pride. Second, and just as important, the product is a result 
of predominantly local materials and input costs. This means that its price in each country is 
representative of domestic costs and prices and not imported ones, which would be influenced 
by exchange rates themselves. The index, however, still possesses limitations. Big Macs cannot 
be traded across borders, and costs and prices are influenced by a variety of other factors in 
each country market, such as real estate rental rates and taxes.

150
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
A less extreme form of this principle would be that in relatively efficient markets the price 
of a basket of goods would be the same in each market. Replacing the price of a single product 
with a price index allows the PPP exchange rate between two countries to be stated as
S = PI ¥
PI $,
where PI ¥ and PI $ are price indices expressed in local currency for Japan and the United 
States, respectively. For example, if the identical basket of goods cost ¥1,000 in Japan and $10 
in the United States, the PPP exchange rate would be
¥1000
$10
= ¥100/$ or ¥100 = $1.00.
Just in case you are starting to believe that PPP is just about numbers, Global Finance in 
Practice 6.1 reminds you of the human side of the equation.
Relative Purchasing Power Parity
If the assumptions of the absolute version of PPP theory are relaxed a bit, we observe what is 
termed relative purchasing power parity. Relative PPP holds that PPP is not particularly helpful 
in determining what the spot rate is today, but that the relative change in prices between two 
The principles of purchasing power are not just theoretical, 
they can also capture the problems, poverty, and misery of 
a people. The devaluation of the North Korean won (KPW) in 
November 2009 was one such case.
The North Korean government has been trying to stop 
the growth and activity in the street markets of its country 
for decades. For many years the street markets have been 
the sole opportunity for most of the Korean people to earn a 
living. Under the communist state’s stewardship, the quality 
of life for its 24 million people has continued to deteriorate. 
Between 1990 and 2008, the country’s infant mortality rate 
had increased 30%, and life expectancy had fallen by three 
years. The United Nations estimated that one in three children 
under the age of five suffered malnutrition. Although most of 
the working population worked officially for the government, 
many were underpaid (or in many cases not paid at all). They 
often bribed their bosses to allow them to leave work early to 
try to scrape out a living in the street markets of the under-
ground economy.
But it was this very basic market economy that ­President 
Kim Jong-il (now deceased) and the governing regime wished 
to stamp out. On November 30, 2009, the Korean government 
made a surprise announcement to its people: a new, more 
valuable Korean won would replace the old one. “You have 
until the end of the day to exchange your old won for new 
won.” All old 1,000 won notes would be replaced with 10 won 
notes, knocking off two zeros from the officially recognized 
value of the currency. This meant that everyone holding old 
won, their cash and savings, would now officially be worth 
1/100th of what it was previously. Exchange was limited to 
100,000 old won. People who had worked and saved for 
decades to accumulate what was roughly $200 or $300 in 
savings outside of North Korea were wiped out; their total life 
savings were essentially worthless. By officially denouncing 
the old currency, the North Korean people would be forced to 
exchange their holdings for new won. The government would 
indeed undermine the underground economy.
The results were devastating. After days of street pro-
tests, the government raised the 100,000 ceiling to 150,000. 
By late January 2010, inflation was rising so rapidly that Kim 
Jong-il apologized to the people for the revaluation’s impact 
on their lives. The government administrator who had led the 
revaluation was arrested, and in February 2010, executed “for 
his treason.”
Global Finance in Practice 6.1
The Immiseration of the North Korean People—The “Revaluation”  
of the North Korean Won

151
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
countries over a period of time determines the change in the exchange rate over that period. 
More specifically:
If the spot exchange rate between two countries starts in equilibrium, any change in the 
differential rate of inflation between them tends to be offset over the long run by an equal 
but opposite change in the spot exchange rate.
Exhibit 6.2 shows a general case of relative PPP. The vertical axis shows the percentage 
change in the spot exchange rate for foreign currency, and the horizontal axis shows the percent-
age difference in expected rates of inflation (foreign relative to home country). The diagonal 
parity line shows the equilibrium position between a change in the exchange rate and relative 
inflation rates. For instance, point P represents an equilibrium point at which inflation in the 
foreign country, Japan, is 4% lower than in the home country, the United States. Therefore, rela-
tive PPP predicts that the yen will appreciate by 4% per annum with respect to the U.S. dollar. If 
current market expectations led to either point W or S in Exhibit 6.2, the home currency would be 
considered either weak (point W) or strong (point S), and the market would not be in equilibrium.
The logic behind the application of PPP to changes in the spot exchange rate is that if 
a country experiences inflation rates higher than those of its main trading partners, and its 
exchange rate does not change, its exports of goods and services become less competitive 
with comparable products produced elsewhere. Imports from abroad become more price-­
competitive with higher-priced domestic products. These price changes lead to a deficit on 
the current account in the balance of payments unless offset by capital and financial flows.
Empirical Tests of Purchasing Power Parity
There has been extensive testing of both the absolute and relative versions of purchasing 
power parity and the law of one price. These tests have, for the most part, not proved PPP to 
P
–5
–4
–1
–3
–1
–4
–2
–2
–3
1
3
2
–6
2
4
6
3
5
1
PPP Line
4
If the market was at point W, the expected change in
the spot exchange rate would be 4% although the 
percentage diﬀerence in expected inﬂation was only
–2%; the home currency would be weak.
If the market was at point S, the expected change in
the spot exchange rate would be 2% although the
percentage diﬀerence in expected inﬂation was –4%;
the home currency would be strong.
Percentage diﬀerence in expected rates of
inﬂation (foreign relative to home country)
Percentage change in the spot
exchange rate for foreign currency
W (weak)
S
(strong)
Exhibit 6.2
Relative Purchasing Power Parity

152
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
be accurate in predicting future exchange rates. Goods and services do not in reality move 
at zero cost between countries, and in fact many services are not “tradable,” for example, for 
haircuts. Many goods and services are not of the same quality across countries, reflecting dif-
ferences in the tastes and resources of the countries of their manufacture and consumption.
Two general conclusions can be made from these tests: (1) PPP holds up well over the very 
long run but poorly for shorter time periods; and (2) The theory holds better for countries with 
relatively high rates of inflation and underdeveloped capital markets.
Exchange Rate Indices: Real and Nominal
Because any single country trades with numerous partners, we need to track and evaluate its 
individual currency value against all other currency values in order to determine relative pur-
chasing power. The objective is to discover whether a country’s exchange rate is “overvalued” 
or “undervalued” in terms of PPP. One of the primary methods of dealing with this problem is 
the calculation of exchange rate indices. These indices are formed through trade—by weighting 
the bilateral exchange rates between the home country and its trading partners.
The nominal effective exchange rate index uses actual exchange rates to create an index, 
on a weighted average basis, of the value of the subject currency over time. It does not really 
indicate anything about the “true value” of the currency or anything related to PPP. The nomi-
nal index simply calculates how the currency value relates to some arbitrarily chosen base 
period, but it is used in the formation of the real effective exchange rate index. The real effective 
exchange rate index indicates how the weighted average purchasing power of the currency has 
changed relative to some arbitrarily selected base period. Exhibit 6.3 plots the real effective 
exchange rate indexes for Japan, the euro area, and the U.S. for the 1980–2012 period.
The real effective exchange rate index for the U.S. dollar, ER
$ , is found by multiplying the 
nominal effective exchange rate index, EN
$ , by the ratio of U.S. dollar costs, C$ over foreign 
currency costs, CFC, both in index form:
ER
$ = EN
$ * C$
CFC.
If changes in exchange rates just offset differential inflation rates—if purchasing power 
parity holds—all the real effective exchange rate indices would stay at 100. If an exchange rate 
strengthened more than was justified by differential inflation, its index would rise above 100. 
If the real effective exchange rate index were above 100, the currency would be considered 
“overvalued” from a competitive perspective, and vice versa.
Exhibit 6.3 shows how the real effective exchange rate of the U.S. dollar, Japanese yen, and 
the European euro have changed over the past 35 years. The dollar’s index value was substan-
tially above 100 in the early 1980s (overvalued), falling below 100 during the 1988–1996 period 
(undervalued), then rising above 100 again. The dollar has been only slightly overvalued since 
2012. While the euro has not strayed far from “proper valuation” since 2009, the Japanese yen 
has been clearly undervalued since mid-2012.
Apart from measuring deviations from PPP, a country’s real effective exchange rate is an 
important tool for management when predicting upward or downward pressure on a country’s 
balance of payments and exchange rate, as well as an indicator of whether producing for export 
in that country could be competitive.
Exchange Rate Pass-Through
Exchange rate pass-through is a measure of the response of imported and exported prod-
uct prices to changes in exchange rates. When that pass-through is partial, meaning the full 
percentage change in the exchange rate is not reflected in prices, a country’s real effective 

153
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
exchange rate index can deviate from its PPP-equilibrium level of 100. Although PPP implies 
that all exchange rate changes are passed through by equivalent changes in prices to trading 
partners, empirical research in the years following the growth in floating-rate currencies ques-
tioned this long-held assumption.
Complete versus Partial Pass-Through. To illustrate exchange rate pass-through, assume 
that Volvo produces an automobile in Belgium and pays all production expenses in euros 
(Volvo currently has no manufacturing in North America). The price of this specific model is 
€50,000. When the firm exports the auto to the United States, the price of the Volvo in the U.S. 
market should simply be the euro value converted to U.S. dollars at the spot exchange rate:
PVolvo
$
= PVolvo
:
* S$/:
where PVolvo
$
 is the Volvo price in dollars, PVolvo
:
 is the Volvo price in euros, and S$/: is the spot 
exchange in number of dollars per euro. If the euro were to appreciate 20% versus the U.S. 
dollar—from $1.00/€ to $1.20/€—the price of the Volvo in the U.S. market should theoretically 
rise to $60,000. If the price in dollars increases by the same percentage change as the exchange 
rate, then there has been complete pass-through (or 100%) of changes in exchange rates.
PVolvo,2
$
PVolvo,1
$
- $60,000
$50,000 = 1.20 or a 20% increase
However, if Volvo worried that a price increase of this magnitude in the U.S. market would 
severely decrease sales volumes, it might work to prevent the dollar price of this model from 
Source: Bank for International Settlements, www.bis.org/statistics/eer/.
60
70
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
01-1980
08-1980
03-1981
10-1981
05-1982
12-1982
07-1983
02-1984
09-1984
04-1985
11-1985
06-1986
01-1987
08-1987
03-1988
10-1988
05-1989
12-1989
07-1990
02-1991
09-1991
04-1992
11-1992
06-1993
01-1994
08-1994
03-1995
10-1995
05-1996
12-1996
07-1997
02-1998
09-1998
04-1999
11-1999
06-2000
01-2001
08-2001
03-2002
10-2002
05-2003
12-2003
07-2004
02-2005
09-2005
04-2006
11-2006
06-2007
01-2008
08-2008
03-2009
10-2009
05-2010
12-2010
07-2011
02-2012
09-2012
04-2013
11-2013
06-2014
United States dollar
Japanese yen
Euro Area euro
Exhibit 6.3
Real Effective Exchange Rate Indexes (base year 2010 = 100)

154
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
rising the full amount in the U.S. market. If the price of this same Volvo model rose to only 
$58,000 in the U.S. market, the percentage increase would be less than the 20% appreciation 
of the euro versus the dollar.
PVolvo,2
$
PVolvo,1
$
- $58,000
$50,000 = 1.60 or a 16% increase
If the price in U.S. dollars rises by less than the percentage change in exchange rates (as is often 
the case in international trade), then there has been only partial pass-through of exchange rate 
changes.
For example, components and raw materials imported to Belgium cost less in euros when 
the euro appreciates versus the currency of foreign suppliers. It is also likely that some time 
may pass before all exchange rate changes are finally reflected in the prices of traded goods, 
including the period over which previously signed contracts are delivered upon. It is obviously 
in the interest of Volvo to do what it can to prevent appreciation of the euro from raising the 
price of its automobiles in major export markets.
Price Elasticity of Demand. The concept of price elasticity of demand is useful when deter-
mining the desired degree of pass-through. Recall that the price elasticity of demand for any 
good is the percentage change in quantity of the good demanded as a result of the percentage 
change in the good’s price:
Price elasticity of demand = ep = %∆Qd
%∆P
where Qd is quantity demanded and P is product price. If the absolute value of ep is less than 
1.0, then the good is relatively “inelastic.” If it is greater than 1.0, the good is relatively “elastic.”
A Belgian product that is relatively price-inelastic—meaning that the quantity demanded 
is relatively unresponsive to price changes—may often demonstrate a high degree of pass-
through. This is because a higher dollar price in the United States market would have little 
noticeable effect on the quantity of the product demanded by consumers. Dollar revenue 
would increase, but euro revenue would remain the same. However, products that are relatively 
price-elastic would respond in the opposite way. If the 20% euro appreciation resulted in 20% 
higher dollar prices, U.S. consumers would decrease the number of Volvos purchased. If the 
price elasticity of demand for Volvos in the United States were greater than one, total dollar 
sales revenue of Volvos would decline.
Pass-Through and Emerging Market Currencies. A number of emerging market countries 
have chosen in recent years to change their objectives and choices as described in the impos-
sible trinity (introduced and detailed previously in Chapter 2). These countries have changed 
from choosing a pegged exchange rate and independent monetary policy over the free flow 
of capital (point A in Exhibit 6.4) to policies allowing more capital flows at the expense of a 
pegged or fixed exchange rate (toward point C in Exhibit 6.4).
This change in focus has also now introduced exchange rate pass-through as an issue in 
these same emerging markets. With changing exchange rates and increased trade and financial 
product movements in and out of these countries, prices are changing. Although price volatil-
ity alone is a source of growing concern, price changes contributing to inflationary pressure 
is even more unsettling. The root cause of these problems lies not with choices made by the 
emerging market nations, but rather with the interest rate choices made by the major industrial 
countries with which they trade.
Since 2009, all the major industrial country currency markets—the dollar, the euro, the 
yen—have been characterized by extremely low interest rates, as concerns over economic 

155
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
growth and employment have dominated. Select emerging market countries have then 
­experienced appreciating currencies in some cases (because their interest rates are higher 
than industrial country currencies). Those exchange rate changes have led to exchange rate 
­pass-through of imported products—rising prices—contributing to inflationary pressures.
Interest Rates and Exchange Rates
We have already seen how prices of goods in different countries should be related through 
exchange rates. We now consider how interest rates are linked to exchange rates.
The Fisher Effect
The Fisher effect, named after economist Irving Fisher, states that nominal interest rates in 
each country are equal to the required real rate of return plus compensation for expected 
inflation. More formally, this is derived from (1 + r)(1 + p) - 1 as
i = r + p + rp,
where i is the nominal rate of interest, r is the real rate of interest, and p is the expected rate 
of inflation over the period of time for which funds are to be lent. The final compound term, 
rp is frequently dropped from consideration due to its relatively minor value. The Fisher effect 
then reduces to (approximate form)
i = r + p.
The Fisher effect applied to the United States and Japan would be as follows:
i$ = r$ + p$; i¥ = r¥ + p¥.
where the superscripts $ and ¥ pertain to the respective nominal (i), real (r), and expected 
inflation (p) components of financial instruments denominated in dollars and yen, respec-
tively. We need to forecast the future rate of inflation, not what inflation has been. Predicting 
the future is, well, difficult.
Many emerging market countries have chosen to move from Point A to Point C, exchanging ﬁxed exchange rates for the chance of
attracting capital inﬂows. The result is that these countries are now the subject to varying levels of exchange rate pass-through.
Pegged
Exchange Rate
Emerging Market Nations
traditionally value exchange rate
stability & monetary independence
Exchange Rate Pass-Through.
Now that these countries are experiencing
changing exchange rates, exchange rate pass-through
is a growing source of inﬂationary
pressure and price instability.
New Choices for Emerging Market Nations
Objective: attract capital inﬂows
Free Flow
of Capital
B
C
Independent
Monetary Policy
A
Exhibit 6.4
Pass-Through, the Impossible Trinity, and Emerging Markets

156
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
Empirical tests using ex post national inflation rates have shown that the Fisher effect 
usually exists for short-maturity government securities such as Treasury bills and notes. Com-
parisons based on longer maturities suffer from the increased financial risk inherent in fluc-
tuations of the market value of the bonds prior to maturity. Comparisons of private sector 
securities are influenced by unequal creditworthiness of the issuers. All the tests are incon-
clusive to the extent that recent past rates of inflation are not a correct measure of future 
expected inflation.
The International Fisher Effect
The relationship between the percentage change in the spot exchange rate over time and the 
differential between comparable interest rates in different national capital markets is known as 
the international Fisher effect. “Fisher-open,” as it is often termed, states that the spot exchange 
rate should change in an equal amount but in the opposite direction to the difference in inter-
est rates between two countries. More formally,
S1 - S2
S2
* 100 = i$ - i¥,
where i$ and i¥ are the respective national interest rates, and S is the spot exchange rate using 
indirect quotes (an indirect quote on the dollar is, for example, ¥ = $1.00) at the beginning of 
the period (S1) and the end of the period (S2). This is the approximation form commonly used 
in industry. The precise formulation is as follows:
S1 - S2
S2
= i$ - i¥
1 + i¥ .
Justification for the international Fisher effect is that investors must be rewarded or 
penalized to offset the expected change in exchange rates. For example, if a dollar-based 
investor buys a 10-year yen bond earning 4% interest, instead of a 10-year dollar bond earn-
ing 6% interest, the investor must be expecting the yen to appreciate vis-à-vis the dollar by 
at least 2% per year during the 10 years. If not, the dollar-based investor would be better off 
remaining in dollars. If the yen appreciates 3% during the 10-year period, the dollar-based 
investor would earn a bonus of 1% higher return. However, the international Fisher effect 
predicts that, with unrestricted capital flows, an investor should be indifferent to whether his 
bond is in dollars or yen—because investors worldwide would see the same opportunity and 
compete it away.
Empirical tests lend some support to the relationship postulated by the international 
Fisher effect, although considerable short-run deviations occur. A more serious criticism has 
been posed, however, by recent studies that suggest the existence of a foreign exchange risk 
premium for most major currencies. Also, speculation in uncovered interest arbitrage creates 
distortions in currency markets. Thus, the expected change in exchange rates might consistently 
be greater than the difference in interest rates.
The Forward Rate
A forward rate (or outright forward as described in Chapter 5) is an exchange rate quoted 
today for settlement at some future date. A forward exchange agreement between currencies 
states the rate of exchange at which a foreign currency will be “bought forward” or “sold for-
ward” at a specific date in the future (typically after 30, 60, 90, 180, 270, or 360 days).
The forward rate is calculated for any specific maturity by adjusting the current spot 
exchange rate by the ratio of euro currency interest rates of the same maturity for the two sub-
ject currencies. For example, the 90-day forward rate for the Swiss franc/U.S. dollar exchange 

157
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
rate (F SF/$) is found by multiplying the current spot rate (SSF/$) by the ratio of the 90-day 
euro-Swiss franc deposit rate (iSF) over the 90-day eurodollar deposit rate.
F 90
SF/$ = SSF/$ *
J1 + ¢iSF * 90
360≤R
J1 + ¢i$ * 90
360≤R
Assuming a spot rate of SF1.4800/$, a 90-day euro Swiss franc deposit rate of 4.00% per 
annum, and a 90-day eurodollar deposit rate of 8.00% per annum, the 90-day forward rate is 
SF1.4655/$.
F 90
SF/$ = SF1.4800/$ *
J1 + ¢0.0400 * 90
360≤R
J1 + a0.0800 * 90
360≤R
= SF1.4800/$ * 1.01
1.02 = SF1.4655/$
The forward premium or discount is the percentage difference between the spot and 
forward exchange rate, stated in annual percentage terms. When the foreign currency price 
of the home currency is used, as in this case of SF/$, the formula for the percent-per-annum 
premium or discount becomes
f SF = Spot - Forward
Forward
*
360
Days * 100.
Substituting the SF/$ spot and forward rates, as well as the number of days forward (90),
f SF = SF1.4800/$ - SF1.4655/$
SF1.4655/$
* 360
90 * 100 =  +3.96% per annum.
The sign is positive, indicating that the Swiss franc is selling forward at a 3.96% per annum 
premium over the dollar (it takes 3.96% more dollars to get a franc at the 90-day forward 
rate).
As illustrated in Exhibit 6.5, the forward premium on the eurodollar forward arises from 
the differential between eurodollar and Swiss franc interest rates. Because the forward rate for 
any particular maturity utilizes the specific interest rates for that term, the forward premium or 
discount on a currency is visually obvious—the currency with the higher interest rate (in this 
case the U.S. dollar)—will sell forward at a discount, and the currency with the lower interest 
rate (here the Swiss franc) will sell forward at a premium.
The forward rate is calculated from three observable data items—the spot rate, the foreign 
currency deposit rate, and the home currency deposit rate—and is not a forecast of the future 
spot exchange. However, the forward rate is frequently used by managers as a forecast, yield-
ing mixed results, as the following section describes.
Interest Rate Parity (IRP)
The theory of interest rate parity (IRP) provides the link between the foreign exchange markets 
and the international money markets. The theory states:
The difference in the national interest rates for securities of similar risk and maturity 
should be equal to, but opposite in sign to, the forward rate discount or premium for the 
foreign currency, except for transaction costs.

158
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
Exhibit 6.6 shows how the theory of interest rate parity works. Assume that an investor 
has $1,000,000 and several alternative but comparable Swiss franc (SF) monetary investments. 
If the investor chooses to invest in a dollar money market instrument, the investor would earn 
the dollar rate of interest. This results in (1 + i$) at the end of the period, where I$ is the dollar 
rate of interest in decimal form.
10.0%
Interest Yield
Maturity or Days Forward
60
120
30
90
150
180
Eurodollar
yield curve
Euro-Swiss franc
yield curve
Forward premium is the
percentage diﬀerence of 3.96%
4.0%
4.0%
9.0%
8.0%
8.0%
7.0%
6.0%
5.0%
2.0%
1.0%
0.0%
3.0%
Exhibit 6.5
Currency Yield Curves and the Forward Premium
U.S. Dollar Money Market
Swiss Franc Money Market
$1,000,000
$1,020,000
$1,019,993
Spot: SF1.4800 = $1.00
SF1,480,000
SF1,494,800
× 1.01
× 1.02
Start 
End 
Swiss franc interest = 4.00% per annum (1% for 90 days)
Eurodollar interest rate = 8.00% (2% for 90 days)
Diﬀer by
transaction cost
90-day period
Forward: SF1.4655 = $1.00
  (F90)
Exhibit 6.6
Interest Rate Parity (IRP)

159
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
The investor may, however, choose to invest in a Swiss franc money market instrument 
of identical risk and maturity for the same period. This action would require that the investor 
exchange the dollars for francs at the spot rate, invest the francs in a money market instrument, 
sell the francs forward (in order to avoid any risk that the exchange rate would change), and 
at the end of the period convert the resulting proceeds back to dollars.
A dollar-based investor would evaluate the relative returns of starting in the top-left 
­corner and investing in the dollar market (straight across the top of the box) compared to 
investing in the Swiss franc market (going down and then around the box to the top-right 
corner). The comparison of returns would be
(1 + i$) = SSF/$ * (1 + iSF) *
1
F SF/$,
where S = spot rate of exchange and F = the forward rate of exchange. Substituting in the 
spot rate (SF1.4800/$) and forward rate (SF1.4655/$) and respective interest rates from Exhibit 
6.6, the interest rate parity condition is
(1 + 0.02) = 1.4800 * (1 + 0.01) *
1
1.4655
.
The left-hand side of the equation is the gross return the investor would earn by investing 
in dollars. The right-hand side is the gross return the investor would earn by exchanging dollars 
for Swiss francs at the spot rate, investing the franc proceeds in the Swiss franc money market, 
and simultaneously selling the principal plus interest in Swiss francs forward for dollars at the 
current 90-day forward rate.
Ignoring transaction costs, if the returns in dollars are equal between the two alternative 
money market investments, the spot and forward rates are considered to be at IRP. The trans-
action is “covered,” because the exchange rate back to dollars is guaranteed at the end of the 
90-day period. Therefore, as shown in Exhibit 6.6, in order for the two alternatives to be equal, 
any differences in interest rates must be offset by the difference between the spot and forward 
exchange rates (in approximate form):
F
S = (1 + iSF)
(1 + i$)
 , or SF1.4655/$
SF1.4800/$ = 1.01
1.02 = 0.9902 ≈1%.
Covered Interest Arbitrage (CIA)
The spot and forward exchange markets are not constantly in the state of equilibrium described 
by interest rate parity. When the market is not in equilibrium, the potential for “riskless” or 
arbitrage profit exists. The arbitrager who recognizes such an imbalance will move to take 
advantage of the disequilibrium by investing in whichever currency offers the higher return 
on a covered basis. This is called covered interest arbitrage (CIA).
Exhibit 6.7 describes the steps that a currency trader, most likely working in the arbitrage 
division of a large international bank, would implement to perform a CIA transaction. The 
currency trader, Fye Hong, may utilize any of a number of major eurocurrencies that his 
bank holds to conduct arbitrage investments. The morning conditions indicate to Fye Hong 
that a CIA transaction that exchanges 1 million U.S. dollars for Japanese yen, invested in 
a six-month euroyen account and sold forward back to dollars, will yield a profit of $4,638 
($1,044,638 - $1,040,000) over and above the profit available from a eurodollar investment. 
Conditions in the exchange markets and euromarkets change rapidly however, so if Fye Hong 
waits even a few minutes, the profit opportunity may disappear.

160
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
Fye Hong now executes the following transaction:
Step 1: Convert $1,000,000 at the spot rate of ¥106.00/$ to ¥106,000,000 (see “Start” in Exhibit 6.7).
Step 2: Invest the proceeds, ¥106,000,000, in a euroyen account for six months, earning 4.00% 
per annum, or 2% for 180 days.
Step 3: Simultaneously sell the future yen proceeds (¥108,120,000) forward for dollars at 
the 180-day forward rate of ¥103.50/$. This action “locks in” gross dollar revenues of 
$1,044,638 (see “End” in Exhibit 6.7).
Step 4: Calculate the cost (opportunity cost) of funds used at the eurodollar rate of 8.00% per 
annum, or 4% for 180 days, with principal and interest then totaling $1,040,000. Profit 
on CIA (“End”) is $4,638 ($1,044,638 - $1,040,000).
Note that all profits are stated in terms of the currency in which the transaction was initial-
ized, but that a trader may conduct investments denominated in U.S. dollars, Japanese yen, or 
any other major currency. All that is required to make a covered interest arbitrage profit is for 
interest rate parity not to hold. Depending on the relative interest rates and forward premium, 
Fye Hong would have started in Japanese yen, invested in U.S. dollars, and sold the dollars 
forward for yen. The profit would then end up denominated in yen. But how would Fye Hong 
decide in which direction to go around the box in Exhibit 6.7?
Rule of Thumb. The key to determining whether to start in dollars or yen is to compare 
the ­differences in interest rates to the forward premium on the yen (the cost of cover). For 
example, in Exhibit 6.7, the difference in 180-day interest rates is 2.00% (dollar interest rates 
are higher by 2.00%). The premium on the yen for 180 days forward is as follows:
f ¥ = Spot - Forward
Forward
* 360
180 * 100 = ¥106.00/$ - ¥103.50/$
¥103.50/$
* 200 = 4.8309%
In other words, by investing in yen and selling the yen proceeds forward at the forward 
rate, Fye Hong earns more on the combined interest rate arbitrage and forward premium than 
if he continues to invest in dollars.
U.S. Dollar Money Market
Japanese Yen Money Market
$1,000,000
$1,040,000
$1,044,638
Investor converts dollars
to yen at spot rate
Spot: ¥106.00 = $1.00
¥106,000,000
¥108,120,000
× 1.02
× 1.04
Start 
End 
Investor deposits yen in euro-yen account at 4.00% per annum (2% for 180 days)
Eurodollar rate = 8.00% (4% for 180 days)
Arbitrage
potential
180-day period
Forward: ¥103.50 = $1.00
(F180)                            
Investor converts yen back to
dollars at 180-day forward rate
Exhibit 6.7
Covered Interest Arbitrage (CIA)

161
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
Arbitrage Rule of Thumb: If the difference in interest rates is greater than the forward 
premium (or expected change in the spot rate), invest in the higher interest yielding cur-
rency. If the difference in interest rates is less than the forward premium (or expected 
change in the spot rate), invest in the lower interest yielding currency.
Using this rule of thumb should enable Fye Hong to choose in which direction to go 
around the box in Exhibit 6.7. It also guarantees that he will always make a profit if he goes 
in the right direction. This rule assumes that the profit is greater than any transaction costs 
incurred.
This process of CIA drives the international currency and money markets toward the 
equilibrium described by interest rate parity. Slight deviations from equilibrium provide oppor-
tunities for arbitragers to make small riskless profits. Such deviations provide the supply and 
demand forces that will move the market back toward parity (equilibrium).
Covered interest arbitrage opportunities continue until interest rate parity is reestablished, 
because the arbitragers are able to earn risk-free profits by repeating the cycle as often as 
possible. Their actions, however, nudge the foreign exchange and money markets back toward 
equilibrium for the following reasons:
1.	 The purchase of yen in the spot market and the sale of yen in the forward market 
narrows the premium on the forward yen. This is because the spot yen strengthens 
from the extra demand and the forward yen weakens because of the extra sales. 
A narrower premium on the forward yen reduces the foreign exchange gain previ-
ously captured by investing in yen.
2.	 The demand for yen-denominated securities causes yen interest rates to fall, and the 
higher level of borrowing in the United States causes dollar interest rates to rise. The 
net result is a wider interest differential in favor of investing in the dollar.
Uncovered Interest Arbitrage (UIA)
A deviation from covered interest arbitrage is uncovered interest arbitrage (UIA), wherein 
investors borrow in countries and currencies exhibiting relatively low interest rates and con-
vert the proceeds into currencies that offer much higher interest rates. The transaction is 
“uncovered,” because the investor does not sell the higher yielding currency proceeds forward, 
choosing to remain uncovered and accept the currency risk of exchanging the higher yield 
currency into the lower yielding currency at the end of the period. Exhibit 6.8 demonstrates 
the steps an uncovered interest arbitrager takes when undertaking what is termed the “yen 
carry-trade.”
The “yen carry-trade” is an age-old application of UIA. Investors, from both inside and 
outside Japan, take advantage of extremely low interest rates in Japanese yen (0.40% per 
annum) to raise capital. Investors exchange the capital they raise for other currencies like 
U.S. dollars or euros. Then they reinvest these dollar or euro proceeds in dollar or euro money 
markets where the funds earn substantially higher rates of return (5.00% per annum in 
Exhibit 6.8). At the end of the period—a year, in this case—they convert the dollar proceeds 
back into Japanese yen in the spot market. The result is a tidy profit over what it costs to repay 
the initial loan.
The trick, however, is that the spot exchange rate at the end of the year must not change 
significantly from what it was at the beginning of the year. If the yen were to appreciate 
significantly against the dollar, as it did in late 1999, moving from ¥120/$ to ¥105/$, these 
“uncovered” investors would suffer sizable losses when they convert their dollars into yen to 
repay the yen they borrowed. Higher return at higher risk. The Mini-Case at the end of this 
chapter details one of the most frequent carry trade structures, the Australian dollar/Japanese 
yen cross rate.

162
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
Equilibrium between Interest Rates and Exchange Rates
Exhibit 6.9 illustrates the conditions necessary for equilibrium between interest rates and 
exchange rates. The vertical axis shows the difference in interest rates in favor of the foreign 
currency, and the horizontal axis shows the forward premium or discount on that currency. 
The interest rate parity line shows the equilibrium state, but transaction costs cause the line 
to be a band rather than a thin line.
Japanese Yen Money Market
U.S. Dollar Money Market
¥10,000,000
¥10,040,000 Repaid
¥10,500,000 Earn
¥460,000 Proﬁt
Investor converts yen to
dollars at spot rate
Spot: ¥120.00 = $1.00
$83,333.33
$87,500.00
× 1.05
× 1.004
Start 
End 
Investor deposits dollars in U.S. dollar money market at 5.00% per annum
Investor borrows yen for 360 days at 0.40% per annum
360-day period
Expected Spot: ¥120.00 = $1.00
Investor converts dollars back
to yen at expected spot rate
Exhibit 6.8
Uncovered Interest Arbitrage (UIA): The Yen Carry Trade
–5
–4
–1
–3
–1
–4
–2
–2
–3
1
4
3
2
–6
2
4
6
3
5
1
4.83
Percentage premium
on foreign currency (¥)
Percentage diﬀerence between
foreign (¥) and domestic interest rates
If market interest rates were at point U, covered
interest arbitrage proﬁts are available, and would
be undertaken until the market drove interest
rate diﬀerences back to point X, Y, or Z.
U
X
Z
Y
Exhibit 6.9
Interest Rate Parity and Equilibrium

163
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
Transaction costs arise from foreign exchange and investment brokerage costs on 
buying and selling securities. Typical transaction costs in recent years have been in the 
range of 0.18% to 0.25% on an annual basis. For individual transactions, like Fye Hong’s 
covered interest arbitrage (CIA) activities illustrated in Exhibit 6.7, there is no explicit 
transaction cost per trade; rather, the costs of the bank in supporting Fye Hong’s activities 
are the transaction costs. Point X in Exhibit 6.9 shows one possible equilibrium position, 
where a 4% lower rate of interest on yen securities would be offset by a 4% premium on the 
forward yen.
The disequilibrium situation, which encouraged the interest rate arbitrage in the previous 
CIA example of Exhibit 6.7, is illustrated in Exhibit 6.9 by point U. Point U is located off the 
interest rate parity line because the lower interest on the yen is 4% (annual basis), whereas 
the premium on the forward yen is slightly over 4.8% (annual basis). Using the formula for 
forward premium presented earlier, we calculate the forward premium on the Japanese yen 
as follows:
¥106.00/$ - 103.50/$
¥103.50/$
* 360 Days
180 Days * 100 = 4.83%
The situation depicted by point U is unstable, because all investors have an incentive to exe-
cute the same covered interest arbitrage. Except for a bank failure, the arbitrage gain is virtu-
ally risk-free.
Some observers have suggested that political risk does exist, because one of the govern-
ments might apply capital controls that would prevent execution of the forward contract. 
This risk is fairly remote for covered interest arbitrage between major financial centers of 
the world, especially because a large portion of funds used for covered interest arbitrage is in 
eurodollars. The concern may be valid for pairings with countries not noted for political and 
fiscal stability.
The net result of the disequilibrium is that fund flows will narrow the gap in interest rates 
and/or decrease the premium on the forward yen. In other words, market pressures will cause 
point U in Exhibit 6.9 to move toward the interest rate parity band. Equilibrium might be 
reached at point Y, or at any other locus between X and Z, depending on whether forward 
market premiums are more or less easily shifted than interest rate differentials.
Uncovered interest arbitrage takes many forms in global financial markets today, and 
opportunities do exist for those who are willing to bear the risk (and potentially pay the 
price). Global Finance in Practice 6.2 describes one such speculation, foreign-currency home 
mortgages in Hungary, which as described, can turn an innocent homeowner into a foreign 
currency speculator.
No one understands the linkage between interest rates 
and currencies better than Hungarian homeowners. Given 
the choice of taking mortgages out in local currency 
­(Hungarian  forint) or foreign currency (Swiss francs for 
­example), many chose francs because the interest rates were 
lower.
Global Finance in Practice 6.2
Hungarian Mortgages
But regardless of the actual interest rate itself, the fall 
in the value of the forint against the franc by more than 40% 
resulted in radically increasing mortgage debt service pay-
ments in Hungarian forint. These borrowers are now trying to 
have their own mortgages declared “unconstitutional” in order 
to get out from under these rising debt burdens.
(continued )

164
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
Forward Rate as an Unbiased Predictor of the Future Spot Rate
Some forecasters believe that foreign exchange markets for the major floating currencies are 
“efficient” and forward exchange rates are unbiased predictors of future spot exchange rates.
Exhibit 6.10 demonstrates the meaning of “unbiased prediction” in terms of how the for-
ward rate performs in estimating future spot exchange rates. If the forward rate is an unbiased 
predictor of the future spot rate, the expected value of the future spot rate at time 2 equals the 
present forward rate for time 2 delivery, available now, E1 (S2) = F1,2.
Intuitively, this means that the distribution of possible actual spot rates in the future is 
centered on the forward rate. The fact that it is an unbiased predictor, however, does not mean 
that the future spot rate will actually be equal to what the forward rate predicts. Unbiased pre-
diction simply means that the forward rate will, on average, overestimate and underestimate 
the actual future spot rate in equal frequency and degree. The forward rate may, in fact, never 
actually equal the future spot rate.
The rationale for this relationship is based on the hypothesis that the foreign exchange 
market is reasonably efficient. Market efficiency assumes that (1) All relevant information is 
quickly reflected in both the spot and forward exchange markets; (2) Transaction costs are low; 
and (3) Instruments denominated in different currencies are perfect substitutes for one another.
Empirical studies of the efficient foreign exchange market hypothesis have yielded con-
flicting results. Nevertheless, a consensus is developing that rejects the efficient market hypoth-
esis. It appears that the forward rate is not an unbiased predictor of the future spot rate and 
that it does pay to use resources to attempt to forecast exchange rates.
If the efficient market hypothesis is correct, a financial executive cannot expect to profit in 
any consistent manner from forecasting future exchange rates, because current quotations in 
the forward market reflect all that is presently known about likely future rates. Although future 
exchange rates may well differ from the expectation implicit in the present forward market 
160
180
200
220
240
Jun-00
Nov-00
Apr-01
Sep-01
Feb-02
Jul-02
Dec-02
May-03
Oct-03
Mar-04
Aug-04
Jan-05
Jun-05
Nov-05
Apr-06
Sep-06
Feb-07
Jul-07
Dec-07
May-08
Oct-08
Mar-09
Aug-09
Jan-10
Jun-10
Nov-10
Apr-11
Sep-11
Feb-12
Jul-12
Dec-12
May-13
140
260
Jan-00
Oct-13
Averaging about HUN 170 = 1.00 CHF
Rising to HUN 240 = 1.00 CHF
+41%
HUN/CHF
spot rate
Hungarian forint/Swiss francs (monthly, January 2000 – January 2014)

165
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
quotation, we cannot know today in which way actual future quotations will differ from today’s 
forward rate. The expected mean value of deviations is zero. The forward rate is therefore an 
“unbiased” estimator of the future spot rate.
Tests of foreign exchange market efficiency, using longer time periods of analysis, con-
clude that either exchange market efficiency is untestable or, if it is testable, that the market is 
not efficient. Furthermore, the existence and success of foreign exchange forecasting services 
suggest that managers are willing to pay a price for forecast information even though they 
can use the forward rate as a forecast at no cost. The “cost” of buying this information is, in 
many circumstances, an “insurance premium” for financial managers who might get fired for 
using their own forecast, including forward rates, when that forecast proves incorrect. If they 
“bought” professional advice that turned out wrong, the fault was not in their forecast!
If the exchange market is not efficient, it is sensible for a firm to spend resources on fore-
casting exchange rates. This is the opposite conclusion to the one in which exchange markets 
are deemed efficient.
Prices, Interest Rates, and Exchange Rates in Equilibrium
Exhibit 6.11 illustrates all of the fundamental parity relations simultaneously, in equilibrium, 
using the U.S. dollar and the Japanese yen. The forecasted inflation rates for Japan and the 
United States are 1% and 5%, respectively—a 4% differential. The nominal interest rate in the 
U.S. dollar market (1-year government security) is 8%—a differential of 4% over the Japanese 
nominal interest rate of 4%. The spot rate is ¥104/$, and the 1-year forward rate is ¥100/$.
Relation A: Purchasing Power Parity (PPP). According to the relative version of purchasing 
power parity, the spot exchange rate one year from now, S2, is expected to be ¥100/$:
S2 = S1 * 1 + p¥
1 + p$ = ¥104/$ * 1.01
1.05 = ¥100/$.
This is a 4% change and equal, but opposite in sign, to the difference in expected rates of 
inflation (1% - 5%, or -4%).
Exchange Rate 
Time
Error
Error
Error
S1
F1
S2
F2
S3
S4
F3
t1
t2
t3
t4
The forward rate available “today” (t) for delivery at a future time (t + 1) is used as a forecast or predictor of the spot rate at time t + 1.
The diﬀerence between the spot rate which then occurs and the forward rate is the forecast error. When the forward rate is termed an
“unbiased predictor of the future spot rate” it means that the errors are normally distributed around the mean future spot rate (the sum
of the errors equal zero).
Exhibit 6.10
Forward Rate as an Unbiased Predictor of Future Spot

166
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
Relation B: The Fisher Effect. The real rate of return is the nominal rate of interest less the 
expected rate of inflation. Assuming efficient and open markets, the real rates of return should 
be equal across currencies.
Here, the real rate is 3% in U.S. dollar markets (r = i - p = 8% - 5%) and in Japanese 
yen markets (4% - 1%). Note that the 3% real rate of return is not in Exhibit 6.11, but rather 
the Fisher effect’s relationship—that nominal interest rate differentials equal the difference in 
expected rates of inflation, -4%.
Relation C: International Fisher Effect. The forecast change in the spot exchange rate, in this 
case 4%, is equal to, but opposite in sign to, the differential between nominal interest rates:
S1 - S2
S2
* 100 = i¥ - i$ = -4%
Relation D: Interest Rate Parity (IRP). According to the theory of interest rate parity, the 
difference in nominal interest rates is equal to, but opposite in sign to, the forward premium. 
For this numerical example, the nominal yen interest rate (4%) is 4% less than the nominal 
dollar interest rate (8%):
i¥ - i$ = 1% - 5% = -4%
and the forward premium, f ¥, is a positive 4%:
f ¥ = S1 - F
F
* 100 = ¥104/$ - ¥100/$
¥100/$
* 100 = 4%.
Relation E: Forward Rate as an Unbiased Predictor. Finally, the 1-year forward rate on the 
Japanese yen, F, if assumed to be an unbiased predictor of the future spot rate, also forecasts 
¥100/$.
Forecast Change in
Spot Exchange Rate
+4%
(Yen Strengthens)
Forward Premium
on Foreign Currency
+4%
(Yen Strengthens)
Forecast Diﬀerence
in Rates of Inﬂation
–4%
(Less in Japan)
Diﬀerence in Nominal
Interest Rates
–4%
(Less in Japan)
Forward Rate
as an Unbiased
Predictor (E)
Interest Rate
Parity (D) 
International
Fisher Eﬀect (C)
Purchasing
Power
Parity (A)
Fisher
Eﬀect (B)
Exhibit 6.11
International Parity Conditions in Equilibrium (Approximate Form)

167
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
Summary Points
■
■
Parity conditions have traditionally been used by econo-
mists to help explain the long-run trend in an exchange 
rate.
■
■
Under conditions of freely floating rates, the expected 
rate of change in the spot exchange rate, differential 
rates of national inflation and interest, and the forward 
discount or premium are all directly proportional to 
each other and mutually determined. A change in one 
of these variables has a tendency to change all of them 
with a feedback on the variable that changes first.
■
■
If the identical product or service can be sold in two dif-
ferent markets, and there are no restrictions on its sale 
or transportation costs of moving the product between 
markets, the product’s price should be the same in both 
markets. This is called the law of one price.
■
■
The absolute version of purchasing power parity states 
that the spot exchange rate is determined by the relative 
prices of similar baskets of goods.
■
■
The relative version of purchasing power parity states that 
if the spot exchange rate between two countries starts in 
equilibrium, any change in the differential rate of inflation 
between them tends to be offset over the long run by an 
equal but opposite change in the spot exchange rate.
■
■
The Fisher effect, named after economist Irving Fisher, 
states that nominal interest rates in each country are 
equal to the required real rate of return plus compensa-
tion for expected inflation.
■
■
The international Fisher effect, “Fisher-open” as it is 
often termed, states that the spot exchange rate should 
change in an equal amount, but in the opposite direc-
tion, to the difference in interest rates between two 
countries.
■
■
The theory of interest rate parity (IRP) states that the 
difference in the national interest rates for securities 
of similar risk and maturity should be equal to, but 
opposite in sign to, the forward rate discount or pre-
mium for the foreign currency, except for transaction 
costs.
■
■
When the spot and forward exchange markets are not 
in equilibrium, as described by interest rate parity, the 
potential for “riskless” or arbitrage profit exists. This is 
called covered interest arbitrage (CIA).
■
■
Some forecasters believe that for the major floating 
currencies, foreign exchange markets are “efficient” 
and forward exchange rates are unbiased predictors of 
future spot exchange rates.
At more than ¥ 1,500,000bn (some $16,800bn), these sav-
ings are considered the world’s biggest pool of investable 
wealth. Most of it is stashed in ordinary Japanese bank 
accounts; a surprisingly large amount is kept at home in 
cash, in tansu savings, named for the traditional wooden 
cupboards in which people store their possessions. But 
from the early 2000s, the housewives—often referred 
to collectively as “Mrs. Watanabe,” a common Japanese 
­surname—began to hunt for higher returns.
—“Shopping, Cooking, Cleaning Playing the Yen 
Carry Trade,” Financial Times, February 21, 2009.
Over the past 20 years, Japanese yen interest rates have 
remained extremely low by global standards. For years the 
monetary authorities at the Bank of Japan have worked 
tirelessly fighting equity market collapses, ­deflationary 
pressures, liquidity traps, and economic recession, all by 
keeping yen-denominated interests rates hovering at 
around 1% per annum or lower. Combined with a sophisti-
cated financial industry of size and depth, these low interest 
rates have spawned an international financial speculation 
termed the yen carry trade.
In the textbooks, this trading strategy is categorized 
more formally, as uncovered interest arbitrage (UIA). It is 
a fairly simple speculative position: borrow money where 
it is cheap and invest it in a different currency market with 
higher interest returns. The only real trick is to time the 
market correctly so that when the currency in the high-
yield market is converted back to the original currency, the 
exchange rate has either stayed the same or moved in favor 
Mrs. Watanabe and the Japanese Yen Carry Trade1
Mini-Case
1Copyright 2014 © Thunderbird School of Global Management. All rights reserved. This case was prepared by Professor Michael 
­Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only, and not to indicate either effective or ineffective management.

168
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
in Japan. The Japanese banking sector, however, has been 
continuously in search of new and diverse investments with 
which to balance the often despondent domestic economy. 
It has therefore sought out foreign investors and foreign 
borrowers who are attractive customers. Multinational 
companies have found ready access to yen-denominated 
debt for years—debt, which is, once again, available at 
extremely low interest.
A third expeditor of the yen carry trade is the value 
of the Japanese yen itself. The yen has long been consid-
ered the most international of Asian currencies, and is 
widely traded. It has, however, also been exceedingly vola-
tile over time. But it is not volatility alone, as volatility itself 
could undermine interest arbitrage overnight. The key has 
been in the relatively long trends in value change of the yen 
against other major currencies like the U.S. dollar, or as in 
the following example, the Australian dollar.
The Australian Dollar/Japanese Yen 
Exchange Rate
Exhibit A illustrates the movement of the Japanese yen/
Australian dollar exchange rate over a 13-year period, from 
2000 through 2013. This spot rate movement and long-­
running periodic trends have offered a number of extended 
periods in which interest arbitrage was highly profitable.
of the speculator. “In favor of” means that the high-yielding 
currency has strengthened against the borrowed currency. 
And as Shakespeare stated, “ay, there’s the rub.”
Yen Availability
But why the focus on Japan? Aren’t there other major cur-
rency markets in which interest rates are periodically low? 
Japan and the Japanese yen turn out to have a number of 
uniquely attractive characteristics to investors and specula-
tors pursuing carry trade activities.
First, Japan has consistently demonstrated one of the 
world’s highest savings rates for decades. This means that 
an enormous pool of funds has accumulated in the hands of 
private savers, savers who are traditionally very conserva-
tive. Those funds, whether stuffed in the mattress or placed 
in savings accounts, earn little in return. (In fact, given the 
extremely low interest rates offered, there is little effective 
difference between the mattress and the bank.)
A second factor facilitating the yen carry trade is the 
sheer size and sophistication of the Japanese financial sec-
tor. Not only is the Japanese economy one of the largest 
industrial economies in the world, it is one that has grown 
and developed with a strong international component. One 
only has to consider the size and global reach of Toyota or 
Sony to understand the established and developed infra-
structure surrounding business and international finance 
110
50
Jan-00
Jul-00
Jul-01
Jan-01
Jul-02
Jan-02
Jul-03
Jan-03
Jul-04
Jan-04
Jul-05
Jan-05
Jul-06
Jan-06
Jul-07
Jan-07
Jul-08
Jan-08
Jul-09
Jan-09
Jul-10
Jan-10
Jul-11
Jan-11
Jul-12
Jan-12
Jul-13
Jan-13
Japanese yen per Australian dollar (monthly)
60
70
80
90
100
The Japanese yen depreciated steadily against
the Australian dollar from 2000 to late 2007
After a dramatic appreciation in 2008,
the yen depreciated steadily again versus
the Australian dollar from 2009–2012
Exhibit A
The Trending JPY and AUD Spot Rate

169
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
Post 2009 Financial Crisis
The global financial crisis of 2008–2009 has left a market-
place in which the U.S. Federal Reserve and the European 
Central Bank have pursued easy money policies. Both cen-
tral banks, in an effort to maintain high levels of liquidity and 
to support fragile commercial banking systems, have kept 
interest rates at near-zero levels. Now global investors who 
see opportunities for profit in an anemic global economy 
are using those same low-cost funds in the U.S. and Europe 
to fund uncovered interest arbitrage activities. But what is 
making this “emerging market carry trade” so unique is not 
the interest rates, but the fact that investors are shorting two 
of the world’s core currencies: the dollar and the euro.
Consider the strategy outlined in Exhibit C—a Euro-
Indian rupee carry trade. An investor borrows EUR20 
million at an incredibly low rate (again, because of ECB 
strategy to stimulate the sluggish European economy), say 
1.00% per annum or 0.50% for 180 days. The EUR20 mil-
lion are then exchanged for Indian rupees (INR), the cur-
rent spot rate at the start of 2012 being a dramatic low of 
INR67.4 = EUR1.00. The resulting INR1,348,000,000 are 
put into an interest-bearing deposit with any of a number 
of Indian banks attempting to attract capital. The rate of 
interest offered, 2.50% (1.25% for 180 days), is not particu-
larly high, but is greater than that available in the dollar, 
euro, or even yen markets. The account value at the end of 
180 days, INR1,364,850,000, is then returned to euros at the 
spot rate of INR68.00 = EUR1.00, but at a loss. Although 
The two periods of Aussie dollar appreciation are 
clear—after-the-fact. During those periods, an investor 
who was short yen and long Aussie dollars (and enjoying 
relatively higher Aussie dollar interest) could and did enjoy 
substantial returns.
But what about shorter holding periods, say a year, 
in which the speculator does not have a crystal ball over 
the long-term trend of the spot rate—but only a guess? 
Consider the one-year speculation detailed in Exhibit B. 
An investor looking at the exchange rate in January 2009 
(Exhibit A) would see a yen that had reached a recent 
historical “low”—a strong position against the Aussie dol-
lar. Betting that the yen would likely bounce, weakening 
once again against the Aussie dollar, she could borrow 
JPY50 million at 1.00% interest per annum for one year. 
She could then exchange the JPY50 million yen for Aus-
tralian dollars at JPY60.91 = AUD1.00, and then deposit 
the AUD820,883 proceeds for one year at the Australian 
interest rate of 4.50% per annum. The investor could 
even have rationalized that even if the exchange rate did 
not change, she would earn a 3.50% per annum interest 
differential.
As it turned out, the spot exchange rate one year 
later, in January 2010, saw a much weaker Japanese yen 
against the Aussie dollar, JPY83.19 = AUD1.00. The 
one-year Aussie-Yen carry trade position would then 
have earned a very healthy profit of JPY20,862,296.83 
on a one-year investment of JPY50,000,000, a 41.7% rate 
of return.
Investor borrows
JPY50,000,000
at 1.00% interest
JPY50,500,000.00
71,362,296.83
JPY20,862,296.83
Converts yen to
Australian dollars at
JPY60.91 = AUD1.00
JPY83.19 = AUD1.00
AUD820,883
AUD827,853
4.50% per annum
or 1.045
1.00% per annum
or 1.01
Start 
End 
The Australian dollars are then invested at the higher Australian dollar interest rate of 4.50% per annum for one year. The result, principal, and interest of
AUD 827,853, is then converted back to Japanese yen at the current spot rate. With luck, talent, or both, the result is proﬁtable.
The funds borrowed at 1.00% per annum bill need to be repaid
in one year, principal and interest of JPY50,500,000.
360 days
Exhibit B
The Aussie-Yen Carry Trade

5.	 Nominal Effective Exchange Rate Index. Explain how 
a nominal effective exchange rate index is constructed.
6.	 Real Effective Exchange Rate Index. What formula 
is used to convert a nominal effective exchange rate 
index into a real effective exchange rate index?
7.	 Exchange Rate Pass-Through. What is exchange rate 
pass-through?
8.	 Partial Exchange Rate Pass-Through. What is partial 
exchange rate pass-through, and how can it occur in 
efficient global markets?
9.	 Price Elasticity of Demand. How is the price elasticity 
of demand relevant to exchange rate pass-through?
10.	 The Fisher Effect. Define the Fisher effect. To what 
extent do empirical tests confirm that the Fisher effect 
exists in practice?
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Law of One Price. Define the law of one price care-
fully, noting its fundamental assumptions. Why are 
these assumptions so difficult to apply in the real 
world in order to apply the theory?
2.	 Purchasing Power Parity. Define the two forms of pur-
chasing power parity, absolute and relative.
3.	 Big Mac Index. How close does the Big Mac Index 
conform to the theoretical requirements for a law of 
one price measurement of purchasing power parity?
4.	 Undervaluation and Purchasing Power Parity. Accord-
ing to the theory of purchasing power parity, what 
should happen to a currency that is undervalued?
170
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 Why are interest rates so low in the traditional core 
markets of USD and EUR?
2.	 What makes this “emerging market carry trade” so 
different from traditional forms of uncovered interest 
arbitrage?
3.	 Why are many investors shorting the dollar and 
the euro?
the rupee had not moved much, it had moved enough to 
eliminate the arbitrage profits.
Carry trade activity is often described in the global press 
as if it is easy or riskless profit. It is not. As in the case of 
the euro-rupee just described, the combination of inter-
est rates and exchange rates is subject to a volatile global 
marketplace, which does indeed have a lot of moving parts. 
An accurate crystal ball will always prove very useful.
Investor borrows
EUR20,000,000
at 1.00% interest
EUR20,100,000
EUR20,071,324
(EUR28,676)
Converts euros to
Indian rupiah at
INR67.40 = EUR1.00
Convert INR back to EUR
at spot rate of
INR68.00 = EUR1.00
INR1,348,000,000
INR1,364,850,000
2.50% per annum or
1.0125 for 180 days
1.00% per annum or
1.005 for 180 days
Start 
End 
The Indian rupees are invested at 2.50% per annum, 1.25% for 180 days. The result, principal and interest of INR1,364,850,000, is converted back to euros at
the spot rate in the market in 180 days of INR68.00 = EUR1.00. Unfortunately, the small movement in the spot rate has eliminated the interest arbitrage proﬁts.
The funds borrowed at 1.00% per annum bill need to be repaid
in 180 days, principal and interest of EUR20,100,000.
180-day period
Exhibit C
The Euro-Rupee Carry Trade

171
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
The Malaysian ringgit presently trades at RM3.1350/$. 
She determines that the dollar cost today for a 30-day 
stay would be $10,000. The hotel informs her that 
any increase in its room charges will be limited to 
any increase in the Malaysian cost of living. Malaysian 
inflation is expected to be 2.75% per annum, while 
U.S. inflation is expected to be 1.25%.
a.	 How many dollars might Theresa expect to need 
one year hence to pay for her 30-day vacation?
b.	 By what percent will the dollar cost have gone up? 
Why?
2.	 Argentine Tears. The Argentine peso was fixed 
through a currency board at Ps1.00/$ throughout the 
1990s. In January 2002, the Argentine peso was floated. 
On January 29, 2003, it was trading at Ps3.20/$. During 
that one-year period, Argentina’s inflation rate was 
20% on an annualized basis. Inflation in the United 
States during that same period was 2.2% annualized.
a.	 What should have been the exchange rate in Janu-
ary 2003 if PPP held?
b.	 By what percentage was the Argentine peso under-
valued on an annualized basis?
c.	 What were the probable causes of undervaluation?
3.	 Derek Tosh and Yen-Dollar Parity. Derek Tosh is 
attempting to determine whether U.S./Japanese 
financial conditions are at parity. The current spot 
rate is a flat ¥89.00/$, while the 360-day forward rate 
is ¥84.90/$. Forecast inflation is 1.100% for Japan, and 
5.900% for the United States. The 360-day euroyen 
deposit rate is 4.700%, and the 360-day eurodollar 
deposit rate is 9.500%.
a.	 Diagram and calculate whether international par-
ity conditions hold between Japan and the United 
States.
b.	 Find the forecasted change in the Japanese yen/U.S. 
dollar (¥/$) exchange rate one year from now.
4.	 Sydney to Phoenix. Terry Lamoreaux owns homes 
in Sydney, Australia, and Phoenix, United States. He 
travels between the two cities at least twice a year. 
Because of his frequent trips, he wants to buy some 
new high-quality luggage. He has done his research 
and has decided to purchase a Briggs and Riley three-
piece luggage set. There are retail stores in Phoenix 
and Sydney. Terry was a finance major and wants to 
use purchasing power parity to determine if he is pay-
ing the same price regardless of where he makes his 
purchase.
a.	 If the price of the three-piece luggage set in Phoe-
nix is $850 and the price of the same three-piece set 
in Sydney is A$930, using purchasing power parity, 
11.	 Approximate Form of Fisher Effect. Why is the 
approximate form of the Fisher Effect frequently used 
instead of the precise formulation? Does this intro-
duce significant analysis error?
12.	 The International Fisher Effect. Define the international 
Fisher effect. To what extent do empirical tests confirm 
that the international Fisher effect exists in practice?
13.	 Interest Rate Parity. Define interest rate parity. What 
is the relationship between interest rate parity and 
forward rates?
14.	 Covered Interest Arbitrage. Define the terms cov-
ered interest arbitrage and uncovered interest arbi-
trage. What is the difference between these two 
transactions?
15.	 Uncovered Interest Arbitrage. Explain what expecta-
tions an investor or speculator would need to under-
take an uncovered interest arbitrage investment?
16.	 Forward Rate Calculation. If someone you were work-
ing with argued that the current forward rate quoted 
on a currency pair is the market’s expectation of where 
the future spot rate will end up, what would you say?
17.	 Forward Rate as an Unbiased Predictor. Some fore-
casters believe that foreign exchange markets for the 
major floating currencies are “efficient,” and forward 
exchange rates are unbiased predictors of future spot 
exchange rates. What is meant by “unbiased predic-
tor” in terms of the reliability of the forward rate in 
estimating future spot exchange rates?
18.	 Transaction Costs. If transaction costs for undertak-
ing covered or uncovered interest arbitrage were large, 
how do you think it would influence arbitrage activity?
19.	 Carry Trade. The term carry trade is used quite fre-
quently in the business press. What does it mean, and 
what conditions and expectations do investors need to 
hold to undertake carry trade transactions?
20.	 Market Efficiency. Many academics and profession-
als have tested the foreign exchange and interest rate 
markets to determine their efficiency. What have they 
concluded?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Pulau Penang Island Resort. Theresa Nunn is plan-
ning a 30-day vacation on Pulau Penang, Malaysia, one 
year from now. The present charge for a luxury suite 
plus meals in Malaysian ringgit (RM) is RM1,045/day. 

172
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
the past week. Takeshi wonders if he should try an 
uncovered interest arbitrage (UIA) and thereby save 
the cost of forward cover. Many of Takeshi’s research 
associates—and their computer models—are predict-
ing the spot rate to remain close to ¥118.00/$ for the 
coming 180 days. Using the same data as in Problem 7, 
analyze the UIA potential.
9.	 Copenhagen Covered (A). Heidi Høi Jensen, a foreign 
exchange trader at JPMorgan Chase, can invest $5 mil-
lion, or the foreign currency equivalent of the bank’s 
short-term funds, in a covered interest arbitrage with 
Denmark. Using the following quotes, can Heidi make 
a covered interest arbitrage (CIA) profit?
Arbitrage funds available
$5,000,000
Spot exchange rate (kr/$)
6.1720
3-month forward rate (kr/$)
6.1980
U.S. dollar 3-month interest rate
3.000%
Danish kroner 3-month interest rate
5.000%
10.	 Copenhagen Covered (B). Heidi Høi Jensen is now 
evaluating the arbitrage profit potential in the same 
market after interest rates change. (Note that any time 
the difference in interest rates does not exactly equal 
the forward premium, it must be possible to make a 
CIA profit one way or another.)
Arbitrage funds available
$5,000,000
Spot exchange rate (kr/$)
6.1720
3-month forward rate (kr/$)
6.1980
U.S. dollar 3-month interest rate
4.000%
Danish kroner 3-month interest rate
5.000%
11.	 Copenhagen Covered (C). Heidi Høi Jensen is again 
evaluating the arbitrage profit potential in the same mar-
ket after another change in interest rates. ­(Remember 
that any time the difference in interest rates does not 
exactly equal the forward premium, it must be possible 
to make a CIA profit one way or another.)
Arbitrage funds available
$5,000,000
Spot exchange rate (kr/$)
6.1720
3-month forward rate (kr/$)
6.1980
U.S. dollar 3-month interest rate
3.000%
Danish kroner 3-month interest rate
6.000%
12.	 Casper Landsten—CIA (A). Casper Landsten is a for-
eign exchange trader for a bank in New York. He has 
$1 million (or its Swiss franc equivalent) for a short-
term money market investment and wonders whether 
he should invest in U.S. dollars for three months or 
is the price of the luggage truly equal if the spot 
rate is A$1.0941/$?
b.	 If the price of the luggage remains the same in 
Phoenix one year from now, determine the price 
of the luggage in Sydney in one year’s time if PPP 
holds true. The U.S. inflation rate is 1.15% and the 
Australian inflation rate is 3.13%.
5.	 Starbucks in Croatia. Starbucks opened its first store 
in Zagreb, Croatia in October 2010. In Zagreb, the 
price of a tall vanilla latte is 25.70 Croatian kunas (kn 
or HRK). In New York City, the price of a tall vanilla 
latte is $2.65. The exchange rate between Croatian 
kunas and U.S. dollars is kn5.6288 = $1. According to 
purchasing power parity, is the Croatian kuna overval-
ued or undervalued?
6.	 Corolla Exports and Pass-Through. Assume that the 
export price of a Toyota Corolla from Osaka, Japan 
is ¥2,150,000. The exchange rate is ¥87.60/$. The fore-
cast rate of inflation in the United States is 2.2% per 
year and in Japan it is 0.0% per year. Use this data 
to answer the following questions on exchange rate 
pass-through.
a.	 What was the export price for the Corolla at the 
beginning of the year expressed in U.S. dollars?
b.	 Assuming purchasing power parity holds, what 
should be the exchange rate at the end of the year?
c.	 Assuming 100% exchange rate pass-through, what 
will be the dollar price of a Corolla at the end of the 
year?
d.	 Assuming 75% exchange rate pass-through, what 
will be the dollar price of a Corolla at the end of 
the year?
7.	 Takeshi Kamada—CIA Japan (A). Takeshi Kamada, 
a foreign exchange trader at Credit Suisse (Tokyo), is 
exploring covered interest arbitrage possibilities. He 
wants to invest $5,000,000 or its yen equivalent, in a 
covered interest arbitrage between U.S. dollars and Jap-
anese yen. He faced the following exchange rate and 
interest rate quotes. Is CIA profit possible? If so, how?
Arbitrage funds available
$5,000,000
Spot rate (¥/$)
118.60
180-day forward rate (¥/$)
117.80
180-day U.S. dollar interest rate
4.800%
180-day Japanese yen interest rate
3.400%
8.	 Takeshi Kamada—UIA Japan (B). Takeshi Kamada, 
Credit Suisse (Tokyo), observes that the ¥/$ spot rate 
has been holding steady, and that both dollar and yen 
interest rates have remained relatively fixed over 

173
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
Assumptions
London
New York
Spot exchange rate ($/€)
1.3264
1.3264
1-year Treasury bill rate
3.900%
4.500%
Expected inflation rate
Unknown
1.250%
a.	 What do the financial markets suggest for inflation 
in Europe next year?
b.	 Estimate today’s 1-year forward exchange rate 
between the dollar and the euro?
17.	 Chamonix Chateau Rentals. You are planning a ski 
vacation to Mt. Blanc in Chamonix, France, one year 
from now. You are negotiating the rental of a chateau. 
The chateau’s owner wishes to preserve his real income 
against both inflation and exchange rate changes, and 
so the present weekly rent of €9,800 (Christmas sea-
son) will be adjusted upward or downward for any 
change in the French cost of living between now and 
then. You are basing your budgeting on purchasing 
power parity (PPP). French inflation is expected to 
average 3.5% for the coming year, while U.S. dollar 
inflation is expected to be 2.5%. The current spot rate 
is $1.3620/€. What should you budget as the U.S. dollar 
cost of the 1-week rental?
Spot exchange rate ($/€)
$1.3620
Expected U.S. inflation for coming year
2.500%
Expected French inflation for coming year
3.500%
Current chateau nominal weekly rent (€)
9,800.00
18.	 East Asiatic Company—Thailand. The East Asiatic 
Company (EAC), a Danish company with subsidiar-
ies throughout Asia, has been funding its Bangkok 
subsidiary primarily with U.S. dollar debt because of 
the cost and availability of dollar capital as opposed 
to Thai baht-denominated (B) debt. The treasurer of 
EAC-Thailand is considering a 1-year bank loan for 
$250,000. The current spot rate is B32.06/$, and the 
dollar-based interest is 6.75% for the 1-year period. 
1-year loans are 12.00% in baht.
a.	 Assuming expected inflation rates for the coming 
year of 4.3% and 1.25% in Thailand and the United 
States, respectively, according to purchase power 
parity, what would be the effective cost of funds in 
Thai baht terms?
b.	 If EAC’s foreign exchange advisers believe strongly 
that the Thai government wants to push the value 
of the baht down against the dollar by 5% over the 
coming year (to promote its export competitive-
ness in dollar markets), what might be the effective 
cost of funds in baht terms?
c.	 If EAC could borrow Thai baht at 13% per annum, 
would this be cheaper than either part (a) or part (b)?
make a CIA investment in the Swiss franc. He faces 
the following quotes:
Arbitrage funds available
$1,000,000
Spot exchange rate (SFr/$)
1.2810
3-month forward rate (SFr/$)
1.2740
U.S. dollar 3-month interest rate
4.800%
Swiss franc 3-month interest rate
3.200%
13.	 Casper Landsten—UIA (B). Casper Landsten, using 
the same values and assumptions as in Problem 12, 
decides to seek the full 4.800% return available in U.S. 
dollars by not covering his forward dollar receipts—
an uncovered interest arbitrage (UIA) transaction. 
Assess this decision.
14.	 Casper Landsten—Thirty Days Later. One month 
after the events described in Problems 12 and 13, 
Casper Landsten once again has $1 million (or its 
Swiss franc equivalent) to invest for three months. He 
now faces the following rates. Should he again enter 
into a covered interest arbitrage (CIA) investment?
Arbitrage funds available
$1,000,000
Spot exchange rate (SFr/$)
1.3392
3-month forward rate (SFr/$)
1.3286
U.S. dollar 3-month interest rate
4.750%
Swiss franc 3-month interest rate
3.625%
15.	 Statoil of Norway’s Arbitrage. Statoil, the national 
oil company of Norway, is a large, sophisticated, and 
active participant in both the currency and petro-
chemical markets. Although it is a Norwegian com-
pany, because it operates within the global oil market, 
it considers the U.S. dollar, rather than the Norwe-
gian krone, as its functional currency. Ari Karlsen is 
a currency trader for Statoil and has immediate use 
of either $3 million (or the Norwegian krone equiva-
lent). He is faced with the following market rates and 
wonders whether he can make some arbitrage profits 
in the coming 90 days.
Arbitrage funds available
$3,000,000
Spot exchange rate (Nok/$)
6.0312
3-month forward rate (Nok/$)
6.0186
U.S. dollar 3-month interest rate
5.000%
Norwegian krone 3-month interest rate
4.450%
16.	 Separated by the Atlantic. Separated by more than 
3,000 nautical miles and five time zones, money and 
foreign exchange markets in both London and New 
York are very efficient. The following information has 
been collected from the respective areas:

174
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
The ringgit was fixed to the U.S. dollar at RM3.80/$ for 
seven years. In 2005, the Malaysian government allowed 
the currency to float against several major currencies. 
The current spot rate today is RM3.13485/$. Local cur-
rency time deposits of 180-day maturities are earning 
8.900% per annum. The London eurocurrency market 
for pounds is yielding 4.200% per annum on similar 
­180-day maturities. The current spot rate on the Brit-
ish pound is $1.5820/£, and the 180-day forward rate is 
$1.5561/£.
21.	 The Beer Standard. In 1999, The Economist reported 
the creation of an index, or standard, for the evalua-
tion of African currency values using the local prices 
of beer. Beer, instead of Big Macs, was chosen as the 
product for comparison because McDonald’s had not 
penetrated the African continent beyond South Africa, 
and beer met most of the same product and market 
characteristics required for the construction of a proper 
currency index. Investec, a South African investment 
banking firm, has replicated the process of creating a 
measure of purchasing power parity (PPP) like that of 
the Big Mac Index of The Economist, for Africa.
The index compares the cost of a 375-milliliter 
bottle of clear lager beer across Sub-Saharan Africa. As 
a measure of PPP, the beer needs to be relatively homo-
geneous in quality across countries, and must possess 
substantial elements of local manufacturing, inputs, dis-
tribution, and service in order to actually provide a mea-
sure of relative purchasing power. The beer is first priced 
in local currency (purchased in the taverns of the locals, 
and not in the high-priced tourist centers). The price is 
then converted to South African rand and the rand-price 
compared to the local currency price as one measure of 
whether the local currency is undervalued or overvalued 
versus the South African rand. Use the data in the table 
below and complete the calculation of whether the indi-
vidual currencies are undervalued or overvalued.
19.	 Maltese Falcon. Imagine that the mythical solid gold 
falcon, initially intended as a tribute by the Knights of 
Malta to the King of Spain in appreciation for his gift 
of the island of Malta to the order in 1530, has recently 
been recovered. The falcon is 14 inches high and solid 
gold, weighing approximately 48 pounds. Assume that 
gold prices have risen to $440/ounce, primarily as a 
result of increasing political tensions. The falcon is cur-
rently held by a private investor in Istanbul, who is 
actively negotiating with the Maltese government on 
its purchase and prospective return to its island home. 
The sale and payment are to take place one year from 
now, and the parties are negotiating over the price and 
currency of payment. The investor has decided, in a 
show of goodwill, to base the sales price only on the 
falcon’s specie value—its gold value.
The current spot exchange rate is 0.39 Maltese lira 
(ML) per 1.00 U.S. dollar. Maltese inflation is expected to 
be about 8.5% for the coming year, while U.S. ­inflation, 
on the heels of a double-dip recession, is expected to 
come in at only 1.5%. If the investor bases value in the 
U.S. dollar, would he be better off receiving Maltese 
lira in one year (assuming purchasing power parity) or 
receiving a guaranteed dollar payment (assuming a gold 
price of $420 per ounce one year from now).
20.	 Malaysian Risk. Clayton Moore is the manager of an 
international money market fund managed out of Lon-
don. Unlike many money funds that guarantee their 
investors a near risk-free investment with variable inter-
est earnings, Clayton Moore’s fund is a very aggressive 
fund that searches out relatively high interest earnings 
around the globe, but at some risk. The fund is pound-
denominated. Clayton is currently evaluating a rather 
interesting opportunity in Malaysia. Since the Asian 
Crisis of 1997, the Malaysian government enforced a 
number of currency and capital restrictions to pro-
tect and preserve the value of the Malaysian ringgit. 
Problem 21.
Country
Beer
Beer Prices
Implied PPP 
Rate
Spot Rate
Local 
Currency
Price in 
Currency
Price in 
Rand
South Africa
Castle
Rand
2.30
—
—
—
Botswana
Castle
Pula
2.20
2.94
0.96
0.75
Ghana
Star
Cedi
1,200.00
3.17
521.74
379.10
Kenya
Tusker
Shilling
41.25
4.02
17.93
10.27
Malawi
Carlsberg
Kwacha
18.50
2.66
8.04
6.96
Mauritius
Phoenix
Rupee
15.00
3.72
6.52
4.03
Namibia
Windhoek
N$
2.50
2.50
1.09
1.00
Zambia
Castle
Kwacha
1,200.00
3.52
521.74
340.68
Zimbabwe
Castle
Z$
9.00
1.46
3.91
6.15

175
International Parity Conditions    CHAPTER 6 
22.	 Grupo Bimbo (Mexico). Grupo Bimbo, headquartered 
in Mexico City, is one of the largest bakery companies 
in the world. On January 1st, when the spot exchange 
rate is Ps10.80/$, the company borrows $25.0 million 
from a New York bank for one year at 6.80% interest 
(Mexican banks had quoted 9.60% for an equivalent 
loan in pesos). During the year, U.S. inflation is 2% 
and Mexican inflation is 4%. At the end of the year 
the firm repays the dollar loan.
a.	 If Bimbo expected the spot rate at the end of one 
year to be that equal to purchasing power parity, 
what would be the cost to Bimbo of its dollar loan 
in peso-denominated interest?
b.	 What is the real interest cost (adjusted for infla-
tion) to Bimbo, in peso-denominated terms, of 
borrowing the dollars for one year, again assuming 
purchasing power parity ?
c.	 If the actual spot rate at the end of the year turned 
out to be Ps9.60/$, what was the actual peso-
denominated interest cost of the loan?
23.	 AvtoVAZ of Russia’s Kalina Export Pricing Analysis. 
AvtoVAZ OAO, a leading auto manufacturer in Russia, 
was launching a new automobile model in 2001, and is 
in the midst of completing a complete pricing analysis 
of the car for sales in Russia and export. The new car, 
the Kalina, would be initially priced at Rubles 260,000 
in Russia, and if exported, $8,666.67 in U.S. dollars at 
the current spot rate of Rubles 30 = $1.00. AvtoVAZ 
intends to raise the price domestically with the rate of 
Russian inflation over time, but is worried about how 
that compares to the export price given U.S. dollar 
inflation and the future exchange rate. Use the data 
table above to answer the pricing analysis questions.
Problem 23.
Calendar Year
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Kalina Price (rubles)
260,000
Russian inflation (forecast)
14.0%
12.0%
11.0%
8.0%
8.0%
U.S. inflation (forecast)
2.5%
3.0%
3.0%
3.0%
3.0%
Exchange rate (rubles = USD1.00)
30.00
d.	 How would the Kalina’s export price evolve 
over time if it followed Russian inflation and 
the exchange rate of the ruble versus the dollar 
remained relatively constant over this period of 
time?
e.	 Vlad, one of the newly hired pricing strate-
gists, believes that prices of automobiles in both 
domestic and export markets will both increase 
with the rate of inflation, and that the ruble/dollar 
exchange rate will remain fixed. What would this 
imply or forecast for the future export price of the 
Kalina?
f.	 If you were AvtoVAZ, what would you hope would 
happen to the ruble’s value versus the dollar over 
time given your desire to export the Kalina? Now if 
you combined that “hope” with some assumptions 
about the competition—other automobile sales 
prices in dollar markets over time—how might 
your strategy evolve?
g.	 So what did the Russian ruble end up doing over 
the 2001–2006 period?
Internet Exercises
1.	 Big Mac Index Updated. Use The Economist’s Web 
site to find the latest edition of the Big Mac Index 
of currency overvaluation and undervaluation. (You 
will need to do a search for “Big Mac Currencies.”) 
Create a worksheet to compare how the British 
pound, the euro, the Swiss franc, and the Canadian 
dollar have changed from the version presented in 
this chapter.
The Economist
www.economist.com/markets-data
2.	 Purchasing Power Parity Statistics. The Organiza-
tion for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) publishes detailed measures of prices and 
purchasing power for its member countries. Go to the 
OECD’s Web site and download the spreadsheet file 
with the historical data for purchasing power for the 
member countries.
OECD
www.oecd.org/std/prices-ppp/
a.	 If the domestic price of the Kalina increases with 
the rate of inflation, what would its price be over 
the 2002–2006 period?
b.	 Assuming that the forecasts of U.S. and Russian 
inflation prove accurate, what would the value of 
the ruble be over the coming years if its value ver-
sus the dollar followed purchasing power parity?
c.	 If the export price of the Kalina were set using 
the purchasing power parity forecast of the ruble-­
dollar exchange rate, what would the export price 
be over the 2002–2006 period?

176
CHAPTER 6    International Parity Conditions
■
■Benchmark government bonds (a sampling of rep-
resentative government issuances by major coun-
tries and recent price movements). Note which 
countries are showing longer maturity benchmark 
rates.
■
■Emerging market bonds (government issuances, 
Brady bonds, etc.)
■
■Eurozone rates (miscellaneous bond rates for 
assorted European-based companies; includes debt 
ratings)
4.	 World Bank’s International Comparison Program. 
The World Bank has an ongoing research program 
that focuses on the relative purchasing power of 107 
different economies globally. Download the latest 
data tables and highlight which economies seem to be 
showing the greatest growth in recent years in relative 
purchasing power. Search the Internet for the World 
Bank’s ICP program site.
3.	 International Interest Rates. A number of Web sites 
publish current interest rates by currency and maturity. 
Use the Financial Times Web site listed here to isolate 
the interest rate differentials between the U.S. dollar, 
the British pound, and the euro for all maturities up 
to and including one year.
Financial Times
markets.ft.com/RESEARCH/
Markets/Interest-Rates
Data Listed by the Financial Times:
■
■International money rates (bank call rates for major 
currency deposits)
■
■Money rates (LIBOR and CD rates, etc.)
■
■10-year spreads (individual country spreads versus 
the euro and U.S. 10-year treasuries). Check which 
countries actually have lower 10-year government 
bond rates than the United States and the euro. 
Probably Switzerland and Japan.

177
The following is a purely algebraic presentation of the parity conditions explained in this 
chapter. It is offered to provide those who wish for additional theoretical detail and definition 
ready access to the step-by-step derivation of the various conditions.
The Law of One Price
The law of one price refers to the state in which, in the presence of free trade, perfect substitut-
ability of goods, and costless transactions, the equilibrium exchange rate between two curren-
cies is determined by the ratio of the price of any commodity I denominated in two different 
currencies. For example,
St =
Pi,t
$
Pi,t
SF,
where Pi
$ and Pi
SF refer to the prices of the same commodity i, at time t, denominated in U.S. 
dollars and Swiss francs, respectively. The spot exchange rate, St, is simply the ratio of the two 
currency prices.
Purchasing Power Parity
The more general form in which the exchange rate is determined by the ratio of two price 
indexes is termed the absolute version of purchasing power parity (PPP). Each price index 
reflects the currency cost of the identical “basket” of goods across countries. The exchange 
rate that equates purchasing power for the identical collection of goods is then stated as 
follows:
St = Pt
$
Pt
SF,
where Pt
$ and Pt
SF are the price index values in U.S. dollars and Swiss francs at time t, respec-
tively. If p$ and pSF represent the rate of inflation in each country, the spot exchange rate at 
time t + 1 would be
St + 1 =
Pt
$(1 + p$)
Pt
SF(1 + pSF) = StJ (1 + p$)
(1 + pSF) R.
The change from period t to t + 1 is then
St + 1
St
=
Pt
$(1 + p$)
Pt
SF(1 + pSF)
Pt
$
Pt
SF
=
StJ (1 + p$)
(1 + pSF) R
St
= (1 + p$)
(1 + pSF)
.
CHAPTER 6 Appendix
An Algebraic Primer to International 
Parity Conditions
177

178
Appendix    An Algebraic Primer to International Parity Conditions
Isolating the percentage change in the spot exchange rate between periods t to t + 1 is then
St + 1 - St
St
=
StJ (1 + p$)
(1 + pSF) R - St
St
= (1 + p$) - (1 + pSF)
(1 + pSF)
.
This equation is often approximated by dropping the denominator of the right-hand side if it 
is considered to be relatively small. It is then stated as
St + 1 - St
St
= (1 + p$) - (1 + pSF) = p$ - pSF.
Forward Rates
The forward exchange rate is that contractual rate that is available to private agents through 
banking institutions and other financial intermediaries who deal in foreign currencies and debt 
instruments. The annualized percentage difference between the forward rate and the spot rate 
is termed the forward premium,
f SF = J
Ft,t + 1 - St
St
R * J 360
nt,t + 1
R.
where f SF is the forward premium on the Swiss franc, Ft,t + 1 is the forward rate contracted at 
time t for delivery at time t + 1, St is the current spot rate, and nt, t + 1 is the number of days 
between the contract date (t) and the delivery date (t + 1).
Covered Interest Arbitrage (CIA) and Interest Rate Parity (IRP)
The process of covered interest arbitrage is when an investor exchanges domestic currency for 
foreign currency in the spot market, invests that currency in an interest-bearing instrument, 
and signs a forward contract to “lock in” a future exchange rate at which to convert the foreign 
currency proceeds (gross) back to domestic currency. The net return on CIA is
Net Return = J
(1 + iSF)Ft,t + 1
St
R - (1 + i$),
where St and Ft,t + 1 are the spot and forward rates ($/SF), iSF is the nominal interest rate (or 
yield) on a Swiss franc-denominated monetary instrument, and i$ is the nominal return on a 
similar dollar-denominated instrument.
If they possess exactly equal rates of return—that is, if CIA results in zero riskless profit—
interest rate parity (IRP) holds, and appears as
(1 + i$) = J
(1 + iSF)Ft,t + 1
St
R
or alternatively as
(1 + i$)
(1 + iSF) =
Ft,t + 1
St
.

179
An Algebraic Primer to International Parity Conditions    Appendix 
If the percent difference of both sides of this equation is found (the percentage difference 
between the spot and forward rate is the forward premium, then the relationship between the 
forward premium and relative interest rate differentials is
Ft, t + 1 - St
St
= f SF = i$ - iSF
1 + iSF .
If these values are not equal (thus, the markets are not in equilibrium), there exists a 
potential for riskless profit. The market will then be driven back to equilibrium through CIA 
by agents attempting to exploit such arbitrage potential, until CIA yields no positive return.
Fisher Effect
The Fisher effect states that all nominal interest rates can be decomposed into an implied real 
rate of interest (return) and an expected rate of inflation:
i$ = [(1 + r$)(1 + p$)] - 1,
where r$ is the real rate of return and p$ is the expected rate of inflation for dollar-­denominated 
assets. The subcomponents are then identifiable:
i$ = r$ + p$ + r$p$.
As with PPP, there is an approximation of this function that has gained wide acceptance. The 
cross-product term of r$p$ is often very small and therefore dropped altogether:
i$ = r$ + p$.
International Fisher Effect
The international Fisher effect is the extension of this domestic interest rate relationship to the 
international currency markets. If capital, by way of covered interest arbitrage (CIA), attempts 
to find higher rates of return internationally resulting from current interest rate differentials, 
the real rates of return between currencies are equalized (e.g., r$ = rSF):
St + 1 - St
St
= (1 + i$) - (1 + iSF)
(1 + iSF)
= i$ - iSF
(1 + iSF)
.
If the nominal interest rates are then decomposed into their respective real and expected 
inflation components, the percentage change in the spot exchange rate is
St + 1 - St
St
= (r$ + p$ + r$p$) - (rSF + pSF + rSFpSF)
1 + rSF + pSF + rSFpSF
.
The international Fisher effect has a number of additional implications, if the following 
requirements are met: (1) capital markets can be freely entered and exited; (2) capital markets 
possess investment opportunities that are acceptable substitutes; and (3) market agents have 
complete and equal information regarding these possibilities.
Given these conditions, international arbitragers are capable of exploiting all potential 
riskless profit opportunities, until real rates of return between markets are equalized (r$ = rSF). 

180
Appendix    An Algebraic Primer to International Parity Conditions
Thus, the expected rate of change in the spot exchange rate reduces to the differential in the 
expected rates of inflation:
St + 1 - St
St
= p$ + r$p$ - pSF - rSFpSF
1 + rSF + pSF + rSFpSF .
If the approximation forms are combined (through the elimination of the denominator and the 
elimination of the interactive terms of r and p), the change in the spot rate is simply
St + 1 - St
St
= p$ - pSF.
Note the similarity (identical in equation form) of the approximate form of the international 
Fisher effect to purchasing power parity, discussed previously (the only potential difference is 
that between ex post and ex ante (expected) inflation.

Chapter	 7
Foreign Currency  
Derivatives:  
Futures and Options
Unless derivatives contracts are collateralized or guaranteed, their ultimate 
value also depends on the creditworthiness of the counterparties to them. 
In the meantime, though, before a contract is settled, the counterparties 
record profits and losses—often huge in amount—in their current ­earnings 
­statements ­without so much as a penny changing hands. The range of 
­derivatives ­contracts is limited only by the imagination of man (or sometimes, 
so it seems, madmen).
—Warren Buffett, Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2002.
Financial management of the multinational enterprise in the twenty-first century will cer-
tainly include the use of financial derivatives. These derivatives, so named because their val-
ues are derived from an underlying asset like a stock or a currency, are powerful tools used 
in business today for two very distinct management objectives, speculation and hedging. The 
financial manager of an MNE may purchase financial derivatives in order to take positions 
in the expectation of profit—speculation—or may use these instruments to reduce the risks 
associated with the everyday management of corporate cash flow—hedging. Before these 
financial instruments can be used effectively, however, the financial manager must under-
stand certain basics about their structure and pricing.
In this chapter, we cover the primary foreign currency financial derivatives used today 
in multinational finance. Here we focus on the fundamentals of their valuation and use for 
speculative purposes; Chapter 9 will describe how these foreign currency derivatives can 
be used to hedge commercial transactions. The Mini-Case at the end of this chapter, KiKos 
Learning Objectives
■
■
Explain how foreign currency futures are quoted, valued, and used for speculation 
purposes
■
■
Explore the buying and writing of foreign currency options in terms of risk and return
■
■
Examine how foreign currency option values change with exchange rate movements 
and over time
■
■
Analyze how foreign currency option values change with price component changes
181

182
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
and the South Korean Won, illustrates how currency options can be combined to form rather 
complex products—even for their buyers.
A word of caution—of reservation—before proceeding further. Financial derivatives are 
powerful tools in the hands of careful and competent financial managers. They can also be 
destructive devices when used recklessly and carelessly. The history of finance is littered 
with cases in which financial managers—either intentionally or unintentionally—took huge 
positions resulting in significant losses for their companies, and occasionally, their outright 
collapse. In the right hands and with the proper controls, however, derivatives may provide 
management with opportunities to enhance and protect corporate financial performance. 
User beware.
Foreign Currency Futures
A foreign currency futures contract is an alternative to a forward contract that calls for future 
delivery of a standard amount of foreign exchange at a fixed time, place, and price. It is simi-
lar to futures contracts that exist for commodities (hogs, cattle, lumber, etc.), interest-bearing 
deposits, and gold.
Most world money centers have established foreign currency futures markets. In the 
United States, the most important market for foreign currency futures is the International 
Monetary Market (IMM) of Chicago, a division of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
Contract Specifications
Contract specifications are established by the exchange on which futures are traded. Using 
the Chicago IMM as an example, the major features of standardized futures trading can be 
illustrated by the Mexican peso futures traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), 
as shown in Exhibit 7.1.
Each futures contract is for 500,000 Mexican pesos. This is the notional principal. Trad-
ing in each currency must be done in an even multiple of currency units. The method of 
stating exchange rates is in American terms, the U.S. dollar cost (price) of a foreign currency 
(unit), $/MXN, where the CME is mixing the old dollar symbol with the ISO 4217 code for 
the peso, MXN. In Exhibit 7.1 this is U.S. dollars per Mexican peso. Contracts mature on the 
third Wednesday of January, March, April, June, July, September, October, or December. 
Contracts may be traded through the second business day prior to the Wednesday on which 
they mature. Unless holidays interfere, the last trading day is the Monday preceding the 
maturity date.
Exhibit 7.1
 Mexican Peso (CME) (MXN 500,000; $ per 10MXN)
Maturity
Open
High
Low
Settle
Change
Lifetime
Open 
Interest
High
Low
Mar
0.10953
0.10988
0.10930
0.10958
 . . . 
0.11000
0.09770
34,481.00
June
0.10790
0.10795
0.10778
0.10773
 . . . 
0.10800
0.09730
3,405.00
Sept
0.10615
0.10615
0.10610
0.10573
 . . . 
0.10615
0.09930
1,481.00
All contracts are for 500,000 Mexican pesos. “Open” means the opening price on the day. “High” means the high price on the day. “Low” indicates the 
lowest price on the day. “Settle” is the closing price on the day. “Change” indicates the change in the settle price from the previous day’s close. “High” 
and “Low” to the right of “Change” indicate the highest and lowest prices this specific contract (as defined by its maturity) has experienced over its 
­trading history. “Open Interest” indicates the number of contracts outstanding.

183
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options    CHAPTER 7 
One of the defining characteristics of futures is the requirement that the purchaser deposit 
a sum as an initial margin or collateral. This requirement is similar to requiring a performance 
bond, and it can be met by a letter of credit from a bank, Treasury bills, or cash. In addition, 
a maintenance margin is required. The value of the contract is marked to market daily, and all 
changes in value are paid in cash daily. Marked-to-market means that the value of the contract is 
revalued using the closing price for the day. The amount to be paid is called the variation margin.
Only about 5% of all futures contracts are settled by the physical delivery of foreign 
exchange between buyer and seller. More often, buyers and sellers offset their original position 
prior to delivery date by taking an opposite position. That is, an investor will normally close 
out a futures position by selling a futures contract for the same delivery date. The complete 
buy/sell or sell/buy is called a “round turn.”
Customers pay a commission to their broker to execute a round turn and a single price 
is quoted. This practice differs from that of the interbank market, where dealers quote a bid 
and an offer and do not charge a commission. All contracts are agreements between the client 
and the exchange clearinghouse, rather than between the two clients involved. Consequently, 
clients need not worry that a specific counterparty in the market will fail to honor an agree-
ment, termed counterparty risk. The clearinghouse is owned and guaranteed by all members 
of the exchange.
Using Foreign Currency Futures
Any investor wishing to speculate on the movement of the Mexican peso versus the U.S. dollar 
could pursue one of the following futures strategies. Keep in mind the principle of a futures 
contract: A speculator who buys a futures contract is locking in the price at which she must buy 
that currency on the specified future date. A speculator who sells a futures contract is locking 
in the price at which she must sell that currency on that future date.
Short Positions. If Amber McClain, a speculator working for International Currency Traders, 
believes that the Mexican peso will fall in value versus the U.S. dollar by March, she could sell 
a March futures contract, taking a short position. By selling a March contract, Amber locks 
in the right to sell 500,000 Mexican pesos at a set price. If the price of the peso falls by the 
maturity date as she expects, Amber has a contract to sell pesos at a price above their current 
price on the spot market. Hence, she makes a profit.
Using the quotes on Mexican peso (MXN) futures in Exhibit 7.1, Amber sells one March 
futures contract for 500,000 pesos at the closing price, termed the settle price, of $.10958/MXN. 
The value of her position at maturity—at the expiration of the futures contract in March—is 
then
Value at maturity (Short position) = -Notional principal * (Spot - Futures).
Note that the short position is entered into the valuation as a negative notional principal. If 
the spot exchange rate at maturity is $.09500/MXN, the value of her position on settlement is
Value = -MXN500,000 * ($.09500/MXN - $.10958/MXN) = $7,290.
Amber’s expectation proved correct; the Mexican peso fell in value versus the U.S. dollar. 
We could say, “Amber ends up buying at $.09500 and sells at $.10958 per peso.”
All that was really required of Amber to speculate on the Mexican peso’s value was for her 
to form an opinion on the Mexican peso’s future exchange value versus the U.S. dollar. In this 
case, she opined that it would fall in value by the March maturity date of the futures contract.
Long Positions. If Amber McClain expected the peso to rise in value versus the dollar in 
the near term, she could take a long position, by buying a March future on the Mexican 

184
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
peso. Buying a March future means that Amber is locking in the price at which she must buy 
­Mexican pesos at the future’s maturity date. Amber’s futures contract at maturity would have 
the following value:
Value at maturity (Long position) = Notional principal * (Spot - Futures).
Again using the March settle price on Mexican peso futures in Exhibit 7.1, $.10958/MXN, if 
the spot exchange rate at maturity is $.1100/MXN, Amber has indeed guessed right. The value 
of her position on settlement is then
Value = MXN500,000 * ($.11000/MXN - $.10958/MXN) = $210.
In this case, Amber makes a profit in a matter of months of $210 on the single futures 
contract. We could say, “Amber buys at $.10958 and sells at $.11000 per peso.”
But what happens if Amber’s expectation about the future value of the Mexican peso 
proves wrong? For example, if the Mexican government announces that the rate of inflation 
in Mexico has suddenly risen dramatically, and the peso falls to $.08000/MXN by the March 
maturity date, the value of Amber’s futures contract on settlement is
Value = MXN500,000 * ($.08000/MXN - $.10958/MXN) = ($14,790).
In this case, Amber McClain suffers a speculative loss. Futures contracts could obviously be 
used in combinations to form a variety of more complex positions. When we combine contracts, 
valuation is fairly straightforward and additive in character.
Foreign Currency Futures versus Forward Contracts
Foreign currency futures contracts differ from forward contracts in a number of important 
ways. Individuals find futures contracts useful for speculation because they usually do not have 
access to forward contracts. For businesses, futures contracts are often considered inefficient 
and burdensome because the futures position is marked to market on a daily basis over the 
life of the contract. Although this does not require the business to pay or receive cash daily, it 
does result in more frequent margin calls from its financial service providers than the business 
typically wants.
Currency Options
A foreign currency option is a contract that gives the option purchaser (the buyer) the right, 
but not the obligation, to buy or sell a given amount of foreign exchange at a fixed price per 
unit for a specified time period (until the maturity date). A key phrase in this definition is 
“but not the obligation,” which means that the owner of an option possesses a valuable choice.
In many ways, buying an option is like buying a ticket to a benefit concert. The buyer 
has the right to attend the concert, but is not obliged to. The buyer of the concert ticket risks 
nothing more than what she pays for the ticket. Similarly, the buyer of an option cannot lose 
more than what he pays for the option. If the buyer of the ticket decides later not to attend the 
concert, prior to the day of the concert, the ticket can be sold to someone else who wishes to go.
Option Fundamentals
There are two basic types of options, calls and puts. A call is an option to buy foreign currency, 
and a put is an option to sell foreign currency. The buyer of an option is termed the holder, 
while the seller of an option is referred to as the writer or grantor.
Every option has three different price elements: 1) the exercise price or strike price, the 
exchange rate at which the foreign currency can be purchased (call) or sold (put); 2) the 

185
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options    CHAPTER 7 
premium, which is the cost, price, or value of the option itself; and 3) the underlying or actual 
spot exchange rate in the market.
An American option gives the buyer the right to exercise the option at any time between 
the date of writing and the expiration or maturity date. A European option can be exercised 
only on its expiration date, not before. Nevertheless, American and European options are 
priced almost the same because the option holder would normally sell the option itself before 
maturity. The option would then still have some “time value” above its “intrinsic value” if 
exercised (explained later in this chapter).
The premium or option price is the cost of the option, usually paid in advance by the buyer 
to the seller. In the over-the-counter (OTC) market (options offered by banks), premiums are 
quoted as a percentage of the transaction amount. Premiums on exchange-traded options 
are quoted as a domestic currency amount per unit of foreign currency.
An option whose exercise price is the same as the spot price of the underlying currency is 
said to be at-the-money (ATM). An option that would be profitable, excluding the cost of the 
premium, if exercised immediately is said to be in-the-money (ITM). An option that would not 
be profitable, again excluding the cost of the premium, if exercised immediately is referred to 
as out-of-the-money (OTM).
Foreign Currency Options Markets
In the past three decades, the use of foreign currency options as a hedging tool and for specu-
lative purposes has blossomed into a major foreign exchange activity. A number of banks in 
the United States and other capital markets offer flexible foreign currency options on transac-
tions of $1 million or more. The bank market, or over-the-counter market as it is called, offers 
custom-tailored options on all major trading currencies for any period up to one year, and in 
some cases, two to three years.
The Philadelphia Stock Exchange introduced trading in standardized foreign currency 
option contracts in the United States in 1982. The Chicago Mercantile Exchange and other 
exchanges in the U.S. and abroad have followed suit. Exchange-traded contracts are par-
ticularly appealing to speculators and individuals who do not normally have access to the 
­over-the-counter market. Banks also trade on the exchanges because it is one of several ways 
they can offset the risk of options they may have transacted with clients or other banks.
Increased use of foreign currency options is a reflection of the explosive growth in the 
use of other kinds of options and the resultant improvements in option pricing models. The 
original option-pricing model developed by Fischer Black and Myron Scholes in 1973 has been 
expanded, adapted, and commercialized in hundreds of forms since that time. One wonders if 
Black and Scholes truly appreciated what a monster they may have created!
Options on the Over-the-Counter Market. Over-the-counter (OTC) options are most fre-
quently written by banks for U.S. dollars against British pounds sterling, Canadian dollars, 
Japanese yen, Swiss francs, or the euro, but increasingly are available for nearly every major 
traded currency. As Global Finance in Practice 7.1 notes, the rise of the Chinese renminbi in 
recent years has sparked its own option growth.
The main advantage of OTC options is that they are tailored to the specific needs of the firm. 
Financial institutions are willing to write or buy options that vary by amount (notional principal), 
strike price, and maturity. Although the OTC markets were relatively illiquid in the early years, 
these markets have grown to such proportions that liquidity is now quite good. On the other hand, 
the buyer must assess the writing bank’s ability to fulfill the option contract. The financial risk 
associated with the counterparty (counterparty risk) is an ever-present issue in international mar-
kets as a result of the increasing use of financial contracts like options and swaps. Exchange-traded 
options are more the territory of individuals and financial institutions than of business firms.

186
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
If an investor wishes to purchase an option in the OTC market, the investor will normally 
place a call to the currency option desk of a major money center bank, specify the currencies, 
maturity, strike rate(s), and ask for an indication, a bid-offer quote. The bank will normally 
take a few minutes to a few hours to price the option and return the call.
Options on Organized Exchanges. Options on the physical (underlying) currency are traded 
on a number of organized exchanges worldwide, including the Philadelphia Stock Exchange 
(PHLX) and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Exchange-traded options are settled through 
a clearinghouse, so that buyers do not deal directly with sellers. The clearinghouse is the coun-
terparty to every option contract and it guarantees fulfillment. Clearinghouse obligations are 
in turn the obligation of all members of the exchange, including a large number of banks. In the 
case of the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, clearinghouse services are provided by the Options 
Clearing Corporation (OCC).
Currency Option Quotations and Prices
Typical quotes in The Wall Street Journal for options on Swiss francs are shown in Exhibit 7.2. 
The Journal’s quotes refer to transactions completed on the Philadelphia Stock Exchange 
Daily trading volume in Chinese renminbi currency options 
boomed in 2014 and 2015 for a variety of reasons. First and 
foremost was the growth in trade and the increasing settle-
ment of cross-border transactions with Chinese firms in Chi-
nese RMB. Although in the past this trade was dominated by 
the U.S. dollar, the Chinese government and Chinese firms 
are in the process of shifting more of the currency transaction 
burden to external counterparties.
The RMB cross-rate against the euro has seen rapid growth 
specifically. Many European companies have been pushed to 
settle more and more transactions in RMB, but they wish to do 
so without going through the U.S. dollar, which has been the 
more common practice—going USD/RMB and then EUR/USD.
Options, in addition to forwards, have seen growing 
demand and liquidity because of the People’s Bank of Chi-
na’s management of the RMB versus the USD (although this 
changed in 2014 as the RMB fell versus the dollar on occa-
sion). For many years this focus on the dollar created a one-
sided movement, as the RMB slowly and steadily was revalued 
against the dollar. But the euro’s movements against the RMB 
were not one-sided, creating more and more demand—and 
more interest—for currency options between the two.
Global Finance in Practice 7.1
Euro-Renminbi (EUR-RMB) Options Growth
Exhibit 7.2
 Swiss Franc Option Quotations (U.S. cents/SF)
Option and Underlying
Strike Price
Calls – Last
Puts – Last
Aug
Sep
Dec
Aug
Sep
Dec
58.51
56.0
—
—
2.76
0.04
0.22
1.16
58.51
56.5
—
—
—
0.06
0.30
—
58.51
57.0
1.13
—
1.74
0.10
0.38
1.27
58.51
57.5
0.75
—
—
0.17
0.55
—
58.51
58.0
0.71
1.05
1.28
0.27
0.89
1.81
58.51
58.5
0.50
—
—
0.50
0.99
—
58.51
59.0
0.30
0.66
1.21
0.90
1.36
—
58.51
59.5
0.15
0.40
—
2.32
—
—
58.51
60.0
—
0.31
—
2.32
2.62
3.30
each option = 62,500 Swiss francs. The August, September, and December listings are the option maturities or expiration dates.

187
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options    CHAPTER 7 
on the previous day. Although a multitude of strike prices and expiration dates are quoted 
(shown in the exhibit), not all were actually traded the previous trading day, and in that case 
no premium price is shown. Currency option strike prices and premiums on the U.S. dollar are 
typically quoted as direct quotations on the U.S. dollar and indirect quotations on the foreign 
currency ($/SF, $/¥, etc.).
Buyer of a Call
Options differ from all other types of financial instruments in the patterns of risk they produce. 
The option owner, the holder, has the choice of exercising the option or allowing it to expire 
unused. The owner will exercise it only when exercising is profitable, which means only when the 
option is in the money. In the case of a call option, as the spot price of the underlying currency 
moves up, the holder has the possibility of unlimited profit. On the down side, however, the 
holder can abandon the option and walk away with a loss never greater than the premium paid.
Exhibit 7.2 illustrates the three different prices that characterize any foreign currency 
option. The three prices that characterize an “August 58.5 call option” (highlighted in 
Exhibit 7.2) are the following:
1.	 Spot rate. “Option and Underlying” in the exhibit means that 58.51 cents, or $0.5851, 
was the spot dollar price of one Swiss franc at the close of trading on the preceding day.
2.	 Exercise price. The exercise price, or “Strike Price” in the exhibit, means the price per 
franc that must be paid if the option is exercised. The August call option on francs 
of 58.5 means $0.5850/SF. Exhibit 7.2 lists nine different strike prices, ranging from 
$0.5600/SF to $0.6000/SF, although more were available on that date than are listed.
3.	 Premium. The premium is the cost or price of the option. The price of the August 58.5 
call option on Swiss francs was 0.50 U.S. cents per franc, or $0.0050/SF. There was no 
trading of the September and December 58.5 call on that day. The premium is the 
market value of the option, and therefore the terms premium, cost, price, and value 
are all interchangeable when referring to an option.
The August 58.5 call option premium is 0.50 cents per franc, and in this case, the August 
58.5 put’s premium is also 0.50 cents per franc. Since one option contract on the Philadelphia 
Stock Exchange consists of 62,500 francs, the total cost of one option contract for the call (or 
put in this case) is SF62,500 * $0.0050/SF = $312.50.
Hans Schmidt is a currency speculator in Zurich. The position of Hans as a buyer of a 
call is illustrated in Exhibit 7.3. Assume he purchases the August call option on Swiss francs 
described previously, the one with a strike price of $0.585, and a premium of $0.005/SF. The 
vertical axis measures profit or loss for the option buyer at each of several different spot prices 
for the franc up to the time of maturity.
At all spot rates below the strike price of $0.585, Hans would choose not to exercise his 
option. This is obvious because at a spot rate of $0.580 for example, he would prefer to buy a 
Swiss franc for $0.580 on the spot market, rather than exercising his option to buy a franc at 
$0.585. If the spot rate were to remain at $0.580 or below until August when the option expired, 
Hans would not exercise the option. His total loss would be limited to only what he paid for 
the option, the $0.005/SF purchase price. Regardless of how far the spot rate was to fall, his 
loss would be limited to the original $0.005/SF cost.
Alternatively, at all spot rates above the strike price of $0.585, Hans would exercise the 
option, paying only the strike price for each Swiss franc. For example, if the spot rate were 
$0.595 per franc at maturity, he would exercise his call option, buying Swiss francs for $0.585 
each instead of purchasing them on the spot market at $0.595 each. He could sell the Swiss 
francs immediately in the spot market for $0.595 each, pocketing a gross profit of $0.010/SF, 
or a net profit of $0.005/SF after deducting the original cost of the option of $0.005/SF. 

188
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
–$0.020
–$0.015
–$0.010
–$0.005
$0.000
$0.005
$0.010
$0.015
$0.020
$0.025
$0.030
 0.560
 0.565
 0.570
 0.575
 0.580
 0.595
 0.600
 0.605
 0.610
The buyer of a call option on has unlimited proﬁt potential (in the money), and limited loss potential, the amount of the premium (out of the money). 
Proﬁt (U.S.$/SF)
Strike Price or Strike Rate
“At the Money”
“In the Money”
“Out of the Money”
Spot Rate
(U.S.$/SF)
Proﬁt to the Buyer of a Call
     Breakeven Rate  = Strike + Premium
 
       = 0.585 + 0.005
 
       = 0.590
Limited Loss
Unlimited Proﬁt
Potential
 0.590
 0.585
 0.555
 0.615
Exhibit 7.3
Profit and Loss for the Buyer of a Call Option
Hans’ profit, if the spot rate is greater than the strike price, with strike price $0.585, a premium 
of $0.005, and a spot rate of $0.595, is
 Profit = Spot Rate - (Strike Price + Premium)
 = $0.595/SF - ($0.585/SF + $0.005/SF)
 = $0.005/SF
More likely, Hans would realize the profit through executing an offsetting contract on 
the options exchange rather than taking delivery of the currency. Because the dollar price of 
a franc could rise to an infinite level (off the upper right-hand side of Exhibit 7.3), maximum 
profit is unlimited. The buyer of a call option thus possesses an attractive combination of 
­outcomes: limited loss and unlimited profit potential.
Note that break-even price of $0.590/SF is the price at which Hans neither gains nor loses 
on exercising the option. The premium cost of $0.005, combined with the cost of exercising 
the option of $0.585, is exactly equal to the proceeds from selling the francs in the spot market 
at $0.590. Hans will still exercise the call option at the break-even price. This is because by 
exercising it he at least recoups the premium paid for the option. At any spot price above the 
exercise price but below the break-even price, the gross profit earned on exercising the option 
and selling the underlying currency covers part (but not all) of the premium cost.
Writer of a Call
The position of the writer (seller) of the same call option is illustrated in Exhibit 7.4. If the 
option expires when the spot price of the underlying currency is below the exercise price of 

189
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options    CHAPTER 7 
$0.585, the option holder does not exercise. What the holder loses, the writer gains. The writer 
keeps as profit the entire premium paid of $0.005/SF. Above the exercise price of 58.5, the 
writer of the call must deliver the underlying currency for $0.585/SF at a time when the value 
of the franc is above $0.585. If the writer wrote the option “naked,” that is, without owning 
the currency, then the writer will need to buy the currency at spot and, in this scenario, take 
the loss. The amount of such a loss is unlimited and increases as the price of the underlying 
currency rises.
Once again, what the holder gains, the writer loses, and vice versa. Even if the writer 
already owns the currency, the writer will experience an opportunity loss, surrendering against 
the option the same currency that could have been sold for more in the open market. For 
example, the profit to the writer of a call option of strike price $0.585, premium $0.005, a spot 
rate of $0.595/SF is
 Profit = Premium - (Spot Rate - Strike Price)
 = $0.005/SF - ($0.595/SF - $0.585/SF)
 = $0.005/SF
but only if the spot rate is greater than or equal to the strike rate. At spot rates less than the 
strike price, the option will expire worthless and the writer of the call option will keep the 
premium earned. The maximum profit that the writer of the call option can make is limited 
to the premium. The writer of a call option has a rather unattractive combination of potential 
outcomes: limited profit potential and unlimited loss potential—but there are ways to limit 
such losses through other offsetting techniques that we will discuss later in this chapter.
–$0.030
–$0.025
–$0.020
–$0.015
–$0.010
–$0.005
$0.000
$0.005
$0.010
$0.015
$0.020
$0.025
 0.560
 0.565
 0.570
 0.575
 0.580
 0.595
 0.600
 0.605
 0.610
 0.615
The writer of a call option on has unlimited loss potential and limited proﬁt potential, the amount of the premium.
Proﬁt (U.S.$/SF)
Strike Price or Strike Rate
“At the Money”
Spot Rate
(U.S.$/SF)
Proﬁt to the Writer of a Call
 0.590
 0.550
 0.555
 0.585
Limited Proﬁt
Unlimited Loss
Potential
       Breakeven Rate = Strike + Premium
 
       = 0.585 + 0.005
 
       = 0.590
Exhibit 7.4
Profit and Loss for the Writer of a Call Option

190
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
Buyer of a Put
Hans’ position as buyer of a put is illustrated in Exhibit 7.5. The basic terms of this put are 
similar to those we just used to illustrate a call. The buyer of a put option, however, wants to 
be able to sell the underlying currency at the exercise price when the market price of that 
currency drops (rather than when it rises as in the case of a call option). If the spot price of a 
franc drops to, say, $0.575/SF, Hans will deliver francs to the writer and receive $0.585/SF. The 
francs can now be purchased on the spot market for $0.575 each, and the cost of the option 
was $0.005/SF, so he will have a net gain of $0.005/SF.
Explicitly, the profit to the holder of a put option if the spot rate is less than the strike price, 
with a strike price $0.585/SF, premium of $0.005/SF, and a spot rate of $0.575/SF, is
 Profit = Strike Price - (Spot Rate + Premium)
 = $0.585/SF - ($0.575/SF + $0.005/SF)
 = $0.005/SF
The break-even price for the put option is the strike price less the premium, or $0.580/SF in 
this case. As the spot rate falls further and further below the strike price, the profit potential 
would continually increase, and Hans’ profit could be up to a maximum of $0.580/SF, when 
the price of a franc would be zero. At any exchange rate above the strike price of 58.5, Hans 
would not exercise the option, and so would lose only the $0.005/SF premium paid for the put 
option. The buyer of a put option has an almost unlimited profit potential with a limited loss 
potential. Like the buyer of a call, the buyer of a put can never lose more than the premium 
paid up front.
–$0.020
–$0.015
–$0.010
–$0.005
$0.000
$0.005
$0.010
$0.015
$0.020
$0.025
$0.030
 0.560
Unlimited Proﬁt
Potential
 0.565
 0.570
 0.575
 0.580
 0.595
 0.600
 0.605
 0.610
 0.615
The buyer of a put option on has unlimited proﬁt potential (in the money), and limited loss potential, the amount of the premium (out of the money). 
Proﬁt (U.S.$/SF)
Strike Price or Strike Rate
“At the Money”
“Out of the Money”
“In the Money”
Spot Rate
(U.S.$/SF)
Proﬁt to the
Buyer of a Put
       Breakeven Rate = Strike – Premium
 
       = 0.585 – 0.005
 
       = 0.580
Limited Loss
 0.590
 0.550
 0.555
 0.585
Exhibit 7.5
Profit and Loss for the Buyer of a Put Option

191
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options    CHAPTER 7 
Writer of a Put
The position of the writer who sold the put to Hans is shown in Exhibit 7.6. Note the sym-
metry of profit/loss, strike price, and break-even prices between the buyer and the writer of 
the put. If the spot price of francs drops below $0.585 per franc, Hans will exercise the option. 
Below a price of $0.585 per franc, the writer will lose more than the premium received from 
writing the option ($0.005/SF), falling below breakeven. Between $0.580/SF and $0.585/SF 
the writer will lose part, but not all, of the premium received. If the spot price is above 
$0.585/SF, Hans will not exercise the option, and the option writer will pocket the entire 
premium of $0.005/SF.
The profit (loss) earned by the writer of a $0.585 strike price put, premium $0.005, at a 
spot rate of $0.575, is
 Profit (loss) = Premium - (Strike Price - Spot Rate)
 = $0.005/SF - ($0.585/SF - $0.575/SF)
 = $0.005/SF
but only for spot rates that are less than or equal to the strike price. At spot rates greater than 
the strike price, the option expires out-of-the-money and the writer keeps the premium. The 
writer of the put option has the same combination of outcomes available to the writer of a call: 
limited profit potential and loss potential.
Global Finance in Practice 7.2 describes one of the largest, and most successful, currency 
option speculations ever made, that by Andrew Krieger against the New Zealand kiwi. We 
should all be so good.
–$0.030
–$0.025
–$0.020
–$0.015
–$0.010
–$0.005
$0.000
$0.005
$0.010
$0.015
$0.020
 0.560
 0.565
 0.570
 0.575
 0.580
 0.595
 0.600
 0.605
 0.610
 0.615
The writer of a put option on has limited proﬁt potential, the premium, and an unlimited loss potential.
Proﬁt (U.S.$/SF)
Strike Price or Strike Rate
“At the Money”
Spot Rate
(U.S.$/SF)
Proﬁt to the Writer of a Put
       Breakeven Rate = Strike – Premium
 
       = 0.585 – 0.005
 
       = 0.580
Limited Proﬁt
Unlimited Loss
Potential
 0.590
 0.550
 0.555
 0.585
Exhibit 7.6
Profit and Loss for the Writer of a Put Option

192
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
Option Pricing and Valuation
Exhibit 7.7 illustrates the profit/loss profile of a European-style call option on British pounds. 
The call option allows the holder to buy British pounds at a strike price of $1.70/£. It has a 
90-day maturity. The value of this call option is actually the sum of two components:
Total Value (premium) = Intrinsic Value * Time Value
The pricing of any currency option combines six elements. For example, this European-
style call option on British pounds has a premium of $0.033/£ (3.3 cents per pound) at a spot 
In 1987 Andrew Krieger was a 31-year-old currency trader 
for Bankers Trust of New York (BT). Following the U.S. stock 
market crash in October 1987, the world’s currency markets 
moved rapidly to exit the dollar. Many of the world’s other 
currencies—including small ones that were in stable, open, 
industrialized markets, like that of New Zealand—became the 
subject of interest. As the world’s currency traders dumped 
dollars and bought kiwis, the value of the kiwi rose sharply.
Krieger believed that the markets were overreacting. He 
took a short position on the kiwi, betting on its eventual fall. 
And he did so in a big way, combining spot, forward, and 
options positions. (Krieger supposedly had approval for posi-
tions rising to nearly $700 million in size, while all other BT 
traders were restricted to $50 million.) Krieger, on behalf of BT, 
is purported to have shorted 200 million kiwi—more than the 
entire New Zealand money supply at the time. His view proved 
correct. The kiwi fell, and Krieger was able to earn millions in 
currency gains for BT. Ironically, only months later, Krieger 
resigned from BT when annual bonuses were announced and 
he was reportedly awarded only $3 million on the more than 
$300 million profit.
Eventually, the New Zealand central bank lodged com-
plaints with BT, in which the CEO at the time, Charles S. San-
ford Jr., seemingly added insult to injury when he reportedly 
remarked “We didn’t take too big a position for Bankers Trust, 
but we may have taken too big a position for that market.”
Global Finance in Practice 7.2
The New Zealand Kiwi, Key, and Krieger
Call Option on British Pounds with a Strike Price of $1.70/£
Valuation on ﬁrst day of 90-day maturity
Option Premium (U.S. cents/£)
Spot rate ($ = £1.00)
0.000
2.000
4.000
6.000
8.000
10.000
1.60 1.61 1.62 1.63
1.65
1.67
1.69
1.64
1.66
1.68
1.70 1.71 1.72 1.73
1.75
1.77
1.74
1.76
1.78 1.79 1.80
1.372
3.302
Premium
(total value = intrinsic value + time value)
Intrinsic
Value
Time value
6.356
5.000
Exhibit 7.7
Option Intrinsic Value, Time Value, and Total Value

193
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options    CHAPTER 7 
rate of $1.70/£. This premium is calculated using the following assumptions: a spot rate of 
$1.70/£, a 90-day maturity, a $1.70/£ forward rate, both U.S. dollar and British pound interest 
rates of 8.00% per annum, and an option volatility for the 90-day period of 10.00% per annum.
Intrinsic value is the financial gain if the option is exercised immediately. It is shown by the 
solid line in Exhibit 7.7, which is zero until it reaches the strike price, then rises linearly (1 cent for 
each 1-cent increase in the spot rate). Intrinsic value will be zero when the option is out-of-the-
money—that is, when the strike price is above the market price—as no gain can be derived from 
exercising the option. When the spot rate rises above the strike price, the intrinsic value becomes 
positive because the option is always worth at least this value if exercised. On the date of maturity, 
an option will have a value equal to its intrinsic value (zero time remaining means zero time value).
Exhibit 7.7 (graphically) and Exhibit 7.8 (table) illustrate all three value elements of the 
$1.70/£ strike 90-day call option on British pounds across a spectrum of spot rates. When the 
spot rate is $1.75/£, the option is in-the-money, and has positive time (¢1.356/£) and intrinsic 
values (¢5.000/£). When the spot rate is $1.70/£—the same as the option strike rate, the option 
is ­at-­the-money, has no intrinsic value but does have time value (¢3.302/£). When the spot rate is 
$1.65/£, the option is out-of-the-money, has no intrinsic value but does have a time value (¢1.372/£).
The time value of an option exists because the price of the underlying currency, the spot 
rate, can potentially move further and further into the money before the option’s expira-
tion. Time value is shown in Exhibit 7.7 as the area between the total value of the option 
and its intrinsic value. An investor will pay something today for an out-of-the-money option 
(i.e., zero intrinsic value) on the chance that the spot rate will move far enough before maturity 
to move the option in-the-money. Consequently, the price of an option is always somewhat 
greater than its intrinsic value, since there is always some chance—some might say “hope 
­everlasting”—that the intrinsic value will rise by the expiration date.
An investor will pay something today for an out-of-the-money option (i.e., zero intrinsic 
value) on the chance that the spot rate will move far enough before maturity to move the 
option in-the-money. Consequently, the price of an option is always somewhat greater than 
its intrinsic value, since there is always some chance that the intrinsic value will rise between 
the present and the expiration date.
Advanced Topic: Currency Option Pricing Sensitivity
If currency options are to be used effectively, either for the purposes of speculation or risk 
management (covered in the coming chapters), the individual trader needs to know how 
option values—premiums—react to their various components. The following section will 
­analyze these six basic sensitivities:
1.	 The impact of changing forward rates
2.	 The impact of changing spot rates
Exhibit 7.8
Call Option Premiums: Intrinsic Value and Time Value Components
Strike Rate
($/£)
Spot Rate
($/£)
Money
Call 
Premium
(U.S. cents/£)
=
Intrinsic 
Value
(U.S. 
cents/£)
+
Time  
Value
(U.S. cents/£)
Option 
Delta
(0 to 1)
1.70
1.75
In-the-money (ITM)
6.37
=
5.00
+
1.37
0.71
1.70
1.70
At-the-money (ATM)
3.30
=
0.00
+
3.30
0.50
1.70
1.65
Out-of-the-money (OTM)
1.37
=
0.00
+
1.37
0.28

194
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
3.	 The impact of time to maturity
4.	 The impact of changing volatility
5.	 The impact of changing interest differentials
6.	 The impact of alternative option strike prices
Forward Rate Sensitivity
Although rarely noted, standard foreign currency options are priced around the forward rate 
because the current spot rate and both the domestic and foreign interest rates (home currency 
and foreign currency rates) are included in the option premium calculation.
Recall from Chapter 4 that the forward rate is calculated from the current spot rate and the 
two subject currency interest rates for the desired maturity. For example, the 90-day forward 
rate for the call option on British pounds described above is calculated as follows:
F90 = $1.70/£ *
J1 + ¢0.08 * 90
360≤R
J1 + ¢0.08 * 90
360≤R
= $1.70/£.
Regardless of the specific strike rate chosen and priced, the forward rate is central to 
valuation. The option-pricing formula calculates a subjective probability distribution centered 
on the forward rate. This approach does not mean that the market expects the forward rate 
to be equal to the future spot rate, it is simply a result of the arbitrage-pricing structure of 
options.
The forward rate focus also provides helpful information for the trader managing a posi-
tion. When the market prices a foreign currency option, it does so without any bullish or bear-
ish sentiment on the direction of the foreign currency’s value relative to the domestic currency. 
If the trader has specific expectations about the future spot rate’s direction, those expectations 
can be put to work. A trader will not be inherently betting against the market. In a following 
section we will also describe how a change in the interest differential between currencies, the 
theoretical foundation of forward rates, also alters the value of the option.
Spot Rate Sensitivity (delta)
The call option on British pounds depicted in Exhibit 7.8 possesses a premium that exceeds 
the intrinsic value of the option over the entire range of spot rates surrounding the strike rate. 
As long as the option has time remaining before expiration, the option will possess this time 
value element. This characteristic is one of the primary reasons why an American-style option, 
which can be exercised on any day up to and including the expiration date, is seldom actually 
exercised prior to expiration. If the option holder wishes to liquidate it for its value, then it 
would normally be sold and not exercised, so any remaining time value can also be captured 
by the holder. If the current spot rate falls on the side of the option’s strike price—which 
would induce the option holder to exercise the option upon expiration—the option also has 
an intrinsic value. The call option illustrated in Exhibit 7.7 is in-the-money (ITM) at spot rates 
to the right of the strike rate of $1.70/£, at-the-money (ATM) at $1.70/£, and out-of-the-money 
(OTM) at spot rates less than $1.70/£.
The vertical distance between the market value and the intrinsic value of a call option 
on pounds is greatest at a spot rate of $1.70/£. At $1.70/£ the spot rate equals the strike price 
(at-the-money). This premium of 3.30 cents per pound consists entirely of time value. In fact, 
the value of any option that is currently out-of-the-money (OTM) is made up entirely of time 
value. The further the option’s strike price is out-of-the-money, the lower the value or premium 

195
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options    CHAPTER 7 
of the option. This is because the market believes the probability of this option ­actually ­moving 
into the exercise range prior to expiration is significantly less than for an option that is already 
at-the-money. If the spot rate were to fall to $1.68/£, the option premium falls to 2.39 cents/£—
again, entirely time value. If the spot rate were to rise above the strike rate to $1.72/£, the pre-
mium rises to 4.39 cents/£. In this case the premium represents an intrinsic value of 2.00 cents 
($1.72/£ - $1.70/£) plus a time value element of 2.39 cents. Note the symmetry of time value 
premiums (2.39 cents) to the left and to the right of the strike rate.
The symmetry of option valuation about the strike rate can be observed by decomposing 
the option premiums into their respective intrinsic and time values. Exhibit 7.8 illustrates how 
varying the current spot rate by {$0.05 about the strike rate of $1.70/£ alters each option’s 
intrinsic and time values.
The sensitivity of the option premium to a small change in the spot exchange rate is called 
the delta. For example, the delta of the $1.70/£ call option, when the spot rate changes from 
$1.70/£ to $1.71/£, is simply the change in the premium divided by the change in the spot rate:
Delta = ∆ premium
∆ spot rate = $0.038/£ - $0.033/£
$1.71/£ - $1.70/£
= 0.5
If the delta of the specific option is known, it is easy to determine how the option’s value 
will change as the spot rate changes. If the spot rate changes by one cent ($0.01/£), given a delta 
of 0.5, the option premium would change by 0.5 * $0.01, or $0.005. If the initial premium was 
$0.033/£, and the spot rate increased by 1 cent (from $1.70/£ to $1.71/£), the new option pre-
mium would be $0.033 + $0.005 = $0.038/£. Delta varies between +1 and 0 for a call option 
and -1 and 0 for a put option.
Traders in options categorize individual options by their delta rather than in-the-money, 
at-the-money, or out-of-the-money. As an option moves further in-the-money, delta rises 
toward 1.0. As an option moves further out-of-the-money, delta falls toward zero. Note that 
the out-of-the-money option in Exhibit 7.8 has a delta of only 0.28.1
Rule of Thumb: The higher the delta (deltas of .7, or .8 and up are considered high) the 
greater the probability of the option expiring in-the-money.
Time to Maturity: Value and Deterioration (theta)
Option values increase with the length of time to maturity. The expected change in the option 
premium from a small change in the time to expiration is termed theta.
Theta is calculated as the change in the option premium over the change in time. If the 
$1.70/£ call option were to age 1 day from its initial 90-day maturity, the theta of the call option 
would be the difference in the two premiums, 3.30 cents/£ and 3.28 cents/£ (assuming a spot 
rate of $1.70/£):
theta = ∆ premium
∆ time
= cents 3.30/£ - cents 3.28/£
90 - 89
= 0.02.
Theta is based not on a linear relationship with time, but rather the square root of time. 
Option premiums deteriorate at an increasing rate as they approach expiration. In fact, the 
majority of the option premium—depending on the individual option—is lost in the final 
30 days prior to expiration.
1The expected change in the option’s delta resulting from a small change in the spot rate is termed gamma. It is often used as a measure 
of the stability of a specific option’s delta. Gamma is utilized in the construction of more sophisticated hedging strategies, which focus 
on deltas (delta-neutral strategies).

196
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
This exponential relationship between option premium and time is seen in the ratio of 
option values between the three-month and the one-month at-the-money maturities. The ratio 
for the at-the-money call option is not 3 to 1 (holding all other components constant), but 
rather 1.73 times the price.
Premium of 3 month
Premium of 1 month = 23
21
= 1.73
1.00 = 1.73
The rapid deterioration of option values in the last days prior to expiration is seen by once 
again calculating the theta of the $1.70/£ call option, but now as its remaining maturity moves 
from 15 days to 14 days:
theta = ∆ premium
∆ time
= cents 1.37/£ - cents 1.32/£
15 - 14
= 0.05.
A decrease of one day in the time to maturity now reduces the option premium by 0.05 cents/£, 
rather than only 0.02 cents/£ as it did when the maturity was 90 days.
The implications of time value deterioration for traders are quite significant. A trader pur-
chasing an option with only one or two months until expiration will see rapid deterioration of the 
option’s value. If the trader were to then sell the option, it would have a significantly smaller mar-
ket value in the periods immediately following its purchase. At the same time, however, a trader 
who is buying options of longer maturities will pay more, but not proportionately more, for the 
longer maturity option. A six-month option’s premium is approximately 2.45 times more expensive 
than the one-month, while the 12-month option would be only 3.46 times more expensive than 
the one-month. This implies that two three-month options do not equal one six-month option.
Rule of Thumb: A trader will normally find longer-maturity options better values, giving 
the trader the ability to alter an option position without suffering significant time value 
deterioration.
Sensitivity to Volatility (lambda)
There are few words in the financial field more used and abused than volatility. Option volatil-
ity is defined as the standard deviation of daily percentage changes in the underlying exchange 
rate. Volatility is important to option value because of an exchange rate’s perceived likelihood 
to move either into or out of the range in which the option would be exercised. If the exchange 
rate’s volatility is rising, and therefore the risk of the option being exercised is increasing, the 
option premium would be increasing.
Volatility is stated in percent per annum. For example, an option may be described as hav-
ing a 12.6% annual volatility. The percentage change for a single day can be found as follows:
12.6%
2365
= 12.6%
19.105 = 0.66% daily volatility.
For our $1.70/£ call option, an increase in annual volatility of 1 percentage point—for exam-
ple from 10.0% to 11.0%—will increase the option premium from $0.033/£ to $0.036/£. The 
marginal change in the option premium is equal to the change in the option premium itself 
divided by the change in volatility:
∆ premium
∆ volatility = $0.036/£ - $0.033/£
0.11 - 0.10
= 0.3.
The primary problem with volatility is that it is unobservable; it is the only input into the option 
pricing formula that is determined subjectively by the trader pricing the option. No single 

197
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options    CHAPTER 7 
correct method for its calculation exists. The problem is one of forecasting; historical volatility 
is not necessarily an accurate predictor of the future volatility of the exchange rate’s move-
ment, yet there is little to go on except history.
Volatility is viewed three ways: historic, where the volatility is drawn from a recent period 
of time; forward-looking, where the historic volatility is altered to reflect expectations about 
the future period over which the option will exist; and implied, where the volatility is backed 
out of the market price of the option.
■
■
Historic volatility.  Historic volatility is normally measured as the percentage move-
ment in the spot rate on a daily, 6-, or 12-hour basis over the previous 10, 30, or even 
90 days.
■
■
Forward-looking volatility.  Alternatively, an option trader may adjust recent his-
toric volatilities for expected market swings or events, either upward or downward.
If option traders believe that the immediate future will be the same as the recent past, 
the historic volatility will equal the forward-looking volatility. If, however, the future period 
is expected to experience greater or lesser volatility, the historic measure must be altered for 
option pricing.
■
■
Implied volatility.  Implied volatility is equivalent to having the answers to the test; 
implied volatilities are calculated by being backed out of the market option pre-
mium values traded. Since volatility is the only unobservable element of the option 
premium price, after all other components are accounted for, the residual value of 
volatility implied by the price is found.
Selected implied volatilities for a number of currency pairs are listed in Exhibit 7.9. The 
exhibit clearly illustrates that option volatilities vary considerably across currencies, and that 
the relationship between volatility and maturity (time to expiration) does not move just one 
direction. For example, the first exchange rate quoted, the US$/euro cross-rate, initially falls 
from 8.1% volatility at one week to 7.4% for the 1-month and 2-month maturities, and then 
rises to 9.3% for the 3-year maturity.
Because volatilities are the only judgmental component that the option writer contrib-
utes, they play a critical role in the pricing of options. All currency pairs have historical 
Exhibit 7.9
Foreign Currency Implied Volatilities (percent)
Currency (cross)
Symbol
1 week
1 month
2 month
3 month
6 month
1 year
2 year
3 year
European euro
EUR
8.1
7.4
7.4
7.4
7.8
8.5
9.0
9.3
Japanese yen
JPY
12.3
11.4
11.1
11.0
11.0
11.2
11.8
12.7
Swiss franc
CHF
8.9
8.4
8.4
8.4
8.9
9.5
9.8
9.9
British pound
GBP
7.7
7.3
7.2
7.1
7.3
7.5
7.9
8.2
Canadian dollar
CAD
6.4
6.4
6.3
6.4
6.7
7.1
7.4
7.6
Australian dollar
AUD
11.2
10.7
10.5
10.3
10.4
10.6
10.8
11.0
British pound/euro
GBPEUR
6.7
6.4
6.5
6.4
6.8
7.3
7.6
7.8
Euro/Japanese yen
EURJPY
11.6
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.8
12.6
13.4
14.1
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Note: These implied volatility rates are averages of mid-level rates for bid and ask “at-money quotations” on selected currencies at 11 a.m. on the last 
business day of the month, September 30, 2013.

198
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
series that contribute to the formation of the expectations of option writers. But in the end, 
the truly talented option writers are those with the intuition and insight to price the future 
effectively.
Like all futures markets, option volatilities react instantaneously and negatively to unset-
tling economic and political events (or rumor). A doubling of volatility for an at-the-money 
option will result in an equivalent doubling of the option’s price. Most currency option traders 
focus their activities on predicting movements of currency volatility in the short run, because 
short-run movements move price the most. For example, option volatilities rose significantly in 
the months preceding the Persian Gulf War, in September 1992 when the European Monetary 
System was in crisis, in 1997 after the onset of the Asian financial crisis, in the days following 
the terrorist attacks on the United States in September 2001, and in the months following 
the onset of the global financial crisis in September 2008. In all instances option volatilities 
for major cross-currency combinations rose to nearly 20% for extended periods. As a result, 
premium costs rose by corresponding amounts.
Rule of Thumb: Traders who believe volatilities will fall significantly in the near-term 
will sell (write) options now, hoping to buy them back for a profit immediately after 
volatilities fall causing option premiums to fall.
Sensitivity to Changing Interest Rate Differentials (rho and phi)
At the start of this section we pointed out that currency option prices and values are focused 
on the forward rate. The forward rate is in turn based on the theory of Interest Rate Parity 
discussed previously in Chapter 6. Interest rate changes in either currency will alter the for-
ward rate, which in turn will alter the option’s premium or value. The expected change in the 
option premium from a small change in the domestic interest rate (home currency) is term 
rho. The expected change in the option premium from a small change in the foreign interest 
rate ­(foreign currency) is termed phi.
Continuing with our numerical example, an increase in the U.S. dollar interest rate from 
8.0% to 9.0% increases the ATM call option premium on British pounds from $0.033/£ to 
$0.035/£. This is a rho value of positive 0.2.
rho =
∆ premium
∆ U.S. dollar interest rate = $0.035/£ - $0.033/£
9.0% - 8.0%
= 0.2.
A similar 1% increase in the foreign interest rate, the pound sterling rate in this case, 
reduces the option value (premium) from $0.033/£ to $0.031/£. The phi for this call option 
premium is therefore a negative 0.2.
phi =
∆ premium
∆ foreign interest rate = $0.031/£ - $0.033/£
9.0% - 8.0%
= -0.2.
For example, throughout the 1990s U.S. dollar (domestic currency) interest rates were 
substantially lower than pound sterling (foreign currency) interest rates. This meant that the 
pound consistently sold forward at a discount versus the U.S. dollar. If this interest differential 
were to widen (either from U.S. interest rates falling or foreign currency interest rates rising, or 
some combination of both), the pound would sell forward at a larger discount. An increase in 
the forward discount is the same as a decrease in the forward rate (in U.S. dollars per unit of 
foreign currency). The option premium condition above states that the premium must increase 
as interest rate differentials increase (assuming spot rates remain unchanged).
For the option trader, an expectation on the differential between interest rates can obvi-
ously help in the evaluation of where the option value is headed. For example, when foreign 

199
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options    CHAPTER 7 
interest rates are higher than domestic interest rates, the foreign currency sells forward 
at a discount. This results in relatively lower call option premiums (and lower put option 
premiums).
Rule of Thumb: A trader who is purchasing a call option on foreign currency should 
do so before the domestic interest rate rises. This will allow the trader to purchase the 
option before its price increases.
Alternative Strike Prices and Option Premiums
The sixth and final element that is important in option valuation (but, thankfully, has no 
Greek alias) is the selection of the actual strike price. Although we have conducted all of 
our sensitivity analysis using the strike price of $1.70/£ (a forward-at-the-money strike rate), 
a firm purchasing an option in the over-the-counter market may choose its own strike rate. 
Options with strike rates that are already in-the-money will have both intrinsic and time 
value elements. Options with strike rates that are out-of-the-money will have only a time 
value component.
Exhibit 7.10 briefly summarizes the various “Greek” elements and impacts discussed in 
the previous sections. The option premium is one of the most complex concepts in financial 
theory, and the application of option pricing to exchange rates does not make it any simpler. 
Only with a considerable amount of time and effort can the individual be expected to attain 
a “second-sense” in the management of currency option positions.
Prudence in Practice
In the following chapters we will illustrate how derivatives can be used to reduce the risks 
associated with the conduct of multinational financial management. It is critical, however, that 
the user of any financial tool or technique—including financial derivatives—follow sound 
principles and practices. Many a firm has been ruined as a result of the misuse of derivatives. 
A word to the wise: Do not fall victim to what many refer to as the gambler’s dilemma—­
confusing luck with talent.
Major corporate financial disasters related to financial derivatives continue to be a prob-
lem in global business. As is the case with so many issues in modern society, technology is not 
at fault, rather human error in its use.
Exhibit 7.10
Summary of Option Premium Components
Greek
Definition
Interpretation
Delta
Expected change in the option premium for a 
small change in the spot rate
The higher the delta, the more likely the 
option will move in-the-money
Theta
Expected change in the option premium for  
a small change in time to expiration
Premiums are relatively insensitive until the 
final 30 or so days
Lambda
Expected change in the option premium for a 
small change in volatility
Premiums rise with increases in volatility
Rho
Expected change in the option premium for  
a small change in the domestic interest rate
Increases in domestic interest rates cause 
increasing call option premiums
Phi
Expected change in the option premium for a 
small change in the foreign interest rate
Increases in foreign interest rates cause 
decreasing call option premiums

200
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
Summary Points
■
■
Foreign currency futures contracts are standardized 
forward contracts. Unlike forward contracts, however, 
trading occurs on the floor of an organized exchange 
rather than between banks and customers. Futures also 
require collateral and are normally settled through the 
purchase of an offsetting position.
■
■
Corporate financial managers typically prefer foreign 
currency forwards over futures out of simplicity of 
use and position maintenance. Financial speculators 
typically prefer foreign currency futures over forwards 
because of the liquidity of the futures markets.
■
■
Foreign currency options are financial contracts that 
give the holder the right, but not the obligation, to buy 
(in the case of calls) or sell (in the case of puts) a speci-
fied amount of foreign exchange at a predetermined 
price on or before a specified maturity date.
■
■
The use of a currency option as a speculative device 
for the buyer of an option arises from the fact that an 
option gains in value as the underlying currency rises 
(for calls) or falls (for puts). The amount of loss when 
the underlying currency moves opposite to the desired 
direction is limited to the option premium.
■
■
The use of a currency option as a speculative device for 
the writer (seller) of an option arises from the option 
premium. If the option—either a put or call—expires 
out-of-the-money (valueless), the writer of the option 
has earned, and retains, the entire premium.
■
■
Speculation is an attempt to profit by trading on 
expectations about prices in the future. In the foreign 
exchange market, one speculates by taking a position in 
a foreign currency and then closing that position after-
ward; a profit results only if the rate moves in the direc-
tion that the speculator expected.
■
■
Currency option valuation, the determination of the 
option’s premium, is a complex combination of the current 
spot rate, the specific strike rate, the forward rate (which 
itself is dependent on the current spot rate and interest 
differentials), currency volatility, and time to maturity.
■
■
The total value of an option is the sum of its intrinsic 
value and time value. Intrinsic value depends on the 
relationship between the option’s strike price and the 
current spot rate at any single point in time, whereas 
time value estimates how intrinsic value may change—
for the better—prior to maturity.
That possibility arises from a fundamental tenet of inter-
national law that is not written down in any law book: In 
extremis, the locals win.
—“Bad Trades, Except in Korea,” by Floyd Norris, 
The New York Times, April 2, 2009
South Korean exporters in 2006, 2007, and into 2008 were 
not particularly happy with exchange rate trends. The 
South Korean won (KRW) had been appreciating, slowly 
but steadily, for years against the U.S. dollar. This was a 
major problem for Korean manufacturers, as much of their 
sales was exports to buyers paying in U.S. dollars. As the 
dollar continued to weaken, each dollar resulted in fewer 
and fewer Korean won—and nearly all of their costs were 
in Korean won. Korean banks, in an effort to service these 
hedging needs, became the sale and promotion of Knock-In 
Knock-Out option agreements (KiKos).
Knock-In Knock-Outs (KiKos)
Many South Korean manufacturers had suffered falling mar-
gins on sales for years. Already operating in highly competi-
tive markets, the appreciation of the won had cut further and 
further into their margins after currency settlement. As seen in 
Exhibit A, the won had traded in a narrow range for years. But 
that was little comfort as the difference between KRW1,000 
and KRW 930 to the dollar was a big chunk of margin.
South Korean banks had started promoting KiKos 
as a way of managing this currency risk. The Knock-In 
Knock-Out (KiKo) was a complex option structure, which 
KiKos and the South Korean Won2
Mini-Case
2Copyright ©2015 Thunderbird School of Global Management, Arizona State University. All rights reserved. This case was prepared by 
Professor Michael H. Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only.

201
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options    CHAPTER 7 
final KiKo feature. This final feature was that the KiKo 
assured the exporter a single “better-than-market-rate” on 
the exchange of dollars for won as long as the exchange 
rate stayed within the bounds. Thus, the combined struc-
ture allowed the South Korean exporters to continue to 
exchange dollars for won at a rate like KRW 980 = USD 
when the spot market rate might have only been KRW 910.
This was not, however, a “locked-in rate.” The exchange 
rate had to stay within the upper and lower bounds to reap 
the higher “guaranteed” exchange rate. If the spot rate 
moved dramatically below the knock-out rate, the knock-
out feature would cancel the agreement. This was particu-
larly troublesome because this was the very range in which 
the exporters needed protection. On the upper side, the 
knock-in feature, if the spot rate moved above the knock-in 
rate the exporter was required to deliver the dollars to the 
bank at that specific rate, although movement in this direc-
tion was actually in the exporter’s favor. And the potential 
costs of the knock-in position were essentially unlimited, 
as a multiple of the exposure had been sold, putting the 
exporter into a purely speculative position.
combined the sale of call options on the KRW (the ­knock-in 
component) and the purchase of put options on the USD 
(the knock-out component). These structures then estab-
lished the trading range seen in Exhibit A that the banks 
and exporters believed that the won would stay within. In 
one case the bank salesman told a Korean manufacturer 
“we are 99% sure that the Korean won will continue to stay 
within this trading range for the year.”3
But that was not the entirety of the KiKo structure. 
The bottom of the range, essentially a protective put on the 
dollar, assured the exporter of being able to sell dollars 
at a set rate if the won did indeed continue to appreci-
ate. This strike rate was set close-in to the current market 
and was therefore quite expensive. In order to finance that 
purchase the sale of calls on the knock-in rate was a mul-
tiple (sometimes call the turbo feature) meaning that the 
exporter sold call options on a multiple, sometimes two 
or three times, the amount of the currency exposure. The 
exporters were “over-hedged.” This multiple yielded higher 
earnings on the call options that financed the purchased 
puts and provided added funds to be contributed to the 
3“KIKO Hedges Slay Korean Exporters, Threaten Banks,” Bomi Lim, Bloomberg BusinessWeek, October 17, 2008.
Korean Won (KRW) = USD1.00
890
910
850
870
1/3/2006
2/3/2006
3/3/2006
4/3/2006
5/3/2006
6/3/2006
7/3/2006
8/3/2006
9/3/2006
10/3/2006
11/3/2006
12/3/2006
1/3/2007
2/3/2007
3/3/2007
4/3/2007
5/3/2007
6/3/2007
7/3/2007
8/3/2007
9/3/2007
10/3/2007
11/3/2007
12/3/2007
1/3/2008
2/3/2008
930
950
970
990
1,050
1,030
1,010
Bad for Korean
exporter earning U.S.$
As won gets stronger against the dollar,
exporters receiving dollars turn them into
fewer and fewer won. If trend continues
exporters need protection. KiKos are
essentially a bet that the exchange rate will
not move far from current trading range.
Knock-Out: If rate goes below here,
exporter has no protection (all options expire)
Knock-In: If rate goes above here,
exporter has to take this rate
Knock-Out Rate
Knock-In Rate
Good for Korean
exporter earning U.S.$
Exhibit A
South Korean Won’s Steady Appreciation

202
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
were in English was that the KiKos were not ­originally 
constructed by the Korean banks. They were created by 
a number of major Western hedge funds that then sold 
the products through the Korean banks, the Korean banks 
earning more and more fees for selling more and more 
KiKos. The Korean banks, however, were responsible for 
payment on the KiKos; if the exporting companies did not 
or could not pay-up, the banks would have to pay.
Secondly, exporters argued that the risks associated 
with the KiKos, particularly the knock-in risks of mul-
tiple notional principals to the underlying exposures, 
were not adequately explained to them. The exporters 
argued that the Korean banks had a duty to adequately 
explain to them the risks—and even more importantly—
only sell them products that were suitable for their 
needs. (Under U.S. law this would be termed a fiduciary 
responsibility.)
The Korean banks argued that they had no such spe-
cific duty, and regardless, they had explained the risks suf-
ficiently. The banks also argued that this was not a case 
of an unsophisticated buyer not understanding a complex 
product; both buyer and seller were sufficiently sophisti-
cated to understand the intricate workings and risks of 
these structures. The banks had in fact explained in sig-
nificant detail how the exporters could close-out their 
2008 and Financial Crisis
It did not take long for everything to go amiss. In the spring 
of 2008 the won started falling—rapidly—against the U.S. 
dollar. As illustrated by Exhibit B, the spot exchange rate 
of the won blew through the typical upper knock-in rate 
boundary quickly. By March of 2008 the won was trad-
ing at over KRW 1,000 to the dollar. The knock-in call 
options sold were exercised against the Korean manufac-
turers. Losses were enormous. By the end of August, days 
before the financial crisis broke in the United States, it was 
estimated there were already more than KRW 1.7 trillion 
(USD 1.67 billion) in losses by Korean exporters.
Caveat Emptor (Buyer Beware)
The magnitude of losses quickly resulted in the filing of 
hundreds of lawsuits in Korean courts. Korean manufactur-
ers who had purchased the KiKos sued the Korean banks 
to avoid the payment of losses, losses that in many cases 
would cause the bankruptcy of their businesses.
Exporters argued that the Korean banks had sold them 
complex products, which they did not understand. The lack 
of understanding was on at least two different levels. First, 
many of the KiKo contracts were only in English, and many 
Korean buyers did not understand English. The reason they 
Korean Won (KRW) = USD1.00
1,000
1,100
800
1/2/2007
2/2/2007
3/2/2007
4/2/2007
5/2/2007
6/2/2007
7/2/2007
8/2/2007
9/2/2007
10/2/2007
11/2/2007
12/2/2007
1/2/2008
2/2/2008
3/2/2008
4/2/2008
5/2/2008
6/2/2008
7/2/2008
8/2/2008
9/2/2008
10/2/2008
11/2/2008
12/2/2008
1/2/2009
2/2/2009
3/2/2009
4/2/2009
5/2/2009
6/2/2009
900
1,200
1,300
1,400
1,500
1,600
In the spring of 2008 the
won started falling against
the U.S. dollar–activating
the knock-in rate
By August 30, 2008, more than
KRW 1.7 trillion (USD 1.67
billion) in currency losses had
been suﬀered by exporters
Knock-In Rate
Knock-Out Rate
Exhibit B
South Korean Won’s Fall and the Knock-In

Mini-Case Questions
1.	 What were the expectations—and the fears—of the 
South Korean exporting firms that purchase the 
KiKos?
2.	 What is the responsibility of a bank that is offering and 
promoting these derivative products to its customers? 
Does it have some duty to protect their interests? Who 
do you think was at fault in this case?
3.	 If you were a consultant advising firms on their use 
of foreign currency derivative products, what lessons 
would you draw from this case, and how would you 
communicate that to your clients?
positions and then limit the losses, but the exporters had 
chosen not to do so.
In the end the Korean courts found in favor of the 
exporters in some cases, in favor of the banks in others. One 
principle that the courts followed was that the exporters 
found themselves in “changed circumstances” in which the 
change in the spot exchange rate was unforeseeable, and the 
losses resulting—too great. But some firms, for example GM 
Daewoo, lost $1.11 billion. Some Korean banks suffered sig-
nificant losses as well, and may have in fact helped transmit 
the financial crisis of 2008 from the United States and the 
European Union to many of the world’s emerging markets.4
4“Exotic Derivatives Losses in Emerging Markets: Questions of Suitability, Concerns for Stability,” by Randall Dodd, International 
Monetary Fund, IMF Working Paper WP/09, July 2009.
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Foreign Currency Futures. What is a foreign currency 
future?
2.	 Futures Terminology. Explain the meaning and prob-
able significance for international business of the fol-
lowing contract specifications: a) notional principal; 
b) margin; and c) marked-to-market
3.	 Long and a Short. How can foreign currency futures 
be used to speculate on the exchange rate move-
ments, and what role do long and short positions play 
in that speculation?
4.	 Futures and Forwards. How do foreign currency 
futures and foreign currency forwards compare?
5.	 Puts and Calls. Define a put and call on the British 
pound sterling.
6.	 Options versus Futures. Explain the difference 
between foreign currency options and futures and 
when either might be most appropriately used.
7.	 Call Option Contract. Suppose that exchange-traded 
American call options on pounds sterling with a 
strike price of 1.460 and a maturity of next March are 
now quoted at 3.67. What does this mean to a poten-
tial buyer?
8.	 Premiums, Prices & Costs. What is the difference 
between the price of an option, the value of an option, 
the premium on an option, and the cost of a foreign 
currency option?
9.	 Three Prices. What are the three different prices 
or “rates” integral to every foreign currency option 
contract?
10.	 Writing Options. Why would anyone write an option, 
knowing that the gain from receiving the option pre-
mium is fixed but the loss, if the underlying price goes 
in the wrong direction, can be extremely large?
11.	 Decision Prices. Once an option has been purchased, 
only two prices or rates are part of the holder’s 
decision-making process. Which two and why?
12.	 Option Cash Flows and Time. The cash flows asso-
ciated with a call option on euros by a U.S. dollar-
based investor occur at different points in time. 
What are they and how much does the time element 
matter?
13.	 Option Valuation. The value of an option is stated 
to be the sum of its intrinsic value and its time value. 
Explain what is meant by these terms.
14.	 Time Value Deterioration. An option’s value declines 
over time, but it does not do so evenly. Explain what 
that means for option valuation.
15.	 Option Values and Money. Options are often 
described as in-the-money, at-the-money, or out-
of-the-money. What does that mean and how is it 
determined?
16.	 Option Pricing and the Forward Rate. What is the 
relationship or link between the forward rate and the 
foreign currency option premium?
17.	 Option Deltas. What is an option delta? How does it 
change when the option is in-the-money, at-the-money, 
or out-of-the-money?
18.	 Historic versus Implied Volatility. What is the dif-
ference between a historic volatility and an implied 
volatility?
203
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options    CHAPTER 7 

204
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
Option
Strike Price
Premium
Put on Sing $
$0.6500/S$
$0.00003/S$
Call on Sing $
$0.6500/S$
$0.00046/S$
a.	 Should Cece buy a put on Singapore dollars or a 
call on Singapore dollars?
b.	 What is Cece’s break-even price on the option pur-
chased in part (a)?
c.	 Using your answer from part (a), what is Cece’s 
gross profit and net profit (including premium) if the 
spot rate at the end of 90 days is indeed $0.7000/S$?
d.	 Using your answer from part (a), what is Cece’s 
gross profit and net profit (including premium) if 
the spot rate at the end of 90 days is $0.8000/S$?
4.	 Kapinsky Capital Geneva (A). Christoph Hoffeman 
trades currency for Kapinsky Capital of Geneva. 
Christoph has $10 million to begin with, and he must 
state all profits at the end of any speculation in U.S. 
dollars. The spot rate on the euro is $1.3358/€, while 
the 30-day forward rate is $1.3350/€.
a.	 If Christoph believes the euro will continue to rise 
in value against the U.S. dollar, so that he expects 
the spot rate to be $1.3600/€ at the end of 30 days, 
what should he do?
b.	 If Christoph believes the euro will depreciate in 
value against the U.S. dollar, so that he expects the 
spot rate to be $1.2800/€ at the end of 30 days, what 
should he do?
5.	 Kapinsky Capital Geneva (B). Christoph Hoffeman 
of Kapinsky Capital now believes the Swiss franc 
will appreciate versus the U.S. dollar in the coming 
3-month period. He has $100,000 to invest. The cur-
rent spot rate is $0.5820/SF, the 3-month forward rate 
is $0.5640/SF, and he expects the spot rates to reach 
$0.6250/SF in three months.
a.	 Calculate Christoph’s expected profit assuming a 
pure spot market speculation strategy.
b.	 Calculate Christoph’s expected profit assuming he 
buys or sells SF three months forward.
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Saguaro Funds. Tony Begay, a currency trader for 
­Chicago-based Saguaro Funds, uses futures quotes on 
the British pound (£) to speculate on the value of the 
pound. Use the futures quotes in the table at the bot-
tom of the page to answer the following questions.
Problem 1.
British Pound Futures, U.S.$/pound (CME)
Contract = 62,500 pounds
Maturity
Open
High
Low
Settle
Change
High
Open 
Interest
March
1.4246
1.4268
1.4214
1.4228
0.0032
1.4700
25,605
June
1.4164
1.4188
1.4146
1.4162
0.0030
1.4550
809
a.	 If Tony buys 5 June pound futures, and the spot 
rate at maturity is $1.3980/£, what is the value of 
her position?
b.	 If Tony sells 12 March pound futures, and the spot 
rate at maturity is $1.4560/£, what is the value of 
her position?
c.	 If Tony buys 3 March pound futures, and the spot 
rate at maturity is $1.4560/£, what is the value of 
her position?
d.	 If Tony sells 12 June pound futures, and the spot 
rate at maturity is $1.3980/£, what is the value of 
her position?
2.	 Amber McClain. Amber McClain, the currency specu-
lator we met in the chapter, sells eight June futures 
contracts for 500,000 pesos at the closing price quoted 
in Exhibit 7.1.
a.	 What is the value of her position at maturity if the 
ending spot rate is $0.12000/Ps?
b.	 What is the value of her position at maturity if the 
ending spot rate is $0.09800/Ps?
c.	 What is the value of her position at maturity if the 
ending spot rate is $0.11000/Ps?
3.	 Cece Cao in Jakarta. Cece Cao trades currencies for 
Sumatra Funds in Jakarta. She focuses nearly all of her 
time and attention on the U.S. dollar/Singapore dollar 
($/S$) cross-rate. The current spot rate is $0.6000/S$. 
After considerable study, she has concluded that the 
Singapore dollar will appreciate versus the U.S. dollar 
in the coming 90 days, probably to about $0.7000/S$. 
She has the following options on the Singapore dollar 
to choose from:

205
Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options    CHAPTER 7 
Arthur is convinced that the British pound will slide 
significantly—possibly to $1.3200/£—in the coming 30 
to 60 days. The current spot rate is $1.4260/£. Arthur 
wishes to buy a put on pounds, which will yield the 
25% return expected by his investors. Which of the 
following put options would you recommend he pur-
chase? Prove your choice is the preferable combina-
tion of strike price, maturity, and up-front premium 
expense.
Strike Price
Maturity
Premium
$1.36/£
30 days
$0.00081/£
$1.34/£
30 days
$0.00021/£
$1.32/£
30 days
$0.00004/£
$1.36/£
60 days
$0.00333/£
$1.34/£
60 days
$0.00150/£
$1.32/£
60 days
$0.00060/£
11.	 Calandra Panagakos at CIBC. Calandra Panagakos 
works for CIBC Currency Funds in Toronto. Calandra 
is something of a contrarian—as opposed to most of 
the forecasts, she believes the Canadian dollar (C$) 
will appreciate versus the U.S. dollar over the coming 
90 days. The current spot rate is $0.6750/C$. Calandra 
may choose between the following options on the 
Canadian dollar.
Option
Strike Price
Premium
Put on C$
$0.7000
$0.00003/S$
Call on C$
$0.7000
$0.00049/S$
a.	 Should Calandra buy a put on Canadian dollars or 
a call on Canadian dollars?
b.	 What is Calandra’s break-even price on the option 
purchased in part (a)?
c.	 Using your answer from part (a), what is Calandra’s 
gross profit and net profit (including premium) 
if the spot rate at the end of 90 days is indeed 
$0.7600?
d.	 Using your answer from part (a), what is Calandra’s 
gross profit and net profit (including premium) if 
the spot rate at the end of 90 days is $0.8250?
Pricing Your Own Options
An Excel workbook entitled FX Option Pricing is down-
loadable from this book’s Web site. The workbook has five 
spreadsheets constructed for pricing currency options for 
the following five currency pairs (dollar/euro shown here): 
U.S. dollar/euro, U.S. dollar/Japanese yen, euro/Japanese 
6.	 Peleh’s Puts. Peleh writes a put option on Japanese yen 
with a strike price of $0.008000/¥ (¥125.00/$) at a pre-
mium of 0.0080¢ per yen and with an expiration date 
six months from now. The option is for ¥12,500,000. 
What is Peleh’s profit or loss at maturity if the end-
ing spot rates are ¥110/$, ¥115/$, ¥120/$, ¥125/$, ¥130/$, 
¥135/$, and ¥140/$?
7.	 Chavez S.A. Chavez S.A., a Venezuelan company, 
wishes to borrow $8,000,000 for eight weeks. A rate 
of 6.250% per annum is quoted by potential lenders 
in New York, Great Britain, and Switzerland, using, 
respectively, international, British, and the Swiss-­
eurobond definitions of interest (day count conven-
tions). From which source should Chavez borrow?
8.	 Cachita Haynes at Vatic Capital. Cachita Haynes 
works as a currency speculator for Vatic Capital of 
Los Angeles. Her latest speculative position is to profit 
from her expectation that the U.S. dollar will rise sig-
nificantly against the Japanese yen. The current spot 
rate is ¥120.00/$. She must choose between the follow-
ing 90-day options on the Japanese yen:
Option
Strike Price
Premium
Put on yen
¥125/$
$0.00003/S$
Call on yen
¥125/$
$0.00046/S$
a.	 Should Cachita buy a put on yen or a call on yen?
b.	 What is Cachita’s break-even price on the option 
purchased in part (a)?
c.	 Using your answer from part (a), what is Cachita’s 
gross profit and net profit (including premium) if 
the spot rate at the end of 90 days is ¥140/$?
9.	 Calling All Euros. Assume a call option on euros is 
written with a strike price of $1.2500/€ at a premium 
of 3.80¢ per euro ($0.0380/€) and with an expiration 
date three months from now. The option is for 100,000. 
­Calculate your profit or loss should you exercise 
before maturity at a time when the euro is traded spot 
at strike prices beginning at $1.10/€, rising to $1.40/€ in 
increments of $0.05.
10.	 Arthur Doyle at Baker Street. Arthur Doyle is a 
currency trader for Baker Street, a private invest-
ment house in London. Baker Street’s clients are a 
collection of wealthy private investors who, with a 
minimum stake of £250,000 each, wish to speculate 
on the movement of currencies. The investors expect 
annual returns in excess of 25%. Although officed in 
London, all accounts and expectations are based in 
U.S. dollars.

206
CHAPTER 7    Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
yen, U.S. dollar/British pound, and euro/British pound. Use 
the appropriate spreadsheet from the workbook to answer 
Problems 12–16.
12.	 U.S. Dollar/Euro. The table above indicates that a 1-year 
call option on euros at a strike rate of $1.25/€ will cost 
the buyer $0.0632/€, or 4.99%. But that assumed a vola-
tility of 12.000% when the spot rate was $1.2674/€. What 
would that same call option cost if the volatility was 
reduced to 10.500% when the spot rate fell to $1.2480/€?
13.	 U.S. Dollar/Japanese Yen. What would be the pre-
mium expense, in home currency, for a Japanese firm 
to purchase an option to sell 750,000 U.S. dollars, 
assuming the initial values listed in the FX Option 
Pricing workbook?
14.	 Euro/Japanese Yen. A French firm is expecting to 
receive JPY10.4 million in 90 days as a result of an 
export sale to a Japanese semiconductor firm. What 
will it cost, in total, to purchase an option to sell the 
yen at €0.0072/JPY?
15.	 U.S. Dollar/British Pound. Assuming the same ini-
tial values for the dollar/pound cross rate in the FX 
Option Pricing workbook, how much more would a 
call option on pounds be if the maturity was doubled 
from 90 to 180 days? What percentage increase is this 
for twice the length of maturity?
16.	 Euro/British Pound. How would the call option pre-
mium change on the right to buy pounds with euros if 
the euro interest rate changed to 4.000% from the ini-
tial values listed in the FX Option Pricing workbook?
Internet Exercises
1.	 Financial Derivatives and the ISDA. The International 
Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) publishes 
a wealth of information about financial derivatives, 
their valuation and their use, in addition to providing 
master documents for their contractual use between 
parties. Use the following ISDA Internet site to find 
the definitions to 31 basic financial derivative ques-
tions and terms:
ISDA
www.isda.org/educat/faqs.html
2.	 Risk Management of Financial Derivatives. If you 
think this book is long, take a look at the freely down-
loadable U.S. Comptroller of the Currency’s handbook 
on risk management related to the care and use of 
financial derivatives!
Comptroller 
of the 
Currency
www.occ.gov/publications/
publications-by-type/­ 
comptrollers-handbook/deriv.pdf
3.	 Option Pricing. OzForex Foreign Exchange Services 
is a private firm with an enormously powerful foreign 
currency derivative-enabled Web site. Use the follow-
ing site to evaluate the various “Greeks” related to 
currency option pricing.
OzForex
www.ozforex.com.au/forex-tools/tools/
fx-options-calculator
4.	 Garman-Kohlhagen Option Formulation. For those 
brave of heart and quantitatively adept, check out the 
following Internet site’s detailed presentation of the 
Garman-Kohlhagen option formulation used widely 
in business and finance today.
Riskglossary.com
www.riskglossary.com/link/
garman_kohlhagen_1983.htm
5.	 Chicago Mercantile Exchange. The Chicago Mercan-
tile Exchange trades futures and options on a variety 
of currencies, including the Brazilian real. Navigate 
to FX under the Trading tab on the following site to 
evaluate the uses of these currency derivatives:
Chicago 
Mercantile 
Exchange
www.cmegroup.com
6.	 Implied Currency Volatilities. The single unobserv-
able variable in currency option pricing is the volatil-
ity, since volatility inputs are the expected standard 
deviation of the daily spot rate for the coming period 
of the option’s maturity. Use the New York Federal 
Reserve’s Web site to obtain current implied currency 
volatilities for major trading ­cross-rate pairs.
Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York
www.ny.frb.org/markets/
impliedvolatility.html
7.	 Montreal Exchange. The Montreal Exchange is a Cana-
dian exchange devoted to the support of financial deriv-
atives in Canada. Use its Web site to view the latest on 
MV volatility—the volatility of the Montreal Exchange 
Index itself—in recent trading hours and days.
Montreal Exchange
www.m-x.ca/
marc_options_en.php

The foreign currency option model presented here, the European style option, is the result 
of the work of Black and Scholes (1972), Cox and Ross (1976), Cox, Ross, and Rubinstein 
(1979), Garman and Kohlhagen (1983), and Bodurtha and Courtadon (1987). Although we 
do not explain the theoretical derivation of the following option-pricing model, the original 
model derived by Black and Scholes is based on the formation of a riskless hedged portfolio 
composed of a long position in the security, asset, or currency, and a European call option. The 
solution to this model’s expected return yields the option premium.
The basic theoretical model for the pricing of a European call option is:
C = e-rfT SN(d1) - Ee
-rdT N(d2)
where
C	
premium on a European call
e	
continuous time discounting
S	
spot exchange rate ($/foreign currency)
E	
exercise or strike rate
T	
time to expiration
N	 cumulative normal distribution function
rf	
foreign interest rate
rd	 domestic interest rate
s	
standard deviation of asset price (volatility)
ln	 natural logarithm
The two density functions, d1 and d2, are defined:
d1 =
ln¢ S
E ≤+ ¢rd - rf + s2
2 ≤T
s2T
and:
d2 = d1 - s2T.
This expression can be rearranged so the premium on a European call option is written in 
terms of the forward rate:
C = e-rfT FN(d1) - e-rdT EN(d2)
where the spot rate and foreign interest rate have been replaced with the forward rate, F, and 
both the first and second terms are discounted over continuous time, e. If we now slightly 
CHAPTER 7 Appendix
Currency Option Pricing Theory
207

208
simplify, we find that the option premium is the present value of the difference between two 
cumulative normal density functions.
C = [FN(d1) - EN(d2)]e-rdT.
The two density functions are now defined:
d1 =
ln¢ F
E ≤+ ¢ s2
2 ≤T
s2T
and
d2 = d1 - s2T.
Solving each of these equations for d1 and d2 allows the determination of the European call 
option premium. The premium for a European put option, P, is similarly derived:
P = [F(N(d1) - 1) - E(N(d2) - 1)]e-rdT.
The European Call Option: Numerical Example
The actual calculation of the option premium is not as complex as it appears from the pre-
ceding set of equations. Assuming the following basic exchange rate and interest rate values, 
computation of the option premium is relatively straightforward.
Spot rate
= $1.7000/£
90-day Forward
= $1.7000/£
Strike rate
= $1.7000/£
U.S. dollar interest rate
= 8.00% (per annum)
Pound sterling interest rate
= 8.00% (per annum)
Time (days)
= 90
Std. Dev. (volatility)
= 10.00%
e (infinite discounting)
= 2.71828
The value of the two density functions are first derived:
d1 =
ln¢ F
E ≤+ ¢ s2
2 ≤T
s2T
=
ln¢ 1.7000
1.7000≤+ ¢ 0.10002
2
≤90
365
0.1000A
90
365
= 0.025
and
d2 = 0.025 - 0.1000A
90
365 = -0.025.
The values of d1 and d2 are then found in a cumulative normal probability table,
N(d1) = N(0.025) = 0.51; N(d2) = N(-0.025) = 0.49.
The premium of the European call with a “forward-at-the-money” strike rate is
C = [(1.7000)(0.51)] - (1.7000)(0.49)]2.71828-0.08(90/365) = $0.033/£.
This is the call option premium, price, value or cost.
Appendix    Currency Option Pricing Theory

Chapter	 8
Interest Rate Risk 
and Swaps
Confidence in markets and institutions, it’s a lot like oxygen. When you have 
it, you don’t even think about it. Indispensable. You can go years without 
thinking about it. When it’s gone for five minutes, it’s the only thing you 
think about. The confidence has been sucked out of the credit markets and 
institutions.
—Warren Buffett, October 1, 2008.
All firms—domestic or multinational, small or large, leveraged or unleveraged—are sensitive 
to changes in interest rates. Although a variety of interest rate risks exist, this book focuses 
on the financial management of the nonfinancial (nonbank) multinational firm. The inter-
national financial marketplace in which these multinational firms operate is largely defined 
by both interest rates and exchange rates, and those theoretical linkages were established in 
Chapter 6 on parity relationships. We now turn to the interest rate structures and challenges 
of firms operating in a multi-currency interest rate world.
The first part of the chapter, interest rate foundations, details the various reference rates 
and floating rates that all multinationals deal in. The chapter then turns to the government-
corporate interest rate relationships that define the costs and availability of capital. The third 
section focuses on the various forms of interest rate risk confronting multinational firms. 
The fourth and final section details how a variety of financial derivatives, including interest 
rate swaps, can be used to manage these interest rate risks. The Mini-Case at the end of the 
chapter, Argentina and the Vulture Funds, illustrates the risks a sovereign nation faces in 
attempting to recover from excessive debt and default.
Learning Objectives
■
■
Explain interest rate fundamentals, including basic floating rates of interest and fixed 
rates of interest
■
■
Define corporate interest rate risk and demonstrate how to manage it
■
■
Explore the use of interest rate futures and forward rate agreements in the 
­management of interest rate risk
■
■
Examine the use of interest rate swaps to manage the interest rate risks of 
­multinational firms
■
■
Detail how cross-currency swaps may be used to manage both foreign currency and 
interest rate risks in multinational financial management
209

210
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
Interest Rate Foundations
We begin our discussion of interest rates with some definitions. A reference rate—for example, 
U.S. dollar LIBOR—is the rate of interest used in a standardized quotation, loan agreement, 
or financial derivative valuation. LIBOR, the London Interbank Offered Rate, is by far the 
most widely used and quoted reference rate.
As defined by the British Bankers Association (BBA), LIBOR is quoted for overnight, 
1 week, 1 month, 2 months, etc., through 12-month maturities. Of these, 1-month, 3-month, 
and 6-month LIBOR are the most significant maturities due to their widespread use in vari-
ous loan and derivative agreements. The dollar and euro are the most widely used currencies, 
although the BBA also calculates the Japanese yen LIBOR, and other currency LIBOR rates 
at the same time in London from samples of banks. As Global Finance in Practice 8.1 describes, 
LIBOR itself has been the subject of controversy in recent years.
The interbank interest rate market is not, however, confined to London. Most major 
domestic financial centers construct their own interbank offered rates for local loan agree-
ment purposes. These rates include PIBOR (Paris Interbank Offered Rate), MIBOR (Madrid 
Interbank Offered Rate), SIBOR (Singapore Interbank Offered Rate), and FIBOR (Frankfurt 
Interbank Offered Rate), to name but a few.
“The idea that my word is my Libor is dead.”
—Mervyn King, Bank of England Governor.
No single interest rate is more fundamental to the operation of 
the global financial markets than the London Interbank Offered 
Rate (LIBOR). But beginning as early as 2007, a number of 
participants in the interbank market on both sides of the Atlan-
tic suspected that there was trouble with LIBOR.
LIBOR is published under the auspices of the British 
Bankers Association (BBA). Each day, a panel of 16 major 
multinational banks is requested to submit estimated borrow-
ing rates in the unsecured interbank market, which are then 
collected, massaged, and published in three steps.
Step 1. The banks on the LIBOR panels must submit their 
estimated borrowing rates by 11:10 a.m. London 
time. The submissions are made directly to ­Thomson 
Reuters, which executes the process on behalf of 
the BBA.
Step 2. Thomson Reuters discards the lowest 25% and high-
est 25% of interest rates submitted. It then calculates 
an average rate by maturity and currency using the 
remaining 50% of borrowing rate quotes.
Step 3. The BBA publishes the day’s LIBOR rates 20 minutes 
later, by 11:30 a.m. London time.
This same process is used to publish LIBOR for mul-
tiple currencies across a comprehensive set of maturities. 
The 3-month and 6-month maturities are the most significant 
maturities due to their widespread use in various loan and 
derivative agreements, with the dollar and the euro being the 
most widely used currencies.
One problem with LIBOR is the origin of the rates submit-
ted by banks. First, rates are based on “estimated borrowing 
rates” to avoid reporting only actual transactions, as many 
banks may not conduct actual transactions in all maturities 
and currencies each day. As a result, the origin of the rate sub-
mitted by each bank becomes, to some degree, discretionary.
Secondly, banks—specifically money-market and deriva-
tive traders within the banks—have a number of interests that 
may be impacted by borrowing costs reported by the bank 
that day. One such example can be found in the concerns 
of banks in the interbank market in September 2008, when 
the credit crisis was in full-bloom. When a bank reported that 
it was being charged a higher rate by other banks, it was 
effectively self-reporting the market’s assessment that it was 
increasingly risky. In the words of one analyst, it was akin “to 
hanging a sign around one’s neck that I am carrying a con-
tagious disease.” Market analysts are now estimating that 
many of the banks in the LIBOR panel were reporting bor-
rowing rates that were anywhere from 30 to 40 basis points 
lower than actual rates throughout the financial crisis. Court 
documents continue to shed light on the depth of the market’s 
manipulation, although it is not really known to what degree 
attempts at manipulation have been successful.
Global Finance in Practice 8.1
The Trouble with LIBOR

211
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
Exhibit 8.1 shows 3-month USD-LIBOR over the past 30 years. It has obviously moved 
over large ranges, from over 11% in the late 1980s to near-zero percent in the post 2008 finan-
cial crisis years. The most recent period—that in which the U.S. Federal Reserve has pursued 
quantitative easing (QE)—in which the Federal Reserve has continued to pump liquidity into 
the financial system, has clearly kept 3-month LIBOR at very low levels.
But as we noted in Chapter 6 on international parity conditions, interest rates are currency 
specific. Exhibit 8.2 makes that very apparent as it presents 3-month LIBOR rates for five of 
the world’s largest financial markets—the U.S. dollar, the euro, the Swiss franc, British pound, 
and Japanese yen. The true volatility of short-term interest rates is clear here, in that in just 
the past 15 years these major loan rate foundations have bounced from near 7.00% to near 
or—in some cases recently—below zero percent.
Corporate Cost of Debt
Individual borrowers—whether they are governments or companies—possess their own indi-
vidual credit quality, the market’s assessment of their ability to repay debt in a timely manner. 
These credit assessments result in the assignments of designations of differences in the cost and 
access to capital. This means individual organizational borrowers not only pay different rates to 
borrow (different interest rates), but also have access to different amounts of capital or debt.
The cost of debt for any individual borrower will therefore possess two components, the 
risk-free rate of interest (kUS $), plus a credit risk premium (RPM$ Rating) reflecting the assessed 
0
1/1/1986
9/1/1986
5/1/1987
1/1/1988
9/1/1988
5/1/1989
1/1/1990
9/1/1990
5/1/1991
1/1/1992
9/1/1992-
5/1/1993
1/1/1994
9/1/1994
5/1/1995
1/1/1996
9/1/1996
5/1/1997
1/1/1998
9/1/1998
5/1/1999
1/1/2000
9/1/2000
5/1/2001
1/1/2002
9/1/2002
5/1/2003
1/1/2004
9/1/2004
5/1/2005
1/1/2006
9/1/2006
5/1/2007
1/1/2008
9/1/2008
5/1/2009
1/1/2010
9/1/2010
5/1/2011
1/1/2012
9/1/2012
5/1/2013
1/1/2014
9/1/2014
2
4
6
8
10
12
Percent per annum
1991–1992
Recession
Asian
Financial
Crisis
Global
Financial
Crisis
Federal Reserve
Uses Quantitative
Easing
2001
Recession
2008–2010
Recession
Source: LIBOR data from the Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED), Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Exhibit 8.1
 U.S. Dollar 3-month LIBOR (monthly, 1986–2014)

212
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
credit quality of the individual borrower. For an individual borrower in the United States, the 
cost of debt (kDebt
$) would be:
kDebt
$ = kUS $ + RPM$ Rating
The credit risk premium represents the credit risk of the individual borrower. In credit 
markets this assignment is typically based on the borrower’s credit rating as designated by one 
of the major credit rating agencies, Moody’s, Standard & Poors, and Fitch. An overview of those 
credit ratings is presented in Exhibit 8.3. Although each agency utilizes different methodolo-
gies, all consider the industry in which the firm operates, its current level of indebtedness, its 
past, present, and prospective operating performance, and a multitude of other factors.
Although there is obviously a wide spectrum of credit ratings, the designation of invest-
ment grade versus speculative grade is extremely important. An investment grade borrower 
(Baa3, BBB–, and above), is considered a high-quality borrower that is expected to be able 
to repay a new debt obligation in a timely manner regardless of market events or business 
performance. A speculative grade borrower (Ba1 or BB+ and below) is believed to be a riskier 
borrower, and depending on the nature of a market downturn or business shock, may have 
difficulty servicing new debt.
Exhibit 8.3 also illustrates how the cost of debt changes with credit quality. At this time the 
U.S. Treasury was paying 1.74% for funds for a 5-year period. The average single-A borrower 
(“A”) paid 2.35% per annum for funds for a 5-year period at this time, 0.61% above the U.S. 
Treasury. Note that the costs of credit quality—credit spreads—are quite minor for borrowers 
of investment grade. Speculative grade borrowers, however, are charged a hefty premium in 
0
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
1
2
3
4
7
6
5
–1
Percent per annum
British pound
U.S. dollar
Euro
Swiss franc
Japanese yen
Exhibit 8.2
 3-month LIBOR for Select Currencies (Daily, Jan. 1999–Jan. 2015)

213
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
Exhibit 8.3
Credit Ratings and Cost of Funds
Investment Grade
Moody’s
S&P
Fitch
5-year
Average Rate
Spread
Over Treasury*
Prime
Aaa
AAA
AAA
1.92%
0.18%
High grade
Aa1
AA+
AA+
Aa2
AA
AA
2.24%
0.50%
Aa3
AA-
AA-
Upper medium grade
A1
a+
A+
A2
A
A
2.35%
0.61%
A3
A-
A-
Lower medium grade
Baa1
BBB+
BBB+
Baa2
BBB
BBB
2.81%
1.07%
Baa3
BBB-
BBB-
Speculative Grade
Speculative Grade
Ba1
BB+
BB+
Ba2
BB
BB
4.69%
2.95%
Ba3
BB-
BB-
Highly speculative
B1
B+
B+
B2
B
B
7.01%
5.27%
B3
B-
B-
Substantial risks
Caa1
CCC+
CCC
8.56%
6.82%
Extremely speculative
Caa2
CCC
Default imminent
Caa3
CCC-
In default
C
C, D
DDD, DD, D
*These are long-term credit ratings. Rates quoted are for October 28, 2014, all for 5-year maturities. The 5-year U.S. ­Treasury rate was 1.74%.
the market. For example the average single-B (“B”) borrower paid 7.01% per annum for a 
5-year maturity, a full 5.27% above U.S. Treasuries.
The cost of debt for corporate borrowers also changes over maturity. Exhibit 8.4 graphi-
cally presents the full range of maturities of the same credit ratings and costs presented in the 
previous exhibit. Once again, it is the U.S. Treasury yield curve, the U.S. government’s cost of 
funds over varying maturities, which establishes the base rates at which all corporate credits are 
then priced. Note that AAA-rated firms (currently there are only three—ExxonMobil, Micro-
soft, Johnson & Johnson) pay very little more than the U.S. government to borrow money. The 
bulk of the larger firms operating in the U.S. today, in the S&P500, are either A, BBB, or BB 
in rating. The U.S. Treasury yield curve is quite flat, but still upward sloping indicating that 
short-term funds are cheaper than long-term funds. (We have limited the graphic to 10 years 
in maturity. U.S. Treasuries actually extend out to 30 years.)
Every country with an established financial system will have some version of this same 
government yield curve plus corporate borrowing spread structure. In addition to the U.S., the 
largest in the world would be those of the European Union, the United Kingdom, and Japan. 

214
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
As we will see later in this chapter, however, different countries—and currencies—possess 
very different costs of funds.
Credit Risk and Repricing Risk
For a corporate borrower, it is especially important to distinguish between credit risk and 
repricing risk. Credit risk, sometimes termed roll-over risk, is the possibility that a borrower’s 
creditworthiness at the time of renewing a credit—its credit rating—is reclassified by the 
lender. This can result in changing fees, changing interest rates, altered credit line commitments, 
or even denial. Repricing risk is the risk of changes in interest rates charged (earned) at the 
time a financial contract’s rate is reset. A borrower that is renewing a credit will face current 
market conditions on the base rate used for financing, a true floating-rate.
Sovereign Debt
Debt issued by governments—sovereign debt—is historically considered debt of the highest 
quality, higher than that of non-government borrowers within that same country. This quality 
preference stems from the ability of a government to tax its people and, if need be, print more 
money. Although the first may cause significant economic harm in the form of unemployment, 
and the second significant financial harm in the form of inflation, they are both tools available 
to the sovereign. The government therefore has the ability to service its own debt, one way or 
another, when that debt is denominated in its own currency. In certain sovereign combinations, 
like the EU, these fundamentals may be altered, as described in Global Finance in Practice 8.2 
on European sovereign debt.
A government, typically through its central banking authority, also conducts its own mon-
etary policy. That policy will, in combination with economic conditions of growth and inflation, 
2
4
12
10
8
6
0
1 yr
2 yr
3 yr
4 yr
5 yr
6 yr
7 yr
8 yr
9 yr
10 yr
Percent per annum
Standard & Poor’s (S&P) Rating
155 basis points
The basis point spreads between credit ratings rise dramatically
for borrowers of credit qualities less than BBB–so-called
speculative grade borrowers.
Credit spreads for investment grade borrowers–BBB and
above–are quite small, allowing these borrowers to raise
debt at rates only slightly above the U.S. Treasury.
CCC
B
BB
BBB
A
AA
AAA
Treasuries
232 basis points
188 basis points
Exhibit 8.4
 U.S. Corporate Credit Spreads (October 28, 2014)

215
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
The European Union is a complex organism compared to the 
customary structure of fiscal and monetary policy institutions 
described in the typical Economics 101 course. With the 
adoption of a common currency, the EU members participat-
ing in the euro gave up exclusive rights over the ability to print 
money (to service debt). Because it is a common currency, 
no one EU member has the right to simply print more euros—
that is the policy realm of the European Central Bank (ECB). 
The members of the EU do have relative freedom to set their 
own fiscal policies—government spending, taxation, and the 
­creation of government surpluses or deficits.
Following the onslaught of the global financial crisis in 2008–
2009, a number of EU member countries suffered significant 
economic crises. Part of their economic woes included growing 
fears over their ability to service their outstanding sovereign debt. 
As seen below, these market fears and concerns drove the cost 
of their funds on the international marketplace very high, showing 
a dramatic separation of sovereign debt costs.
Global Finance in Practice 8.2
European Sovereign Debt
European Sovereign Debt Interest Costs
5
10
20
15
25
30
0
Jan-05
Apr-05
Jul-05
Oct-05
Jan-06
Apr-06
Jul-06
Oct-06
Jan-07
Apr-07
Jul-07
Oct-07
Jan-08
Apr-08
Jul-08
Oct-08
Jan-09
Apr-09
Jul-09
Oct-09
Jan-10
Apr-10
Jul-10
Oct-10
Jan-11
Apr-11
Jul-11
Oct-11
Jan-12
Apr-12
Jul-12
Oct-12
Jan-13
Apr-13
Jul-13
Oct-13
Jan-14
Apr-14
Jul-14
Oct-14
Percent (euros)
In January 2012 the government of Greece borrowed at rates which were
2400 basis points –24%—higher than the government of Germany
Greece
Portugal
Ireland
Germany
Source: Long-term interest rate statistics for EU member states, European Central Bank, www.ecb.int/stats/money/long.
10-year maturities.
determine the entire structure of its own interest rates of all maturities. Depending on the 
depth and breadth of domestic financial markets—the sophistication of the domestic financial 
marketplace—those maturities may be very short or very long. A large industrial country like 
the United States or Japan may issue its own debt instruments, (borrow money) at maturities 
as long as 30 years or longer. All denominated in its own currency, and saleable on the global 
market to buyers, domestic and foreign. The U.S. for example has financed a large portion of 
its government debt by selling U.S. Treasuries to investors all over the world, to private indi-
viduals, organizations, and even governments.

216
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
Domestic interest rates are in domestic currency, and as discussed in Chapter 6 on inter-
national parity conditions, interest rates are themselves currency specific. A direct comparison 
of interest rates across countries is only truly economically possible if the rates have all been 
converted to one currency (as is the case when looking at various opportunities for uncovered 
interest arbitrage), or when different countries raise debt in a common currency (say the U.S. 
dollar), or if exchange rates never change.
Sovereign Spreads
Many emerging market country governments often raise debt capital in the international 
markets, and they do so typically in one of the world’s most widely traded currencies like the 
U.S. dollar, European euro, or Japanese yen. Exhibit 8.5 provides a comparison of what sev-
eral sovereign borrowers have had to pay for U.S. dollar funds over and above that of the U.S. 
Treasury, the U.S. dollar sovereign spread, over the last two decades.
What Exhibit 8.5 details is the global financial market’s assessment of sovereign credit 
risk—the ability of these sovereign borrowers to repay foreign currency denominated debt—
U.S. dollar debt in this case—in a timely manner. For example, the cost of Brazilian sovereign 
dollar debt (kBrazil
$), the cost for the government of Brazil to raise U.S. dollar debt on global 
markets, can be decomposed into two basic components: (1) the U.S. government’s own cost 
of dollar debt (kUS  $); and (2) the Brazilian sovereign spread, a risk-premium for a dollar 
­borrower who must earn U.S. dollars in order to service the debt (RPM$ Brazil):
kBrazil
$ = U.S. Treasury dollar rate + Brazilian sovereign spread = kUS  $ + RPM$ Brazil
As illustrated in Exhibit 8.4, for some of these country borrowers like Pakistan, the 
­sovereign spread has periodically been extremely high. A number of member countries of 
500
1,000
2,000
1,500
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
0
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
Percent paid over U.S. Treasuries
Russia
Pakistan
Brazil
Indonesia
China
Exhibit 8.5
Selected Sovereign Spreads Over U.S. Treasuries

217
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
the European Union—particularly Greece, Portugal, and Ireland—have themselves struggled 
with recessionary economies and rising costs of debt in recent years. In early 2015, Russia 
was downgraded to “speculative” status by the major credit rating agencies. This downgrade, 
a result of economic deterioration associated with sanctions by Western nations (related to 
Ukraine) and the fall in the price of oil (that provides more than 50% of Russian government 
revenues), reduced Russia’s access to capital.
Interest Rate Risk
The single largest interest rate risk of the nonfinancial firm is debt service. The debt structure 
of the MNE will possess differing maturities of debt, different interest rate structures (such as 
fixed versus floating-rate), and different currencies of denomination. Therefore the manage-
ment of this debt portfolio can be quite complex, and in all cases, important.
The second most prevalent source of interest rate risk for the MNE lies in its holdings 
of interest-sensitive securities. Unlike debt, which is recorded on the right-hand-side of the 
firm’s balance sheet (a liability), the marketable securities portfolio of the firm appears on 
the left-hand-side (an asset). Marketable securities represent potential earnings or interest 
inflows to the firm. Ever-increasing competitive pressures have pushed financial managers 
to tighten their management of interest rates on both the left and right sides of the firm’s 
balance sheet.
International interest rate calculations are also a concern of any firm borrowing or invest-
ing. Interest rate calculations differ by the number of days used in the period’s calculation and 
in the definition of how many days there are in a year (for financial purposes). Exhibit 8.6 
illustrates three different examples of how different calculation methodologies result in dif-
ferent 1-month payments of interest on a $10 million loan, 5.500% per annum interest, for an 
exact period of 28 days.
The first example shown, International Practice, uses a 28-day month in a 360-day financial 
year. The result is an interest payment of $42,777.78:
0.055 * $10,000,000 * (28/360) = $42,777.78
If, however, the interest rate calculation had utilized the Swiss (Eurobond) Practice of a 
standard 30-day calculation, the interest cost for the same 1-month period would have been 
$45,833.33, a substantial $3,055.56 higher. Clearly, calculation methods matter.
Exhibit 8.6
International Interest Rate Calculations
International interest rate calculations differ by the number of days used in the period’s calculation and their definition of how many 
days there are in a year (for financial purposes). The following example highlights how the different methods result in different 
1-month payments of interest on a $10 million loan, 5.500% per annum interest, for an exact period of 28 days.
$10 million @ 5.500% per annum
Practice
Day Count in Period
Days/Year
Days Used
Interest Payment
International
Exact number of days
360
28
$42,777.78
British
Exact number of days
365
28
$42,191.78
Swiss (Eurobond)
Assumed 30 days/month
360
30
$45,833.33

218
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
Debt Structures and Strategies
Consider the three different bank loan structures being considered by U.S. medical equip-
ment manufacturer, MedStat. Each is intended to provide $10 million in financing for a 3-year 
period.
Strategy 1: Borrow $1 million for three years at a fixed rate of interest.
Strategy 2: Borrow $1 million for three years at a floating rate, LIBOR + 2%, LIBOR to be 
reset annually.
Strategy 3: Borrow $1 million for one year at a fixed rate, then renew the credit annually.
Although the lowest cost of funds is always a major selection criterion, it is not the only 
one. If MedStat chooses Strategy 1, it assures itself of the funds for the full three years at a 
known interest rate. It has maximized the predictability of cash flows for the debt obligation. 
What it has sacrificed to some degree is the ability to enjoy a lower interest rate in the event 
that interest rates fall over the period. Of course, it has also eliminated the risk that it would 
face higher rates if interest rates rose over the period.
Strategy 2 offers what Strategy 1 did not—flexibility. It too assures MedStat of full fund-
ing for the 3-year period. This eliminates credit risk. Repricing risk is, however, alive and well 
in Strategy 2. If LIBOR changes dramatically by the second or third year, the LIBOR rate 
change is passed through completely to MedStat the borrower. The spread, however, remains 
fixed (reflecting the credit standing that has been locked in for the full three years). Flexibility 
comes at a cost in this case, the risk that interest rates can go up as well as down.
Strategy 3 offers MedStat more flexibility and more risk. First, the firm is borrowing at 
the shorter end of the yield curve. If the yield curve is positively sloped, as is commonly the 
case in major industrial markets, the base interest rate should be lower. But the short end 
of the yield curve is also the more volatile. It responds to short-term events in a much more 
pronounced fashion than longer-term rates. The strategy also exposes the firm to the possibil-
ity that its credit rating may change dramatically by the time for credit renewal, for better or 
worse. Noting that credit ratings in general attempt to establish whether a firm can meet its 
debt-service obligations under worsening economic conditions, firms that are highly credit-
worthy (investment-rated grades) may view Strategy 3 as a more relevant alternative than do 
firms of lower quality (speculative grades).
Although the previous example gives only a partial picture of the complexity of funding 
decisions and choices within the firm, it demonstrates the many ways credit risks and repric-
ing risks are inextricably intertwined. The expression “interest rate exposure” is a complex 
concept, and the proper measurement of the exposure prior to its management is critical. We 
now proceed to describe the interest rate risk of the most common form of corporate debt, 
floating-rate loans.
MedStat’s Floating-Rate Loans
Floating-rate loans are a widely used source of debt for firms worldwide. They are also the 
source of the single largest and most frequently observed corporate interest rate exposure. 
Exhibit 8.7 depicts the costs and cash flows for a 3-year floating rate loan taken out by ­MedStat. 
The loan of US$10 million will be serviced with annual interest payments and total principal 
repayment at the end of the 3-year period.
The loan is priced at U.S. dollar LIBOR + 1.250% (note that the cost of money, interest, 
is often referred to as price). The LIBOR base will be reset each year on an agreed-upon date 
(say two days prior to payment). Whereas the LIBOR component is truly floating, the spread 
of 1.250% is actually a fixed component of the interest payment, which is known with certainty 
for the life of the loan.

219
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
MedStat will not know the actual interest cost of the loan until the loan has been com-
pletely repaid. Caitlin Kelly, the CFO of MedStat, may forecast what LIBOR will be for the 
life of the loan, but she will not know with certainty until all payments have been completed. 
This uncertainty is not only an interest rate risk, but it is also an actual cash flow risk associ-
ated with the interest payment. (A fixed interest rate loan has interest rate risk, in this case 
opportunity cost, which does not put actual cash flows at risk.)
Exhibit 8.7 illustrates the cash flows and all-in-costs (AIC) of the floating-rate loan. The 
AIC is found by calculating the internal rate of return (IRR) of the total cash flow stream, 
including proceeds up-front and repayment over time. This baseline analysis assumes that 
LIBOR remains at 5.000% for the life of the loan. Including the up-front loan origination fees 
of 1.50%, the AIC to MedStat is 6.820% (or 6.250% without fees). But this is only hypothetical, 
as MedStat and its bank both assume that over time LIBOR will change. Which direction it 
will change, and by how much per year, is of course unknown. The loan’s LIBOR component, 
but not the credit spread, creates a debt-service cash flow risk over time for MedStat.
If MedStat Corporation decided, after it had taken out the loan, that it wished to manage 
the interest rate risk associated with the loan agreement, it would have a number of manage-
ment alternatives:
■
■
Refinancing. MedStat could go back to its lender and restructure and refinance the 
entire agreement. This is not always possible and it is often expensive.
■
■
Forward rate agreements (FRAs). MedStat could lock in the future interest rate pay-
ments with forward rate agreements (FRAs), interest rate contracts similar to foreign 
exchange forward contracts.
Exhibit 8.7
MedStat’s Floating-Rate Loan
The expected interest rates and cash flows associated with a 3-year $10 million floating-rate loan with annual payments. MedStat 
pays an intitation (origination) fee of 1.500% of principal up-front.
Loan Interest
Year 0
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
LIBOR (floating)
5.000%
5.000%
5.000%
Credit spread (fixed)
  1.250%
  1.250%
  1.250%
Total interest payable
6.250%
6.250%
6.250%
Principal Payments
Loan principal
$10,000,000
Origination fees
1.50%
  (150,000)
Loan proceeds
$9,850,000
Principal repayment
($10,000,000)
Interest Cash Flows
LIBOR (floating)
($500,000)
($500,000)
($500,000)
Credit spread (fixed)
(125,000)
(125,000)
(125,000)
Total interest payable
($625,000)
($625,000)
($625,000)
Total loan cash flows
$9,850,000
($625,000)
($625,000)
($10,625,000)
All-in-Cost (AIC) or IRR
6.820%
Note: The effective cost of funds (before-tax) for MedStat—the all-in-cost (AIC)—is calculated by finding the internal rate of return (IRR) of the 
total cash flows associated with the loan and its repayment. The AIC of the original loan agreement, ­without fees, would be 6.250%.

220
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
■
■
Interest rate futures. Interest rate futures have gained substantial acceptance in the 
corporate sector. MedStat could lock in the future interest rate payments by taking 
an interest rate futures position.
■
■
Interest rate swaps. MedStat could enter into an additional agreement with a bank or 
swap dealer in which it exchanged—swapped—future cash flows in such a way that 
the interest rate payments on the floating-rate loan would become fixed.
The following section details how the three interest rate derivative management solutions (all 
above but refinancing) work and might be utilized by a corporate borrower.
Interest Rate Futures and FRAs
Like foreign currency, there are a multitude of interest rate-based financial derivatives. We 
first describe interest rate futures and forward rate agreements (FRAs) before moving on to 
the interest rate swap.
Interest Rate Futures
Unlike foreign currency futures, interest rate futures are relatively widely used by financial 
managers and treasurers of nonfinancial companies. Their popularity stems from the high 
liquidity of the interest rate futures markets, their simplicity in use, and the rather standardized 
interest rate exposures most firms possess. The two most widely used futures contracts are the 
eurodollar futures traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) and the U.S. Treasury 
Bond Futures of the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT). To illustrate the use of futures for man-
aging interest rate risks, we will focus on the 3-month eurodollar futures contracts. Exhibit 8.8 
presents eurodollar futures for two years (they actually trade 10 years into the future).
The yield of a futures contract is calculated from the settlement price, which is the closing 
price for that trading day. For example, a financial manager examining the eurodollar quotes 
in Exhibit 8.8 for a March 2011 contract would see that the settlement price on the previous 
day was 94.76, an annual yield of 5.24%:
Yield = (100.00 - 94.76) = 5.24%
Since each contract is for a 3-month period (quarter) and a notional principal of $1 million, 
each basis point is actually worth $2,500 (0.01 * $1,000,000 * 90/360).
Exhibit 8.8
Eurodollar Futures Prices
Maturity
Open
High
Low
Settle
Yield
Open Interest
June 10
94.99
95.01
94.98
95.01
4.99
455,763
Sept
94.87
94.97
94.87
94.96
5.04
535,932
Dec
94.60
94.70
94.60
94.68
5.32
367,036
March 11
94.67
94.77
94.66
94.76
5.24
299,993
June
94.55
94.68
94.54
94.63
5.37
208,949
Sept
94.43
94.54
94.43
94.53
5.47
168,961
Dec
94.27
94.38
94.27
94.36
5.64
130,824
Typical presentation by The Wall Street Journal. Only regular quarterly maturities shown. All contracts are for $1 million; 
points of 100%. Open interest is number of contracts outstanding.

221
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
If a financial manager were interested in hedging a floating-rate interest payment due in 
March 2011, she would need to sell a future, to take a short position. This strategy is referred to 
as a short position because the manager is selling something she does not own (as in shorting 
common stock). If interest rates rise by March, as the manager fears, the futures price will fall 
and she will be able to close the position at a profit. This profit will roughly offset the losses 
associated with rising interest payments on her debt. If the manager is wrong, however, and 
interest rates actually fall by the maturity date, causing the futures price to rise, she will suffer 
a loss that will wipe out the “savings” derived from making a lower floating-rate interest pay-
ment than she expected. So by selling the March 2011 futures contract, the manager locks in 
an interest rate of 5.24%.
Obviously, interest rate futures positions could be, and are on a regular basis, purchased 
purely for speculative purposes. Although that is not the focus of the managerial context here, 
the example shows how any speculator with a directional view on interest rates could take 
positions in expectations of profit.
As mentioned previously, the most common interest rate exposure of the nonfinancial 
firm is interest payable on debt. Such exposure is not, however, the only interest rate risk. 
As more and more firms manage their entire balance sheet, the interest earnings from the 
left-­hand-side are under increasing scrutiny. If financial managers are expected to earn higher 
interest on interest-bearing securities (marketable securities), they may well find a second use 
for the interest rate futures market—to lock in future interest earnings. Exhibit 8.9 provides 
an ­overview of these two basic interest rate exposures and management strategies.
Forward Rate Agreements
A forward rate agreement (FRA) is an interbank-traded contract to buy or sell interest rate 
payments on a notional principal. These contracts are settled in cash. The buyer of an FRA 
obtains the right to lock in an interest rate for a desired term that begins at a future date. The 
contract specifies that the seller of the FRA will pay the buyer the increased interest expense 
on a nominal sum (the notional principal) of money if interest rates rise above the agreed rate, 
but the buyer will pay the seller the differential interest expense if interest rates fall below the 
agreed rate. Maturities available are typically 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months.
Like foreign currency forward contracts, FRAs are useful on individual exposures. They 
are contractual commitments of the firm that allow little flexibility to enjoy favorable move-
ments, such as when LIBOR is falling as described in the previous section. Firms also use FRAs 
if they plan to invest in securities at future dates but fear that interest rates might fall prior 
to the investment date. Because of the limited maturities and currencies available, however, 
FRAs are not widely used outside the largest industrial economies and currencies.
Exhibit 8.9
Interest Rate Futures Strategies for Common Exposures
Exposure or Position
Futures Action
Interest Rates
Position Outcome
Paying interest on future  
date
Sell a Futures  
(short position)
If rates go up
Futures price falls; short earns 
a profit
If rates go down
Futures price rises; short earns 
a loss
Earning interest on future  
date
Buy a Futures  
(long position)
If rates go up
Futures price falls; long earns 
a loss
If rates go down
Futures price rises; long earns 
a profit

222
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
Interest Rate Swaps
Swaps are contractual agreements to exchange or swap a series of cash flows. These cash flows 
are most commonly the interest payments associated with debt service, the payments associ-
ated with fixed-rate and floating-rate debt obligations.
Swap Structures
The following three key concepts clarify the differences between swap agreements:
1.	 If the agreement is for one party to swap its fixed interest rate payment for the float-
ing interest rate payments of another, it is termed an interest rate swap, sometimes 
referred to as a plain-vanilla swap.
2.	 If the agreement is to swap currencies of debt service, for example Swiss franc interest 
payments in exchange for U.S. dollar interest payments, it is termed a currency swap 
or cross-currency swap.
3.	 A single swap may combine elements of both interest rate swaps and currency swaps. 
For example, a swap agreement may swap fixed-rate dollar payments for floating-rate 
euro payments.
In all cases, the swap serves to alter the firm’s cash flow obligations, as in changing 
­floating-rate payments into fixed-rate payments associated with an existing debt obligation. 
The swap itself is not a source of capital, but rather an alteration of the cash flows associated 
with payment.
The two parties may have various motivations for entering into the agreement. For exam-
ple, a very common position is as follows: A corporate borrower of good credit standing has 
existing floating-rate debt service payments. The borrower, after reviewing current market con-
ditions and forming expectations about the future, may conclude that interest rates are about to 
rise. In order to protect the firm against rising debt-service payments, the company’s treasury 
may enter into a swap agreement to pay fixed/receive floating. This means the firm will now 
make fixed interest rate payments and receive from the swap counterparty floating interest 
rate payments. The floating-rate payments that the firm receives are used to service the debt 
obligation of the firm, so the firm on a net basis is now making fixed interest rate payments. 
Using derivatives it has synthetically changed floating-rate debt into fixed-rate debt. It has 
done so without going through the costs and intricacies of refinancing existing debt obligations.
The cash flows of an interest rate swap are interest rates applied to a set amount of capital 
(notional principal). For this reason, these cash flows are also referred to as coupon swaps. 
Firms entering into interest rate swaps set the notional principal so that the cash flows resulting 
from the interest rate swap cover their interest rate management needs.
Interest rate swaps are contractual commitments between a firm and a swap dealer and 
are completely independent of the interest rate exposure of the firm. That is, the firm may 
enter into a swap for any reason it sees fit and then swap a notional principal that is less than, 
equal to, or even greater than the total position being managed. For example, a firm with a 
variety of floating-rate loans on its books may, if it wishes, enter into interest rate swaps for 
only 70% of the existing principal. The size of the swap notional principal is a choice purely 
in the hands of corporate management, and is not confined to the size of existing floating-rate 
loan obligations. It should also be noted that the interest rate swap market is filling a gap in 
market efficiency. If all firms had free and equal access to capital markets, regardless of inter-
est rate structure or currency of denomination, the swap market would most likely not exist. 
The fact that the swap market not only exists but also flourishes and provides benefits to all 
parties is in some ways the proverbial “free lunch.”

223
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
Illustrative Case: MedStat’s Floating-Rate Debt
MedStat is a U.S.-based firm with a $40 million floating-rate bank loan. The company is finish-
ing the first two years of the loan agreement (it is the end of the third quarter of 2017), with 
three years remaining. The loan is priced at LIBOR + 1.250%, the 3-month LIBOR rate plus 
a 1.250% credit risk premium. The recent movements of LIBOR and MedStat’s floating-rate 
debt are depicted in Exhibit 8.10.
As seen in Exhibit 8.10, LIBOR has started moving upward in the past year. MedStat’s 
management is now worried that interest rates will continue to rise and the company’s inter-
est costs rise with them. Management is considering entering into a pay-fixed receive-floating 
plain-vanilla interest rate swap. MedStat’s New York bank has quoted it a fixed-rate payment 
of 3.850% in exchange for LIBOR. The notional principal of the swap, the base amount for 
calculating the interest cash flows, is something MedStat must choose. In this case they decide 
to enter into a notional principal equal to the full amount of the floating-rate loan, $40 million.
The interest rates of the proposed swap, when combined with MedStat’s current 
­floating-rate debt obligations, would appear as follows:
Debt/Swap Component
Floating
Fixed
Floating-rate loan
(LIBOR)
(1.250%)
Swap (pay fixed, receive floating)
LIBOR
(3.850%)
Floating-rate loan after swap
—
(5.100%)
1.500
1.000
0.500
2.000
3.000
2.500
3.500
4.000
4.500
5.000
0
2016 Q1
2018 Q3
Interest Rate (percent per annum)
2016 Q2
2016 Q3
2016 Q4
2017 Q1
2017 Q2
2017 Q3
2017 Q4
2018 Q1
2018 Q2
MedStat has $40 million in ﬂoating rate loans, paying a ﬂoating interest rate of LIBOR + 1.250%. Over the past year LIBOR has been trending upward.
Company management is now considering swapping its ﬂoating-rate debt for ﬁxed-rate payments—a pay ﬁxed, receive ﬂoating—plain vanilla interest
rate swap. If it swaps now it can lock-in a ﬁxed rate payment of 3.850% (pay ﬁxed component) in exchange for LIBOR (received ﬂoating component).
Fixed-rate loan available at
current time (2017 Q3) of 3.850%
Current
Period
3-month LIBOR + Spread
Company credit
spread of 1.250%
3-month LIBOR
Exhibit 8.10
MedStat Considers a Plain Vanilla Interest Rate Swap

224
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
MedStat will now receive a floating-rate payment from the bank of LIBOR, which is then used 
to pay the LIBOR component on its floating-rate loan. What then remains is for MedStat to 
pay the fixed-rate spread on the loan, the 1.250% spread, plus the fixed-rate payment of the 
swap, 3.850%.
The fixed rate quoted to MedStat is based on a corporate issuer of AA quality for a 3-year 
maturity, which is the length of time the swap needs in order to cover the floating-rate loan. 
The fixed rates available in the swap market will therefore always reflect the current govern-
ment and corporate yield curves in the appropriate currency market, in this case the U.S. dollar.
Note that the swap agreement swaps only the floating-rate component, LIBOR, and does 
not swap or deal with the credit spread in any way. This is because of two principles: (1) the 
swap market does not wish to deal with the credit risk of any individual borrower, only the core 
fixed and floating-rate foundations; and (2) the fixed-rate credit spread is indeed a fixed-rate 
component, and does not change over the life of the loan. The swap market is intended only 
for the true floating-rate component, and therefore the final combined fixed-rate obligation 
of MedStat after the swap is purely a fixed-rate payment at a combined rate of 5.100%.
The plain-vanilla interest rate swap is a very cheap and effective method of altering the 
cash flows associated with debt. They allow a firm to alter the interest rate associated with any 
debt obligation without suffering the costs (time and money) of repayment and refinancing.
Alternative Futures
Whether MedStat’s swap to pay fixed proves to be the right strategy depends on what happens 
in the coming series of quarters. If LIBOR increases over the coming two or three quarters, 
but only marginally, then the decision to swap may not turn out to be the best one. If, however, 
LIBOR rises significantly, the swap may save MedStat sizable interest expenses.
It is also important to consider what might have happened if MedStat had decided not to 
execute the swap. Exhibit 8.11 provides one potential future—that LIBOR continues to rise—
and MedStat’s interest cost management options worsen. Both floating rates and fixed rates 
­available are now higher. This is because as short-term interest rates rise, so do the fixed rates in the  
marketplace. In this case as 3-month LIBOR rose from 1.885% to 2.250%, the fixed rate 
offered in the plain-vanilla swap rose from 3.850% to 4.200%. The company could still enter 
into a swap, but all interest rates, fixed and floating, are now higher.
Plain-Vanilla Swap Strategies
Company use of the plain-vanilla swap market can be divided into two basic categories, debt 
structure and debt cost.
Debt Structure. All companies will pursue a target debt structure that combines maturity, 
currency of composition, and fixed/floating pricing. The fixed/floating objective is one of the 
most difficult for many companies to determine with any confidence, and they often just try 
to replicate industry averages.
Companies which have very high credit quality and therefore advantaged access to the 
fixed-rate debt markets, companies of A or AA like Walmart or IBM, often raise large amounts 
of debt in long maturities at fixed rates. They then use the plain-vanilla swap market to alter 
selective amounts of their fixed-rate debt into floating-rate debt to achieve their desired objec-
tive. Swaps allow them to alter the fixed/floating composition quickly and easily without the 
origination and registration fees of the direct debt markets.
Companies of lower credit quality, sometimes those of less than investment grade, often 
find the fixed-rate debt market not open to them. Getting fixed-rate debt is either impossible 
or too costly. They will generally raise their debt at floating rates and then periodically evaluate 
whether the plain-vanilla swap market offers any attractive alternatives to swap from paying-
floating to paying-fixed.

225
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
The plain-vanilla swap market is, of course, also frequently used by firms to adjust their 
fixed/floating debt structure for changing interest rate expectations. This was the case of 
MedStat described previously. Expectations of rising interest rates led the company to use 
plain-vanilla swaps to swap out of floating-rate payments into fixed-rate payments. During the 
2009–2014 period, with interest rates often hitting historical lows in U.S. dollar and European 
euro debt markets, many firms used the swap market frequently to swap increasingly into 
fixed-rate obligations.
Debt Cost. All firms are always interested in opportunities to lower the cost of their debt. The 
plain-vanilla swap market is one highly accessible and low-cost method of doing so.
For an example of the second use, to achieve cheaper funding costs, we can again use the 
example of MedStat. Assume that MedStat regularly explored opportunities in the debt and 
swap markets. In our previous example, in the third quarter of 2017 MedStat discovered that 
it could swap $40 million of its existing debt for an all-in-fixed-rate cost (swap fixed-rate plus 
remaining credit spread) of 5.100%. At that same time, banks may have offered the company 
3-year fixed-rate loans of the same size at a fixed rate of 5.20% or 5.30%. MedStat could, if it 
wished, swap floating-rate debt for fixed-rate debt to lock in cheaper fixed-rate debt.
These lower costs, achieved through the plain-vanilla swap market, may simply reflect 
short-term market imperfections and inefficiencies or the comparative advantage some bor-
rowers have in selected markets via selective financial service providers. The savings may be 
large—30, 40, or even 50 basis points on occasion—or quite small. It is up to the management 
of the firm and its corporate treasury to determine how much savings is needed to make it 
1.500
1.000
0.500
2.000
3.000
2.500
3.500
4.000
4.500
5.000
0
2016 Q1
2018 Q3
Interest Rate (percent per annum)
2016 Q2
2016 Q3
2016 Q4
2017 Q1
2017 Q2
2017 Q3
2017 Q4
2018 Q1
2018 Q2
If MedStat had decided not to execute the swap, and LIBOR continued to rise, MedStat would be left with increasingly poor choices.
If MedStat decided that it would now enter into the pay ﬁxed receive ﬂoating swap, the ﬁxed rate now available to the company is
now higher, 4.200%, rather than the previous quote of 3.850%. This is because as short-term ﬂoating rates of interest like LIBOR rise,
so do the ﬁxed rates of interest in the marketplace.
Fixed rate loan now available
(2017 Q4) of 4.200%
Fixed rate loan available at
current time (2017 Q3) of 3.850%
3-month LIBOR + Spread
Company credit
spread of 1.250%
3-month LIBOR
Current Period
Exhibit 8.11
MedStat’s Deteriorating Choices as LIBOR Rises

226
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
worth spending the time and effort needed to execute the swaps. Banks promote the swap 
market and will regularly market deals to corporate treasuries. A corporate treasurer once 
remarked to the author that “unless the proposed structure or deal can save me 15 or 20 basis 
points, at a minimum, do not bother calling me to push the deal.”
Cross-Currency Swaps
Since all swap rates are derived from the yield curve in each major currency, the fixed-to-
floating-rate interest rate swap existing in each currency allows firms to swap across curren-
cies. Exhibit 8.12 lists typical swap rates for the euro, the U.S. dollar, the Japanese yen, and 
the Swiss franc. These swap rates are based on the government security yields in each of the 
individual currency markets, plus a credit spread applicable to investment grade borrowers in 
the respective markets.
Note that the swap rates in Exhibit 8.12 are not rated or categorized by credit ratings. 
This is because the swap market itself does not carry the credit risk associated with individual 
borrowers. Individual borrowers with obligations priced at LIBOR plus a spread will keep the 
spread. The fixed spread, a credit risk premium, is still borne by the firm itself. For example, 
lower-rated firms may pay spreads of 3% or 4% over LIBOR, while some of the world’s larg-
est and most financially sound MNEs may actually raise capital at LIBOR rates. The swap 
market does not differentiate the rate by the participant; all swap at fixed rates versus LIBOR.
The usual motivation for a currency swap is to replace cash flows scheduled in an unde-
sired currency with flows in a desired currency. The desired currency is probably the currency 
Exhibit 8.12  Interest Rate Swap Quotes (December 31, 2014)
Euro €
£ Sterling
Swiss franc
U.S. dollar
Japanese yen
Years
Bid
Ask
Bid
Ask
Bid
Ask
Bid
Ask
Bid
Ask
1
0.14
0.18
0.63
0.66
-0.14
-0.08
0.42
0.45
0.11
0.17
2
0.16
0.20
0.91
0.95
-0.18
-0.10
0.86
0.89
0.11
0.17
3
0.20
0.24
1.11
1.15
-0.14
-0.06
1.26
1.29
0.13
0.19
4
0.26
0.30
1.28
1.33
-0.07
0.01
1.55
1.58
0.15
0.21
5
0.34
0.38
1.42
1.47
0.02
0.10
1.75
1.78
0.19
0.25
6
0.42
0.46
1.53
1.58
0.11
0.19
1.90
1.93
0.24
0.30
7
0.51
0.55
1.62
1.67
0.21
0.29
2.02
2.05
0.30
0.36
8
0.60
0.64
1.69
1.74
0.30
0.38
2.11
2.10
0.36
0.42
9
0.70
0.74
1.76
1.81
0.39
0.47
2.19
2.22
0.42
0.48
10
0.79
0.83
1.82
1.87
0.47
0.55
2.26
2.29
0.49
0.55
12
0.95
0.99
1.91
1.98
0.59
0.69
2.37
2.40
0.61
0.69
15
1.12
1.16
2.02
2.11
0.75
0.85
2.48
2.51
0.82
0.90
20
1.30
1.34
2.12
2.25
0.95
1.05
2.59
2.62
1.09
1.17
25
1.39
1.43
2.15
2.28
1.06
1.16
2.64
2.67
1.22
1.30
30
1.44
1.48
2.17
2.30
1.11
1.21
2.67
2.70
1.29
1.37
LIBOR
Typical presentation by the Financial Times. Bid and ask spreads as of close of London business. US$ is quoted against 3-month LIBOR; 
­Japanese yen against 6-month LIBOR; Euro and Swiss franc against 6-month LIBOR.

227
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
in which the firm’s future operating revenues will be generated. Firms often raise capital in 
currencies in which they do not possess significant revenues or other natural cash flows. The 
reason they do so is cost; specific firms may find capital costs in specific currencies attractively 
priced to them under special conditions. Having raised the capital, however, the firm may wish 
to swap its repayment into a currency in which it has future operating revenues.
The utility of the currency swap market to an MNE is significant. An MNE wishing to swap 
a 10-year fixed 2.29% U.S. dollar cash flow stream could swap to 0.83% fixed in euros, 1.87% 
fixed in British pounds, 0.55% fixed in Swiss francs, or 0.55% fixed in Japanese yen. It could 
swap from fixed dollars not only to fixed rates, but also to floating LIBOR rates in the various 
currencies as well. Any of which could be arranged with the swap dealer/bank in a matter of only 
hours and at a fraction of the transaction costs and fees of actually borrowing in those currencies.
MedStat Corporation: Swapping Floating Dollars into  
Fixed-Rate British Pounds
We return to MedStat Corporation to demonstrate how to use a cross-currency swap. After 
raising $10 million in floating-rate financing, and subsequently swapping into fixed-rate pay-
ments, MedStat decides that it would prefer to make its debt service payments in British 
pounds. MedStat had recently signed a sales contract with a British buyer that will be paying 
pounds to MedStat over the next 3-year period. This would be a natural inflow of British 
pounds for the coming three years, and MedStat wishes to match the currency of denomination 
of the cash flows through a cross-currency swap.
MedStat enters into a 3-year pay British pounds and receive U.S. dollars cross-currency 
swap. Both interest rates are fixed. MedStat will pay 1.15% (ask rate) fixed British pound 
interest, and receive 1.26% (bid rate) fixed U.S. dollars. These swap rates are taken from 
Exhibit 8.12.
As illustrated in Exhibit 8.13, the 3-year currency swap entered into by MedStat is ­different 
from the plain-vanilla interest rate swap in two important ways:
1.	 The spot exchange rate in effect on the date of the agreement establishes what the 
notional principal is in the target currency. The target currency is the currency MedStat 
is swapping into, in this case the British pound. The $10,000,000 notional principal 
converts to a £6,410,256 notional principal. This is the principal used to establish the 
actual cash flows MedStat is committing to making (1.15% * £6,410,256 = £73,718).
2.	 The notional principal itself is part of the swap agreement. In plain-vanilla interest rate 
swaps, both interest payment cash flows were based on the same notional principal (in 
the same currency). Hence, there was no need to include the principal in the agree-
ment. In a cross-currency swap, however, because the notional principals are denomi-
nated in two different currencies, and the exchange rate between those two currencies 
may change over time, the notional principals are part of the swap agreement.
At the time of the swap’s inception, both positions have the same net present value. 
­MedStat’s swap commits it to three future cash payments in British pounds in return for receiv-
ing three payments in U.S. dollars. The payments are set. Accounting practices will require 
­MedStat to regularly track and value its position, mark-to-market the swap, on the basis of 
current exchange rates and interest rates. If after the swap is initiated, the British pound appre-
ciates versus the dollar, and MedStat is paying pounds, MedStat will record a loss on the swap 
for accounting purposes. (Similarly, the swap dealer’s side of the transaction will record a gain.) 
At the same time, if interest rates in British pound markets rise, and MedStat’s swap commits it 
to a fixed rate of 1.15%, then a gain will result from the interest component of the swap’s value. 
In short, gains and losses on the swap, at least for accounting purposes, will persist throughout 
the swap’s life. The currency swaps described here are non-amortizing swaps, where the swap 

228
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
Swap Component
Year 0
$10,000,000
Notional principal in U.S.$
Total cash ﬂows in U.S.$
Spot exchange rate
$1.56 = £1.00
Total cash ﬂows in UK£
Notional principal in UK£
MedStat will pay ﬁxed UK£ at
£6,410,256
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
$126,000
$126,000
$10,126,000
£73,718
£73,718
£6,483,974
1.15%
1.15%
1.15%
Note: The U.S. dollar receive ﬁxed rate is the three-year bid rate from Exhibit 8.12. The British pound pay ﬁxed rate is the three-year ask rate from
Exhibit 8.12. All rates are per annum, with annual payments and full principal repayment at maturity.
MedStat will receive ﬁxed U.S.$ at
1.26%
1.26%
1.26%
Exhibit 8.13
MedStat’s Cross-Currency Swap
parties pay the entire principal at maturity, rather than over the life of the swap agreement. 
This is relatively standard practice in the market.
MedStat Corporation: Unwinding Swaps
As with all original loan agreements, it may happen that at some future date the partners to 
a swap may wish to terminate the agreement before it matures. If, for example, after one year 
MedStat Corporation’s British sales contract is terminated, MedStat will no longer need the 
swap as part of its hedging program. MedStat could terminate or unwind the swap with the 
swap dealer.
Unwinding a currency swap requires the discounting of the remaining cash flows under 
the swap agreement at current interest rates, then converting the target currency (British 
pounds in this case) back to the home currency of the firm (U.S. dollars for MedStat). If 
­MedStat has two payments remaining on the swap agreement (an interest-only payment, and a 
principal and interest payment), and the 2-year fixed rate of interest for pounds is now 1.50%, 
the present value of MedStat’s commitment in British pounds is:
PV(£) = £73,717.95
(1.015)1
+ £6,483,974.36
(1.015)2
= £6,366,374.41
At the same time, the present value of the remaining cash flows on the dollar side of the swap 
is determined using the current 2-year fixed dollar interest rate, which is now 1.40%:
PV($) = $126,000.00
(1.04)1
+ $10,126,000.00
(1.04)2
= $9,972,577.21

229
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
MedStat’s currency swap, if unwound at this time, would yield a present value of net 
inflows (what it receives under the swap) of $9,972,577.21 and a present value of outflows (what 
it pays under the swap) of £6,366,374.41. If the exchange rate is now $1.65/£, the net settlement 
of this currency swap will be:
Settlement = $9,972,577.21 - (£6,366,374.41 * $1.65/£) = -$531,940.56.
MedStat must therefore make a cash payment to the swap dealer of $531,941 to unwind 
the swap. MedStat’s cash loss on this swap resulted largely from the appreciation of the Brit-
ish pound against the U.S. dollar (the interest rates both rose marginally). Since MedStat had 
promised to pay in the currency that is now stronger in value—the pound—unwinding the swap 
is costly. (If for example the exchange rate was still $1.56/£, MedStat would have closed out 
the position with a gain of $41,033.) It is important to remember, however, that the swap was 
entered into as a hedge of MedStat’s long British pound position; it was not meant as a finan-
cial investment. One infamous unwinding required courts of law, that of the swaps Procter &  
Gamble purchased from Bankers Trust, as described in Global Finance in Practice 8.3.
In 1994, Procter & Gamble (P&G) announced that it had 
incurred a $157 million pre-tax loss from closing out an inter-
est rate swap transaction it had entered into with Bankers 
Trust. The loss would result in a $102 million after-tax charge 
to third-quarter earnings. According to P&G, this swap was a 
highly complex and speculative transaction that was counter 
to P&G’s policy of conservatively managing their debt portfo-
lio. Derivatives like these are dangerous and we were badly 
burned. We won’t let this happen again. We are seriously 
considering our legal options relative to Bankers Trust, the 
financial institution that designed these swaps and brought 
them to us.
P&G wanted to continue to make floating-rate payments 
in return for receiving fixed-rate payments in order to maintain 
a balance between its fixed and floating-rate debt obligations. 
The swap would essentially transform existing fixed-rate debt 
obligations held by P&G into floating-rate obligations at a quite 
attractive rate. According to Bankers Trust, P&G stated that 
it was confident that interest rates would not rise significantly 
over the next year (although interest rates were at that time 
at historically low levels). P&G wanted to achieve the same 
favorable floating-rate as under another swap which had just 
matured, CP minus 40 basis points. But it did not want to 
incur significant risk.
Bankers Trust sold P&G a “5/30 Year Linked Swap,”  
a 5-year swap structure with a notional principal of $200 million.  
Bankers Trust would pay P&G a fixed rate of 5.30% on a semi-
annual basis. P&G in turn would pay Bankers Trust commercial 
paper (CP) less 75 basis points for the first six months of the 
swap agreement, and thereafter, CP less 75 basis points plus 
an additional spread (the “Spread”) which could never be less 
than zero, and which would be fixed at the end of the first six 
months. The Spread was calculated as follows:
Spread =
98.5 * (5@year Treasury yield)
5.78%
- 30@year 6.25%
    Treasury price
100
The Spread formula was actually a speculative play 
on the entire U.S. Treasury yield curve. If 5-year Treasuries 
stayed roughly where they were at, the spread stayed near 
zero. However, because the Spread could increase geometri-
cally with interest rate increases, rather than the customary 
arithmetic increases of standard interest rate movements, the 
instrument was considered highly leveraged.
The Spread formula was also extraordinarily sensitive to 
rising 5-year Treasury note yields. Each 1% increase in 5-year 
yields would increase P&G’s payments under the leveraged 
swap by more than 17% of notional principal per year (CP plus 
1,700 basis points), while each 1% decline in long bond prices 
would cost P&G 1% of notional principal. P&G had interpreted 
it as 0.17%, not 17%. A number of analysts noted the rather 
peculiar way in which the Spread was expressed. The division 
by 100 gave a number less than one, which appeared as a 
fraction of 1%.
Global Finance in Practice 8.3
Procter & Gamble and Bankers Trust

230
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
Counterparty Risk
Counterparty risk is the potential exposure any individual firm bears that the second party 
to any financial contract will be unable to fulfill its obligations under the contract’s specifi-
cations. Concern over counterparty risk periodically rises, usually associated with large and 
well-publicized derivative and swap defaults. The rapid growth in the currency and interest 
rate financial derivatives markets has actually been accompanied by a surprisingly low default 
rate to date, particularly in a global market that is unregulated in principle.
Counterparty risk has long been one of the major factors that favor the use of exchange-
traded rather than over-the-counter derivatives. Most exchanges, like the Philadelphia Stock 
Exchange for currency options or the Chicago Mercantile Exchange for Eurodollar futures, are 
themselves the counterparty to all transactions. This allows all firms a high degree of confidence in 
being able to buy or sell exchange-traded products quickly and with little concern over the credit 
quality of the exchange itself. Financial exchanges typically require a small fee from all traders 
on the exchanges to pay for insurance funds created expressly for the purpose of protecting all 
parties. Over-the-counter products, however, are direct credit exposures to the firm because the 
contract is generally between the buying firm and the selling financial institution. Most financial 
derivatives in today’s world financial centers are sold or brokered only by the largest and sound-
est financial institutions. This structure does not mean, however, that firms can enter continuing 
agreements with these institutions without some degree of real financial risk and concern.
A firm entering into a currency or interest rate swap agreement retains ultimate respon-
sibility for the timely servicing of its own debt obligations. Although a swap agreement may 
constitute a contract to exchange U.S. dollar payments for euro payments, the firm that actu-
ally holds the dollar debt is still legally responsible for payment. The original debt remains 
on the borrower’s books. In the event that a swap counterparty does not make the payment 
as agreed, the firm legally holding the debt is still responsible for debt service. In the event of 
such a failure, the euro payments would cease by the right of offset, and the losses associated 
with the failed swap would be mitigated.
The real exposure of an interest or currency swap is not the total notional principal, but the 
mark-to-market values of differentials in interest or currency interest payments ­(replacement 
cost) since the inception of the swap agreement. It is similar to the change in swap value 
­discovered by unwinding a swap described previously. This amount is typically only 2% to 3% 
of the notional principal.
Summary Points
■
■
The single largest interest rate risk of the nonfinancial 
firm is debt service. The debt structure of the MNE will 
possess differing maturities of debt, different interest 
rate structures (such as fixed versus floating rate), and 
different currencies of denomination.
■
■
The increasing volatility of world interest rates, ­combined 
with the increasing use of short-term and ­variable-rate 
debt by firms worldwide, has led many firms to actively 
manage their interest rate risks.
■
■
The primary sources of interest rate risk to a multi-
national nonfinancial firm are short-term borrowing, 
short-term investing, and long-term debt service.
■
■
The techniques and instruments used in interest rate 
risk management in many ways resemble those used in 
currency risk management. The primary instruments 
used for interest rate risk management include forward 
rate agreements (FRAs), forward swaps, interest rate 
futures, and interest rate swaps.
■
■
The interest rate and currency swap markets allow 
firms that have limited access to specific curren-
cies and interest rate structures to gain access at 
­relatively low costs. This in turn allows these firms 
to manage their currency and interest rate risks more 
effectively.
■
■
A cross-currency interest rate swap allows a firm to 
alter both the currency of denomination of cash flows 
in debt service and the fixed-to-floating or floating- 
to-fixed interest rate structure.

231
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
Argentina’s default on its foreign currency denominated 
sovereign debt in 2001 had proved to be a never-ending 
nightmare. Now, in June 2014, 13 years after the default, 
the U.S. Supreme Court had confirmed a lower-court rul-
ing, which would force Argentina to consider defaulting 
on its international debt obligations once again. But the 
story was a tangled one, which included investors all over 
the world, international financial law, courts in New York 
State and the European Union, and a battle between 
hedge funds and so-called vulture funds—funds that pur-
chased distressed sovereign debt at low prices and then 
pursued full repayment through litigation. Time was run-
ning out.
The Default
Argentina’s currency and economy had nearly collapsed in 
1999. The rising sovereign debt obligations of the Argentine 
government, debt denominated in U.S. dollars and Euro-
pean euros, could not be serviced by the faltering economy. 
In late December 2001, Argentina officially defaulted on 
its foreign debt: $81.8 billion in private debt, $6.3 billion to 
the Paris Club; and $9.5 billion to the International Mon-
etary Fund (IMF).
The debt had been originally issued in 1994 and reg-
istered under New York State governing law. New York 
law was specifically chosen because Argentina had become 
known as a serial defaulter. The bonds were issued under 
a specific structure, a Fiscal Agency Agreement (hence 
FAA Bonds), which would require all debt service be made 
through escrow accounts in New York.
The normal process following default is for the debtor 
to enter into talks with its creditors to restructure its 
debt obligations. Reaching consensus on sovereign debt 
­restructuring, however, may be difficult because there is 
no international statutory regime for sovereign default 
similar to domestic bankruptcy codes. This leaves three 
options: (1)  a collective solution; or (2) a voluntary 
exchange of old debt for restructured obligations; or (3) 
litigation.
The first option, the collective solution, is usually accom-
plished via the use of collective action clauses (CCAs) 
that impose similar reorganization terms on all creditors 
once a specific percentage of creditors, 75% to 90%, have 
agreed to the restructuring terms. These CCAs prevent 
a small number of creditors—holdouts—from blocking 
restructuring. Unfortunately, the Argentine bonds did not 
have collective action clauses.
Given the absence of a collective action clause, Argen-
tina was left with the second option, a voluntary exchange 
of old debt for new debt. Debt restructuring itself nor-
mally includes four key elements: (1) a reduction in the 
principal of the obligation; (2) a reduction in the interest 
rate; (3) an extension of the obligation’s maturity; and (4) 
capitalization of missed interest payments. The total result 
is a reduction in the net present value of the debt obli-
gation, the so-called haircut, which may range anywhere 
from 30% to 70%.
A second common clause included within sovereign 
debt, the pari passu clause (Latin for “equal steps,” and is 
read as “equal among equals”), calls for all creditors to be 
treated equally, assuring that private or individual deals 
are not made in preference to some creditors over oth-
ers. Argentina’s sovereign debt did include a pari passu 
clause (Argentine Fiscal Agency Agreement (1994), 
Clause 1©):
“The Securities will constitute [. . .] direct, unconditional, 
unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of the Repub-
lic and shall at all times rank pari passu and without any 
preference among themselves. The payment obligations 
of the Republic under the Securities shall at all times rank 
at least equally with all its other present and future unse-
cured and unsubordinated External Indebtedness (as 
defined in this Agreement).”
Restructuring
Following the December 2001 default, Argentina initiated 
restructuring discussions with its creditors. From the very 
beginning it took a hard line. Nearly every dimension of 
the proposed restructuring was in debate, but the 70% 
haircut Argentina proposed was the single biggest prob-
lem. What followed, as seen in Exhibit A, was a long and 
twisted path toward debt resolution. It is important to note 
that many buyers of these bonds in the secondary markets 
were not original investors—they were intentionally buy-
ing defaulted debt.
After three years of contentious talks and two unsuc-
cessful proposals, Argentina moved forward with a uni-
lateral reorganization offer to all creditors in early 2005. 
In preparation for the offer, Argentina passed the Lock 
Argentina and the Vulture Funds
Mini-Case

232
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
value new debt instruments. But a number of holdouts still 
refused the exchange and instead pursued litigation.
In the prospectus associated with the 2005 and 2010 
exchange offers (Exhibit B details both offers), ­Argentina 
made it very clear that it did not intend to ever make 
­further payments on the original FAA bonds:
[FAA Bonds] that are in default and that are not ten-
dered may remain in default indefinitely . . . Argen-
tina does not expect to resume payments on any [FAA 
Bonds] that remain outstanding following the expira-
tion of the exchange offer . . . there can be no assur-
ance that [holders of unexchanged FAA Bonds] will 
receive any future payments or be able to collect through 
litigation . . . 
Dueling Hedge Funds
Distressed sovereign debt is not a rarity, and so it is not sur-
prising that a number of hedge funds have made the buying 
and selling of publicly traded distressed debt a business 
line. There was, however, a fundamental difference between 
hedge fund investing in corporate distressed debt and 
­sovereign distressed debt. A fund purchasing a substantial 
portion of distressed corporate debt may become integrally 
Law, Ley cerrojo. The Lock Law prohibited Argentina 
from making any arrangement to pay the unexchanged 
bonds: “The national State shall be prohibited from con-
ducting any type of in-court, out-of-court or private settle-
ment with respect to the FAA [Fiscal Agency Agreement] 
bonds.” The Lock Law was meant to provide additional 
incentive for all creditors to exchange old debt for new 
debt—immediately.
Characterized as a “take it or leave it” offer, creditors 
were offered 26% to 30% of the net present value of the 
original face value of bond obligations, and as a result of 
the Lock Law, a one-time only offer. The offer was accepted 
by 75% of Argentina’s creditors, reducing outstanding pri-
vate debt from $81.8 billion to $18.6 billion. The offer was 
executed by exchanging the original bonds for new Argen-
tina bonds.
The following year Argentina repaid the $9.5 billion in 
debt owed to the IMF. In 2010, in an attempt to eliminate 
the remaining outstanding private debt, Argentina tempo-
rarily suspended the Lock Law to allow the same bond 
exchange terms be offered once again to private debt hold-
ers. This second offer reduced the outstanding private debt 
principal to $8.6 billion. A full 92% of all original credi-
tors had now exchanged the original debt for the reduced 
0
20
Jan-95
Sep-95
May-96
Jan-97
Sep-97
May-98
Jan-99
Sep-99
May-00
Jan-01
Sep-01
May-02
Jan-03
Sep-03
May-04
Jan-05
Sep-05
May-06
Jan-07
Sep-07
May-08
Jan-09
Sep-09
May-10
Jan-11
Sep-11
May-12
Jan-13
Sep-13
May-14
40
60
80
100
140
120
Bond Price (Nov 2002 maturity, defaulted, percent of par)
Argentina takes hard
line with creditors in
continuing talks
Vulture
Funds increase
positions
Second
Circuit Court
Decision
Supreme Court
aﬃrms
Second Circuit
Argentina Defaults
$81.8 billion
$18.6 billion
remains
$6.8 billion
remains
2010 Oﬀer:
Same exchange as 2005;
Holdouts of $1.3 bn
in litigation
2005 Oﬀer: Exchange of
new for old debt at 26%
on the dollar; 24% holdout
Financial
Crisis
Exhibit A
 Argentine Sovereign Bond Price and Default

233
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
In some cases it provided insurance against the possibility 
that a borrower might not pay. In other instances, it was a 
way in which a speculator could bet against the increasingly 
risky security. This was a result of the fact that, as opposed 
to traditional insurance where an owner of the asset pur-
chased insurance for their asset, an investor in CDSs need 
not own the asset (like your neighbor purchasing fire insur-
ance on your house).
Gramercy’s Chief Investment Officer was Robert 
­Koenigsberger, formerly the manager of the sovereign debt 
restructuring team at Lehman Brothers. Koenigsberger had 
acted as an advisor to Argentina in its arguments in U.S. 
and European courts. It was in fact Gramercy that had per-
suaded Argentina to reopen the 2005 restructuring nego-
tiations in 2010.
As Gramercy championed the 2010 restructuring offer-
ing, it argued that the markets were mis-pricing Argen-
tine debt on the basis of government debt as percentage 
of GDP. Argentina’s credit default swap (CDS) spread 
was a full 700 basis points—7.00%—above U.S. Treasur-
ies, although Argentina’s debt/GDP ratio was a moderate 
46.4%. At the same time Brazil had a CDS spread of 119 
involved in turning around the company; that was not the 
case with distressed sovereign debt.
Gramercy. One sovereign debt investor of note was 
Gramercy. In Gramercy’s promotion of its distressed debt 
fund shown in Exhibit C, it highlighted its investments in 
the debt of Argentina. Note that the stated target return 
greatly exceeds the yield to maturity (the rate of return 
expected by a prospective investor at issuance who 
holds the security to maturity). The higher target return 
is based on the highly discounted purchase price of the 
securities relative to what Gramercy hopes/expects to 
sell the securities at a future date. Gramercy reportedly 
held $400 million in Argentine bonds in 2012 and still 
in 2014.
In addition to its purchase of distressed sovereign debt, 
Gramercy also aggressively protected its investments on the 
downside through the use of credit default swaps (CDSs). 
The credit default swap is a derivative contract that derives 
its value from the credit quality and performance of any 
specific asset. A CDS is a way to bet whether a specific 
security would either fail to pay on time or fail to pay at all. 
Exhibit B
The Terms of the 2010 Argentina Bond Exchange
Bond Characteristic
Retail Investors
Institutional Investors
Bond Type
Par Bond (pays face value)
Discount Bond (66.3% reduction from face value)
Amount
Upto $2.0 billion
Upto $16.3 billion
Maturity Date
Dec-38
31-Dec-33
Annual Interest Rate
2.5%–5.25% increasing over time
8.28%
Past Due Interest (PDI)
Cash payment
Separate 2017 global bonds @ 8.75%
Bank Commission
0.40%
0.40%
Source: Securities and Exchange Commission, Amendment #5 to Argentina 18-K, April 19, 2010, and Prospectus Directive, April 27, 2010, 
pp. 11, 33–42, and 106–112.
Exhibit C
Gramercy’s Holdings of Argentine Debt
Security
Maturity
Yield to 
Maturity
Average Entry 
Price
Target Exit 
Price
Target 
Return
Argentina Par 2.5% (USD)
Dec 2038
11.82%
$32.67
$59.00
88.25%
Argentina Bonar 7% (USD)
Apr 2017
14.42%
$66.20
$100.00
61.63%
Argentina Discount 8.28% (USD)
Dec 2033
12.81%
$65.79
$107.50
75.99%
Source: Abstracted from “Gramercy Distressed Opportunity Fund II,” September 2012, Current Investments, p. 12.

234
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
based in New York, giving U.S. courts jurisdiction. On Octo-
ber 25, 2012, Judge Thomas P. Griesa for the United States 
District Court for the Southern District of New York, in 
NML Capital, Ltd. v. The Republic of Argentina, found in 
favor of the plaintiff:
. . . the judgements of the district court (1) granting sum-
mary judgement to plaintiffs on their claims for breach of 
the Equal Treatment Provision and (2) ordering Argen-
tina to make “Ratable Payments” to plaintiffs concurrent 
with or in advance of its payments to holders of the 2005 
and 2010 restructured debt are affirmed.
The impact of the court’s decision was dramatic. Argen-
tina immediately announced that it would not honor the 
court’s decision. One month later Argentina lost its [first] 
appeal, with Judge Griesa instructing Argentina to move 
forward quickly to comply with the Court’s judgement. 
Again, Argentina refused to comply. Fitch, one of the three 
major global sovereign credit rating services, now down-
graded Argentina’s credit rating (long-term foreign cur-
rency) from B to CC, noted that “a default by Argentina 
is probable.”
The markets closely followed the case. As illustrated by 
Exhibit D, the value of the outstanding Argentine exchange 
bonds plummeted in the days and months following the 
rulings. For example, the Argentine 2017 Global Bond 
(exchange bond from 2005) carrying an 8.75% coupon fell 
9.9% in the one day following the court judgement, and a 
cumulative 24% in the following week.
In subsequent hearings Judge Griesa cautioned Argen-
tina on altering the payment processes on the bonds. This 
was in response to Argentina’s newest strategy to cir-
cumvent the U.S. courts by processing payments to the 
basis points with a 61.7% debt/GDP ratio, and Turkey a 
150 basis point CDS spread with a 49.0% debt/GDP ratio. 
If Gramercy was correct, and if the market “corrected 
its error,” the prices of the Argentine bonds would rise 
dramatically.
Elliot. A second hedge fund, Elliot Management Corp, had 
waged war on Argentina and its debt for years. Elliot, led 
by Paul Singer, a 68-year-old billionaire and a high-profile 
supporter of the U.S. Republican Party, was one of the chief 
litigants against Argentina. Singer had been called the 
father of vulture funds, and had used this same investment 
strategy in Peru, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and 
Panama, in recent years.
Elliot’s fund, NML Capital Ltd., had first invested in 
Argentine bonds before the 2001 default, but had pur-
chased most of its holdings as late as 2008, in the midst 
of the global financial crisis, at rock-bottom prices. (One 
story reported that Elliot paid $48.7 million for $832 mil-
lion in bonds, $0.06 on the dollar.) It now claimed it was 
due $2.5 billion. As the lead holdout, Elliot had refused 
the offered exchange in 2005 or 2010. Elliot was known for 
hard-knuckle tactics, actually having detained an Argen-
tine naval training vessel, the ARA Libertad, in a Ghana-
ian port for more than two months in an attempt to attach 
collateral.
NML Ltd. v Republic of Argentina
Because the distressed debt was under the jurisdiction of 
New York State law, specifically the Fiscal Agency Agree-
ment (FAA), the case was eventually heard in U.S. Dis-
trict Court. The FAA stipulated that the repayments on 
the bonds were to be made by Argentina through a trustee 
Exhibit D
District Court Ruling Impact on Exchange Bond Values
Republic Global Bond (Exchange), 
8.75%, 2017
Republic Global Bond (Exchange 2005), 
8.28%, 2033
Date
Price
Change
Spread vs. 
U.S. Treasury
Price
Change
Chg in Spread  
vs. U.S.  
Treasury
October 25, 2012
$100.053
3.04%
$80.428
October 26, 2012
$90.157
-9.9%
$72.125
-10.3%
1.5%
November 2, 2012
$76.483
-23.6%
7.79%
$61.278
-23.8%
3.74%
Source: Petition for a Write of Certiorari, Supreme Court of the United States, No. 13, Exchange Bondholder Group v. NNL Capital., Ltd., February 21, 2014.

235
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
What Now?
Argentina’s response to the latest U.S. court rulings was 
outrage. Within days Argentina announced a plan to swap 
existing bonds governed by U.S. law for debt issued under 
Argentine law. Although unprecedented in sovereign debt 
markets, the move had been anticipated by market analysts. 
If investors were willing to undertake the exchange they 
would receive some of the highest interest yields in the 
world—foregoing default—but they would give up all legal 
rights and protection provided under U.S. law.
Judge Griesa released a statement that any attempt by 
Argentina to proceed with payments on its restructured 
debt, without settling with holdouts first, was illegal. Argen-
tina continued to argue that this was impossible. According 
to the Argentine Finance Minister, if Argentina settled with 
the holdouts, the exchange bondholders could possibly 
sue for equal treatment—the RUFO clause (Rights Upon 
Future Offer), and total claims could reach $120 billion. 
The RUFO clause, contained in all of the exchange bonds 
issued in 2005 and 2010, guaranteed exchange bondhold-
ers the same rights and payments that might possibly be 
provided the holdout bondholders. Given the renewed 
currency crises the country was currently suffering, Argen-
tina’s hard currency reserves were estimated at only $30 
billion, inadequate to threaten invoking RUFO interests.
On June 30, 2014, Argentina failed to make payments 
on its outstanding exchange bonds. The country now had 
a single 30-day grace period before entering into selec-
tive default. In early July, representatives of the Argentine 
Finance Ministry and the Elliot Group met to see if they 
could find an acceptable solution.
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 What is the role played by legal clauses such as the 
collective action clause and the pari passu clause in 
sovereign debt issuances?
2.	 What is the difference between a typical hedge fund 
investing in sovereign debt (even distressed sovereign 
debt) and the so-called vulture funds?
3.	 If you were appointed a mediator by the court to find 
a solution, what options or alternatives would you 
­suggest for resolving the crisis?
exchanged bondholders through financial ­institutions 
­outside the United States. The FAA bonds and their 
­governing law expressly required processing through New 
York financial institutions.
On appeal Argentina argued that the District Court 
had misconstrued the pari passu clause, but the Second 
Circuit court was not persuaded. The court noted that the 
combination of the issuance and service on the exchange 
bonds, without making equal payments to the holdouts, 
and simultaneously stating under the Lock Law that 
the holdouts would not ever be paid, was in effect rank-
ing or subordinating the original debt. The court went 
on to note the particularly critical role the pari passu 
clause plays:
When sovereigns default they do not enter bankruptcy 
proceedings where the legal rank of debt determines the 
order in which creditors will be paid. Instead, sovereigns 
can choose for themselves the order in which creditors 
will be paid. In this context, the [Pari Passu Clause] pre-
vents Argentina as payor from discriminating against the 
FAA bonds in favor of other unsubordinated, foreign 
bonds.
To its credit, Argentina had made substantial efforts at 
repairing its relationship with the outside world. In late 
May it had committed to repaying the $9.7 billion owed 
the Paris Club, and had agreed to pay Repsol of Spain,  
$5 billion in Argentine bonds for its seizure of its Argentine 
subsidiary earlier in 2013.
On Monday June 25, 2014, Argentina deposited $832 
million in a New York bank in preparation for payment 
of interest on its exchange bonds. This would be in direct 
conflict with the ruling of the courts. According to Argen-
tina’s economic minister: “Complying with a ruling doesn’t 
exempt us from honouring our obligations. Argentina will 
meet its obligations, will pay its debt, will honour its prom-
ises.” A full-page official communique was placed in the 
Financial Times explaining the country’s position. But the 
court order prevented the banks from dispensing payments 
on the restructured debt unless holdout creditors were also 
paid. Argentina argued that because it had deposited the 
money in the transfer accounts for payment, the bondhold-
ers had been paid. The courts disagreed.

236
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Reference Rates. What is an interest “reference rate” 
and how is it used to set rates for individual borrowers?
2.	 My Word is My LIBOR. Why has LIBOR played such 
a central role in international business and financial 
contracts? Why has this been questioned in recent 
debates over its value reported?
3.	 Credit Risk Premium. What is a credit risk premium?
4.	 Credit and Repricing Risk. From the point of view of 
a borrowing corporation, what are credit and repric-
ing risks? Explain steps a company might take to 
­minimize both.
5.	 Credit Spreads. What is a credit spread? What credit 
rating changes have the most profound impact on the 
credit spread paid by corporate borrowers?
6.	 Investment Grade versus Speculative Grade. What do 
the general categories of investment grade and specu-
lative grade represent?
7.	 Sovereign Debt. What is sovereign debt? What specific 
characteristic of sovereign debt constitutes the great-
est risk to a sovereign issuer?
8.	 Floating Rate Loan Risk. Why do borrowers of 
lower credit quality often find their access limited to 
­floating-rate loans?
9.	 Interest Rate Futures. What is an interest rate future? 
How can they be used to reduce interest rate risk by 
a borrower?
10.	 Interest Rate Futures Strategies. What would be the 
preferred strategy for a borrower paying interest on a 
future date if he expected interest rates to rise?
11.	 Forward rate agreement. How can a business firm that 
has borrowed on a floating-rate basis use a forward 
rate agreement to reduce interest rate risk?
12.	 Plain Vanilla. What is a plain-vanilla interest rate 
swap? Are swaps a significant source of capital for 
multinational firms?
13.	 Swaps and Credit Quality. If interest rate swaps are 
not the cost of government borrowing, what credit 
quality do they represent?
14.	 LIBOR Flat. Why do fixed-for-floating interest rate 
swaps never swap the credit spread component on a 
floating-rate loan?
15.	 Debt Structure Swap Strategies. How can interest rate 
swaps be used by a multinational firm to manage its 
debt structure?
16.	 Cost-Based Swap Strategies. How do corporate bor-
rowers use interest rate or cross-currency swaps to 
reduce the costs of their debt?
17.	 Cross-Currency Swaps. Why would one company 
with interest payments due in pounds sterling want 
to swap those payments for interest payments due in 
U.S. dollars?
18.	 Value Swings in Cross-Currency Swaps. Why are there 
significantly larger swings in the value of a cross-­
currency swap than there is in a plain-vanilla interest 
rate swap?
19.	 Unwinding a Swap. How does a company cancel or 
unwind a swap?
20.	 Counterparty risk. How does organized exchange 
trading in swaps remove any risk that the counter-
party in a swap agreement will not complete the 
agreement?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 U.S. Treasury Bill Auction Rates—March 2009. The 
interest yields on U.S. Treasury securities in early 
2009 fell to very low levels as a result of the combined 
events surrounding the global financial crisis. Calcu-
late the simple and annualized yields for the 3-month 
and 6-month Treasury bills auctioned on March 9, 
2009, listed here.
3-Month T-Bill
6-Month T-Bill
Treasury bill, 
face value
$10,000.00
$10,000.00
Price at sale
$9,993.93
$9,976.74
Discount
$6.07
$23.26
2.	 Credit Crisis, 2008. During financial crises, short-term 
interest rates will often change quickly (typically up) 
as indications that markets are under severe stress. The 
interest rates shown in the table below are for selected 
dates in September–October 2008. ­Different publica-
tions define the TED Spread in different ways, but 
one measure is the differential between the overnight 
LIBOR interest rate and the 3-month U.S. Treasury 
bill rate.

237
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
Date
Overnight 
USD 
LIBOR
3-Month 
U.S. 
Treasury TED Spread
9/8/08
2.15%
1.70%
_________
9/9/08
2.14%
1.65%
_________
9/10/08
2.13%
1.65%
_________
9/11/08
2.14%
1.60%
_________
9/12/08
2.15%
1.49%
_________
9/15/08
3.11%
0.83%
_________
9/16/08
6.44%
0.79%
_________
9/17/08
5.03%
0.04%
_________
9/18/08
3.84%
0.07%
_________
9/19/08
3.25%
0.97%
_________
9/22/08
2.97%
0.85%
_________
9/23/08
2.95%
0.81%
_________
9/24/08
2.69%
0.45%
_________
9/25/08
2.56%
0.72%
_________
9/26/08
2.31%
0.85%
_________
9/29/08
2.57%
0.41%
_________
9/30/08
6.88%
0.89%
_________
10/1/08
3.79%
0.81%
_________
10/2/08
2.68%
0.60%
_________
10/3/08
2.00%
0.48%
_________
10/6/08
2.37%
0.48%
_________
10/7/08
3.94%
0.79%
_________
10/8/08
5.38%
0.65%
_________
10/9/08
5.09%
0.55%
_________
10/10/08
2.47%
0.18%
_________
10/13/08
2.47%
0.18%
_________
10/14/08
2.18%
0.27%
_________
10/15/08
2.14%
0.20%
_________
10/16/08
1.94%
0.44%
_________
10/17/08
1.67%
0.79%
_________
a.	 Calculate the spread between the two market rates 
shown here in September and October 2008.
b.	 On what date is the spread the narrowest? The 
widest?
c.	 When the spread widens dramatically, presumably 
demonstrating some form of financial anxiety or 
crisis, which of the rates moves the most and why?
3.	 Underwater Mortgages. Bernie Madeoff pays 
$240,000 for a new four-bedroom 2,400-square-foot 
home outside Tonopah, Nevada. He plans to make a 
20% down payment, but is having trouble deciding 
whether he wants a 15-year fixed rate (6.400%) or a 
30-year fixed rate (6.875%) mortgage.
a.	 What is the monthly payment for both the 15- and 
30-year mortgages, assuming a fully amortizing loan 
of equal payments for the life of the mortgage? Use 
a spreadsheet calculator for the payments.
b.	 Assume that instead of making a 20% down pay-
ment, he makes a 10% down payment, and finances 
the remainder at 7.125% fixed interest for 15 years. 
What is his monthly payment?
c.	 Assume that the home’s total value falls by 25%. If 
the homeowner is able to sell the house, but now 
at the new home value, what would be his gain or 
loss on the home and mortgage assuming all of the 
mortgage principal remains? Use the same assump-
tions as in part a.
4.	 Botany Bay Corporation. Botany Bay Corporation 
of Australia seeks to borrow US$30,000,000 in the 
eurodollar market. Funding is needed for two years. 
Investigation leads to three possibilities. Compare the 
alternatives and make a recommendation.
1.	 Botany Bay could borrow the US$30,000,000 for 
two years at a fixed 5% rate of interest.
2.	 Botany Bay could borrow the US$30,000,000 at 
LIBOR + 1.5%. LIBOR is currently 3.5%, and 
the rate would be reset every six months.
3.	 Botany Bay could borrow the US$30,000,000 for 
one year only at 4.5%. At the end of the first year 
Botany Bay Corporation would have to negotiate 
for a new 1-year loan.
5.	 Chrysler LLC. Chrysler LLC, the now privately held 
company sold off by DaimlerChrysler, must pay float-
ing rate interest three months from now. It wants to 
lock in these interest payments by buying an interest 
rate futures contract. Interest rate futures for three 
months from now settled at 93.07, for a yield of 6.93% 
per annum.
a.	 If the floating interest rate three months from now 
is 6.00%, what did Chrysler gain or lose?
b.	 If the floating interest rate three months from now 
is 8.00%, what did Chrysler gain or lose?
6.	 CB Solutions. Heather O’Reilly, the treasurer of CB 
Solutions, believes interest rates are going to rise, so 
she wants to swap her future floating rate interest 
payments for fixed rates. Presently, she is paying per 
annum on $5,000,000 of debt for the next two years, 
with payments due semiannually. LIBOR is currently 

238
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
Problem 7.
Loan
Payments
1
2
3
4
Principal
$100
Interest
(10.00)
(7.85)
(5.48)
(2.87)
Interest rate
0.10
Principal
(21.55)
(23.70)
(26.07)
(28.68)
Maturity 
(years)
4.0
Total
(31.55)
(31.55)
(31.55)
(31.55)
Problem 8.
Loan
0
Payments
1
2
3
4
5
6
Principal
$220
Interest
(26.950)
(23.650)
(19.946)
(15.788)
(11.120)
(5.881)
Interest rate
12.250%
Principal
  (26.939)
  (30.239)
  (33.943)
  (38.101)
  (42.769)
(48.008)
Maturity 
(years)
6.0
Total
(53.889)
(53.889)
(53.889)
(53.889)
(53.889)
(53.889)
4.00% per annum. Heather has just made an interest 
payment today, so the next payment is due six months 
from today.
Heather finds that she can swap her current float-
ing rate payments for fixed payments of 7.00% per 
annum. (CB Solution’s weighted average cost of cap-
ital is 12%, which Heather calculates to be 6% per 
6-month period, compounded semiannually).
a.	 If LIBOR rises at the rate of 50 basis points per 
6-month period starting tomorrow, how much does 
Heather save or cost her company by making this 
swap?
b.	 If LIBOR falls at the rate of 25 basis points per 
6-month period, starting tomorrow, how much does 
Heather save or cost her company by making this 
swap?
7.	 Negotiating the Rate. A sovereign borrower is consid-
ering a $100 million loan for a 4-year maturity. It will 
be an amortizing loan, meaning that the interest and 
principal payments will total, annually, to a constant 
amount over the maturity of the loan. There is, how-
ever, a debate over the appropriate interest rate. The 
borrower believes the appropriate rate for its current 
creditstanding in the market today is 10%, but a num-
ber of the international banks with which it is nego-
tiating are arguing that it is most likely 12%, at the 
minimum 11%. What impact do these different inter-
est rates have on the prospective annual payments?
8.	 Saharan Debt Negotiations. The country of Sahara is 
negotiating a new loan agreement with a consortium of 
international banks. Both sides have a tentative agree-
ment on the principal—$220 million. But there are still 
wide differences of opinion on the final interest rate 
a.	 What would the annual amortizing loan payments 
be for the bank consortium’s proposal?
b.	 What would the annual amortizing loan payments 
be for Sahara’s loan preferences?
c.	 How much would annual payments drop on the 
bank consortium’s proposal if the same loan was 
stretched out from four to six years?
9.	 Delos Debt Renegotiations (A). Delos borrowed €80 
million two years ago. The loan agreement, an amor-
tizing loan, was for six years at 8.625% interest per 
annum. Delos has successfully completed two years 
of debt-service, but now wishes to renegotiate the 
terms of the loan with the lender to reduce its annual 
payments.
a.	 What were Delos’s annual principal and interest 
payments under the original loan agreement?
b.	 After two years debt service, how much of the 
­principal is still outstanding?
c.	 If the loan were restructured to extend another two 
years, what would the annual payments—principal 
and interest—be? Is this a significant reduction 
from the original agreement’s annual payments?
10.	 Delos Debt Renegotiations (B). Delos is continuing 
to renegotiate its prior loan agreement (€80 ­million 
for six years at 8.625% per annum), two years into 
the agreement. Delos is now facing serious tax rev-
enue shortfalls, and fears for its ability to service 
its debt obligations. So it has decided to get more 
and maturity. The banks would like a shorter loan, 
four years in length, while Sahara would prefer a 
long maturity of six years. The banks also believe the 
interest rate will need to be 12.250% per annum, but 
Sahara believes that is too high, arguing for 11.750%.

239
Interest Rate Risk and Swaps    CHAPTER 8 
aggressive, and has gone back to its lenders with a 
request for a haircut, a reduction in the remaining 
loan amount. The banks have, so far, only agreed to 
restructure the loan agreement for another two years 
(new loan of six years on the remaining principal bal-
ance) but at an interest rate a full 200 basis points 
higher, 10.625%.
a.	 If Delos accepts the current bank proposal of the 
remaining principal for six years (extending the 
loan an additional two years since two of the origi-
nal six years have already passed), but at the new 
interest rate, what are its annual payments going 
to be? How much relief does this provide Delos on 
annual debt-service?
b.	 Delos’s demands for a haircut are based on get-
ting the new annual debt service payments down. 
If Delos does agree to the new loan terms, what 
size of haircut should it try and get from its lenders 
to get its payments down to €10 million per year?
11.	 Raid Gauloises. Raid Gauloises is a rapidly growing 
French sporting goods and adventure racing outfitter. 
The company has decided to borrow €20,000,000 via a 
euro-euro floating rate loan for four years. Raid must 
decide between two competing loan offers from two 
of its banks.
Banque de Paris has offered the 4-year debt with an 
up-front initiation fee of 1.8%. Banque de Sorbonne, 
however, has offered a higher spread, but with no loan 
initiation fees up front, for the same term and princi-
pal. Both banks reset the interest rate at the end of 
each year.
Euro-LIBOR is currently 4.00%. Raid’s econo-
mist forecasts that LIBOR will rise by 0.5 percentage 
points each year. Banque de Sorbonne, however, offi-
cially forecasts euro-LIBOR to begin trending upward 
at the rate of 0.25 percentage points per year. Raid 
Gauloises’ cost of capital is 11%. Which loan proposal 
do you recommend for Raid Gauloises?
12.	 Firenza Motors. Firenza Motors of Italy recently took 
out a 4-year €5 million loan on a floating rate basis. It 
is now worried, however, about rising interest costs. 
Although it had initially believed interest rates in the 
eurozone would be trending downward when taking 
out the loan, recent economic indicators show growing 
inflationary pressures. Analysts are predicting that the 
European Central Bank will slow monetary growth 
driving interest rates up.
Firenza is now considering whether to seek some 
protection against a rise in euro-LIBOR, and is consid-
ering a forward rate agreement (FRA) with an insur-
ance company. According to the agreement, Firenza 
would pay to the insurance company at the end of 
each year the difference between its initial interest 
cost at (6.50%) and any fall in interest cost due to a 
fall in LIBOR. Conversely, the insurance company 
would pay to Firenza 70% of the difference between 
Firenza’s initial interest cost and any increase in inter-
est costs caused by a rise in LIBOR.
Purchase of the floating rate agreement will cost 
€100,000, paid at the time of the initial loan. What are 
Firenza’s annual financing costs now if LIBOR rises 
and if LIBOR falls? Firenza uses 12% as its weighted 
average cost of capital. Do you recommend that 
Firenza purchase the FRA?
13.	 Lluvia and Paraguas. Lluvia Manufacturing and Para-
guas Products both seek funding at the lowest possible 
cost. Lluvia would prefer the flexibility of floating rate 
borrowing, while Paraguas wants the security of fixed 
rate borrowing. Lluvia is the more creditworthy com-
pany. They face the following rate structure. Lluvia, 
with the better credit rating, has lower borrowing costs 
in both types of borrowing.
Lluvia wants floating rate debt, so it could borrow 
at LIBOR + 1%. However, it could borrow fixed at 
8% and swap for floating rate debt. Paraguas wants 
fixed rate debt, so it could borrow fixed at 12%. How-
ever, it could borrow floating at LIBOR + 2% and 
swap for fixed rate debt. What should they do?
14.	 Ganado’s Cross-Currency Swap: SFr for US$. Ganado 
Corporation entered into a 3-year cross-currency 
interest rate swap to receive U.S. dollars and pay Swiss 
francs. Ganado, however, decided to unwind the swap 
after one year—thereby having two years left on the 
settlement costs of unwinding the swap after one year. 
Repeat the calculations for unwinding, but assume 
that the rates shown below now apply.
Problem 14.
Assumptions
Values
Swap Rates
3-Year Bid
3-Year Ask
Notional principal
$10,000,000
Original: U.S. dollar
5.56%
5.59%
Original spot exchange rate, SFr/$
1.5000
Original: Swiss francs
1.93%
2.01%
New (1 year later) spot exchange rate, $/euro
5.5560
New fixed U.S. dollar interest
5.20%
New fixed Swiss franc interest
2.20%

240
CHAPTER 8    Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
15.	 Ganado’s Cross-Currency Swap: Yen for Euros. Use 
the table of swap rates in the chapter (Exhibit 8.12), 
and assume Ganado enters into a swap agreement 
to receive euros and pay Japanese yen, on a notional 
principal of €5,000,000. The spot exchange rate at the 
time of the swap is ¥104/€.
a.	 Calculate all principal and interest payments, in 
both euros and Swiss francs, for the life of the swap 
agreement.
b.	 Assume that one year into the swap agreement 
Ganado decides it wants to unwind the swap agree-
ment and settle it in euros. Assuming that a 2-year 
fixed rate of interest on the Japanese yen is now 
0.80%, and a 2-year fixed rate of interest on the 
euro is now 3.60%, and the spot rate of exchange 
is now ¥114/€, what is the net present value of the 
swap agreement? Who pays whom what?
16.	 Falcor. Falcor is the U.S.-based automotive parts sup-
plier that was spun-off from General Motors in 2000. 
With annual sales of over $26 billion, the company has 
expanded its markets far beyond traditional automo-
bile manufacturers in the pursuit of a more diversified 
sales base. As part of the general diversification effort, 
the company wishes to diversify the currency of denom-
ination of its debt portfolio as well. Assume Falcor 
enters into a $50 million 7-year cross-currency interest 
rate swap to do just that—pay euros and receive dol-
lars. Using the data in Exhibit 8.12, solve the following:
a.	 Calculate all principal and interest payments in 
both currencies for the life of the swap.
b.	 Assume that three years later Falcor decides to 
unwind the swap agreement. If 4-year fixed rates 
of interest in euros have now risen to 5.35%, 4-year 
fixed rate dollars have fallen to 4.40%, and the cur-
rent spot exchange rate is $1.02/€, what is the net 
present value of the swap agreement? Explain the 
payment obligations of the two parties precisely.
Internet Exercises
1.	 Financial Derivatives and the ISDA. The International 
Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) publishes 
a wealth of information about financial derivatives, 
their valuation and their use, in addition to providing 
master documents for their contractual use between 
parties. Use the following ISDA Internet site to find 
the definitions to 31 basic financial derivative ques-
tions and terms:
ISDA
www.isda.org/educat/faqs.html
2.	 Risk Management of Financial Derivatives. If you 
think this book is long, take a look at the freely down-
loadable U.S. Comptroller of the Currency’s handbook 
on risk management related to the care and use of 
financial derivatives!
Comptroller 
of the 
Currency
www.occ.gov/publications/
publications-by-type/comptrollers-
handbook/deriv.pdf
3.	 Option Pricing. OzForex Foreign Exchange Services 
is a private firm with an enormously powerful foreign 
currency derivative-enabled Web site. Use the follow-
ing site to evaluate the various “Greeks” related to 
currency option pricing.
OzForex
www.ozforex.com.au/forex-tools/
tools/fx-options-calculator
4.	 Garman-Kohlhagen Option Formulation. For those 
brave of heart and quantitatively adept, check out the 
following Internet site’s detailed presentation of the 
Garman-Kohlhagen option formulation used widely 
in business and finance today.
Riskglossary.com
www.riskglossary.com/link/
garman_-kohlhagen_1983.htm
5.	 Chicago Mercantile Exchange. The Chicago Mercan-
tile Exchange trades futures and options on a variety of 
currencies, including the Brazilian real. Navigate to FX 
under the Trading tab on the following site to evaluate 
the uses of these currency derivatives:
Chicago Mercantile Exchange
www.cmegroup.com
6.	 Implied Currency Volatilities. The single unobserv-
able variable in currency option pricing is the volatil-
ity, since volatility inputs are the expected standard 
deviation of the daily spot rate for the coming period 
of the option’s maturity. Use the New York Federal 
Reserve’s Web site to obtain current implied currency 
volatilities for major trading crossrate pairs.
Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York
www.ny.frb.org/markets/
impliedvolatility.html
7.	 Montreal Exchange. The Montreal Exchange is a 
Canadian exchange devoted to the support of finan-
cial derivatives in Canada. Use its Web site to view the 
latest on MV volatility, the volatility of the Montreal 
Exchange Index itself in recent trading hours and days.
Montreal Exchange
www.m-x.ca/
marc_options_en.php

Chapter	 9
Foreign Exchange Rate 
Determination
The herd instinct among forecasters makes sheep look like independent thinkers.
—Edgar R. Fiedler.
What determines the exchange rate between currencies? This has proven to be a very difficult 
question to answer. Companies and agents need foreign currency for buying imports, or they 
may earn foreign currency by exporting. Investors need foreign currency to invest in interest-
bearing instruments in foreign markets, such as fixed-income securities (bonds), shares in 
publicly traded companies, or other new types of hybrid instruments. Tourists, migrant work-
ers, speculators on currency movements—all of these economic agents buy and sell and sup-
ply and demand currencies every day. This chapter offers a basic theoretical framework with 
which to organize these elements, forces, and principles.
Chapter 6 described the international parity conditions that integrate exchange rates 
with inflation and interest rates and provided a theoretical framework for both the global 
financial markets and the management of international financial business. Chapter 3 pro-
vided a detailed analysis of how an individual country’s international economic activity, its 
balance of payments, can impact exchange rates. This chapter builds on those discussions of 
exchange rate determination schools of thought and looks at a third school of thought—the 
asset market approach. The chapter then turns to government intervention in the foreign 
exchange market. In the third and final section, we discuss a number of approaches to for-
eign exchange forecasting in practice. The chapter concludes with the Mini-Case entitled 
­Russian Ruble Roulette—a study in how the Russian ruble’s value has evolved in just the past 
­three-year period from internal change and external forces.
Learning Objectives
■
■
Explore the three major theoretical approaches to exchange rate determination
■
■
Detail how direct and indirect foreign exchange market intervention is conducted 
by central banks
■
■
Analyze the primary causes of exchange rate disequilibrium in emerging market 
currencies
■
■
Observe how forecasters combine technical analysis with the three major theoretical 
approaches to forecasting exchange rates
241

242
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
Exchange Rate Determination: The Theoretical Thread
There are basically three views of the exchange rate. The first takes the exchange rate as 
the relative price of monies (the monetary approach); the second, as the relative price of 
goods (the purchasing-power-parity approach); and the third, the relative price of bonds.
—Rudiger Dornbusch, “Exchange Rate Economics: Where Do We Stand?,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1980, pp. 143–194.
Professor Dornbusch’s tripartite categorization of exchange rate theory is a good starting 
point, but in some ways not robust enough—in our humble opinion—to capture the multi-
tude of theories and approaches. So, in the spirit of both tradition and completeness, we have 
amended Dornbusch’s three categories with several additional streams of thought in the fol-
lowing discussion.
Exhibit 9.1 provides an overview of the three major schools of thought—theoretical 
­determinants—of exchange rates. The exhibit is organized by the three major schools of 
thought (parity conditions, balance of payments approach, asset market approach) and second 
by the individual drivers within those approaches. At first glance, the idea that there are three 
different theories may appear daunting, but it is important to remember that these are not 
competing theories, but rather complementary theories. Without the depth and breadth of the 
various approaches combined, our ability to capture the complexity of the global market for 
currencies is lost.
In addition to the three schools of thought described in Exhibit 9.1, note that two other 
institutional dimensions are considered—whether the country possesses the capital markets 
and banking systems needed to drive and discover value. Finally, note that most determinants 
Parity Conditions
1.  Relative inﬂation rates
2.  Relative interest rates
3.  Forward exchange rates
4.  Interest rate parity
Asset Approach
1.  Relative real interest rates
2.  Prospects for economic growth
3.  Supply and demand for assets
4.  Outlook for political stability
5.  Speculation and liquidity
Is there a well-developed
and liquid money and capital
market in that currency?
Balance of Payments
1.  Current account balances
2.  Portfolio investment
3.  Foreign direct investment
4.  Exchange rate regimes
5.  Oﬃcial monetary reserves
Is there a sound and secure
banking system in place to
support currency trading?
Spot
Exchange
Rate
Exhibit 9.1
 The Determinants of Foreign Exchange Rates

243
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
of the spot exchange rate are also affected by changes in the spot rate. In other words, they are 
not only linked but also mutually determined.
Purchasing Power Parity Approaches
Under the skin of an international economist lies a deep-seated belief in some variant of 
the PPP theory of the exchange rate.
—Paul Krugman, 1976.
The most widely accepted of all exchange rate determination theories, the theory of purchasing 
power parity (PPP) states that the long-run equilibrium exchange rate is determined by the 
ratio of domestic prices relative to foreign prices, as explained in Chapter 6. The purchasing 
power parity (PPP) approach is both the oldest and most widely followed of the exchange 
rate theories, and most theories of exchange rate determination have PPP elements embedded 
within their frameworks.
There are a number of different versions of PPP: the Law of One Price, Absolute 
­Purchasing Power Parity, and Relative Purchasing Power Parity (all were discussed in detail 
in Chapter 6). The latter of the three theories, Relative Purchasing Power Parity, is thought to 
be the most consistently relevant to possibly explaining what drives exchange rate values. In 
essence, it states that changes in relative prices between countries drive the change in exchange 
rates over time.
If, for example, the current spot exchange rate between the Japanese yen and U.S. dollar 
was ¥90.00 = $1.00, and Japanese and U.S. prices were to change at 2% and 1% over the com-
ing period, respectively, the spot exchange rate next period would be ¥90.89/$.
St + 1 = St * 1 + ∆ in Japanese prices
1 + ∆ in U.S. prices
= ¥90.00/$ * 1.02
1.01 = ¥90.89/$.
Although PPP seems to possess a core element of common sense, it has proven to be quite 
poor at forecasting exchange rates (at least in the short to medium term). The problems are 
both theoretical and empirical. The theoretical problems lie primarily with its basic assump-
tion that the only thing that matters is relative price changes. Yet many currency supply and 
demand forces are driven by other forces, including investment incentives, economic growth, 
and political change. The empirical issues are primarily in deciding which measures or indexes 
of prices to use across countries, in addition to the ability to provide a “predicted change in 
prices” with the chosen indexes.
Balance of Payments (Flows) Approach
After PPP, the most frequently used theoretical approach to exchange rate determination is 
probably that involving the supply and demand for currencies in the foreign exchange market. 
These exchange rate flows reflect current account and financial account transactions recorded 
in a nation’s balance of payments, as described in Chapter 3. The basic balance of payments 
approach argues that the equilibrium exchange rate is found when the net inflow (outflow) of 
foreign exchange arising from current account activities matches the net outflow (inflow) 
of foreign exchange arising from financial account activities.
The balance of payments approach continues to enjoy widespread appeal, as balance of 
payments transactions are among the most frequently captured and reported of international 
economic activity. Trade surpluses and deficits, current account growth in service activity, and, 
recently, the growth and significance of international capital flows continue to fuel this theo-
retical fire.
Criticisms of the balance of payments approach arise from the theory’s emphasis on flows 
of currency and capital rather than on stocks of money or financial assets. Relative stocks of 

244
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
money or financial assets play no role in exchange rate determination in this theory, a weak-
ness explored in the following discussion of monetary and asset market approaches. Curiously, 
while the balance of payments approach is largely dismissed by the academic community, the 
practitioner public-market participants, including currency traders themselves, still rely on 
variations of this theory for much of their decision making.
Monetary Approach
The monetary approach in its simplest form states that the exchange rate is determined by 
the supply and demand for national monetary stocks, as well as the expected future levels and 
rates of growth of monetary stocks. Other financial assets, such as bonds, are not considered 
relevant for exchange rate determination as both domestic and foreign bonds are viewed as 
perfect substitutes. It is all about money stocks.
The monetary approach focuses on changes in the supply and demand for money as the 
primary determinant of inflation. Changes in relative inflation rates in turn are expected to 
alter exchange rates through a purchasing power parity effect. The monetary approach then 
assumes that prices are flexible in the short run as well as the long run, so that the transmission 
mechanism of inflationary pressure is immediate in impact.
A weakness of monetary models of exchange rate determination is that real economic 
activity is relegated to a role in which it only influences exchange rates through changes in the 
demand for money. The monetary approach is also criticized for its omission of a number of 
factors that are generally agreed upon by area experts as important to exchange rate deter-
mination, including (1) the failure of PPP to hold in the short to medium term; (2) money 
demand appears to be relatively unstable over time; and (3) the level of economic activity and 
the money supply appear to be interdependent, not independent.
Asset Market Approach (Relative Price of Bonds)
The asset market approach, sometimes called the relative price of bonds or portfolio balance 
approach, argues that exchange rates are determined by the supply and demand for financial 
assets of a wide variety. Shifts in the supply and demand for financial assets alter exchange 
rates. Changes in monetary and fiscal policy alter expected returns and perceived relative risks 
of financial assets, which in turn alter rates.
Many of the macroeconomic theoretical developments in recent years focused on how 
monetary and fiscal policy changes altered the relative perceptions of return and risk to 
the stocks of financial assets driving exchange rate changes. The frequently cited works of 
­Mundell-Fleming are in this genre. Theories of currency substitution, the ability of individual 
and commercial investors to alter the composition of their portfolios, follow the same basic 
premises of the portfolio balance and rebalance framework.
Unfortunately, for all of the good work and research over the past 50 years, the ability to 
forecast exchange rate values in the short term to long term is—in the words of the authors 
below—sorry. Although academics and practitioners alike agree that in the long run funda-
mental principles such as purchasing power and external balances drive currency values, none 
of the fundamental theories have proven to be very useful in the short to medium term.
 . . . the case for macroeconomic determinants of exchange rates is in a sorry state [The] 
results indicate that no model based on such standard fundamentals like money supplies, 
real income, interest rates, inflation rates and current account balances will ever succeed 
in explaining or predicting a high percentage of the variation in the exchange rate, at 
least at short- or medium-term frequencies.
—Jeffrey A. Frankel and Andrew K. Rose, “A Survey of Empirical Research on Nominal 
Exchange Rates,” NBER Working Paper No. 4865, 1994.

245
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
Technical Analysis
The forecasting inadequacies of fundamental theories has led to the growth and popularity of 
technical analysis, the belief that the study of past price behavior provides insights into future 
price movements. The primary feature of technical analysis is the assumption that exchange 
rates, or for that matter all market-driven prices, follow trends. And those trends may be ana-
lyzed and projected to provide insights into short-term and medium-term price movements 
in the future. Global Finance in Practice 9.1 illustrates one example of a simplified technical 
analysis of the Japanese yen–U.S. dollar crossrate.
Most theories of technical analysis differentiate fair value from market value. Fair value is 
the true long-term value that the price will eventually retain. The market value is subject to a 
multitude of changes and behaviors arising from widespread market participant perceptions 
and beliefs at the time.
The Asset Market Approach to Forecasting
The asset market approach assumes that whether foreigners are willing to hold claims in mon-
etary form depends on an extensive set of investment considerations or drivers. These drivers, 
as previously depicted in Exhibit 9.1, include the following elements:
■
■
Relative real interest rates are a major consideration for investors in foreign bonds 
and short-term money market instruments.
■
■
Prospects for economic growth and profitability are an important determinant of 
cross-border equity investment in both securities and foreign direct investment.
Global Finance in Practice 9.1
Technical Analysis of the JPY/USD Rate (January 2011– February 2014)
75
80
90
85
95
110
105
100
70
Low
¥75.66/$
1/4/2011
2/4/2011
3/4/2011
4/4/2011
5/4/2011
6/4/2011
7/4/2011
8/4/2011
9/4/2011
10/4/2011
11/4/2011
12/4/2011
1/4/2012
2/4/2012
3/4/2012
4/4/2012
5/4/2012
6/4/2012
7/4/2012
8/4/2012
9/4/2012
10/4/2012
11/4/2012
12/4/2012
1/4/2013
2/4/2013
3/4/2013
4/4/2013
5/4/2013
6/4/2013
7/4/2013
8/4/2013
9/4/2013
10/4/2013
11/4/2013
12/4/2013
1/4/2014
2/4/2014
Japanese yen = 1.00 U.S. dollar
Turn #1
Turn #3
Turn #2
Turn #4
Turn #5
Turn #6
The Japanese yen has been the subject of much technical analysis.
• Technically the yen ended a 5-year bear period in Nov. 2011,
   reaching a low of 75.66 to the dollar
  
• As seen in the diagram, turning points are deﬁned by linear
   connections of sub-period high points
• Trend periods are not necessarily the same lengths of time
• Turning point #6 identiﬁed here could possibly not be a true
   turning point depending on future movements

246
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
■
■
Capital market liquidity is particularly important to foreign institutional investors. 
Cross-border investors are not only interested in the ease of buying assets, but also 
in the ease of selling those assets quickly for fair market value if desired.
■
■
A country’s economic and social infrastructure are important indicators of its ability 
to survive unexpected external shocks and to prosper in a rapidly changing world 
economic environment.
■
■
Political safety is exceptionally important to both foreign portfolio and direct inves-
tors. The outlook for political safety is usually reflected in political risk premiums 
for a country’s securities and for purposes of evaluating foreign direct investment 
in that country.
■
■
The credibility of corporate governance practices is important to cross-border portfo-
lio investors. Poor corporate governance practices can reduce foreign investors’ influ-
ence and cause subsequent loss of the firm’s focus on shareholder wealth objectives.
■
■
Contagion is defined as the spread of a crisis in one country to its neighboring coun-
tries and other countries with similar characteristics—at least in the eyes of cross-
border investors. Contagion can cause an “innocent” country to experience capital 
flight with a resulting depreciation of its currency.
■
■
Speculation can either cause a foreign exchange crisis or make an existing crisis 
worse. We will observe this effect through the three illustrative cases—the Asian 
crisis, Russian crisis, and Argentine crisis—discussed later in this chapter.
Foreign investors are willing to hold securities and undertake foreign direct investment in 
highly developed countries based primarily on relative real interest rates and the outlook for 
economic growth and profitability. All the other drivers described in Exhibit 9.1 are assumed 
to be satisfied.
For example, during the 1981–1985 period, the U.S. dollar strengthened despite growing 
current account deficits. This strength was due partly to relatively high real interest rates in 
the United States. Another factor, however, was the heavy inflow of foreign capital into the 
U.S. stock market and real estate, motivated by good long-run prospects for growth and profit-
ability in the United States.
The same cycle was repeated in the United States in the period between 1990 and 2000. 
Despite continued worsening balances on the current account, the U.S. dollar strengthened 
in both nominal and real terms due to foreign capital inflow motivated by rising stock and 
real estate prices, a low rate of inflation, high real interest returns, and a seemingly endless 
“irrational exuberance” about future economic prospects. This time the “bubble” burst fol-
lowing the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States. The attacks and their 
aftermath caused a negative reassessment of long-term growth and profitability prospects 
in the U.S. (as well as a newly formed level of political risk for the United States itself). This 
negative outlook was reinforced by a sharp drop in the U.S. stock markets and a series of 
revelations about failures in corporate governance by several large corporations (the Enron 
era). As would be predicted by both the balance of payments and asset market approaches, 
the U.S. dollar depreciated.
The experience of the United States, as well as other highly developed countries, illustrates 
why some forecasters believe that exchange rates are more heavily influenced by economic 
prospects than by the current account. One scholar summarizes this belief using an interesting 
anecdote.
Many economists reject the view that the short-term behavior of exchange rates is deter-
mined in flow markets. Exchange rates are asset prices traded in an efficient financial 
market. Indeed, an exchange rate is the relative price of two currencies and therefore is 

247
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
determined by the willingness to hold each currency. Like other asset prices, the exchange 
rate is determined by expectations about the future, not current trade flows.
A parallel with other asset prices may illustrate the approach. Let’s consider the stock 
price of a winery traded on the Bordeaux stock exchange. A frost in late spring results in 
a poor harvest, in terms of both quantity and quality. After the harvest the wine is finally 
sold, and the income is much less than the previous year. On the day of the final sale 
there is no reason for the stock price to be influenced by this flow. First, the poor income 
has already been discounted for several months in the winery stock price. Second, the 
stock price is affected by future, in addition to current, prospects. The stock price is based 
on expectations of future earnings, and the major cause for a change in stock price is a 
revision of these expectations.
A similar reasoning applies to exchange rates: Contemporaneous international flows 
should have little effect on exchange rates to the extent they have already been expected. 
Only news about future economic prospects will affect exchange rates. Since economic 
expectations are potentially volatile and influenced by many variables, especially vari-
ables of a political nature, the short-run behavior of exchange rates is volatile.
—Bruno Solnik, International Investments, 3rd Edition, Reading, 
MA: Addison Wesley, 1996, p. 58. Reprinted with permission of 
Pearson Education, Inc.
The asset market approach to forecasting is also applicable to emerging markets. In this case, 
however, a number of additional variables contribute to exchange rate determination. These 
variables are, as described previously, illiquid capital markets, weak economic and social infra-
structure, political instability, corporate governance, contagion effects, and speculation. These 
variables will be illustrated in the section detailing major currency crises later in this chapter.
Currency Market Intervention
A fundamental problem with exchange rates is that no commonly accepted method 
exists to estimate the effectiveness of official intervention into foreign exchange markets. 
Many interrelated factors affect the exchange rate at any given time, and no quantitative 
model exists that is able to provide the magnitude of any causal relationship between 
intervention and an exchange rate when so many interdependent variables are acting 
simultaneously.
—“Japan’s Currency Intervention: Policy Issues,” Dick K. Nanto, CRS Report to Congress 
(United States), July 13, 2007, CRS-7.
The value of a country’s currency is of significant interest to an individual government’s eco-
nomic and political policies and objectives. Those interests sometimes extend beyond the 
individual country, but may actually reflect some form of collective country interest. Although 
many countries have moved from fixed exchange rate values long ago, the governments and 
central bank authorities of the multitude of floating rate currencies still privately and publicly 
profess what value their currency “should hold” in their eyes, regardless of whether the market 
for that currency agrees at that time. Foreign currency intervention—the active management, 
manipulation, or intervention in the market’s valuation of a country’s currency—is a compo-
nent of currency valuation and forecast that cannot be overlooked.
Motivations for Intervention
There is a long-standing saying that “what worries bankers is inflation, but what worries 
elected officials is unemployment.” The principle is actually quite useful in understanding 
the various motives for currency market intervention. Depending upon whether a country’s 

248
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
central bank is an independent institution (e.g., the U.S. Federal Reserve), or a subsidiary of 
its elected government (as the Bank of England was for many years), the bank’s policies may 
either fight inflation or fight slow economic growth, but rarely can do both.
Historically, a primary motive for a government to pursue currency value change was 
to keep the country’s currency cheap so that foreign buyers would find its exports cheap. 
This policy, long referred to as “beggar-thy-neighbor,” has given rise to numerous competi-
tive devaluations over the years. It has not, however, fallen out of fashion. The slow economic 
growth and continuing employment problems in many countries in 2012, 2013, and 2014 led 
some governments, the United States and the European Union being prime examples, to strive 
to hold their currency values down.
Alternatively, the fall in the value of the domestic currency will sharply reduce the pur-
chasing power of its people. If the economy is forced, for a variety of reasons, to continue 
to purchase imported products (e.g., petroleum imports because of no domestic substitute), 
a currency devaluation or depreciation may prove highly inflationary—and in the extreme, 
impoverish the country’s people (as in the case of Venezuela).
It is frequently noted that most countries would like to see stable exchange rates and to 
avoid the entanglements associated with manipulating currency values. Unfortunately, that 
would also imply that they are also happy with the current exchange rate’s impact on country-
level competitiveness. One must look no further than the continuing highly public debate 
between the U.S. and China over the value of the yuan. The U.S. believes the yuan is under-
valued, making Chinese exports to the U.S. overly cheap, which in turn, results in a growing 
current account deficit for the United States and current account surplus for China.
The International Monetary Fund, as one of its basic principles (Article IV), encourages 
members to avoid pursuing “currency manipulation” to gain competitive advantages over 
other members. The IMF defines manipulation as “protracted large-scale intervention in one 
direction in the exchange market.” It seems, however, that many governments often choose 
to ignore the IMF’s advice.
Intervention Methods
There are many ways in which an individual or collective set of governments and central 
banks can alter the value of their currencies. It should be noted, however, that the methods 
of market intervention used are very much determined by the size of the country’s economy, 
the magnitude of global trading in its currency, and the depth and breadth of development in 
its domestic financial markets. A short list of the intervention methods would include direct 
intervention, indirect intervention, and capital controls.
Direct Intervention. This is the active buying and selling of the domestic currency against 
foreign currencies. This traditionally required a central bank to act like any other trader in the 
currency market—albeit a big one. If the goal were to increase the value of the domestic cur-
rency, the central bank would purchase its own currency using its foreign exchange reserves, 
at least to the acceptable limits that it could endure depleting its reserves.
If the goal were to decrease the value of its currency—to fight an appreciation of its cur-
rency’s value on the foreign exchange market—it would sell its own currency in exchange for 
foreign currency, typically a major hard currency like the dollar and euro. Although there are 
no physical limits to its ability to sell its own currency (it could theoretically continue to “print 
money” endlessly), central banks are cautious in the degree to which they may potentially 
change their monetary supplies through intervention.
Direct intervention was the primary method used for many years, but beginning in the 
1970s, the world’s currency markets grew enough that any individual player, even a central 
bank, could find itself with insufficient resources to move the market. As one trader stated a 

249
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
number of years ago, “We at the bank found ourselves little more than a grain of sand on the 
beach of the market.”
One solution to the market size challenge has been the occasional use of coordinated 
intervention, in which several major countries, or a collective such as the G8 of industrialized 
countries, agree that a specific currency’s value is out of alignment with their collective inter-
ests. In that situation, the countries may work collectively to intervene and push a currency’s 
value in a desired direction. The September 1985 Plaza Agreement, an agreement signed at the 
Plaza Hotel in New York City by the members of the Group of Ten, was one such coordinated 
intervention agreement. The members, collectively, had concluded that currency values had 
become too volatile or too extreme in movement for sound economic policy management. The 
problem with coordinated intervention is, of course, achieving agreement between nations. This 
has proven to be a major sticking point in the principle’s use.
Indirect Intervention. This is the alteration of economic or financial fundamentals that are 
thought to be drivers of capital to flow in and out of specific currencies. This was a logical 
development for market manipulation given the growth in size of the global currency markets 
relative to the financial resources of central banks.
The most obvious and widely used factor here is interest rates. Following the financial 
principles outlined in the previous discussion of parity conditions, higher real rates of interest 
attract capital. If a central bank wishes to “defend its currency” for example, it might follow a 
restrictive monetary policy, which would drive real rates of interest up. The method is therefore 
no longer limited to the quantity of foreign exchange reserves held by the country. Instead, it 
is limited only by the country’s willingness to suffer the domestic impacts of higher real inter-
est rates in order to attract capital inflows and therefore drive up the demand for its currency.
Alternatively, in a country wishing for its currency to fall in value, particularly when con-
fronted with a continual appreciation of its value against major trading partner currencies, the 
central bank may work to lower real interest rates, reducing the returns to capital.
Because indirect intervention uses tools of monetary policy, a fundamental dimension of 
economic policy, the magnitude and extent of impacts may reach far beyond currency value. 
Overly stimulating economic activity, or increasing money supply growth beyond real eco-
nomic activity, may prove inflationary. The use of such broad-based tools like interest rates to 
manipulate currency values requires a determination of importance, which in some cases may 
involve a choice to pursue international economic goals at the expense of domestic economic 
policy goals.
Capital Controls. This is the restriction of access to foreign currency by government. This 
involves limiting the ability to exchange domestic currency for foreign currency. When access 
and exchange is permitted, trading takes place only with official designees of the government 
or central bank, and only at dictated exchange rates.
Often, governments will limit access to foreign currencies to commercial trade: for exam-
ple, allowing access to hard currency for the purchase of imports only. Access for investment 
purposes—particularly for short-term portfolios where investors are moving in and out of 
interest-bearing accounts and purchasing or selling securities or other funds—is often prohib-
ited or limited. The Chinese regulation of access and trading of the Chinese yuan is a prime 
example of the use of capital controls over currency value. In addition to the government’s 
setting the daily rate of exchange, access to the exchange is limited by a difficult and timely 
bureaucratic process for approval, and limited to commercial trade transactions.
Failure. It is also important to remember that intervention may—and often does—fail. The 
Turkish currency crisis of 2014 is a classic example of a drastic indirect intervention that ulti-
mately only slowed the rate of capital flight and currency collapse. Turkey had enjoyed some 

250
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
degree of currency stability throughout 2012 and 2013, but the Turkish economy (one of the 
so-called “Fragile Five” countries, along with South Africa, India, Indonesia, and Brazil) suf-
fered a widening current account deficit and rising inflation in late 2013. With the increasing 
anxieties in emerging markets in the fourth quarter of 2013 over the U.S. Federal Reserve’s 
announcement that it would be slowing its bond purchasing (the Taper Program, essentially a 
tighter monetary policy), capital began exiting Turkey. The lira came under increasing down-
ward pressure.
Turkey, however, was also under a great deal of domestic political strife, as the president 
of Turkey believed that the central bank should be stimulating the Turkish economy by low-
ering interest rates. Lower rates provided additional incentive for short-term capital flight. 
Pressures intensified in early January 2014, resulting in a sudden increase in the Turkish one-
week bank repurchase interest rate (or repo rate) from 4.5% to 10.0%. Although the first 
few hours indicated some relief with the lira returning to a slightly stronger value versus the 
dollar (and euro), within days it was trading weaker once again. Indirect intervention in this 
case had not only proven a failure, but the attempted cure may in the end have worsened 
the economy.
Understanding the motivations and methods for currency market intervention is critical 
to any analysis of the determination of future exchange rates. And although it is often impos-
sible to determine, in the end, whether intervention was successful, either direct or indirect in 
form, it is ever-present. Governments will always try to protect their currencies during periods 
of weakness. In the end, it may depend on both luck and talent. Global Finance in Practice 9.2 
provides a short list of possible best practices for effective intervention.
The debate was renewed in September 2010 when Japan intervened in the foreign 
exchange markets for the first time in nearly six years. In an attempt to slow the appreciat-
ing yen, Japan reportedly bought nearly 20 billion U.S. dollars in exchange. Finance Ministry 
officials had stated publicly that 82 yen per dollar was probably the limit of their tolerance for 
yen appreciation—and their tolerance was being tested.
A variety of factors, features, and tactics, according to many 
currency traders, influence the effectiveness of an interven-
tion effort.
■
■Don’t Lean into the Wind.  Markets that are mov-
ing significantly in one direction, like the strengthening 
of the Japanese yen in the fall of 2010, are very tough 
to turn. Termed “leaning into the wind,” intervention dur-
ing a strong market movement will most likely result in a 
very expensive failure. Currency traders argue that central 
banks should time their intervention very carefully, choos-
ing moments when trading volumes are light and direc-
tion nearly flat. Don’t lean into the wind, read it.
■
■Coordinate Timing and Activity.  Use traders or asso-
ciates in a variety of geographic markets and trading cen-
ters, possibly other central banks, if possible. The markets 
are much more likely to be influenced if they believe the 
intervention activity is reflecting a grass-roots movement, 
and not the singular activity of a single trading entity or bank.
■
■Use Good News.  Particularly when trying to quell a 
currency fall, time the intervention to coincide with posi-
tive economic, financial, or business news closely asso-
ciated with a country’s currency market. Traders often 
argue that “markets wish to celebrate good news,” and 
currencies may be no different.
■
■Don’t Be Cheap—Overwhelm Them.  Traders fear 
missing the moment, and a large, coordinated, well-
timed intervention can make them fear they are leaning 
in the wrong direction. A successful intervention is in 
many ways a battle of psychology; play on insecurities. If 
it appears the intervention is gradually having the desired 
impact, throw ever-increasing assets into the battle. 
Don’t get cheap.
Global Finance in Practice 9.2
Rules of Thumb for Effective Intervention

251
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
As illustrated in Exhibit 9.2, the Bank of Japan intervened on September 13 as the yen 
approached 82 yen per dollar. (The Bank of Japan is independent in its ability to conduct 
­Japanese monetary policy, but as the organizational subsidiary of the Japanese Ministry of 
Finance, it must conduct foreign exchange operations on behalf of the Japanese government.) 
Japanese officials reportedly notified authorities in both the United States and the European 
Union of their activity, but noted that they had not asked for permission or support.
The intervention resulted in public outcry from Beijing to Washington to London over the 
“new era of currency intervention.” Although market intervention is always looked down upon 
by free market proponents, the move by Japan was seen as particularly frustrating as it came 
at a time when the United States was continuing to pressure China to revalue its currency, the 
renminbi. As noted by economist Nouriel Roubini, “We are in a world where everyone wants 
a weak currency,” a marketplace in which all countries are looking to stimulate their domestic 
economies through exceptionally low interest rates and corresponding weak currency values—
“a global race to the bottom.”
Ironically, as illustrated in Exhibit 9.2, it appears that the intervention was largely unsuc-
cessful. When the Bank of Japan started buying dollars in an appreciating yen market—the so-
called “leaning into the wind” strategy—it was hoping to either stop the appreciation, change 
the direction of the spot rate movement, or both. In either pursuit, it appears to have failed. 
As one analyst commented, it turned out to be a “short-term fix to a long-term problem.” 
Although the yen spiked downward (more yen per dollar) for a few days, it returned once 
again to an appreciating path within a week.
Japanese yen (JPY) = USD 1.00
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
¥94.71/$
¥80.67/$
Bank of Japan intervention
Sept 13th as yen hits
15-year high
1/4/2010
1/18/2010
2/1/2010
2/15/2010
3/1/2010
3/15/2010
3/29/2010
4/12/2010
4/26/2010
5/10/2010
5/24/2010
6/7/2010
6/21/2010
7/5/2010
7/19/2010
8/2/2010
8/16/2010
8/30/2010
9/13/2010
9/27/2010
10/11/2010
10/25/2010
11/8/2010
11/22/2010
12/6/2010
12/20/2010
Exhibit 9.2
 Intervention and the Japanese Yen, 2010

252
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
Japan’s frequent interventions, described in Exhibit 9.3, have been the subject of much 
study. In an August 2005 study by the IMF, it was noted that between 1991 and 2005, the Bank 
of Japan had intervened on 340 days, while the U.S. Federal Reserve intervened on 22 days and 
the European Central Bank intervened on only 4 days (since its inception in 1998). Although 
the IMF has never found Japanese intervention to be officially “currency manipulation,” an 
analysis by Takatoshi Ito in 2004 concluded that there was on average a one-yen-per-dollar 
change in market rates, roughly 1%, as a result of Japanese intervention over time.
There is no historical case in which [yen] selling intervention succeeded in immediately 
stopping the preexisting long-term uptrend in the Japanese yen.
—Tohru Sasaki, Currency Strategist, JPMorgan.
Japan’s interventions are not, however, a lone example of attempted market manipula-
tion. Even the Swiss National Bank, a bastion of market and instrument stability, repeatedly 
intervened in 2009 to stop the appreciation of the Swiss franc against both the dollar and 
the euro.
Organizations of economic union and integration present extreme examples of currency 
market intervention. As described in Chapter 2, the launch of the euro in 1999 followed two 
decades of economic, monetary, and currency coordination and intervention. This system, the 
European Monetary System or EMS, used an elaborate system of bilateral responsibility, in 
which both country governments were committed to maintaining the parity exchange rates. 
Their commitment extended to both types of intervention, direct and indirect. Global Finance 
in Practice 9.3 describes the EMS system, the so-called “snake in a tunnel.”
40
Jan-80
Jan-81
Jan-82
Jan-83
Jan-84
Jan-85
Jan-86
Jan-87
Jan-88
Jan-89
Jan-90
Jan-91
Jan-92
Jan-93
Jan-94
Jan-95
Jan-96
Jan-97
Jan-98
Jan-99
Jan-00
Jan-01
Jan-02
Jan-03
Jan-04
Jan-05
Jan-06
Jan-07
Jan-08
Jan-09
Jan-10
80
120
160
200
240
280
Japanese yen (JPY) = USD1.00
It is not clear that Japanese intervention over the past
two decades has had the desired impact on preventing
yen appreciation.
Intervention
Intervention
Exhibit 9.3
 The History of Japanese Intervention

253
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
Disequilibrium: Exchange Rates in Emerging Markets
Although the three different schools of thought on exchange rate determination described 
earlier (parity conditions, balance of payments approach, and asset approach) make under-
standing exchange rates appear to be straightforward, that is rarely the case. The large and 
liquid capital and currency markets follow many of the principles outlined so far relatively 
well in the medium to long term. The smaller and less liquid markets, however, frequently 
demonstrate behaviors that seemingly contradict theory. The problem lies not in the theory, 
but in the relevance of the assumptions underlying the theory. An analysis of the emerging 
market crises illustrates a number of these seeming contradictions.
After a number of years of relative global economic tranquility, beginning in the second 
half of the 1990s, a series of currency crises shook all emerging markets. The Asian crisis of 
July 1997 and the fall of the Argentine peso in 2002 demonstrate an array of emerging market 
economic failures, each with its own complex causes and unknown outlooks. These crises also 
illustrated the growing problem of capital flight and short-run international speculation in 
currency and securities markets. We will use each of the individual crises to focus on a specific 
dimension of the causes and consequences.
The Asian Crisis of 1997
At a 1998 conference sponsored by the Milken Institute, a speaker noted that the world’s 
preoccupation with the economic problems of Indonesia was incomprehensible because “the 
total gross domestic product of Indonesia is roughly the size of North Carolina.” The following 
speaker observed, however, that the last time he had checked, “North Carolina did not have 
a population of 220 million people.”
Global Finance in Practice 9.3
The European Monetary System’s “Snake in a Tunnel”
The European Monetary System (EMS), in use between 1979 
and the launch of the euro in 1999, established a central rate 
(or parity rate) of exchange between two currencies, which 
was to be the target long-term exchange rate. The exchange 
rate was then allowed to trade freely as long as it stayed 
within a band of {2.25% of that rate. If or when the rate 
crossed the upper or lower intervention rates (shown in the 
figure), both countries were required to begin intervention 
efforts to drive the exchange rate back toward the central 
rate trading zone.
One of the basic tenets of the system that drove much 
of its success was the bilateral responsibility it established 
between the countries in maintaining the exchange rate. If, 
for example, the German mark (Deutsche mark, DM) was 
appreciating against the French franc (FF), and the market 
rate crossed the intervention rate threshhold, both govern-
ments were required to undertake intervention, either direct 
intervention (buying and selling their currencies in the market) 
or indirect intervention (such as changing interest rates), or 
both, to maintain trading about the central rate.
+2.25%
Spot rate between DM & FF
DM = FF 1.00
Required intervention
DM appreciating
+1.75%
0
–1.75%
–2.25%
Upper Boundary
Upper Intervention
Lower Intervention
Lower Boundary
Central Rate
(Parity rate found by calculating
crossrate of each currency against the
ECU, European Currency Unit)

254
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
The roots of the Asian currency crisis extended from a fundamental change in the econom-
ics of the region, the transition of many Asian nations from being net exporters to net import-
ers. Starting as early as 1990 in Thailand, the rapidly expanding economies of the Far East 
began importing more than they exported, requiring major net capital inflows to support their 
currencies. As long as the capital continued to flow in—capital for manufacturing plants, dam 
projects, infrastructure development, and even real estate speculation—the pegged exchange 
rates of the region could be maintained. When the investment capital inflows stopped, how-
ever, crisis was inevitable.
The most visible roots of the crisis were in the excesses of capital inflows into Thailand. 
With rapid economic growth and rising profits forming the backdrop, Thai firms, banks, and 
finance companies had ready access to capital on the international markets, finding U.S. dollar 
debt cheap offshore. Thai banks continued to raise capital internationally, extending credit to a 
variety of domestic investments and enterprises beyond what the Thai economy could support. 
As capital flows into the Thai market hit record rates, financial flows poured into investments 
of all kinds. As the investment “bubble” expanded, some participants raised questions about 
the economy’s ability to repay the rising debt. The baht came under attack.
Crisis. In May and June 1997, the Thai government repeatedly intervened in the foreign 
exchange markets directly (using up much of its foreign exchange reserves) and indirectly (by 
raising interest rates. A second round of speculative attacks in late June and early July proved 
too much for the Thai authorities. On July 2, 1997, the Thai central bank finally allowed the 
baht to float (or sink in this case). The baht fell 17% against the U.S. dollar and more than 12% 
against the Japanese yen in a matter of hours. By November, the baht had fallen from 25 to 40 
baht per dollar, a fall of about 38%, as illustrated in Exhibit 9.4.
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
Thai baht/U.S. dollar
4/1/97
4/8/97
4/15/97
4/22/97
4/29/97
5/6/97
5/13/97
5/20/97
5/27/97
6/3/97
6/10/97
6/17/97
6/24/97
7/1/97
7/8/97
7/15/97
7/22/97
7/29/97
8/5/97
8/12/97
8/19/97
8/26/97
9/2/97
9/9/97
9/16/97
9/23/97
Thai baht oﬃcially ﬂoated on July 2, 
falling from THB25 to 
THB29 = USD1 in hours
Thai govt. intervenes heavily in 
May and June to thwart rumors 
of the baht’s potential fall 
As more Asian currencies fall in July and August the 
baht continues to fall under market pressure
The Asian crisis and fall of the Thai baht demonstrate 
how myopic the international markets can become, 
having ignored serious current account deﬁcits
in Thailand for years.
Exhibit 9.4
 The Thai Baht and the Asian Crisis

255
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
Within days, in Asia’s own version of the tequila effect, a number of neighboring Asian 
nations, some with and some without similar characteristics to Thailand, came under specula-
tive attack by currency traders and capital markets. The Philippine peso, the Malaysian ringgit, 
and the Indonesian rupiah all fell in the months following the July baht devaluation. In late 
October 1997, Taiwan caught the markets off balance with a surprise competitive devalua-
tion of 15%. The Taiwanese devaluation seemed only to renew the momentum of the crisis. 
Although the Hong Kong dollar survived (at great expense to its foreign exchange reserves), 
the Korean won (KRW) was not so lucky. In November 1997, the historically stable won also 
fell victim, falling from 900 Korean won per dollar to more than 1100. The only currency that 
had not fallen besides the Hong Kong dollar was the Chinese renminbi, which was not freely 
convertible at the time.
Causal Complexities. The Asian economic crisis—for it was more than just a currency 
­collapse—had many roots besides traditional balance of payments difficulties. The causes were 
different in each country, yet there were specific underlying similarities, which allow compari-
son: corporate socialism, corporate governance, and banking stability.
■
■
The rapidly growing export-led countries of Asia had known only stability. Because 
of the influence of government and politics in the business arena, even in the event 
of failure, it was believed that government would not allow firms to fail, workers to 
lose their jobs, or banks to close. Practices that had persisted for decades without 
challenge, such as lifetime employment, were now no longer sustainable.
■
■
Many firms operating within the Far Eastern business environments were largely 
controlled either by families or by groups related to the governing party or body 
of the country. This tendency has been labeled cronyism. Cronyism means that the 
interests of minority stockholders and creditors are often secondary at best to the 
primary motivations of corporate management.
■
■
The banking sector had fallen behind. Bank regulatory structures and markets had 
been deregulated nearly without exception across the globe. The central role played 
by banks in the conduct of business had largely been ignored. As firms across Asia 
collapsed, government coffers were emptied and banks failed. Without banks, the 
“plumbing” of business conduct was shut down.
In the aftermath, the international speculator and philanthropist George Soros was the 
object of much criticism for being the cause of the crisis because of massive speculation by 
his and other hedge funds. Soros, however, was likely only the messenger. Global Finance in 
Practice 9.4 details the Soros debate.
The Argentine Crisis of 2002
Now, most Argentines are blaming corrupt politicians and foreign devils for their ills. 
But few are looking inward, at mainstream societal concepts such as viveza criolla, an 
Argentine cultural quirk that applauds anyone sly enough to get away with a fast one. 
It is one reason behind massive tax evasion here: One of every three Argentines does 
so—and many like to brag about it.
—“Once-Haughty Nation’s Swagger Loses Its Currency,” Anthony Faiola, 
The Washington Post, March 13, 2002.
Argentina’s economic ups and downs have historically been tied to the health of the Argentine 
peso. South America’s southernmost resident—which oftentimes considered itself more Euro-
pean than Latin American—had been wracked by hyperinflation, international indebtedness, 

256
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
and economic collapse in the 1980s. By 1991, the people of Argentina had had enough. Eco-
nomic reform was a common goal of the Argentine people. They were not interested in quick 
fixes, but lasting change and a stable future. They nearly got it.
In 1991, the Argentine peso had been pegged to the U.S. dollar at a one-to-one rate of 
exchange. The policy was a radical departure from traditional methods of fixing the rate of a 
currency’s value. Argentina adopted a currency board, a structure—rather than merely a com-
mitment—to limit the growth of money in the economy. Under a currency board, the central 
bank may increase the money supply in the banking system only with increases in its holdings 
of hard currency reserves. The reserves were, in this case, U.S. dollars. By removing the abil-
ity of government to expand the rate of growth of the money supply, Argentina believed it 
was eliminating the source of inflation that had devastated its standard of living. It was both 
a recipe for conservative and prudent financial management, and a decision to eliminate the 
power of politicians, elected and unelected, to exercise judgment both good and bad. It was 
an automatic and unbendable rule.
This “cure” was a restrictive monetary policy that slowed economic growth. The country’s 
unemployment rate rose to double-digit levels in 1994 and stayed there. The real GDP growth 
rate settled into recession in late 1998, and the economy continued to shrink through 2000. 
Argentine banks allowed depositors to hold their money in either pesos or dollars. This was 
intended to provide a market-based discipline to the banking and political systems, and to 
For Thailand to blame Mr. Soros for its plight is rather like 
condemning an undertaker for burying a suicide.
—The Economist, August 2, 1997, p. 57.
In the weeks following the start of the Asian Crisis in July 1997, 
officials from a number of countries, including Thailand and 
Malaysia, blamed the international financier George Soros for 
causing the crisis. Particularly vocal was the Prime Minister of 
Malaysia, Dr. Mahathir Mohamad, who repeatedly implied that 
Soros had a political agenda associated with Burma’s prospect 
of joining the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). 
Mahathir noted in a number of public speeches that Soros might 
have been making a political statement, and not just speculating 
against currency values. Mahathir argued that the poor people 
of Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, and Indonesia would pay 
a great price for Soros’s attacks on Asian currencies.
George Soros is probably the most famous currency 
speculator (and possibly the most successful) in global his-
tory. Admittedly responsible for much of the European financial 
crisis of 1992 and the fall of the French franc in 1993, he once 
again was the recipient of critical attention following the fall of 
the Thai baht and Malaysian ringgit.
Nine years later, in 2006, Mahathir and Soros met for 
the first time. Mahathir apologized and withdrew his previ-
ous accusations. In Soros’s book published in 1998, The 
Crisis of Global Capitalism: Open Society Endangered, Soros 
explained that his fund had shorted the Thai baht and Malay-
sian ringgit (signed agreements to deliver the currency to other 
buyers at future dates) beginning in early 1997. He argued 
this meant that later in the spring, when his fund attempted 
to cover their positions, they were buyers of the currencies, 
not sellers, and therefore were on the “good side” and were 
in effect helping to support the currency values as the fund 
moved to realize its profits. Unfortunately, as many currency 
analysts have argued, the large short positions formed early 
in 1997 were clear signals in the market (word does move 
rapidly in currency markets) that Soros Funds expected the 
baht and ringgit to fall.
Global Finance in Practice 9.4
Was George Soros to Blame for the Asian Crisis?

257
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
demonstrate the government’s unwavering commitment to maintaining the peso’s value par-
ity with the dollar. Although intended to build confidence in the system, in the end it proved 
disastrous to the Argentine banking system.
Economic Crisis. The 1998 recession proved to be unending. Three-and-a-half years later, 
Argentina was still in recession. By 2001, crisis conditions had revealed three very impor-
tant underlying problems with Argentina’s economy: (1) The Argentine peso was overvalued; 
(2) The currency board regime had eliminated monetary policy alternatives for macroeco-
nomic policy; and (3) The Argentine government budget deficit was out of control. Inflation 
had not been eliminated, and the world’s markets were watching.
Most of the major economies of South America now slid into recession. With slowing 
economic activity, imports fell. Most South American currencies now fell against the U.S. dol-
lar, but because the Argentine peso remained pegged to the dollar, Argentine exports grew 
increasingly overpriced. The sluggish economic growth in Argentina warranted expansionary 
economic policies, but the currency board’s basic premise was that the money supply to the 
financial system could not be expanded any further or faster than the ability of the economy 
to capture dollar reserves—eliminating monetary policy.
Government spending was not slowing, however. As the unemployment rate grew 
higher, as poverty and social unrest grew—both in Buenos Aires, the civil center of Argen-
tina, and in the outer provinces—government was faced with pressure to close the economic 
and social gaps. Government spending continued to increase, but tax receipts did not. Argen-
tina turned to the international markets to aid in the financing of its government’s deficit 
spending. The total foreign debt of the country began rising dramatically. Only a number 
of IMF capital injections prevented the total foreign debt of the country from skyrocket-
ing. By the end of the 1990s, however, total foreign debt had doubled, and the economy’s 
earning power had not.
As economic conditions continued to deteriorate, banks suffered increasing runs. 
Depositors, fearing that the peso would be devalued, lined up to withdraw their money—
both Argentine peso and U.S. dollar cash balances. Pesos were converted to dollars, once 
again adding fuel to the growing fire of currency crisis. The government, fearing that the 
increasing financial drain on banks would cause their collapse, closed the banks. Con-
sumers, unable to withdraw more than $250 per week, were instructed to use debit cards 
and credit cards to make purchases and to conduct the everyday transactions required by 
society.
Devaluation. On Sunday, January 6, 2002, in the first act of his presidency, President Eduardo 
Duhalde devalued the peso from 1.00 Argentine peso per U.S. dollar to 1.40. But the economic 
pain continued. Two weeks after the devaluation, the banks were still closed. On February 
3, 2002, the Argentine government announced that the peso would be floated, as shown in 
Exhibit 9.5. The government would no longer attempt to fix or manage its value to any specific 
level, allowing the market to find or set the exchange rate.
The lessons to be drawn from the Argentine story are somewhat complex. From the 
very beginning, Argentina and the IMF both knew the currency board system was a risky 
strategy, but given its long and disastrous experience with exchange rates, one that had been 
deemed worth taking. In the end, however, despite best efforts, the use of such a radically strict 
exchange rate system in which government had given up nearly all control over its sovereign 
monetary system, proved unsustainable.

258
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
Argentine pesos/U.S. dollar
Roughly six months pass before stabilization
Currency Board ﬁx
ARS1.00 = USD1.00
Feb. 3 the government oﬃcially 
announces the ﬂotation of the peso
Jan. 6 devaluation 
from 1.00/$ to 1.40/$ but 
banks closed, so no trading
11/2/01
11/9/01
11/16/01
11/23/01
11/30/01
12/7/01
12/14/01
12/21/01
12/28/01
1/4/02
1/11/02
1/18/02
1/25/02
2/1/02
2/8/02
2/15/02
2/22/02
3/1/02
3/8/02
3/15/02
3/22/02
3/29/02
4/5/02
4/12/02
4/19/02
4/26/02
5/3/02
5/10/02
5/17/02
5/24/02
5/31/02
6/7/02
6/14/02
6/21/02
6/28/02
7/5/02
7/12/02
7/19/02
7/26/02
Argentina’s Currency Board was an extreme system designed to 
eliminate the ability of government to conduct independent monetary
policy. It was the result of years of disastrous inﬂationary suﬀering 
from poor policy control.
Exhibit 9.5
 The Collapse of the Argentine Peso
Forecasting in Practice
There are numerous foreign exchange forecasting services, many of which are provided by 
banks and independent consultants. In addition, some multinational firms have their own 
in-house forecasting capabilities. Predictions can be based on econometric models, technical 
analysis, intuition, and a certain measure of gall.
Exhibit 9.6 summarizes the various forecasting periods, regimes, and most widely followed 
methodologies. (Remember, if we authors could predict the movement of exchange rates 
with regularity, we surely wouldn’t write books.) Whether any of the forecasting services are 
worth their cost depends both on the motive for forecasting as well as the required accuracy. 
For example, long-run forecasts may be motivated by a multinational firm’s desire to initi-
ate a foreign investment in Japan, or perhaps to raise long-term funds in Japanese yen. Or a 
portfolio manager may be considering diversifying for the long term in Japanese securities. 
The longer the time horizon of the forecast, the more inaccurate, but also the less critical the 
forecast is likely to be.
Short-term forecasts are typically motivated by a desire to hedge a receivable, payable, or 
dividend for a period of perhaps three months. In this case, the long-run economic fundamen-
tals may not be as important as technical factors in the marketplace, government intervention, 
news, and passing whims of traders and investors. Accuracy of the forecast is critical, since 
most of the exchange rate changes are relatively small even though the day-to-day volatility 
may be high.
Forecasting services normally undertake fundamental economic analysis for long-term 
forecasts, and some base their short-term forecasts on the same basic model. Others base 
their short-term forecasts on technical analysis similar to that conducted in security analysis. 

259
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
They attempt to correlate exchange rate changes with various other variables, regardless of 
whether there is any economic rationale for the correlation.
The chances of these forecasts being consistently useful or profitable depend on whether 
one believes the foreign exchange market is efficient. The more efficient the market is, the 
more likely it is that exchange rates are “random walks,” with past price behavior providing 
no clues to the future. The less efficient the foreign exchange market is, the better the chance 
that forecasters may get lucky and find a key relationship that holds, at least for the short 
run. If the relationship is consistent, however, others will soon discover it and the market will 
become efficient again with respect to that piece of information.
Technical Analysis
Technical analysts, traditionally referred to as chartists, focus on price and volume data to 
determine past trends that are expected to continue into the future. The single most important 
element of technical analysis is that future exchange rates are based on the current exchange 
rate. Exchange rate movements, similar to equity price movements, can be subdivided into 
three periods: (1) day-to-day movement, which is seemingly random; (2) short-term move-
ments, ranging from several days to trends lasting several months; and (3) long-term move-
ments, characterized by up and down long-term trends. Long-term technical analysis has 
gained new popularity as a result of recent research into the possibility that long-term “waves” 
in currency movements exist under floating exchange rates.
Exhibit 9.6
 The Collapse of the Argentine Peso
Forecast Period
Regime
Recommended Forecast Methods
SHORT-RUN
Fixed-Rate
1. Assume the fixed rate is maintained
2. Indications of stress on fixed rate?
3. Capital controls; black market rates
4. Indicators of government’s capability to maintain fixed-rate?
5. Changes in official foreign currency reserves
Floating-Rate
1. Technical methods which capture trend
2. Forward rates as forecasts
(a) 630 assume a random walk
(b) 30–90 days, forward rates
3. 90–360 days, combine trend with fundamental analysis
4. Fundamental analysis of inflationary concerns
5. Government declarations and agreements regarding exchange 
rate goals
6. Cooperative agreements with other countries
LONG-RUN
Fixed-Rate
1. Fundamental analysis
2. BOP management
3. Ability to control domestic inflation
4. Ability to generate hard currency reserves to use for intervention
5. Ability to run trade surpluses
Floating-Rate
1. Focus on inflationary fundamentals and PPP
2. Indicators of general economic health such as economic growth and 
stability
3. Technical analysis of long-term trends; new research indicates 
possibility of long-term technical “waves”

260
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
The longer the time horizon of the forecast, the more inaccurate the forecast is likely to 
be. Whereas forecasting for the long run must depend on economic fundamentals of exchange 
rate determination, many of the forecast needs of the firm are short to medium term in their 
time horizon and can be addressed with less theoretical approaches. Time series techniques 
infer no theory or causality but simply predict future values from the recent past. Forecasters 
freely mix fundamental and technical analysis, presumably because forecasting is like playing 
horseshoes—getting close counts. Global Finance in Practice 9.5 provides a short analysis of 
how accurate one prestigious forecaster was over a three-year period.
Cross-Rate Consistency in Forecasting
International financial managers must often forecast their home currency exchange rates for 
the set of countries in which the firm operates, not only to decide whether to hedge or to make 
There are many different foreign exchange forecasting ser-
vices and service providers. JPMorgan Chase (JPMC) is one 
of the most prestigious and widely used. A review of JPMC’s 
forecasting accuracy for the U.S. dollar/euro spot exchange 
rate ($/€) for the 2002 to 2005 period, in 90-day increments, 
is presented in the exhibit. The graph shows the actual spot 
exchange rate for the period and JPMC’s forecast for the spot 
exchange rate for the same period.
There is good news and there is bad news. The good 
news is that JPMC hit the actual spot rate dead-on in both 
May and November 2002. The bad news is that after that, they 
missed. Somewhat worrisome is when the forecast got the 
direction wrong. For example, in February 2004, JPMC had 
Global Finance in Practice 9.5
JPMorgan Chase Forecast of the Dollar/Euro
forecast the spot rate to move from the current rate of $1.27/€ 
to $1.32/€, but in fact, the dollar had appreciated dramati-
cally in the following three-month period to close at $1.19/€. 
This was in fact a massive difference. The lesson learned is 
probably that regardless of how professional and prestigious 
a forecaster may be, and how accurate they may have been 
in the past, forecasting the future—by anyone for anything—is 
challenging to say the least.
*This analysis uses exchange rate data as published in the print 
edition of The Economist, appearing quarterly. The source of 
the exchange rate forecasts, as noted in The Economist, is 
JPMorgan Chase.
$1.40
$1.30
$1.20
$1.10
$1.00
$0.90
$0.80
1.38
1.26
1.32
1.30
1.23
1.23
1.23
1.19
1.19
1.27
1.32
1.22
1.21
1.16
1.17
1.13
1.15
1.07
1.02
1.01
1.00
0.98
0.91
0.90
0.87
Actual spot
rate
USD = 1.00 EUR
JPMC’s forecast of the spot
rate 90 days into the future
2/14/02
5/16/02
8/08/02
11/07/02
2/13/03
5/15/03
8/14/03
11/13/03
2/12/04
5/13/04
8/19/04
11/20/04
3/01/05
5/24/05

261
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
an investment, but also as part of preparing multi-country operating budgets in the home 
country’s currency. These are the operating budgets against which the performance of foreign 
subsidiary managers will be judged. Checking cross-rate consistency—the reasonableness of 
the cross rates implicit in individual forecasts—acts as a reality check.
Forecasting: What to Think?
Obviously, with the variety of theories and practices, forecasting exchange rates into the future 
is a daunting task. Here is a synthesis of our thoughts and experience:
■
■
It appears, from decades of theoretical and empirical studies, that exchange rates do 
adhere to the fundamental principles and theories outlined in the previous sections. 
Fundamentals do apply in the long term. There is, therefore, something of a funda-
mental equilibrium path for a currency’s value.
■
■
It also seems that in the short term, a variety of random events, institutional frictions, 
and technical factors may cause currency values to deviate significantly from their 
long-term fundamental path. This is sometimes referred to as noise. Clearly, therefore, 
we might expect deviations from the long-term path not only to occur, but also to 
occur with some regularity and relative longevity.
Exhibit 9.7 illustrates this synthesis of forecasting thought. The long-term equilibrium 
path of the currency—although relatively well-defined in retrospect—is not always apparent 
in the short term. The exchange rate itself may deviate in something of a cycle or wave about 
the long-term path.
Foreign Currency =
1 unit of Domestic Currency
Technical or random events may drive the
exchange rate from the long-term path
Fundamental
Equilibrium Path
of Exchange Rate
Time
Short-term forces may
induce noise—short-term
volatility around the long-term
path of the exchange rate
If market participants have stabilizing expectations, when forces drive the currency’s value below the long-term fundamental
equilibrium path, they will buy the currency driving its value back toward the fundamental equilibrium path. If market participants
have destabilizing expectations, and forces drive the currency’s value away from the fundamental path, participants may not
move immediately or in signiﬁcant volume to push the currency’s value back toward the fundamental equilibrium path for an
extended period of time (or possibly establish a new long-term fundamental path).
Exhibit 9.7
 Short-Term Noise versus Long-Term Trends

262
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
If market participants agree on the general long-term path and possess stabilizing 
­expectations, the currency’s value will periodically return to the long-term path. It is critical, 
however, that when the currency’s value rises above the long-term path, most market par-
ticipants see it as being overvalued and respond by selling the currency—causing its price to 
fall. Similarly, when the currency’s value falls below the long-term path, market participants 
respond by buying the currency—driving its value up. This is what is meant by stabilizing 
expectations: Market participants continually respond to deviations from the long-term path 
by buying or selling to drive the currency back to the long-term path.
If, for some reason, the market becomes unstable, as illustrated by the dotted deviation 
path in Exhibit 9.7, the exchange rate may move significantly away from the long-term path for 
longer periods of time. Causes of these destabilizing markets—weak infrastructure (such as 
the banking system) and political or social events that dictate economic behaviors—are often 
the actions of speculators and inefficient markets.
Exchange Rate Dynamics: Making Sense of Market Movements
Although the various theories surrounding exchange rate determination are clear and sound, 
it may appear on a day-to-day basis that the currency markets do not pay much attention to 
the theories—they don’t read the books! The difficulty is in understanding which fundamentals 
are driving markets at which points in time.
One example of this relative confusion over exchange rate dynamics is the phenomenon 
known as overshooting. Assume that the current spot rate between the dollar and the euro, as 
illustrated in Exhibit 9.8, is S0. The U.S. Federal Reserve announces an expansionary monetary 
policy that cuts U.S. dollar interest rates. If euro-denominated interest rates remain unchanged, 
the new spot rate expected by the exchange markets based on interest differentials is S1. This 
immediate change in the exchange rate is typical of how the markets react to news, distinct 
economic and political events that are observable. The immediate change in the value of the 
dollar-euro is therefore based on interest differentials.
As time passes, however, the price impacts of the monetary policy change start work-
ing their way through the economy. As price changes occur over the medium to long term, 
purchasing power parity forces drive the market dynamics, and the spot rate moves from S1 
toward S2. Although both S1 and S2 were rates determined by the market, they reflected the 
Spot Exchange Rate
(USD = 1EUR)
After an adjustment period,
by t2 the market has found
a new long-run equilibrium
exchange rate S2
After the initial spike, markets begin
assimilating other relevant information. They
soon recognize that singular focus on the initial
informational shock had been an overreaction;
price begins to fall from S1 toward S2
Informational shock
occurs at time t1;
market reacts moving
from S0 to S1
The Spike
(peak of overshooting)
Time
S0
S2
S1
t1
t2
Exhibit 9.8
 Exchange Rate Dynamics: Overshooting

263
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
dominance of different theoretical principles. As a result, the initial lower value of the dollar 
of S1 is described as overshooting the longer-term equilibrium value of S2.
This is, of course, only one possible series of events and market reactions. Currency mar-
kets are subject to new news every hour of every day, making it very difficult to forecast 
exchange rate movements in short periods of time. In the longer term, as shown in Exhibit 9.8, 
the markets do customarily return to fundamentals of exchange rate determination.
Summary Points
■
■
There are three major schools of thought to explaining 
the economic determinants of exchange rates: parity 
conditions, the balance of payments approach, and the 
asset market approach.
■
■
The recurrence of exchange rate crises demonstrates 
not only how sensitive currency values continue to be to 
economic fundamentals, but also how vulnerable many 
emerging market currencies are.
■
■
Foreign exchange market intervention may be con-
ducted via direct intervention, buying and selling the 
country’s own currency, or indirect intervention, by 
changing the motivations and rules for capital to move 
into or out of a country and its currency.
■
■
Many emerging market currencies periodically expe-
rience fundamental exchange rate disequilibrium. In 
the past, the most frequent cause of disequilibrium 
was hyperinflation, but today the most frequently 
experienced challenge is the large and rapid inflow and 
outflow of non-current account capital.
■
■
Exchange rate forecasting is part of global business. All 
businesses of all kinds must form some expectation of 
what the future holds.
■
■
Short-term forecasting of exchange rates in practice 
focus on time series trends and current spot rates. 
­Longer-term forecasting requires a return to the basic 
analysis of exchange rate fundamentals such as BOP, 
relative inflation and interest rates, and the long-run 
properties of purchasing power parity.
■
■
In the short term, a variety of random events, institu-
tional frictions, and technical factors may cause currency 
values to deviate significantly from their long-term 
fundamental path. In the long term, it does appear 
that exchange rates follow a fundamental equilibrium 
path, one consistent with the fundamental theories of 
exchange rate determination.
The Russian ruble has experienced a multitude of regime 
shifts since the opening of the Russian economy under Per-
estroika in 1991.2 After a number of years of a highly con-
trolled official exchange rate accompanied by tight capital 
controls, the 1998 economic crisis prompted a movement 
to a heavily managed float. Using both direct intervention 
and indirect intervention (interest rate policy), the ruble 
held surprisingly steady until 2008. But all of that stopped 
in 2008 when the global credit crisis, which started in the 
United States, spread to Russia. As illustrated by Exhibit A, 
the impact on the value of the ruble proved disastrous.
Russian Crisis 1998
In an effort to protect the value of the ruble, the Bank 
of Russia spent $200 billion—a full one-third of its for-
eign exchange reserves—throughout 2008 and into 2009. 
Although the market began to calm in early 2009, the Bank 
decided to introduce a more flexible exchange rate regime 
for the management of the ruble.
The new system was a dual-currency floating rate band 
for the ruble. A dual-currency basket was formed from two 
currencies, the U.S. dollar (55%) and the euro (45%), for 
Russian Ruble Roulette1
Mini-Case
1Copyright © 2015 Thunderbird School of Global Management, Arizona State University. All rights reserved. This case was prepared by 
Professor Michael H. Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only and not to indicate either effective or ineffective management.
2There is no established English spelling for the Russian currency—the rouble or the ruble. There is a journalistic tradition that most 
North American publications use ruble, while European organizations favor rouble, as does the Oxford English Dictionary.

264
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
upper and lower band in Exhibit B) that was only 2 rubles 
per basket value, the band was expanded to eventually 
reach 7 rubles.
The ruble’s new-found relative stability was rewarded 
in October 2013 when the Bank of Russia announced that 
it was expanding the neutral “no-intervention” zone from 
1 ruble to 3.1 rubles. This was followed by an announce-
ment in January 2014 that the Bank would begin moving to 
end daily intervention, with a plan to end all intervention 
sometime in 2015. (Daily intervention in recent months had 
averaged about $60 million, a relatively small amount given 
history.) If, however, the ruble did hit either of its bands, 
the Bank did acknowledge that it was prepared to reenter 
the market to preserve stability.
The impetus for moving to a freely-floating ruble was to 
both allow the changes in the currency’s value to “absorb” 
global economic changes, and allow the central bank to 
increase its focus on controlling inflationary forces. Russian 
inflation has been stubbornly high in recent years, and with 
the U.S. Federal Reserve announcing that it would be slow-
ing/stopping its loose money policy in the wake of the finan-
cial crisis of 2008–2009, inflationary pressures were sure to 
continue. But then the regime shift plan began to unravel.
the calculation of the central ruble rate. Around this basket 
rate, a neutral zone was established in which no currency 
intervention would be undertaken. This initial neutral zone 
was 1.00 Ruble versus the basket. Around the neutral zone 
a set of operational band boundaries were established; an 
upper band and lower band for intervention purposes.
If the ruble remained in the neutral zone, no interven-
tion would be made. If, however, the ruble’s value hit either 
operational band, the Bank of Russia would intervene by 
buying rubles (upper band) or selling rubles (lower band) 
to stabilize its value. The Bank was allowed a maximum of 
$700 million per day in purchases of rubles. Once hitting 
that limit, the Bank was to move the band(s) in increments 
of 5 kopecks (100 kopecks = 1.00 ruble) per day.3
As illustrated in Exhibit B, the ruble continued to slide 
(appreciating) against the basket throughout 2009 and into 
2010. The dual-currency band was continually adjusted—
downward—in an effort to put a “moving floor” under-
neath the currency. Finally, in late-2010, the ruble stabilized.
As part of its continual program to allow the ruble to 
grow as a global currency, the distance between the upper 
and lower bands has been repeatedly increased over time. 
Starting with a floating band (the spread between the 
3The daily foreign exchange intervention limit has been adjusted downward a number of times since the dual-currency band was 
­instituted. In January 2014 the limit had contracted to $350 million per day.
0
5
Nov-95
Mar-96
Jul-96
Nov-96
Mar-97
Jul-97
Nov-97
Mar-98
Jul-98
Nov-98
Mar-99
Jul-99
Nov-99
Mar-00
Jul-00
Nov-00
Mar-01
Jul-01
Nov-01
Mar-02
Jul-02
Nov-02
Mar-03
Jul-03
Nov-03
Mar-04
Jul-04
Nov-04
Mar-05
Jul-05
Nov-05
Mar-06
Jul-06
Nov-06
Mar-07
Jul-07
Nov-07
Mar-08
Jul-08
Nov-08
Mar-09
Jul-09
Nov-09
Mar-10
Jul-10
Nov-10
Mar-11
Jul-11
Nov-11
Mar-12
Jul-12
Nov-12
Mar-13
Jul-13
Nov-13
Mar-14
Jul-14
Nov-14
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Russian rubles = 1.00 USD (monthly average)
Russian economic crisis
of 2008 results in a massive
fall from Ruble 6 to
16 = USD 1 in less than
4 weeks
Global ﬁnancial crisis of 2008–2009 causes new
run on the value of the ruble. In Feb. 2009 Bank of
Russia launches a dual-currency (USD & EUR)
ﬂoating-band for management of the ruble
Extended period of relative currency calm and stability, managed
exchange rate maintained at Ruble 30–35 = USD 1
Relatively stable value with higher
volatility as Bank of Russia widens the
band to move toward a true ﬂoating rate
regime, Ruble ≈ 32 = USD 1
Western sanctions on Russian trade and investment, combined with the collapse
in global oil prices, send the value of the ruble to new lows against the dollar
Exhibit A
 The Russian Ruble: 1995–2015

265
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
But the external shocks were not limited to sanctions. 
Beginning in the summer of 2014 the price of crude oil 
(Brent Blend crude is the predominant world price of oil) 
started falling. Oil was Russia’s primary export; the country, 
the government, Russian business, all relied heavily on oil 
and gas export earnings to fund their economy. The pres-
sures on the ruble—which many termed a ­commodity cur-
rency because Russia relied so heavily on oil—intensified.
As illustrated in Exhibit C, the ruble’s fall began to accel-
erate in the fall of 2014. Sanctions were starting to impose real 
costs, the price of oil was falling faster and faster, and capital 
2014: Western Sanctions and the Price of Oil
“External shocks” is a phrase few central bankers ever 
want to hear. In the spring of 2014, however, that was 
exactly what the Russian ruble experienced. In March 2014 
the European Union, the United States, and a host of other 
Western industrial countries imposed political and eco-
nomic sanctions on Russia in opposition to its aggressive 
activities in Eastern Ukraine and its annexation of Crimea 
and Sevastopol. This had an immediate impact on restrict-
ing Russian exports, as well as shutting down a number of 
major foreign direct investment projects in Russia.
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
Jan-09
Mar-09
May-09
Jul-09
Sep-09
Nov-09
Jan-10
Mar-10
May-10
Jul-10
Sep-10
Nov-10
Jan-11
Mar-11
May-11
Jul-11
Sep-11
Nov-11
Jan-12
Mar-12
May-12
Jul-12
Sep-12
Nov-12
Jan-13
Mar-13
May-13
Jul-13
Sep-13
Nov-13
Jan-14
Rubles versus dual-currency basket
Dual-currency basket calculated by authors (monthly average exchange rates).
Upper Band
Lower Band
Dual-Currency
Basket
Exhibit B
  Russian Ruble Floating Band (January 2009–January 2014)
120
80
90
100
110
70
60
50
40
30
1/2/2014
1/16/2014
1/30/2014
2/13/2014
2/27/2014
3/13/2014
3/27/2014
4/10/2014
4/24/2014
5/8/2014
5/22/2014
6/5/2014
6/19/2014
7/3/2014
7/17/2014
7/31/2014
8/14/2014
8/28/2014
9/11/2014
9/25/2014
10/9/2014
10/23/2014
11/6/2014
11/20/2014
12/4/2014
12/18/2014
1/1/2015
March 2014
The European Union, United States,
and a number of other major Western
countries impose sanctions on Russia
related to its annexation of Crimea
and activities in Eastern Ukraine
August 2014
Price of oil falls below $100/bbl
for ﬁrst time since 2009
Summer 2014
Sanctions are increased, cutting travel, visas,
trade, and ﬁnancing of trade with Russia
Russian ruble
(Rubles = 1.00 US$)
December 2014
Russian central
bank raises
Bank borrowing
rate from
10.5% to 17%
in one day
Price of Brent
Crude (US$/bbl)
Exhibit C
  The Russian Ruble, Sanctions, and the Price of Oil (January 2014–January 2015)

266
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
The Bank of Russia’s plan to implement a long-term 
currency strategy, which had been put in place back in 2009, 
now appeared to be something of a train wreck. The Bank’s 
original theory—that by increasingly targeting inflation 
rather than the value of the ruble, the long-term economic 
prospects for Russia and the ruble would be improved—
made sound economic and financial logic in a world of 
$100/bbl oil and no Western sanctions. Many inside and 
outside the Bank now wondered if the ruble could ever 
move from being a simple “emerging market currency” to 
a currency of value, a reserve currency.
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 How would you classify the exchange rate regime used 
by Russia over the 1991–2014 period?
2.	 What did the establishment of operational bands do 
to the expectations of ruble speculators? Would these 
expectations be stabilizing or destabilizing in your 
opinion?
3.	 Would Western sanctions alone been devastating to 
the ruble’s value, or was it the plummeting price of oil 
that had the larger impact?
began to flee Russia. By December the Russian central bank 
estimated that more than $130 billion in capital had already 
left Russia, and another $120 billion in capital outflows were 
expected in 2015. On December 15, on what became known 
as Red Monday, the ruble lost more than 10% of its value. 
The Bank of Russia quickly increased its bank borrowing 
rate from 10.5% to 17%, the following day to 18%, but the 
ruble barely slowed. By the end of 2014 the price of oil had 
fallen to roughly $50 per barrel and the ­Russian ruble was 
trading at well over Rubles 60 per U.S. dollar.
Now a new concern rose which all emerging market cur-
rencies faced with devaluation and depreciation: could the 
country pay its foreign currency debts in the near future? 
It was estimated that Russian borrowers of all kinds, gov-
ernment and business, faced more than $120 billion in hard-
currency foreign debt (largely dollars and euros) in 2015 
alone. Russian businesses of all kinds, including some of 
the world’s largest oil companies, were now restricted from 
borrowing internationally. So they borrowed domestically, 
pumping out ruble-denominated debt at a breakneck pace. 
What would that mean for borrowers and debt-holders in 
the coming years?
7.	 Intervention. What is foreign currency intervention? 
How is it accomplished?
8.	 Intervention Motivation. Why do governments and 
central banks intervene in the foreign exchange mar-
kets? If markets are efficient, why not let them deter-
mine the value of a currency?
9.	 Direct Intervention Usefulness. When is direct inter-
vention likely to be the most successful? And when is 
it likely to be the least successful?
10.	 Intervention Downside. What is the downside of both 
direct and indirect intervention?
11.	 Capital Controls. Are capital controls really a method 
of currency market intervention, or more of a denial 
of activity? How does this fit with the concept of the 
impossible trinity?
12.	 Asian Crisis of 1997 and Disequilibrium. What was the 
primary disequilibrium at work in Asia in 1997 that 
likely caused the Asian financial crisis? Do you think 
it could have been avoided?
13.	 Fundamental Equilibrium. What is meant by the term 
“fundamental equilibrium path” for a currency value? 
What is “noise”?
14.	 Argentina’s Failure. What was the basis of the Argen-
tine Currency Board, and why did it fail, in 2002?
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Exchange Rate Determination. What are the three 
basic theoretical approaches to exchange rate 
determination?
2.	 PPP Inadequacy. The most widely accepted theory 
of foreign exchange rate determination is purchasing 
power parity, yet it has proven to be quite poor at fore-
casting future spot exchange rates. Why?
3.	 Data and the Balance of Payments Approach. Statis-
tics on a country’s balance of payments are used by 
the business press and by the business itself, often in 
terms of predicting exchange rates, but the academic 
profession is highly critical of it. Why?
4.	 Supply and Demand. Which of the three major theo-
retical approaches seems to put the most weight into 
arguments on the supply and demand for currency? 
What is its primary weakness?
5.	 Asset Market Approach to Forecasting. Explain how 
the asset market approach can be used to forecast spot 
exchange rates. How does the asset market approach 
differ from the BOP approach to forecasting?
6.	 Technical Analysis. Explain how technical analysis can 
be used to forecast exchange rates.

267
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
1999. Its value moved from S5,000/$ to S25,000/$. 
What was the percentage change in its value?
2.	 Canadian Loonie. The Canadian dollar’s value against 
the U.S. dollar has seen some significant changes over 
recent history. Use the following graph of the C$/
US$ exchange rate for the 30-year period between 
1980 and end-of-year 2010 to estimate the percentage 
change in the Canadian dollar’s value (affectionately 
known as the “loonie”) versus the dollar for the fol-
lowing periods.
a.	 January 1980–January 1986
b.	 January 1986–October 1991
c.	 October 1991–December 2001
d.	 October 2001–April 2011
e.	 April 2011–January 2015
3.	 Mexico’s Cada Seis Años. Mexico was famous—or 
infamous—for many years for having two things 
every six years (cada seis años in Spanish): a presi-
dential election and a currency devaluation. This 
was the case in 1976, 1982, 1988, and 1994. In its 
last devaluation on December 20, 1994, the value 
of the Mexican peso (Ps) was officially changed 
from Ps3.30/$ to Ps5.50/$. What was the percentage 
devaluation?
4.	 Turkish Lira Devaluation. The Turkish lira (TL) 
was officially devalued by the Turkish government 
in ­February 2001 during a severe political and eco-
nomic crisis. The Turkish government announced 
on ­February 21 that the lira would be devalued by 
20%. The spot exchange rate on February 20 was 
TL68,000/$.
a.	 What was the exchange rate after devaluation?
b.	 What was percentage change after falling to 
TL100,000/$?
15.	 Term Forecasting. What are the major differences 
between short-term and long-term forecasts for 
a  fixed exchange rate versus a floating exchange  
rate?
16.	 Exchange Rate Dynamics. Explain the meaning 
of “overshooting”? What causes it and how is it 
corrected?
17.	 Foreign Currency Speculation. The emerging market 
crises of 1997–2002 were worsened because of ram-
pant speculation. Do speculators cause such crisis or 
do they simply respond to market signals of weakness? 
How can a government manage foreign exchange 
speculation?
18.	 Cross-Rate Consistency in Forecasting. Explain the 
meaning of “cross-rate consistency” as used by MNEs. 
How do MNEs use a check of cross-rate consistency 
in practice?
19.	 Stabilizing versus Destabilizing Expectations. Define 
stabilizing and destabilizing expectations, and describe 
how they play a role in the long-term determination 
of exchange rates.
20.	 Currency Forecasting Services. Many multinational 
firms use forecasting services regularly. If forecast-
ing is essentially “foretelling the future,” and that is 
theoretically impossible, why would these firms spend 
money on these services?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Ecuadorian Hyper-Inflation. The Ecuadorian sucre 
(S) suffered from hyper-inflationary forces throughout 
1.7
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
Jan-80
Sep-80
May-81
Jan-82
Sep-82
May-83
Jan-84
Sep-84
May-85
Jan-86
Sep-86
May-87
Jan-88
Sep-88
May-89
Jan-90
Sep-90
May-91
Jan-92
Sep-92
May-93
Jan-94
Sep-94
May-95
Jan-96
Sep-96
May-97
Jan-98
Sep-98
May-99
Jan-00
Sep-00
May-01
Jan-02
Sep-02
May-03
Jan-04
Sep-04
May-05
Jan-06
Sep-06
May-07
Jan-08
Sep-08
May-09
Jan-10
Sep-10
May-11
Jan-12
Sep-12
May-13
Jan-14
Sep-14
Canadian dollars (CAD) = 1.00 U.S. dollar (USD)
January 1980–January 2015 (monthly average)
1.41 
1.13 
1.60 
0.96 
1.25 
1.26 
1.16 
Problem 2.

268
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
6.	 Brokedown Palace. The Thai baht (THB) was 
devalued by the Thai government from THB25/$ to 
THB29/$ on July 2, 1997. What was the percentage 
devaluation of the baht?
7.	 Brazilian Reais Carnival. The Brazilian reais’ (BRL 
or R$) value was BRL1.80 to USD1.00 on Thursday 
January 24, 2008, then plunged in value to BRL2.39 to 
USD1.00 on January 26, 2009. What was the percent-
age change in its value?
5.	 Argentine Peso’ Anguish. As illustrated in the graph, 
the Argentine peso moved from its fixed exchange rate 
of Ps1.00/$ to over Ps2.00/$ in a matter of days in early 
January 2002. After a brief period of high volatility, the 
peso’s value appeared to settle down into a range vary-
ing between 2.0 and 2.5 pesos per dollar. If you were 
forecasting the Argentine peso further into the future, to 
March 30, 2002, how would you use the information in 
the graphic—the value of the peso freely-floating in the 
weeks following devaluation—to forecast its future value?
Exchange Rates
Nov. 7, 2013
Nov. 7, 2014
Dec. 4, 2014
Dec. 16, 2014
Dec. 24, 2014
Jan. 16, 2014
Russian rubles per Swiss franc
35.286
48.252
56.249
70.285
55.362
76.639
Russian rubles per US dollar
32.408
46.730
54.416
67.509
54.619
65.071
US dollars per Swiss franc
1.0888
1.0326
1.0337
1.0411
1.0136
1.1778
Russo-Swiss Cross—2015.
Switzerland has long served as a cornerstone of banking conservatism and a safe port in a world of currency storms. 
Swiss banks had long been used by investors from all over the world as financially secure institutions that would pre-
serve the depositor’s wealth with confidentiality. A large part of the security offered was the Swiss franc itself. Russian 
citizens of wealth had used Swiss banks heavily in recent years as a place where they could shelter their capital from 
politics, both inside Russia and the outside (EU and US) world. But beginning in the fall of 2014 the Russian ruble’s 
value began to slide against the Swiss franc, threatening their wealth. Use data in the exhibit and the table below to 
answer Problems 8 and 9.
2.4
1.8
2.0
2.2
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
12/17/2001
12/19/2001
12/21/2001
12/23/2001
12/25/2001
12/27/2001
12/29/2001
12/31/2001
1/2/2002
1/4/2002
1/6/2002
1/8/2002
1/10/2002
1/12/2002
1/14/2002
1/16/2002
1/18/2002
1/20/2002
1/22/2002
1/24/2002
1/26/2002
1/28/2002
1/30/2002
2/1/2002
2/3/2002
2/5/2002
2/7/2002
2/9/2002
2/11/2002
2/13/2002
2/15/2002
2/17/2002
2/19/2002
2/21/2002
2/23/2002
2/25/2002
2/27/2002
Argentine pesos (ARG) = 1.00 U.S. dollar (USD)
Daily: Dec 17, 2001–Feb 28, 2002
Problem 5.

269
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
8.	 Mikhail Khodorkovsky’s Dilemma. Mikhail Khodor-
kovsky was one of the infamous Russian oligarchs, 
accumulating billions of dollars in wealth in the mid-
1990s with the fall of the Soviet Union. But in 2003 
he had been imprisoned by the Russian state for a 
decade. Upon his release from prison in 2013 he had 
taken up residence in Switzerland—with his money.
In November 2014 Mikhail held a portfolio of 
USD200 million and CHF150 million in Swiss banks, 
in addition to accounts in Russia still holding RUB1.2 
billion. Using the exchange rate table, answer the 
following:
a.	 What is the value of Mikhail’s portfolio as mea-
sured in Russian rubles?
b.	 What is the value of Mikhail’s portfolio as mea-
sured in Swiss francs?
c.	 What is the value of Mikhail’s portfolio as mea-
sured in U.S. dollars?
d.	 Which currency demonstrated the greatest fluctua-
tions in total value over the six dates?
9.	 Trepak–The Russian Dance. Calculate the percent-
age change in the value of the ruble for the three dif-
ferent crossrates shown above for the six dates. Did 
the ruble fall further against the U.S. dollar or the 
Swiss franc?
10.	 BP and Rosneft 2015. BP (UK) and Rosneft (Russia) 
had severed a long-term joint venture in 2013, with 
Rosneft buying BP out with $55 billion in cash and a 
20% interest (equity interest) in Rosneft itself. Ros-
neft financed a large part of the buyout by borrowing 
heavily. The following year, in July 2014, BP received 
a dividend on its ownership interest in Rosneft of 
RUB24 billion.
But Rosneft’s performance had been declining, 
as was the Russian ruble. The winter of 2014–2015 in 
Europe was a relatively mild one, and Europe’s pur-
chases of Rosneft’s natural gas had fallen as had the 
price of natural gas. Rosneft’s total sales were down, 
and the ruble had clearly fallen dramatically (table 
above). And to add debt to injury, Rosneft was due to 
make a payment of USD19.5 billion in 2015 on its debt 
from the BP buyout.
a.	 Assuming a spot rate of RUB34.78 = USD1.00 in 
July 2014, how much was the dividend paid to BP 
in U.S. dollars?
b.	 If Rosneft were to pay the same dividend to BP 
in July 2015, and the spot rate at that time was 
RUB75 = 1.00USD, what would BP receive in 
U.S. dollars?
c.	 If the combination of Western sanctions against 
Russia and lower global oil prices truly sent the 
Russian economy into recession, and the spot rate 
was RUB75 = 1.00USD in July 2015, what might 
BP’s dividend be in July 2015?
Russian Ruble Tumbles Against Swiss Franc (RUB = 1.00 CHF, Nov. 2014–Jan. 2015)
40
11/3/2014
11/5/2014
11/7/2014
11/9/2014
11/11/2014
11/13/2014
11/15/2014
11/17/2014
11/19/2014
11/21/2014
11/23/2014
11/25/2014
11/27/2014
11/29/2014
12/1/2014
12/3/2014
12/5/2014
12/7/2014
12/9/2014
12/11/2014
12/13/2014
12/15/2014
12/17/2014
12/19/2014
12/21/2014
12/23/2014
12/25/2014
12/27/2014
12/29/2014
12/31/2014
1/2/2015
1/4/2015
1/6/2015
1/8/2015
1/10/2015
1/12/2015
1/14/2015
1/16/2015
1/18/2015
1/20/2015
1/22/2015
1/24/2015
1/26/2015
1/28/2015
1/30/2015
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
70.285
55.362
56.249
76.639
Russian ruble trades for years
at 32 to 34 rubles per Swiss franc.
48.252
Ruble falls to over 40 rubles per
Swiss franc in mid-2014 with the
imposition of sanctions against
Russia by Western nations. Ruble
falls further in late 2014 with the
fall of global oil prices.
Ruble tumbles on reports
of foreign exchange reserve
shortages at Russian central bank
Swiss Central Bank shocks
currency markets by
abandoning its ﬂoor against
the euro; Swiss franc instantly
appreciates against all currencies
including ruble
Problem 8 and 9.

270
CHAPTER 9    Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
Forecasting the Pan-Pacific Pyramid
Use the table below containing economic, financial, and business indicators from October 20, 2007, issue of The Economist 
(print edition) to answer Problems 11 through 16.
Forecasting the Pan-Pacific Pyramid: Australia, Japan and the United States
Gross Domestic Product
Industrial 
Production
Unemployment 
Rate
Country
Latest Qtr
Qtr*
Forecast
2007e
Forecast
2008e
Recent Qtr
Latest
Australia
4.3%
3.8%
4.1%
3.5%
4.6%
4.2%
Japan
1.6%
-1.2%
2.0%
1.9%
4.3%
3.8%
United States
1.9%
3.8%
2.0%
2.2%
1.9%
4.7%
Consumer Prices
Interest Rates
Country
Year Ago
Latest
Forecast
2007e
3-month 
Latest
1-yr Govt
Latest
Australia
4.0%
2.1%
2.4%
6.90%
6.23%
Japan
0.9%
-0.2%
0.0%
0.73%
1.65%
United States
2.1%
2.8%
2.8%
4.72%
4.54%
Trade Balance
Current Account
Current Units (per US$)
Country
Last 12 mos
(billion $)
Last 12 mos
(billion $)
Forecast 07
(% of GDP)
Oct 17th
Year Ago
Australia
-13.0
-$47.0
-5.7%
1.12
1.33
Japan
98.1
$197.5
4.6%
117
119
United States
-810.7
-$793.2
-5.6%
1.00
1.00
Source: Data abstracted from The Economist, October 20, 2007, print edition. Unless otherwise noted, percentages are per-
centage changes over one year. Rec Qtr = recent quarter. Values for 2007e are estimates or forecasts.
11.	 Current Spot Rates. What are the current spot 
exchange rates for the following cross rates?
a.	 Japanese yen/U.S. dollar exchange rate
b.	 Japanese yen/Australian dollar exchange rate
c.	 Australian dollar/U.S. dollar exchange rate
12.	 Purchasing Power Parity Forecasts. Assuming pur-
chasing power parity, and assuming that the forecasted 
change in consumer prices is a good proxy of predicted 
inflation, forecast the following cross rates:
a.	 Japanese yen/U.S. dollar in one year
b.	 Japanese yen/Australian dollar in one year
c.	 Australian dollar/U.S. dollar in one year
13.	 International Fischer Forecasts. Assuming Interna-
tional Fischer applies to the coming year, forecast the 
following future spot exchange rates using the govern-
ment bond rates for the respective country currencies:
a.	 Japanese yen/U.S. dollar in one year
b.	 Japanese yen/Australian dollar in one year
c.	 Australian dollar/U.S. dollar in one year
14.	 Implied Real Interest Rates. If the nominal interest 
rate is the government bond rate, and the current 
change in consumer prices is used as expected infla-
tion, calculate the implied “real” rates of interest by 
currency.
a.	 Australian dollar “real” rate
b.	 Japanese yen “real” rate
c.	 U.S. dollar “real” rate
15.	 Forward Rates. Using the spot rates and 3-month 
interest rates above, calculate the 90-day forward 
rates for:
a.	 Japanese yen/U.S. dollar exchange rate
b.	 Japanese yen/Australian dollar exchange rate
c.	 Australian dollar/U.S. dollar exchange rate
16.	 Real Economic Activity and Misery. Calculate the 
country’s Misery Index (unemployment + inflation) 
and then use it like interest differentials to forecast 
the future spot exchange rate, one year into the future.
a.	 Japanese yen/U.S. dollar exchange rate in one year

271
Foreign Exchange Rate Determination    CHAPTER 9 
this cross rate from when the euro was launched in 
January 1999 through January of 2015. Estimate the 
change in the value of the yen over the following four 
trend periods.
a.	 Jan 1999–Sept 2000
b.	 Sep 2000–Sept 2008
c.	 Sept 2008–Sept 2012
d.	 Sept 2012–Jan 2015
b.	 Japanese yen/Australian dollar exchange rate in 
one year
c.	 Australian dollar/U.S. dollar exchange rate in one 
year
17.	 Yen-Euro Cross. The Japanese yen-euro cross rate 
is one of the more significant currency values for 
global trade and commerce. The graph below shows 
180
100
120
140
160
80
Jan-99
May-99
Sep-99
Jan-00
May-00
Sep-00
Jan-01
May-01
Sep-01
Jan-02
May-02
Sep-02
Jan-03
May-03
Sep-03
Jan-04
May-04
Sep-04
Jan-05
May-05
Sep-05
Jan-06
May-06
Sep-06
Jan-07
May-07
Sep-07
Jan-08
May-08
Sep-08
Jan-09
May-09
Sep-09
Jan-10
May-10
Sep-10
Jan-11
May-11
Sep-11
Jan-12
May-12
Sep-12
Jan-13
May-13
Sep-13
Jan-14
May-14
Sep-14
Jan-15
Japanese yen (JPY) = 1.00 European euro (EUR)
Jan 1, 1999–Jan 31, 2015
132 
92 
168 
146 
96 
Internet Exercises
1.	 Financial Forecast Center. The Financial Forecast 
Center offers a variety of exchange rate and interest 
rate forecasts for business policy use.
Financial 
Forecast Center
www.forecasts.org/index.htm
2.	 IMF Exchange Rates. The IMF’s exchange rate data 
is available online
IMF Exchange 
rates
www.imf.org/external/np/fin/ert/
GUI/Pages/CountryDataBase 
.aspx
3.	 Recent Economic and Financial Data. Use the follow-
ing Web sites to obtain recent economic and financial 
data used for all approaches to forecasting presented 
in this chapter.
Economist.com
www.economist.com/markets-data
FT.com
www.ft.com
EconEdLink
www.econedlink.org/ 
economic-resources/ 
focus-on-economic-data.php
4.	 OzForex Weekly Comment. The OzForex Foreign 
Exchange Services Web site provides a weekly com-
mentary on major political and economic factors and 
events that move current markets. Using their Web 
site, see what they expect to happen in the coming 
week on the three major global currencies—the ­dollar, 
yen, and euro.
OzForex
www.ozforex.com.au/
news-commentary/weekly
5.	 Exchange Rates, Interest Rates, and Global Markets. 
The magnitude of market data can seem overwhelm-
ing on occasion. Use the following Bloomberg markets 
page to organize your mind and your global data.
Bloomberg 
Financial News
www.bloomberg.com/markets
6.	 Banque Canada and the Canadian Dollar Forward 
Market. Use the following Web site to find the lat-
est spot and forward quotes of the Canadian dollar 
against the Bahamian dollar and the Brazilian real.
Banque Canada
www.bankofcanada.ca/rates/
exchange/

This page intentionally left blank 

273
Part  3 
Foreign Exchange 
Exposure
Chapter 10 
Transaction Exposure
Chapter 11 
Translation Exposure
Chapter 12 
Operating Exposure

Chapter	 10
Transaction Exposure
There are two times in a man’s life when he should not speculate: when 
he can’t afford it and when he can.
—“Following the Equator, Pudd’nhead Wilson’s New Calendar,” Mark Twain.
Foreign exchange exposure is a measure of the potential for a firm’s profitability, net cash 
flow, and market value to change because of a change in exchange rates. An important task of 
the financial manager is to measure foreign exchange exposure and to manage it so as to max-
imize the profitability, net cash flow, and market value of the firm. This chapter provides an 
in-depth discussion of transaction exposure, which is the first category of two main accounting 
exposures.The following chapters focus on translation exposure, which is the second category 
of accounting exposures, and operating exposure. The chapter concludes with a Mini-Case, 
China Noah Corporation, examining what a Chinese firm’s currency ­hedging practices.
Types of Foreign Exchange Exposure
What happens to a firm when foreign exchange rates change? There are two distinct 
­categories of foreign exchange exposure for the firm, those that are based in accounting and 
those that arise from economic competitiveness. Accounting exposures, specifically described 
as transaction exposure and translation exposure, arise from contracts and accounts being 
denominated in foreign currency. The economic exposure, which we will describe as operating 
exposure, is the potential change in the value of the firm from its changing global competi-
tiveness as determined by exchange rates. Exhibit 10.1 shows schematically the three main 
types of foreign exchange exposure: transaction, translation, and operating:
■
■
Transaction exposure measures changes in the value of outstanding financial obli-
gations incurred prior to a change in exchange rates but not due to be settled until 
after the exchange rates change. Thus, it deals with changes in cash flows that result 
from existing contractual obligations.
Learning Objectives
■
■
Distinguish between the three major foreign exchange exposures experienced 
by firms
■
■
Analyze the pros and cons of hedging foreign exchange transaction exposure
■
■
Examine the alternatives available to a firm for managing a large and significant 
transaction exposure
■
■
Evaluate the institutional practices and concerns of conducting foreign exchange 
risk management
■
■
Explore advanced dimensions of foreign currency hedging
274

275
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
■
■
Translation exposure is the potential for accounting-derived changes in owner’s 
equity to occur because of the need to “translate” foreign currency financial state-
ments of foreign subsidiaries into a single reporting currency to prepare worldwide 
consolidated financial statements.
■
■
Operating exposure—also called economic exposure, competitive exposure, or strategic 
exposure—measures the change in the present value of the firm resulting from any 
change in future operating cash flows of the firm caused by an unexpected change 
in exchange rates. The change in value depends on the effect of the exchange rate 
change on future sales volume, prices, and costs.
Transaction exposure and operating exposure both exist because of unexpected changes 
in future cash flows. However, while transaction exposure is concerned with future cash flows 
already contracted for, operating exposure focuses on expected (not yet contracted for) future 
cash flows that might change because a change in exchange rates has altered international 
competitiveness.
Why Hedge?
MNEs possess a multitude of cash flows that are sensitive to changes in exchange rates, 
interest rates, and commodity prices. Chapters 10, 11, and 12 focus exclusively on the sen-
sitivity of the individual firm’s value and of its future cash flows to changes in exchange 
rates. We begin by exploring the question of whether exchange rate risk should or should 
not be managed.
1.8
Transaction Exposure
Changes in the recorded value of
identiﬁable transactions of the ﬁrm like
receivables and payables. Results in
realized foreign exchange gains and
losses in income and taxes.
Economic/Operating Exposure
Changes in the expected future cash ﬂows
of the ﬁrm from unexpected changes in exchange
rates. The ﬁrm’s future cash ﬂows are
changed from realized changes in its own
sales, earnings, and cash ﬂows, as well as changes
in competitor responses to exchange rates over time.
Translation Exposure
Changes in the periodic consolidated value of the ﬁrm; results in no change in cash ﬂow or
global tax liabilities–unrealized–changes only the consolidated ﬁnancial results
reported to the market (if publicly traded). Often labeled Accounting Exposure.
Exchange
rate
movement
over time
Time
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
Jan-93
Aug-93
Mar-94
Oct-94
May-95
Dec-95
Jul-96
Feb-97
Sep-97
Apr-98
Nov-98
Jun-99
Jan-00
Aug-00
Mar-01
Oct-01
May-02
Dec-02
Jul-03
Feb-04
Sep-04
Apr-05
Nov-05
Jun-06
Jan-07
Aug-07
Mar-08
Oct-08
May-09
Dec-09
Jul-10
Feb-11
Sep-11
Apr-12
Nov-12
Jun-13
Jan-14
Aug-14
Spot Rate ($ = 1.00 €)
Unrealized
Exposures
Realized
Exposures
Short-term to medium-term
to long-term change
Exhibit 10.1
The Foreign Exchange Exposures of the Firm

276
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
Hedging Defined
Many firms attempt to manage their currency exposures through hedging. Hedging requires 
a firm to take a position—an asset, a contract, or a derivative—the value of which will rise or 
fall in a manner that counters the fall or rise in value of an existing position—the exposure. 
Hedging protects the owner of the existing asset from loss. However, it also eliminates any 
gain from an increase in the value of the asset hedged. The question remains: What is to be 
gained by the firm from hedging?
According to financial theory, the value of a firm is the net present value of all expected 
future cash flows. The fact that these cash flows are expected emphasizes that nothing about 
the future is certain. If the reporting currency value of many of these cash flows is altered by 
exchange rate changes, a firm that hedges its currency exposures reduces the variance in the 
value of its future expected cash flows. Currency risk can then be defined as the variance in 
expected cash flows arising from unexpected changes in exchange rates.
Exhibit 10.2 illustrates the distribution of expected net cash flows of the individual firm. 
Hedging these cash flows narrows the distribution of the cash flows about the mean of the 
distribution. Currency hedging reduces risk. Reduction of risk is not, however, the same as 
adding value or return. The value of the firm depicted in Exhibit 10.2 would be increased only 
if hedging actually shifted the mean of the distribution to the right. In fact, if hedging is not 
“free,” meaning the firm must expend resources to hedge, then hedging will add value only if 
the rightward shift is sufficiently large to compensate for the cost of hedging.
The Pros and Cons of Hedging
Is a reduction in the variability of cash flows sufficient reason for currency risk management?
Hedging reduces the variability of expected cash ﬂows about the mean of the distribution.
This reduction of distribution variance is a reduction of risk.
Hedged
Unhedged
Net Cash Flow (NCF)
NCF
Expected Value E(V)
Exhibit 10.2
Hedging’s Impact on the Expected Cash Flows of the Firm

277
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
Pros. Proponents of hedging cite the following arguments:
■
■
Reduction in risk of future cash flows improves the planning capability of the firm. 
If the firm can more accurately predict future cash flows, it may be able to undertake 
specific investments or activities that it might not otherwise consider.
■
■
Reduction of risk in future cash flows reduces the likelihood that the firm’s cash 
flows will fall below a level sufficient to make debt service payments required for 
continued operation. This minimum cash flow level, often referred to as the point 
of financial distress, lies to the left of the center of the distribution of expected cash 
flows. ­Hedging reduces the likelihood that the firm’s cash flows will fall to this level.
■
■
Management has a comparative advantage over the individual shareholder in 
­knowing the actual currency risk of the firm. Regardless of the level of disclosure 
provided by the firm to the public, management always possesses an advantage in 
the depth and breadth of knowledge concerning the real risks.
■
■
Markets are usually in disequilibrium because of structural and institutional imper-
fections, as well as unexpected external shocks (such as an oil crisis or war). Manage-
ment is in a better position than shareholders to recognize disequilibrium conditions 
and to take advantage of single opportunities to enhance firm’s value through selec-
tive hedging—hedging only exceptional exposures or the occasional use of hedging 
when management has a definite expectation of the direction of exchange rates.
Cons. Opponents of hedging commonly make the following arguments:
■
■
Shareholders are more capable of diversifying currency risk than is the management 
of the firm. If stockholders do not wish to accept the currency risk of any specific 
firm, they can diversify their portfolios to manage the risk in a way that satisfies their 
individual preferences and risk tolerance.
■
■
Currency hedging does not increase the expected cash flows of the firm. Currency risk 
management does, however, consume firm resources and so reduces cash flow. The 
impact on value is a combination of the reduction of cash flow (which lowers value) 
and the reduction in variance (which increases value).
■
■
Management often conducts hedging activities that benefit management at the 
expense of the shareholders. The field of finance called agency theory frequently 
argues that management is generally more risk-averse than are shareholders.
■
■
Managers cannot outguess the market. If and when markets are in equilibrium with 
respect to parity conditions, the expected net present value of hedging should be zero.
■
■
Management’s motivation to reduce variability is sometimes for accounting reasons. 
Management may believe that it will be criticized more severely for incurring for-
eign exchange losses than for incurring even higher cash costs by hedging. Foreign 
exchange losses appear in the income statement as a highly visible separate line item 
or as a footnote, but the higher costs of protection through hedging are buried in 
operating or interest expenses.
■
■
Efficient market theorists believe that investors can see through the “accounting veil” 
and therefore have already factored the foreign exchange effect into a firm’s market 
valuation. Hedging would only add cost.
Every individual firm in the ends decides whether it wishes to hedge, for what purpose, 
and how. But as illustrated by Global Finance in Practice 10.1, this often results in even more 
questions and more doubts.

278
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
Measurement of Transaction Exposure
Transaction exposure measures gains or losses that arise from the settlement of existing finan-
cial obligations whose terms are stated in a foreign currency. Transaction exposure arises from 
any of the following:
1.	 Purchasing or selling on credit—on open account—goods or services when prices are 
stated in foreign currencies
2.	 Borrowing or lending funds when repayment is to be made in a foreign currency
3.	 Being a party to an unperformed foreign exchange forward contract
4.	 Otherwise acquiring assets or incurring liabilities denominated in foreign currencies
The most common example of transaction exposure arises when a firm has a receivable 
or payable denominated in a foreign currency. Exhibit 10.3 demonstrates how this exposure 
is born. The total transaction exposure consists of quotation, backlog, and billing exposures.
The leading automakers in Germany have long been some of 
the world’s biggest advocates of currency hedging. Companies 
like BMW, Mercedes, Porsche—and Porsche’s owner Volkswa-
gen—have aggressively hedged their foreign currency earnings 
for years in response to their structural exposure: while they 
manufacture in the eurozone, they increasingly rely on sales in 
dollar, yen, or other foreign (non-euro) currency markets.
How individual companies hedge, however, differs dra-
matically. Some companies, like BMW, state clearly that they 
“hedge to protect earnings,” but that they do not specu-
late. Others, like Porsche and Volkswagen in the past, have 
sometimes generated more than 40% of their earnings from 
their “hedges.”
Hedges that earn money continue to pose difficulties for 
regulators, auditors, and investors worldwide. How a hedge 
is defined, and whether a hedge should only “cost” but not 
“profit,” has delayed the implementation of many new regula-
tory efforts in the United States and Europe in the post-2008 
financial crisis era. If a publicly traded company—for example 
an automaker—can consistently earn profits from hedging, is 
its core competency automobile manufacturing and assembly, 
or hedging/speculating on exchange rate movements?
Global Finance in Practice 10.1
Hedging and the German Automobile Industry
Time and Events
Seller quotes
a price to buyer
(verbal or written form)
Buyer settles A/R
with cash in amount
of currency
quoted at time t1
Seller ships 
product and
bills buyer
(becomes A/R)
Buyer places
ﬁrm order with
seller at price
oﬀered at time t1
Backlog
Exposure
Time it takes to
ﬁll the order after
contract is signed
Quotation
Exposure
Time between quoting
a price and reaching a
contractual sale
Billing
Exposure
Time it takes to
get paid in cash after
A/R is issued
t1
t2
t3
t4
Exhibit 10.3
The Life Span of a Transaction Exposure

279
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
A transaction exposure is created at the first moment the seller quotes a price in foreign 
currency terms to a potential buyer (t1). The quote can be either verbal, as in a telephone 
quote, or as a written bid or a printed price list. This is quotation exposure. When the order 
is placed (t2), the potential exposure created at the time of the quotation (t1) is converted 
into actual exposure, called backlog exposure, because the product has not yet been shipped 
or billed. Backlog exposure lasts until the goods are shipped and billed (t3), at which time it 
becomes billing exposure, which persists until payment is received by the seller (t4).
Purchasing or Selling on Open Account. Suppose that Ganado Corporation, a U.S. firm, sells 
merchandise on open account to a Belgian buyer for €1,800,000, with payment to be made 
in 60 days. The spot exchange rate on the date of the sale is $1.1200/€, and the seller expects 
to exchange the euros for €1,800,000 * $1.12/€ = $2,016,000 when payment is received. The 
$2,016,000 is the value of the sale that is posted to the firm’s books. Accounting practices 
stipulate that the foreign currency transaction be listed at the spot exchange rate in effect on 
the date of the transaction.
Transaction exposure arises because of the risk that Ganado will receive something other 
than the $2,016,000 expected and booked. For example, if the euro weakens to $1.1000/€ when 
payment is received, the U.S. seller will receive only €1,800,000 * $1.100/€ or $1,980,00, some 
$36,000 less than what was expected at the time of sale.
Transaction settlement: €1,800,000 * $1.1000/€
= $1,980,000
Transaction booked: €1,800,000 * $1.1200/€
= $2,016,000
Foreign exchange gain (loss) on sale
=
($36,000)
If the euro should strengthen to $1.3000/€, however, Ganado receives $2,340,000, an 
increase of $324,000 over the amount expected. Thus, Ganado’s exposure is the chance of 
either a loss or a gain on the resulting dollar settlement versus the amount at which the sale 
was booked.
This U.S. seller might have avoided transaction exposure by invoicing the Belgian buyer 
in dollars. Of course, if the U.S. company attempted to sell only in dollars, it might not have 
obtained the sale in the first place. Even if the Belgian buyer agrees to pay in dollars, trans-
action exposure is not eliminated. Instead, the exposure is transferred to the Belgian buyer, 
whose dollar account payable has an unknown cost 60 days hence.
Borrowing or Lending. A second example of transaction exposure arises when funds are bor-
rowed or loaned, and the amount involved is denominated in a foreign currency. For example, 
in 1994, PepsiCo’s largest bottler outside of the United States was the Mexican company, 
Grupo Embotellador de Mexico (Gemex). In mid-December 1994, Gemex had U.S. dollar 
debt of $264 million. At that time, Mexico’s new peso (“Ps”) was traded at Ps3.45/$, a pegged 
rate that had been maintained with minor variations since January 1, 1993, when the new cur-
rency unit had been created. On December 22, 1994, the peso was allowed to float because of 
economic and political events within Mexico, and in one day it sank to Ps4.65/$. For most of 
the following January it traded in a range near Ps5.50/$.
Dollar debt in mid-December 1994: US$264,000,000 * Ps 3.45/US$ =
Ps910,800,000
Dollar debt in mid-January 1995:      US$264,000,000 * Ps 5.50/US$ =
Ps1,452,000,000
Dollar debt increase measured in Mexican pesos
Ps541,200,000
The number of pesos needed to repay the dollar debt increased by 59%! In U.S. dollar 
terms, the drop in the value of the peso meant that Gemex needed the peso-equivalent of an 
additional $98,400,000 to repay its debt.

280
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
Unperformed Foreign Exchange Contracts. When a firm enters into a forward exchange 
contract, it deliberately creates transaction exposure. This risk is usually incurred to hedge an 
existing transaction exposure. For example, a U.S. firm might want to offset an existing obliga-
tion to purchase ¥100 million to pay for an import from Japan in 90 days. One way to offset 
this payment is to purchase ¥100 million in the forward market today for delivery in 90 days. 
In this manner any change in value of the Japanese yen relative to the dollar is neutralized. 
Thus, the potential transaction loss (or gain) on the account payable is offset by the transaction 
gain (or loss) on the forward contract.
Contractual Hedges. Foreign exchange transaction exposure can be managed by contractual, 
operating, and financial hedges. The main contractual hedges employ the forward, money, 
futures, and options markets. Operating hedges utilize operating cash flows—cash flows origi-
nating from the operating activities of the firm—and include risk-sharing agreements and 
leads and lags in payment strategies. Financial hedges utilize financing cash flows—cash flows 
originating from the financing activities of the firm—and include specific types of debt and 
foreign currency derivatives, such as swaps. Operating and financing hedges will be described 
in greater detail in later chapters.
The term natural hedge refers to an offsetting operating cash flow, a payable arising from 
the conduct of business. A financial hedge refers to either an offsetting debt obligation (such 
as a loan) or some type of financial derivative such as an interest rate swap. Care should be 
taken to distinguish hedges in the same way finance distinguishes cash flows—operating from 
financing. The following case illustrates how contractual hedging techniques may be used to 
protect against transaction exposure.
Ganado’s Transaction Exposure
Maria Gonzalez is the chief financial officer of Ganado. She has just concluded negotiations 
for the sale of a turbine generator to Regency, a British firm, for £1,000,000. This single sale 
is quite large in relation to Ganado’s present business. Ganado has no other current foreign 
customers, so the currency risk of this sale is of particular concern. The sale is made in March 
with payment due three months later in June. Exhibit 10.4 summarizes the financial and mar-
ket information Maria has collected for the analysis of her currency exposure problem. The 
unknown—the transaction exposure—is the actual realized value of the receivable in U.S. 
dollars at the end of 90 days.
Ganado operates on relatively narrow margins. Although Maria and Ganado would be 
very happy if the pound appreciated versus the dollar, concerns center on the possibility that 
the pound will fall. When Ganado had priced and budgeted this contract, it had set a very 
slim minimum acceptable margin at a sales price of $1,700,000; Ganado wanted the deal for 
both financial and strategic purposes. The budget rate, the lowest acceptable dollar per pound 
exchange rate, was therefore established at $1.70/£. Any exchange rate below this budget rate 
would result in Ganado realizing no profit on the deal.
Four alternatives are available to Ganado to manage the exposure: (1) remain unhedged; (2) 
hedge in the forward market; (3) hedge in the money market; or (4) hedge in the options market.
Unhedged Position
Maria may decide to accept the transaction risk. If she believes the foreign exchange advi-
sor, she expects to receive £1,000,000 * $1.76 = $1,760,000 in three months. However, that 
amount is at risk. If the pound should fall to, say, $1.65/£, she will receive only $1,650,000. 
Exchange risk is not one sided, however; if the transaction is left uncovered and the pound 
strengthens even more than forecast, Ganado will receive considerably more than $1,760,000.

281
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
Forward Market Hedge
A forward hedge involves a forward (or futures) contract and a source of funds to fulfill that 
contract. The forward contract is entered into at the time the transaction exposure is created. 
In Ganado’s case, that would be in March, when the sale to Regency was booked as an account 
receivable.
When a foreign currency denominated sale such as this is made, it is booked at the spot 
rate of exchange existing on the booking date. In this case, the spot rate on the date of sale was 
$1.7640/£, so the receivable was booked as $1,764,000. Funds to fulfill the forward contract will 
be available in June, when Regency pays £1,000,000 to Ganado. If funds to fulfill the forward 
contract are on hand or are due because of a business operation, the hedge is considered cov-
ered, perfect, or square, because no residual foreign exchange risk exists. Funds on hand or to 
be received are matched by funds to be paid.
In some situations, funds to fulfill the forward exchange contract are not already available 
or due to be received later, but must be purchased in the spot market at some future date. Such 
a hedge is open or uncovered. It involves considerable risk because the hedger must take a 
chance on purchasing foreign exchange at an uncertain future spot rate in order to fulfill the 
forward contract. Purchase of such funds at a later date is referred to as covering.
Should Ganado wish to hedge its transaction exposure with a forward, it will sell £1,000,000 
forward today at the 3-month forward rate of $1.7540/£. This is a covered transaction in 
The essence of an unhedged approach is as follows:
Ganado’s weighted average cost of capital = 12.00% (3.00% for 90 days)
US$ 3-month borrowing rate = 8.00% per annum (2.00% for 90 days)
US$ 3-month investment rate = 6.00% per annum (1.50% for 90 days)
90-day period
U.S. dollar market
British pound market
Spot rate = $1.7640/£
A/R = £1,000,000
Sale = $1,764,000
UK£ 3-month investment rate = 8.00% per annum (2.00% for 90 days)
UK£ 3-month borrowing rate = 10.00% per annum (2.50% for 90 days)
A/R = $ ?,???,???
June (3-month) put option for £1,000,000 with a strike rate of $1.75/£; premium of 1.5%
90-day Forward rate
F90 = $1.7540/£
Se
90 = $1.7600/£
Foreign exchange
advisors forecast
Exhibit 10.4
 Ganado’s Transaction Exposure
Today
Do nothing.
Three months from today
Receive £1,000,000.
Sell £1,000,000 spot and receive
dollars at that day’s spot rate.

282
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
which the firm no longer has any foreign exchange risk. In three months the firm will receive 
£1,000,000 from the British buyer, deliver that sum to the bank against its forward sale, 
and receive $1,754,000. This would be recorded on Ganado’s income statement as a foreign 
exchange loss of $10,000 ($1,764,000 as booked, $1,754,000 as settled).
The essence of a forward hedge is as follows:
Foreign currency losses are not limited to multinational com-
panies in search of profits in the global marketplace. Stuff 
happens—to everyone. In 2014 Greenpeace, the home of 
the Rainbow Warrior, announced that it had suffered a foreign 
exchange loss of €3.8 million on unauthorized trades. In a July 
14, 2014, press release, Greenpeace explained and apologized:
The losses are a result of a serious error of judgment 
by an employee in our International Finance Unit acting 
beyond the limits of their authority and without following 
proper procedures. Greenpeace International entered 
into contracts to buy foreign currency at a fixed exchange 
rate while the euro was gaining in strength. This resulted 
in a loss of 3.8 million euros against a range of other 
currencies.
Although it does sound as if the individual trader was not 
authorized to make the forward contract purchases (Green-
peace has not released any further detail), the purchase of 
euros forward to try to protect the organization against a rising 
euro sounds more like losses related to hedging rather than 
speculation.
Global Finance in Practice 10.2
Currency Losses at Greenpeace
Today
Sell £1,000,000
forward @ $1.7540/£.
Three months from today
Receive £1,000,000.
Deliver £1,000,000 against forward sale.
Receive $1,754,000.
If Maria’s forecast of future rates was identical to that implicit in the forward quotation, 
that is, $1.7540/£, expected receipts would be the same whether or not the firm hedges. How-
ever, realized receipts under the unhedged alternative could vary considerably from the certain 
receipts when the transaction is hedged. Never underestimate the value of predictability of 
outcomes (and 90 nights of sound sleep). But many things can interrupt sleep, as seen in Global 
Finance in Practice 10.2.
Money Market Hedge (Balance Sheet Hedge)
Like a forward market hedge, a money market hedge (also commonly called a balance sheet 
hedge) also involves a contract and a source of funds to fulfill that contract. In this instance, 
the contract is a loan agreement. The firm seeking to construct a money market hedge bor-
rows in one currency and exchanges the proceeds for another currency. Funds to fulfill the 
contract—that is, to repay the loan—are generated from business operations, in this case, the 
account receivable.
A money market hedge can cover a single transaction, such as Ganado’s £1,000,000 receiv-
able, or repeated transactions. Hedging repeated transactions is called matching. It requires 
the firm to match the expected foreign currency cash inflows and outflows by currency and 
maturity. For example, if Ganado had numerous sales denominated in pounds to British cus-
tomers over a long period of time, then it would have somewhat predictable U.K. pound cash 
inflows. The appropriate money market hedge technique in that case would be to borrow 

283
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
U.K. pounds in an amount matching the typical size and maturity of expected pound inflows. 
Then, if the pound depreciated or appreciated, the foreign exchange effect on cash inflows 
in pounds would be offset by the effect on cash outflows in pounds from repaying the pound 
loan plus interest.
The structure of a money market hedge resembles that of a forward hedge. The difference 
is that the cost of the money market hedge is determined by different interest rates than the 
interest rates used in the formation of the forward rate. The difference in interest rates facing 
a private firm borrowing in two separate country markets may be different from the differ-
ence in risk-free government bill rates or eurocurrency interest rates in these same markets. 
In efficient markets interest rate parity should ensure that these costs are nearly the same, but 
not all markets are efficient at all times.
To hedge in the money market, Maria will borrow pounds in London at once, immediately 
convert the borrowed pounds into dollars, and repay the pound loan in three months with the 
proceeds from the sale of the generator. She will need to borrow just enough to repay both 
the principal and interest with the sale proceeds. The borrowing interest rate will be 10% per 
annum, or 2.5% for three months. Therefore, the amount to borrow now for repayment in 
three months is
£1,000,000
1 + 0.025 = £975,610.
Maria would borrow £975,610 now, and in three months repay that amount plus £24,390 
of interest with the account receivable. Ganado would exchange the £975,610 loan proceeds 
for dollars at the current spot exchange rate of $1.7640/£, receiving $1,720,976 at once.
The money market hedge, if selected by Ganado, creates a pound-denominated liability—
the pound loan—to offset the pound-denominated asset—the account receivable. The money 
market hedge works as a hedge by matching assets and liabilities according to their currency 
of denomination. Using a simple T-account illustrating Ganado’s balance sheet, the loan in 
British pounds is seen to offset the pound-denominated account receivable:
Assets
Liabilities and Net Worth
Account receivable
£1,000,000
Bank loan (principal)
£975,610
Interest payable
24,390
£1,000,000
£1,000,000
The loan acts as a balance sheet hedge against the pound-denominated account receivable.
To compare the forward hedge with the money market hedge, one must analyze how 
Ganado’s loan proceeds will be utilized for the next three months. Remember that the loan 
proceeds are received today, but the forward contract proceeds are received in three months. 
For comparison purposes, one must either calculate the future value of the loan proceeds or 
the present value of the forward contract proceeds. Since the primary uncertainty here is the 
dollar value in three months, we will use future value here.
As both the forward contract proceeds and the loan proceeds are relatively certain, it is 
possible to make a clear choice between the two alternatives based on the one that yields the 
higher dollar receipts. This result, in turn, depends on the assumed rate of investment or use 
of the loan proceeds.
At least three logical choices exist for an assumed investment rate for the loan proceeds 
for the next three months. First, if Ganado is cash rich, the loan proceeds might be invested in 
U.S. dollar money market instruments that yield 6% per annum. Second, Maria might simply 
use the pound loan proceeds to pay down dollar loans that currently cost Ganado 8% per 
annum. Third, Maria might invest the loan proceeds in the general operations of the firm, in 

284
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
which case the cost of capital of 12% per annum would be the appropriate rate. The field of 
finance generally uses the company’s cost of capital to move capital forward and backward in 
time, and we will therefore use the WACC of 12% (3% for the 90-day period here) to calculate 
the future value of proceeds under the money market hedge:
$1,720,976 * 1.03 = $1,772,605
A break-even rate can now be calculated between the forward hedge and the money mar-
ket hedge. Assume that r is the unknown 3-month investment rate (expressed as a decimal) 
that would equalize the proceeds from the forward and money market hedges. We have
 (Loan proceeds) * (1 + rate) = (forward proceeds)  
 $1,720,976 * (1 + r) = $1,754,000 
                             r = 0.0192
One can convert this 3-month (90 days) investment rate to an annual whole percentage 
equivalent, assuming a 360-day financial year, as follows:
0.0192 * 360
90 * 100 = 7.68%
In other words, if Maria Gonzalez can invest the loan proceeds at a rate higher than 7.68% 
per annum, she would prefer the money market hedge. If she can only invest at a rate lower 
than 7.68%, she would prefer the forward hedge.
The essence of a money market hedge is as follows:
Today
Borrow £975,610.
Exchange £975,610 for
dollars @ $1.7640/£.
Receive $1,720,976 cash. 
Three months from today
Receive £1,000,000.
Repay £975,610 loan plus £24,390
interest, for a total of £1,000,000. 
The money market hedge therefore results in cash received up-front (at the start of the 
period), which can then be carried forward in time for comparison with the other hedging 
alternatives.
Options Market Hedge
Maria Gonzalez could also cover her £1,000,000 exposure by purchasing a put option. This 
technique—an option hedge—allows her to speculate on the upside potential for appreciation 
of the pound while limiting downside risk to a known amount. Maria could purchase from her 
bank a 3-month put option on £1,000,000 at an at-the-money (ATM) strike price of $1.75/£ 
with a premium cost of 1.50%. The cost of the option—the premium—is
(Size of option) * (premium) * (spot rate) = cost of option,
£1,000,000
*
0.015
*
$1.7640
=
$26,460.
Because we are using future value to compare the various hedging alternatives, it is 
necessary to project the premium cost of the option forward three months. We will use the 
cost of capital of 12% per annum or 3% per quarter. Therefore the premium cost of the 
put option as of June would be $26,460(1.03) = $27,254. This is equal to $0.0273 per pound 
($27,254 , £1,000,000).
When the £1,000,000 is received in June, the value in dollars depends on the spot rate at 
that time. The upside potential is unlimited, the same as in the unhedged alternative. At any 

285
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
exchange rate above $1.75/£, Ganado would allow its option to expire unexercised and would 
exchange the pounds for dollars at the spot rate. If the expected rate of $1.76/£ materializes, 
Ganado would exchange the £1,000,000 in the spot market for $1,760,000. Net proceeds would 
be $1,760,000 minus the $27,254 cost of the option, or $1,732,746.
In contrast to the unhedged alternative, downside risk is limited with an option. If the 
pound depreciates below $1.75/£, Maria would exercise her option to sell (put) £1,000,000 
at $1.75/£, receiving $1,750,000 gross, but $1,722,746 net of the $27,254 cost of the option. 
Although this downside result is worse than the downside of either the forward or money 
market hedges, the upside potential is unlimited.
The essence of the at-the-money (ATM) put option market hedge is as follows:
Today
Buy put option to
sell pounds @ $1.75/£.
Pay $26,460 for put option.
Three months from today
Receive £1,000,000.
Either deliver £1,000,000 against put,
receiving $1,750,000; or sell £1,000,000
spot if current spot rate is > $1.75/£.
We can calculate a trading range for the pound that defines the break-even points for 
the option compared with the other strategies. The upper bound of the range is determined 
by comparison with the forward rate. The pound must appreciate enough above the $1.7540 
forward rate to cover the $0.0273/£ cost of the option. Therefore, the break-even upside spot 
price of the pound must be $1.7540 + $0.0273 = $1.7813. If the spot pound appreciates 
above $1.7813, proceeds under the option strategy will be greater than under the forward 
hedge. If the spot pound ends up below $1.7813, the forward hedge would have been superior 
in retrospect.
The lower bound of the range is determined by the unhedged strategy. If the spot price 
falls below $1.75/£, Maria will exercise her put and sell the proceeds at $1.75/£. The net pro-
ceeds will be $1.75/£ less than the $0.0273 cost of the option, or $1.7227/£. If the spot rate falls 
below $1.7227/£, the net proceeds from exercising the option will be greater than the net pro-
ceeds from selling the unhedged pounds in the spot market. At any spot rate above $1.7227/£, 
the spot proceeds from remaining unhedged will be greater.
Foreign currency options have a variety of hedging uses. A put option is useful to construc-
tion firms and exporters when they must submit a fixed price bid in a foreign currency without 
knowing until some later date whether their bid is successful. Similarly, a call option is useful to 
hedge a bid for a foreign firm if a potential future foreign currency payment may be required. 
In either case, if the bid is rejected, the loss is limited to the cost of the option.
Comparison of Alternatives
Exhibit 10.5 shows the value of Ganado’s £1,000,000 account receivable over a range of pos-
sible ending spot exchange rates and hedging alternatives. This exhibit makes it clear that the 
firm’s view of likely exchange rate changes aids in the hedging choice as follows:
■
■
If the exchange rate is expected to move against Ganado, to the left of $1.76/£, the 
money market hedge is clearly the preferred alternative with a guaranteed value of 
$1,772,605.
■
■
If the exchange rate is expected to move in Ganado’s favor, to the right of $1.76/£, 
then the preferred alternative is less clearcut, lying between remaining unhedged, the 
money market hedge, or the put option.

286
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
Remaining unhedged is most likely an unacceptable choice. If Maria’s expectations regard-
ing the future spot rate prove to be wrong, and the spot rate falls below $1.70/£, she will not 
reach her budget rate. The put option offers a unique alternative. If the exchange rate moves 
in Ganado’s favor, the put option offers nearly the same upside potential as the unhedged 
alternative except for the up-front costs. If, however, the exchange rate moves against Ganado, 
the put option limits the downside risk to $1,722,746.
Strategy Choice and Outcome
So how should Maria Gonzalez choose among the alternative hedging strategies? She must 
select on the basis of two decision criteria: (1) the risk tolerance of Ganado, as expressed in 
its stated policies; and (2) her own view, or expectation of the direction (and distance) the 
exchange rate will move over the coming 90-day period.
Ganado’s risk tolerance is a combination of management’s philosophy toward transaction 
exposure and the specific goals of treasury activities. Many firms believe that currency risk 
is simply a part of doing business internationally, and therefore, begin their analysis from an 
unhedged baseline. Other firms, however, view currency risk as unacceptable, and either begin 
their analysis from a full forward contract cover baseline, or simply mandate that all transac-
tion exposures be fully covered by forward contracts regardless of the value of other hedging 
alternatives. The treasury in most firms operates as a cost or service center for the firm. On 
the other hand, if the treasury operates as a profit center, it might tolerate taking more risk.
The final choice between hedges—if Maria Gonzalez does expect the pound to appreci-
ate—combines the firm’s risk tolerance, its view, and its confidence in its view. Transaction 
exposure management with contractual hedges requires managerial judgment. Global Finance 
in Practice 10.3 describes how hedging choices may also be influenced by profitability concerns 
and forward premiums.
1.66
$1,840,000
$1,820,000
$1,800,000
$1,780,000
$1,760,000
$1,740,000
$1,720,000
$1,700,000
$1,680,000
$1,660,000
Ending spot exchange rate ($ = £1.00)
Value in U.S. dollars of Ganado’s £1,000,000 A/R at end of 90 days
Put option strike
price of $1.75/£
Uncovered A/R yields whatever
ending spot rate is
Forward rate
is $1.7540/£
Forward hedge yields $1,754,000
$1.75/£ Put option guarantees
minimum of $1,722,746
1.67
1.68
1.69
1.70
1.71
1.72
1.73
1.74
1.75
1.76
1.77
1.78
1.79
1.80
1.81
1.82
1.83
1.84
Money market yields
$1,772,605
$1.75/£ Put
option
Exhibit 10.5
Ganado’s A/R Transaction Exposure Hedging Alternatives

287
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
Management of an Account Payable
The management of an account payable, where the firm would be required to make a foreign 
currency payment at a future date, is similar but not identical to the management of an account 
receivable. If Ganado had a £1,000,000 account payable due in 90 days, the hedging choices 
would appear as follows:
Remain Unhedged. Ganado could wait 90 days, exchange dollars for pounds at that time, and 
make its payment. If Ganado expects the spot rate in 90 days to be $1.7600/£, the payment 
would be expected to cost $1,760,000. This amount is, however, uncertain; the spot exchange 
rate in 90 days could be very different from that expected.
Forward Market Hedge. Ganado could buy £1,000,000 forward, locking in a rate of $1.7540/£, 
and a total dollar cost of $1,754,000. This is $6,000 less than the expected cost of remaining 
unhedged, and therefore clearly preferable to the first alternative.
Money Market Hedge. The money market hedge is distinctly different for a payable as 
opposed to a receivable. To implement a money market hedge in this case, Ganado would 
exchange U.S. dollars spot and invest them for 90 days in a pound-denominated interest-
bearing account. The principal and interest in British pounds at the end of the 90-day period 
would be used to pay the £1,000,000 account payable.
In order to assure that the principal and interest exactly equal the £1,000,000 due in 90 
days, Ganado would discount the £1,000,000 by the pound investment interest rate of 8% for 
90 days in order to determine the pounds needed today:
£1,000,000
1 + ¢.08 * 90
360≤
= £980,392.16.
This £980,392.16 needed today would require $1,729,411.77 at the current spot rate of 
$1.7640/£:
£980,392.16 * $1.7640/£ = $1,729,411.77.
Some multinational firms measure the cost of hedging as the 
“total cash flow expenses of the hedge” as a percentage of 
the initial booked foreign currency transaction. They define the 
“total cash flow expense of the hedge” as any cash expenses 
for purchase (e.g., option premium paid up-front, including the 
time value of money) plus any difference in the final cash flow 
settlement versus the booked transaction.
If a firm were using forwards, there is no up-front cost, so 
the total cash flow expense is simply the difference between 
the forward settlement and the booked transaction (using this 
definition of hedging expense). This is the forward premium. 
But the size of the forward premium has sometimes motivated 
firms to avoid using forward contracts.
Assume a U.S.-based firm has a GBP1 million one-year 
receivable. The current spot rate is USD1.6000 = GBP1.00. 
If U.S. dollar and British pound interest rates were 2.00% and 
4.00%, respectively, the forward rate would be USD1.5692. 
This is a forward premium of -1.923% (the pound is selling 
forward at a 1.923% discount versus the dollar), and in this 
firm’s view, the cost of hedging the transaction is then 1.923%.
However, if British pound interest rates were significantly 
higher, say 8.00%, then the one year forward rate would be 
USD1.5111, a forward premium of -5.556%. Some multina-
tionals see using a forward in this case, in which more than 
5.5% of the transaction’s settlement is “lost” to hedging as too 
expensive. The definition of “too expensive” must be based 
on the philosophy of the individual firm and its risk tolerance 
for currency risk, but fundamentals of financial theory would 
argue that the two cases are not truly different. However, in 
business, depending on how pricing was conducted, a loss 
of 5.56% on the sale settlement could destroy much of the 
net margin on the sale.
Global Finance in Practice 10.3
Forward Rates and the Cost of Hedging

288
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
Finally, in order to compare the money market hedge outcome with the other hedging alter-
natives, the $1,729,411.77 cost today must be carried forward 90 days to the same future date 
as the other hedge choices. If the current dollar cost is carried forward at Ganado’s WACC of 
12%, the total cost of the money market hedge is $1,781,294.12. This is higher than the forward 
hedge and therefore unattractive.
$1,729,411.77 * J1 + a.12 * 90
360b R = $1,781,294.12.
Option Hedge. Ganado could cover its £1,000,000 account payable by purchasing a call option 
on £1,000,000. A June call option on British pounds with a near at-the-money strike price of 
$1.75/£ would cost 1.5% (premium) or
£1,000,000 * 0.015 * $1.7640/£ = $26,460.
This premium, regardless of whether the call option is exercised or not, will be paid up-front. 
Its value, carried forward 90 days at the WACC of 12%, would raise its end of period cost to $27,254.
If the spot rate in 90 days is less than $1.75/£, the option would be allowed to expire and 
the £1,000,000 for the payable would be purchased on the spot market. The total cost of the 
call option hedge, if the option is not exercised, is theoretically smaller than any other alterna-
tive (with the exception of remaining unhedged, because the option premium is still paid and 
lost). If the spot rate in 90 days exceeds $1.75/£, the call option would be exercised. The total 
cost of the call option hedge, if exercised, is as follows:
Exercise call option (£1,000,000 * $1.75/£)
$1,750,000
Call option premium (carried forward 90 days)
    27,254
Total maximum expense of call option hedge
$1,777,254
1.66
$1,840,000
$1,820,000
$1,800,000
$1,780,000
$1,760,000
$1,740,000
$1,720,000
$1,700,000
$1,680,000
$1,660,000
Ending spot exchange rate ($ = £1.00)
Cost in U.S. dollars of Ganado’s £1,000,000 Account Payable at end of 90 days
Call option strike
price of $1.75/£
Uncovered Payable costs whatever
ending spot rate is
Forward rate
of $1.7540/£
Forward locks in $1,754,000
$1.75/£ Call
option
1.67
1.68
1.69
1.70
1.71
1.72
1.73
1.74
1.75
1.76
1.77
1.78
1.79
1.80
1.81
1.82
1.83
1.84
$1.75/£ Call option caps payable
$1,777,254
Money Market locks in
$1,781,294
Exhibit 10.6
 Ganado’s A/P Transaction Exposure Hedging Alternatives

289
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
Payable Hedging Strategy Choice. The four hedging methods of managing a £1,000,000 
account payable for Ganado are summarized in Exhibit 10.6. The costs of the forward hedge 
and money market hedge are certain. The cost using the call option hedge is calculated as a 
maximum, and the cost of remaining unhedged is highly uncertain.
As with Ganado’s account receivable, the final hedging choice depends on the confidence 
of Maria’s exchange rate expectations, and her willingness to bear risk. The forward hedge 
provides the lowest cost of making the account payable payment that is certain. If the dollar 
strengthens against the pound, ending up at a spot rate less than $1.75/£, the call option could 
potentially be the lowest cost hedge. Given an expected spot rate of $1.76/£, however, the 
forward hedge appears to be the preferred alternative.
Risk Management in Practice
There are as many different approaches to exposure management as there are firms. A variety 
of surveys of corporate risk management practices in recent years in the United States, the 
United Kingdom, Finland, Australia, and Germany, indicate no real consensus exists regarding 
the best approach. The following is our attempt to assimilate the basic results of these surveys 
and combine them with our own personal experiences.
Which Goals?
The treasury function of most private firms, the group typically responsible for transaction 
exposure management, is usually considered a cost center. It is not expected to add profit to 
the firm’s bottom line (which is not the same thing as saying it is not expected to add value to 
the firm). Currency risk managers are expected to err on the conservative side when manag-
ing the firm’s money.
Which Exposures?
Transaction exposures exist before they are actually booked as foreign currency-denominated 
receivables and payables. However, many firms do not allow the hedging of quotation expo-
sure or backlog exposure as a matter of policy. The reasoning is straightforward: until the 
transaction exists on the accounting books of the firm, the probability of the exposure actu-
ally occurring is considered to be less than 100%. Conservative hedging policies dictate that 
contractual hedges be placed only on existing exposures.
Which Contractual Hedges?
As might be expected, transaction exposure management programs are generally divided along 
an “option-line,” those that use options and those that do not. Firms that do not use cur-
rency options rely almost exclusively on forward contracts and money market hedges. Global 
Finance in Practice 10.4 demonstrates how market condition may change firm ­hedging choices.
Many MNEs have established rather rigid transaction exposure risk management poli-
cies, which mandate proportional hedging. These policies generally require the use of forward 
contract hedges on a percentage (e.g., 50, 60, or 70%) of existing transaction exposures. As the 
maturity of the exposures lengthens, the percentage forward-cover required decreases. The 
remaining portion of the exposure is then selectively hedged on the basis of the firm’s risk 
tolerance, view of exchange rate movements, and confidence level. Although rarely acknowl-
edged by the firms themselves, selective hedging is essentially speculation. A significant 
­question remains as to whether a firm or a financial manager can consistently predict the 
future ­direction of exchange rates.

290
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
Advanced Topics in Hedging
There are other theoretical dimensions to currency hedging that are not often considered in 
actual industry practice, including the optimal hedge ratio, hedge symmetry, hedge effectiveness, 
and hedge timing.
Hedge Ratio
Transaction exposure is an uncertainty in the value of an asset, such as the value of a specific 
amount of foreign currency, which may be recognized or realized at a future point in time. 
In our example in this chapter, Ganado expected to receive £1,000,000 in 90 days, but does 
not know for certain what that £1,000,000 will be worth in U.S. dollars at that time (the spot 
exchange rate in 90 days).
The objective of currency hedging is to minimize the change in the value of the exposed 
asset or cash flow from a change in exchange rates. Hedging is accomplished by combining the 
exposed asset with a hedge asset to create a two-asset portfolio in which the two assets react 
in relatively equal but opposite directions to an exchange rate change. Once formed, the most 
common objective of hedging is to construct a hedge that will result in a total change in value 
of the two-asset portfolio (∆ Portfolio Value)—if perfect—of zero.
∆ Portfolio Value = ∆ Spot + ∆ Hedge = 0.
A traditional forward hedge forms a two-asset portfolio, combining the spot exposure 
with forward cover. The value of the two-asset portfolio is then the sum of the foreign cur-
rency amount at the current spot rate (the exposure), with the hedge amount sold forward at 
the forward rate.
Two@Asset Portfolio = [(Exposure - Hedge amount) * Spot] + [Hedge amount * Forward rate].
For example, if Ganado hedged 100% of its £1,000,000 account receivable with a forward 
contract at time t = 90 (90 days until settlement), assuming a spot rate of $1.7640/£ and a 
90-day forward rate of $1.7540/£, this two-asset portfolio would be:
Vt = [(£1,000,000 - £1,000,000) * $1.7540/£] + [£1,000,000 * $1.7540/£] = $1,754,000.
The global credit crisis had a number of lasting impacts on 
corporate foreign exchange hedging practices in late 2008 
and early 2009. Currency volatilities rose to some of the high-
est levels seen in years, and stayed there. This caused option 
premiums to rise so dramatically that many companies were 
much more selective in their use of currency options in their 
risk management programs.
The dollar-euro volatility was a prime example. As recently 
as July 2007, the implied volatility for the most widely traded cur-
rency cross was below 7% for maturities from one week to three 
years. By October 31, 2008, the 1-month implied volatility had 
reached 29%. Although this was seemingly the peak, 1-month 
implied volatilities were still over 20% on January 30, 2009.
This makes options very expensive. For example, the pre-
mium on a 1-month call option on the euro with a strike rate 
forward-at-the-money at the end of January 2009 rose from 
$0.0096/€ to $0.0286/€ when volatility is 20%, not 7%. For 
a notional principal of €1 million, that is an increase in price 
from $9,600 to $28,600. That will put a hole in any treasury 
department’s budget.
An increasing number of firms, however, are actively hedg-
ing not only backlog exposures, but also selectively hedging 
quotation and anticipated exposures. Anticipated exposures 
are transactions for which there are—at present—no contracts 
or agreements between parties, but are anticipated on the 
basis of historical trends and continuing business relationships. 
Although this may appear to be overly speculative on the part of 
these firms, it may be that hedging expected foreign-currency 
payables and receivables for future periods is the most conser-
vative approach to protect the firm’s future operating revenues.
Global Finance in Practice 10.4
The Credit Crisis and Option Volatilities in 2009

291
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
Note that when there is a full forward cover, there is no uncovered exposure remaining. The 
variance in the terminal value of this two-asset portfolio with respect to the spot exchange 
rate over the following 90-day period is zero. Its value is set and certain. Also note that if the 
spot rate and the forward rate were exactly equal (which they are not here), the total position 
would be termed a perfect hedge.
If, however, Maria Gonzalez at Ganado decided to selectively hedge the exposure, cover-
ing less than 100% of the exposure, the value of the two-asset portfolio would change with 
the spot exchange rate. The change in value could be either up or down. In this case, Maria 
Gonzalez would need to follow a methodology for determining what proportion, b, of the 
exposure, Xt, to cover (so bXt is the amount of the exposure covered). Now the two-asset 
portfolio is written:
Vt = [(Xt - bXt) * St] + [bXt * Ft].
where the hedge ratio, b, is defined
b =
Value of currency hedge
Value of currency exposure
If the entire exposure was covered as in Ganado’s example above, that is a hedge ratio of 
1.0 or 100%. The hedge ratio, b, is the percentage of an individual exposure’s nominal amount 
covered by a financial instrument such as a forward contract or currency option.
Hedge Symmetry
Some hedges can be constructed to result in no change in value to any and all exchange rate 
changes. The hedge is constructed so that whatever spot value is lost as a result of adverse 
exchange rate movements (∆Spot), that value is replaced by an equal but opposite change in 
the value of the hedge asset, (∆Hedge). The commonly used 100% forward contract cover is 
such a hedge. For example in the case of Ganado, if the entire £1,000,000 account receivable 
is sold forward, Ganado is assured of the same dollar proceeds at the end of the 90-day period 
regardless of which direction the exchange rate moves over the exposure period.
But changes in the underlying spot exchange rate need not only result in losses; gains 
from exchange rate changes are equally possible. In the case of Ganado, if the dollar were to 
weaken against the pound over the 90-day period, the dollar value of the account receivable 
would go up. Ganado may choose to construct a hedge, which would minimize the losses 
in the combined two-asset portfolio (minimize negative ∆Value), and also allow positive 
changes in value (positive ∆Value) from exchange rate changes. A hedge constructed using 
a foreign currency option would be pursuing this additional hedging objective. For Ganado, 
this would be the purchase of a put option on the pound to protect against value losses, and 
also allow Ganado to possibly reap value increases in the event the exchange rate moved 
in its favor.
Hedge Effectiveness
The effectiveness of a hedge is determined to what degree the change in spot asset’s value is 
correlated with the equal but opposite change in the hedge asset’s value to a change in the 
underlying spot exchange rate. In currency markets, spot and futures rates are nearly—but not 
precisely—perfectly correlated. This less-than-perfect correlation is termed basis risk.
Hedge Timing
The hedger must also determine the timing of the hedge objective. Does the hedger wish 
to protect the value of the exposed asset only at the time of its maturity or settlement, or at 

292
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
various points in time over the life of the exposure? For example in the case of Ganado, the 
various hedging alternatives explored in the problem analysis—the forward, money market, 
and purchased option hedges—were all constructed and evaluated for the dollar value of 
the combined hedge portfolio only at the end of the 90-day period. In some cases, however, 
Ganado might wish to protect the value of the exposed asset prior to maturity, for example, at 
the end of a financial reporting period prior to the actual maturity of the exposure.
Summary Points
■
■
MNEs encounter three types of currency exposure: 
transaction exposure, translation exposure, and operat-
ing exposure.
■
■
Transaction exposure measures gains or losses that 
arise from the settlement of financial obligations 
whose terms are stated in a foreign currency.
■
■
Considerable theoretical debate exists as to whether 
firms should hedge currency risk. Theoretically, 
­hedging reduces the variability of the cash flows to 
the firm. It does not increase the cash flows to the 
firm. In fact, the costs of hedging may potentially 
lower them.
■
■
Transaction exposure can be managed by contractual 
techniques and certain operating strategies. Contractual 
hedging techniques include forward, futures, money 
market, and option hedges.
■
■
The choice of which contractual hedge to use depends 
on the individual firm’s currency risk tolerance and its 
expectation of the probable movement of exchange 
rates over the transaction exposure period.
■
■
Risk management in practice requires a firm’s treasury 
to identify its goals, choose which contractual hedges 
it wishes to use, and decide what proportion of the 
­currency exposure should be hedged.
China’s voracious consumer appetites are already 
reaching into every corner of Indonesia. The increasing 
weight of China in every market is a global trend, but 
growing Chinese, as well as Indian, demand is making 
an especially big impact in Indonesia. Nick Cashmore 
of the Jakarta office of CLSA, an investment bank, has 
coined a new term to describe this symbiotic relationship: 
“Chindonesia.”
—“Special Report on Indonesia: More Than a 
Single Swallow,” The Economist, September 10, 2009.
In early 2010, Mr. Savio Chow, CFO of China Noah Corpo-
ration (Noah), was concerned about the foreign exchange 
exposure his company could be creating by shifting much 
of its procurement of wood to Indonesia. Noah was a lead-
ing floorboard manufacturer in China that purchased more 
than USD100 million in lumber annually, primarily from 
local wood suppliers in China. But now Mr. Chow planned 
to shift a large portion of his raw material procurement 
to Indonesian suppliers in light of the abundant wood 
resources in Indonesia and the increasingly tight wood 
supply market in China. Chow knew he needed an explicit 
strategy for managing the currency exposure.
China Noah
Noah, a private company owned by its founding family, 
was one of the largest floorboard producers in China. The 
company was established in 1982 by the current chairman, 
Mr. Se Hok Pan, a Macau resident. Most of the company’s 
senior management team had been with the company since 
inception.
Noah’s primary product was solid wood flooring, which 
used 100% natural wood cut into floorboards, sanded, and 
China Noah Corporation1
Mini-Case 
1Copyright © 2014 Thunderbird, School of Global Management. All rights reserved. This case was prepared by Liangqin Xiao and 
Yan Ying under the direction of Professor Michael H. Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only, and not to indicate either 
­effective or ineffective management. 

293
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
Supply Chain
One of the key characteristics of the floorboard industry 
is that wood makes up the vast majority of all raw mate-
rial and direct cost. In the past three years Noah had spent 
between CNY60 and CNY65 on wood purchasing for every 
square meter of floorboard manufactured. This meant 
wood was almost 90% of cost of goods sold. Given the 
competitiveness of the floorboard industry, the ability to 
control and potentially lower wood cost was the dominant 
driver of corporate profitability.
Noah had never owned any forests of its own, buy-
ing wood from Chinese forest owners or lumber trad-
ers. Chinese wood prices had long been quite cheap by 
global standards, partly as a result of a large-scale illegal 
logging industry. But wood supplies had now tightened 
dramatically as forest resources became increasingly 
scarce due to China’s shift toward environmental pro-
tection, and this tightening supply was sending wood 
prices upward.
The World Wildlife Fund estimated that domestic wood 
supplies met only half of the country’s current timber 
protected with a layer of gloss. Rapid Chinese economic 
growth, together with the rising living standards and the 
emphasis on environmental conservation in China, had 
created a consumer preference for timber products for 
both households and offices. Besides being natural, wood 
products were considered beneficial for both mental and 
physical health. Noah operated five flooring manufacturing 
plants and a distributor/retail network of over 1,500 outlet 
stores across China.
As shown in Exhibit A, Noah had grown rapidly in 
recent years, with sales growing from CNY986 million in 
2006 to CNY1,603 million in 2009 (approximately USD200 
million at the current spot rate of CNY6.92=USD1.00). 
Net profit had risen from CNY115 million to CNY187 mil-
lion (USD27 million) in the same period. Mr. Chow was 
a planner, and as is also illustrated by Exhibit A, he and 
Noah were expecting sales to grow at an annual average 
rate of 20% for the coming five years. Noah’s return on 
sales was expected to be good this year at 13.5%. But if 
Chow’s forecasts were accurate, they would plummet to 
3.7% by 2015.
Exhibit A
China Noah’s Consolidated Statement of Income (actual and forecast, million Chinese yuan)
(CNY million)
2007
2008
2009
2010e
2011e
2012e
2013e
2014e
2015e
Sales revenue
1,290.4
1,394.6
1,602.7
1,923.2
2,307.9
2,769.5
3,323.4
3,988.0
4,785.6
Cost of goods sold
(849.4)
(943.4)
(1,110.0)
(1,294.0)
(1,610.3)
(2,000.7)
(2,491.1)
(3,096.8)
(3,848.2)
Gross profit
441.0
451.2
492.7
629.3
697.6
768.8
832.2
891.2
937.4
  Gross margin
34.2%
32.4%
30.7%
32.7%
30.2%
27.8%
25.0%
22.3%
19.6%
Selling expense
(216.0)
(208.0)
(201.8)
(242.3)
(290.8)
(349.0)
(418.7)
(502.5)
(603.0)
G&A expense
  (19.6)
  (20.0)
  (20.1)
  (24.1)
  (28.9)
  (34.7)
  (41.7)
  (50.0)
  (60.0)
EBITDA
205.7
223.6
271.1
362.8
377.9
385.1
371.8
338.7
274.4
  EBITDA margin
15.9%
16.0%
16.9%
18.9%
16.4%
13.9%
11.2%
8.5%
5.7%
Depreciation
  (40.3)
  (45.3)
  (49.4)
  (57.5)
  (60.8)
  (64.0)
  (67.3)
  (70.5)
  (73.7)
EBIT
165.6
178.4
221.9
305.3
317.1
321.1
304.5
268.2
200.7
  EBIT margin
12.8%
12.8%
13.8%
15.9%
13.7%
11.6%
9.2%
6.7%
4.2%
Interest expense
  (7.1)
  (12.0)
  (15.1)
  (15.9)
  (13.9)
  (11.2)
  (7.7)
  (4.4)
  (2.2)
EBT
158.5
166.4
206.8
289.4
303.2
309.9
296.8
263.8
198.5
Income tax
  (8.4)
  (18.0)
  (20.0)
  (28.9)
  (30.3)
  (31.0)
  (29.7)
  (26.4)
  (19.9)
Net income
150.1
148.4
186.8
260.5
272.9
278.9
267.1
237.5
178.7
  Return on sales
11.6%
10.8%
11.7%
13.5%
11.8%
10.1%
8.0%
6.0%
3.7%
Assumes sales growth of 20% per year. Estimated costs assume INR 1344 = 1.00 RMB. Projected selling expenses 
assumed 12.6% of sales, G&A expenses at 1.3% of sales, and income tax expenses at 10% of EBT. Cost of goods 
sold assumptions for 2010e–2015e are based on Exhibit C, which follows.

294
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
2010 to 42.8 million in 2015, as shown in Exhibit C. If he 
sourced 30% of Noah’s wood from Indonesia in 2010, and 
then increased that proportion 10% per year, Indonesia 
would account for roughly half of Noah’s wood sourcing 
by 2015.
Indonesian Growth
Indonesia’s forests covered 60% of the country. In recent 
years, the country’s high population and rapid industrial-
ization had already led to serious environmental issues, 
including large-scale deforestation, and like that in China, 
much of it illegal. That said, Indonesia was rapidly emerg-
ing as an important exporter of wood.
In terms of macroeconomics, Indonesia had been less 
affected by the recent global recession, in comparison to its 
neighbors. Statistics indicated that Indonesia’s GDP grew 
by 4.5% in 2009, and that it was expected to grow by nearly 
7% per year over the coming decade. Indonesia could soon 
move to economic parity with the BRICs (Brazil, Russia, 
India, and China). Stable political conditions, despite the 
2009 elections and strong domestic demand, could deliver 
that growth.
Foreign Currency Risk
Indonesia had been one of countries hardest hit by the 
Asian financial crisis of 1997–1998. Against the U.S. dollar, 
the Indonesian rupiah dropped from about IDR2,600/USD 
to a low point of IDR14,000/USD, its economy shrinking 
a shocking 14%—although it did rebound in the follow-
ing years. The rupiah had since stabilized in the IDR8,000/
USD to IDR10,000/USD range.
As illustrated by Exhibit D, the rupiah had traded in a 
relatively narrow range of IDR1,000/CNY to IDR1,400/
CNY over the past 10 years, with the exception of the 
recent global credit crisis. Because the Indonesian rupiah 
was a free-floating currency and the Chinese renminbi a 
highly controlled and managed currency, crisis had always 
hit the rupiah much harder. Since Noah was considering 
consumption, and a variety of price forecasts had quite 
honestly frightened Chow. For example, Morgan Stanley 
was forecasting Chinese wood prices to rise by 15% to 20% 
over the coming five years. Major Chinese floorboard pro-
ducers, including Noah, were now looking at countries like 
Brazil, Russia, and Indonesia for more sustainable, legal, 
and cheaper sources of wood.
Noah’s Indonesia Deal
Over the past few months Chow had been pursuing a num-
ber of Indonesian wood supplier deals to replace a por-
tion of its Chinese sourcing. Preliminary price quotes were 
encouraging, prices of CNY62.6/m2 coming in roughly 8% 
cheaper than current Chinese prices. The previous week 
he had presented a potential Indonesian supplier’s term 
sheet (Exhibit B) to Noah’s board of directors. The term 
sheet was based on 30% Indonesian sourcing of the total 
17.2 million square meters of flooring Noah expected to 
sell in 2010.
Chow wished to move quickly to try to control—and 
possibly reduce—Noah’s wood costs for the current year 
and possibly for years to come. The current price quote 
from the consortia of Indonesian wood producers was 
84,090 Indonesian rupiah per square meter (IDR/m2), 
which translated into a price in Chinese yuan per square 
meter (CNY/m2) of 62.6.
PriceCNY = IDR84,080/m2
IDR1,344/CNY = CNY62.6/m2.
At CNY 62.6, this was a 7.7% discount to the current 
Chinese price of 67.8 for the same wood. Since Chinese 
prices were expected to rise 4% to 5% per year for the 
foreseeable future, but the Indonesian consortia was will-
ing to contractually limit annual price increases to just 4% 
per annum, the discount might increase if the IDR/CNY 
exchange rate remained the same.
Chow expected Noah’s production to more than double 
over the next five years, from 17.2 million square meters in 
Exhibit B
Term Sheet from an Indonesian Wood Consortium
Buyer
China Noah Corporation
Seller
An Indonesian wood supply consortium
Quantity
5.16 million m2, 30% of Noah’s wood production in 2010
Unit price
IDR84,090/m2 (equivalent to CNY62.6/m2, exchanged at spot rate)
Total payment
IDR433,840 million
Payment schedule
The payment must be settled in Indonesian rupiah (IDR) in 6 months.

295
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
Chow’s first step in considering hedging alternatives was 
to collect currency and derivative quotes on the Indonesian 
rupiah/Chinese yuan spot rate into the immediate future.
Spot Rate Forecast.  Morgan Stanley’s forecast of the 
IDR/CNY spot rate through 2015 showed a rupiah that 
slowly appreciated against the yuan over the coming five 
years, as illustrated in Exhibit E.
Forward Rates.  Chow had also requested forward rate 
quotes from several of its bankers. An average of their 
quotes is also presented in Exhibit E. Unlike the spot rate 
forecast, the forward rate quotes, based on interest rate 
differentials, locked in a rapidly discounted rupiah against 
the yuan out over the same 5-year period.
Currency Options.  Forward hedging would eliminate Noah’s 
downside risk, but would also eliminate any opportunity to 
benefit from an even weaker Indonesian rupiah—if that 
a fundamental change in its wood-sourcing strategy and 
structure, the exchange rate between the rupiah and the 
yuan over the long-term was considered critical.
Hedging Foreign Exchange Exposure
The Indonesia wood sourcing contract would expose Noah 
to exchange rate risk over a series of 6-month periods 
(March 2010, September 2010, March 2011, etc.). Chow, 
having little experience in managing exchange rate risk, 
had obtained some detailed advice from Noah’s financial 
advisors, Morgan Stanley.
Morgan Stanley had noted that the Chinese government 
was under constant pressure from many countries, includ-
ing the United States, to revalue the yuan. Unlike the yuan, 
the rupiah floated in value, although its value often tracked 
closely against the U.S. dollar. If the Chinese yuan was indeed 
revalued against the U.S. dollar, and the Indonesian rupiah 
tracked the dollar “down,” a weaker rupiah could result. 
Exhibit C
China Noah Corporation’s Cost of Goods Sold Composition
Cny/m2 Floorboard
2007
2008
2009
2010e
2011e
2012e
2013e
2014e
2015e
Wood Cost
  Chinese wood cost
59.9
61.8
65.2
67.8
70.5
73.3
76.3
79.3
82.5
  Percent Chinese
100%
100%
100%
70%
67%
64%
60%
56%
52%
  Indonesian wood cost (IDR/m2):
84,090
87,454
90,952
94,590
98,373
102,308
  Cost in CNY/m2
62.6
65.1
67.7
70.4
73.2
76.1
  Percent Indonesian
0%
0%
0%
30%
33%
36%
40%
44%
48%
  Weighted wood cost
59.9
61.8
65.2
66.2
68.7
71.3
73.9
76.6
79.4
Other Cost
Packaging
2.9
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
Utilities
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.5
Labor
1.0
1.0
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.3
Delivery
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.7
1.8
Sand
0.9
0.9
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.9
0.9
Other
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.3
2.4
Total COGS (CNY/m2)
68.5
70.4
74.0
75.2
78.0
80.8
83.8
86.8
89.9
Flooring Output (milliom m2)
12.4
13.4
15.0
17.2
20.6
24.8
29.7
35.7
42.8
Wood/COGS
87.4%
87.8%
88.1%
88.0%
88.1%
88.2%
88.2%
88.3%
88.3%
Total COGS (million CNY)
849.4
943.4
1,110.0
1,294.0
1,610.3
2,000.7
2,491.1
3,096.8
3,848.2
Assumes INR 1344 = 1.00 CNY for 2010–2015; flooring output growth at 20%, Chinese wood prices increasing 4% 
per year, Indonesian wood prices increasing 4% per year, percentage increase in Indonesian sourcing 10% per year 
from 30% in 2010.

296
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
Indonesian rupiah (IDR) = Chinese yuan 1.00 (CNY)
800
Jan-98
May-98
Sep-98
Jan-99
May-99
Sep-99
Jan-00
May-00
Sep-00
Jan-01
May-01
Sep-01
Jan-02
May-02
Sep-02
Jan-03
May-03
Sep-03
Jan-04
May-04
Sep-04
Jan-05
May-05
Sep-05
Jan-06
May-06
Sep-06
Jan-07
May-07
Sep-07
Jan-08
May-08
Sep-08
Jan-09
May-09
Sep-09
Jan-10
900
1,000
1,300
1,200
1,100
1,400
1,500
1,600
1,700
1,800
Asian ﬁnancial crisis
Global credit crisis of 2008–2009
Exhibit D
Indonesian Rupiah to Chinese Yuan Spot Rate (monthly)
2,200
Indonesian rupiah = 1 Chinese yuan
2,000
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
Spot
2Q 2010
3Q 2010
4Q 2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
 1,357
 1,397
 1,410
 1,405
 1,373
 1,338
 1,299
 1,260
 1,343
 1,352
 1,431
 1,450
 1,470
 1,652
 1,784
 1,915
Forward Rat
Quotations
Spot Rate Forecasts
 2,050
Exhibit E
Forecast and Forward Rates on the IDR/CNY Spot Rate
were to occur. Given Chow’s limited experience with foreign 
exchange derivatives, currency options made him nervous. 
But, as he told his controller, he was determined to consider 
all appropriate techniques available.
Exhibit F lists possible option positions for Noah 
with varying strike prices, based on currently avail-
able market data. The quotes in Exhibit F are of course 
only for the first 6-month payment; longer maturities 

297
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
entail depositing funds now into Indonesian rupiah- 
denominated accounts bearing rupiah interest. Indonesian 
interest rates were consistently higher than comparable 
rates in China, where rates were subject to government 
regulations and restrictions. As illustrated in Exhibit G, 
the 6-month deposit rate in China on CNY was currently 
would be needed for the hedging of future rupiah 
exposures.
Money Market Hedging.  Since Noah’s foreign exchange 
exposure was a payable, Indonesian rupiah at 6-month 
intervals into the future, money market hedging would 
Exhibit F
Currency Option Strike Rates and Premiums
Strike Rate
(IDR/CNY)
CNY Put
Option Premium
(per CNY)
CNY Call
Option Premium
(per CNY)
1300
2.82%
30.59%
1350
3.20%
28.16%
1400
3.73%
25.89%
1450
4.41%
23.77%
1500
5.23%
21.79%
1550
6.19%
19.94%
1600
7.32%
18.27%
1650
8.58%
16.73%
1700
9.98%
15.33%
1750
11.50%
14.05%
1800
13.13%
12.88%
Note: Quotes are for options of a 1 million CNY notional principal
16
Percent per annum (6-month deposits)
10
12
14
8
6
Indonesian rupiah deposit rates of interest
Chinese yuan deposit rates of interest
4
2
0
1/1/2000
4/1/2000
7/1/2000
10/1/2000
1/1/2001
4/1/2001
7/1/2001
10/1/2001
1/1/2002
4/1/2002
7/1/2002
10/1/2002
1/1/2003
4/1/2003
7/1/2003
10/1/2003
1/1/2004
4/1/2004
7/1/2004
10/1/2004
1/1/2005
4/1/2005
7/1/2005
10/1/2005
1/1/2006
4/1/2006
7/1/2006
10/1/2006
1/1/2007
4/1/2007
7/1/2007
10/1/2007
1/1/2008
4/1/2008
7/1/2008
10/1/2008
1/1/2009
4/1/2009
7/1/2009
10/1/2009
1/1/2010
Exhibit G
 Indonesian and Chinese Deposit Rates of Interest

298
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
exchange rate on the settlement date. Mr. Chow thought 
that the Indonesian suppliers were likely to respond posi-
tively to a CAC because of the many forecasts that the IDR 
was likely to fall against the CNY.
Time was running short. China Noah’s Board was waiting 
on a currency management strategy proposal from Mr. Chow.
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 What is the business reason for China Noah’s potential 
currency exposure? Does the company really need to 
subject itself to substantial exchange rate risk? Is the 
risk “material” to China Noah? Do you think China 
Noah should hedge?
2.	 How does China Noah’s profitability (using return 
on sales as the primary metric) change depending on 
whether the IDR/CNY exchange rate follows (a) fore-
cast spot rates, (b) forward rate quotes, or (c) fixed rate 
baseline assumption?
3.	 Assuming Noah made 6-month payments on its wood 
purchases from Indonesia, what is the schedule of for-
eign currency amounts over time?
4.	 What would be your outlook on the future direction of 
the Indonesian rupiah and the Chinese renminbi? Should 
this influence the hedging approach used by Noah?
5.	 Which of the hedging choices would you recommend?
1.98%, while the same rate in Indonesia was a hefty 
6.74%.
Currency Adjustment Clauses. Chow was encouraged 
to also consider a Currency Adjustment Clause or CAC 
as his banker termed it. Noah’s bankers argued that if 
the Indonesian sourcing was to become a long-term 
partnership between Noah and the Indonesian consortia, 
then a CAC would basically allow the two parties to share 
the currency risks, up or down. The rationale for the CAC 
was similar to a profit/risk-sharing program, where buyers/
sellers initially agree to lock in a local currency price on 
a settlement denominated in a foreign currency—in this 
case the Indonesian rupiah purchase price. As long as 
the exchange rate stays within some defined boundary 
around a central foreign exchange rate, say {5% around 
the current spot rate of IDR1344/CNY, the rupiah price 
would remain fixed. If, however, the spot rate at the time of 
payment had moved beyond the {5% boundary, the two 
parties could share the difference between the current spot 
rate and the original central rate.
Mr. Chow estimated that a 4% fluctuation around the 
spot FX rate would be a reasonable benchmark to trig-
ger the profit/risk sharing. In this sense, a possible CAC 
for Noah will initially lock in its payment obligation at 
CNY62.6/M2. Once the exchange rate movement exceeded 
the {4% boundary, the CAC would call for an automatic 
price recalculation by predetermined methods such as 
using the mid-point between the spot exchange rate and the 
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Foreign Exchange Exposure. Define the three types of 
foreign exchange exposure.
2.	 Currency Exposure and Contracting. Which of the 
three currency exposures relate to cash flows already 
contracted for, and which of the exposures do not?
3.	 Currency Risk. Define currency risk.
4.	 Hedging. What is a hedge? How does that differ from 
speculation?
5.	 Value of the Firm. What—according to financial the-
ory—is the value of a firm?
6.	 Cash Flow Variability. How does currency hedging 
theoretically change the expected cash flows of the 
firm?
7.	 Arguments for Currency Hedging. Describe four 
arguments in favor of a firm pursuing an active cur-
rency risk management program.
8.	 Arguments against Currency Hedging. Describe six 
arguments against a firm pursuing an active currency 
risk management program.
9.	 Transaction Exposure. What are the four main types of 
transactions from which transaction exposure arises?
10.	 Life Span of a Transaction Exposure. Diagram the life 
span of an exposure arising from selling a product on 
open account. On the diagram define and show quota-
tion, backlog, and billing exposures.
11.	 Unperformed Contracts. Which contract is more likely 
not to be performed: a payment due from a customer 
in foreign currency (a currency exposure), or a forward 
contract with a bank to exchange the foreign currency 
for the firm’s domestic currency at a contracted rate 
(the currency hedge)?
12.	 Cash Balances. Why do foreign currency cash balances 
not cause transaction exposure?
13.	 Contractual Currency Hedges. What are the four main 
contractual instruments used to hedge transaction 
exposure?

299
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
2.	 Bobcat Company. Bobcat Company, U.S.-based 
manufacturer of industrial equipment, just purchased 
a Korean company that produces plastic nuts and 
bolts for heavy equipment. The purchase price was 
W7,500 million. W1,000 million has already been paid, 
and the remaining W6,500 million is due in six months. 
The current spot rate is W1,110/$, and the 6-month 
forward rate is W1,175/$. The 6-month Korean 
won interest rate is 16% per annum, the 6-month 
U.S. dollar rate is 4% per annum. Bobcat can invest 
at these interest rates, or borrow at 2% per annum 
above those rates. A 6-month call option on won with 
a W1,200/$ strike rate has a 3.0% premium, while the 
6-month put option at the same strike rate has a 2.4% 
premium.
Bobcat can invest at the rates given above, or 
borrow at 2% per annum above those rates. Bobcat’s 
weighted average cost of capital is 10%. Compare 
alternate ways that Bobcat might deal with its for-
eign exchange exposure. What do you recommend 
and why?
3.	 Siam Cement. Siam Cement, the Bangkok-based 
cement manufacturer, suffered enormous losses with 
the coming of the Asian crisis in 1997. The company 
had been pursuing a very aggressive growth strat-
egy in the mid-1990s, taking on massive quantities of 
foreign-currency-denominated debt (primarily U.S. 
dollars). When the Thai baht (B) was devalued from 
its pegged rate of B25.0/$ in July 1997, Siam’s interest 
payments alone were over $900 million on its out-
standing dollar debt (with an average interest rate of 
8.40% on its U.S. dollar debt at that time). Assuming 
Siam Cement took out $50 million in debt in June 
1997 at 8.40% interest, and had to repay it in one year 
when the spot exchange rate had stabilized at B42.0/$, 
what was the foreign exchange loss incurred on the 
transaction?
4.	 P&G India. Procter and Gamble’s affiliate in India, 
P&G India, procures much of its toiletries product line 
from a Japanese company. Because of the shortage of 
working capital in India, payment terms by Indian 
importers are typically 180 days or longer. P&G India 
wishes to hedge an 8.5 million Japanese yen payable. 
Although options are not available on the Indian 
rupee (Rs), forward rates are available against the yen. 
Additionally, a common practice in India is for com-
panies like P&G India to work with a currency agent 
who will, in this case, lock in the current spot exchange 
rate in exchange for a 4.85% fee. Using the follow-
ing exchange rate and interest rate data, ­recommend 
a hedging strategy.
14.	 Money Market Hedges. How does a money mar-
ket hedge differ for an account receivable versus 
that of an account payable? Is it really a meaningful 
difference?
15.	 Balance Sheet Hedging. What is the difference 
between a balance sheet hedge, a financing hedge, and 
a money market hedge?
16.	 Forward versus Money Market Hedging. Theoreti-
cally, shouldn’t forward contract hedges and money 
market hedges have the same identical outcome? 
Don’t they both use the same three specific inputs—
the initial spot rate, the domestic cost of funds, and the 
foreign cost of funds?
17.	 Foreign Currency Option Premia. Why do many firms 
object to paying for foreign currency option hedges? 
Do firms pay for forward contract hedges? How do 
forwards and options differ if at all?
18.	 Decision Criteria. Ultimately, a treasurer must choose 
among alternative strategies to manage transaction 
exposure. Explain the two main decision criteria that 
must be used.
19.	 Risk Management Hedging Practices. According to 
surveys of corporate practices, which currency expo-
sures do most firms regularly hedge?
20.	 Hedge Ratio. What is the hedge ratio? Why would the 
hedge ratio ever be less than one?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 BioTron Medical, Inc. Brent Bush, CFO of a medi-
cal device distributor, BioTron Medical, Inc., was 
approached by a Japanese customer, Numata, with a 
proposal to pay cash (in yen) for its typical orders of 
¥12,500,000 every other month if it were given a 4.5% 
discount. Numata’s current terms are 30 days with no 
discounts. Using the following quotes and estimated 
cost of capital for Numata, Bush will compare the pro-
posal with covering yen payments with forward con-
tracts. Should Brent Bush accept Numata’s proposal?
Spot rate:
¥111.40/$
30-day forward rate:
¥111.00/$
90-day forward rate:
¥110.40/$
180-day forward rate:
¥109.20/$
Numata’s WACC
8.850%
BioTron’s WACC
9.200%

300
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
On April 11, the company sold a system to the City of 
Nagasaki, Japan, for installation in Nagasaki’s famous 
Glover Gardens (where Puccini’s Madame Butterfly 
waited for the return of Lt. Pinkerton). The sale was 
priced in yen at ¥20,000,000, with payment due in 
three months.
Spot exchange rate:
¥118.255/$ (closing mid-rates)
1-month forward rate:
¥117.760/$, a 5.04% per annum 
premium
3-month forward:
¥116.830/$, a 4.88% per annum 
premium
1-year forward:
¥112.450/$ a 5.16% per annum 
premium
Money Rates
United States
Japan
Differential
One month
4.8750%
0.09375%
4.78125%
Three months
4.9375%
0.09375%
4.84375%
Twelve months
5.1875%
0.31250%
4.87500%
Note that the interest rate differentials vary slightly 
from the forward discounts on the yen because of time 
differences for the quotes. The spot ¥118.255/$, for 
example, is a mid-point range. On April 11, the spot 
yen traded in London from ¥118.30/$ to ¥117.550/$. 
­Aquatech’s Japanese competitors are currently bor-
rowing yen from Japanese banks at a spread of two per-
centage points above the Japanese money rate. Krystal’s 
weighted average cost of capital is 16%, and the com-
pany wishes to protect the dollar value of this receivable.
3-month options are available from Kyushu Bank: 
call option on ¥20,000,000 at exercise price of ¥118.00/$: 
a 1% premium; or a put option on ¥20,000,000, at exer-
cise price of ¥118.00/$: a 3% premium.
a.	 What are the costs and benefits of alternative 
hedges? Which would you recommend, and why?
b.	 What is the break-even reinvestment rate 
when comparing forward and money market 
alternatives?
8.	 Caribou River. Caribou River, Ltd., a Canadian man-
ufacturer of raincoats, does not selectively hedge its 
transaction exposure. Instead, if the date of the trans-
action is known with certainty, all foreign currency-
denominated cash flows must utilize the following 
mandatory forward cover formula:
Mandatory 
Forward Cover
0–90 days
91–180 days
180 days
Paying the 
points forward
75%
60%
50%
Receiving the 
points forward
100%
90%
50%
Spot rate:
¥120.60/$
180-day forward rate
¥2.400/Rps
Expected spot, 180 days
¥2.6000
180-day Indian rupee investing rate
8.000%
180-day Japanese yen investing rate
1.500%
Currency agent’s exchange rate
4.850%
P&G India’s cost of capital
12.000%
5.	 Elan Pharmaceuticals. Elan Pharmaceuticals, a U.S.-
based multinational pharmaceutical company, is evalu-
ating an export sale of its cholesterol-reduction drug 
with a prospective Indonesian distributor. The pur-
chase would be for 1,650 million Indonesian rupiah 
(Rp), which at the current spot exchange rate of 
Rp9,450/$, translates into nearly $175,000. Although 
not a big sale by company standards, company pol-
icy dictates that sales must be settled for at least 
a minimum gross margin, in this case, a cash settle-
ment of $168,000. The current 90-day forward rate is 
Rp9,950/$. Although this rate appeared unattractive, 
Elan had to contact several major banks before even 
finding a forward quote on the rupiah. The consensus 
of currency forecasters at the moment, however, is that 
the rupiah will hold relatively steady, possibly falling to 
Rp9,400/$ over the coming 90 to 120 days. Analyze the 
prospective sale and make a hedging recommendation.
6.	 Embraer of Brazil. Embraer of Brazil is one of the 
two leading global manufacturers of regional jets 
(Bombardier of Canada is the other). Regional jets 
are smaller than the traditional civilian airliners pro-
duced by Airbus and Boeing, seating between 50 and 
100 people on average. Embraer has concluded an 
agreement with a regional U.S. airline to produce and 
deliver four aircraft one year from now for $80 million.
Although Embraer will be paid in U.S. dollars, it 
also possesses a currency exposure of inputs—it must 
pay foreign suppliers $20 million for inputs one year 
from now (but they will be delivering the subcompo-
nents throughout the year). The current spot rate on 
the Brazilian real (R$) is R$1.8240/$, but it has been 
steadily appreciating against the U.S. dollar over the 
past three years. Forward contracts are difficult to 
acquire and are considered expensive. Citibank Brasil 
has not explicitly provided Embraer a forward rate 
quote, but has stated that it will probably be pricing 
a forward off the current 4.00% U.S. dollar eurocur-
rency rate and the 10.50% Brazilian government bond 
rate. Advise Embraer on its currency exposure.
7.	 Krystal. Krystal is a U.S.-based company that manufac-
tures, sells, and installs water purification equipment. 

301
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
toys (primarily Barbies and Hot Wheels) to a major 
distributor in Antwerp. The receivable, €30 million, is 
due in 90 days, standard terms for the toy industry in 
Europe. Mattel’s treasury team has collected the fol-
lowing currency and market quotes. The company’s 
foreign exchange advisors believe the euro will be at 
about $1.4200/€ in 90 days. Mattel’s management does 
not use currency options in currency risk management 
activities. Advise Mattel as to which hedging alterna-
tive is probably preferable.
Current spot rate ($/€)
$1.4158
Credit Suisse 90-day forward rate ($/€)
$1.4172
Barclays 90-day forward rate ($/€)
$1.4195
Mattel Toys WACC ($)
9.600%
90-day eurodollar interest rate
4.000%
90-day euro interest rate
3.885%
90-day eurodollar borrowing rate
5.000%
90-day euro borrowing rate
5.000%
11.	 Chronos Time Pieces. Chronos Time Pieces of Bos-
ton exports watches to many countries, selling in local 
currencies to stores and distributors. Chronos prides 
itself on being financially conservative. At least 70% 
of each individual transaction exposure is hedged, 
mostly in the forward market, but occasionally with 
options. Chronos’ foreign exchange policy is such 
that the 70% hedge may be increased up to a 120% 
hedge if devaluation or depreciation appears immi-
nent. Chronos has just shipped to its major North 
American distributor. It has issued a 90-day invoice 
to its buyer for €1,560,000. The current spot rate is 
$1.2224/€, the 90-day forward rate is $1.2270/€. Chro-
nos’ treasurer, Manny Hernandez, has a very good 
track record in predicting exchange rate movements. 
He currently believes the euro will weaken against 
the dollar in the coming 90 to 120 days, possibly to 
around $1.16/€.
a.	 Evaluate the hedging alternatives for Chronos if 
Manny is right (Case 1: $1.16/€) and if Manny is 
wrong (Case 2: $1.26/€). What do you recommend?
b.	 What does it mean to hedge 120% of a transaction 
exposure?
c.	 What would be considered the most conserva-
tive transaction exposure management policy by a 
firm? How does Chronos compare?
12.	 Farah Jeans. Farah Jeans of San Antonio, Texas, is 
completing a new assembly plant near Guatemala City. 
A final construction payment of Q8,400,000 is due in 
six months. (“Q” is the symbol for Guatemalan quet-
zals.) Lucky 13 uses 20% per annum as its weighted 
Caribou expects to receive multiple payments in 
Danish kroner over the next year. DKr3,000,000 is 
due in 90 days; DKr2,000,000 is due in 180 days; and 
DKr1,000,000 is due in one year. Using the following 
spot and forward exchange rates, what would be the 
amount of forward cover required by company policy 
for each period?
Spot rate, Dkr/C$
4.70
3-month forward rate, Dkr/C$
4.71
6-month forward rate, Dkr/C$
4.72
12-month forward rate, Dkr/C$
4.74
9.	 Pupule Travel. Pupule Travel, a Honolulu, Hawaii-
based 100% privately owned travel company, has 
signed an agreement to acquire a 50% ownership share 
of Taichung Travel, a Taiwan-based privately owned 
travel agency specializing in servicing inbound cus-
tomers from the United States and Canada. The acqui-
sition price is 7 million Taiwan dollars (T$7,000,000) 
payable in cash in three months.
Thomas Carson, Pupule Travel’s owner, believes 
the Taiwan dollar will either remain stable or decline 
slightly over the next three months. At the present 
spot rate of T$35/$, the amount of cash required is only 
$200,000, but even this relatively modest amount will 
need to be borrowed personally by Thomas Carson. 
Taiwanese interest-bearing deposits by nonresidents 
are regulated by the government, and are currently 
set at 1.5% per year. He has a credit line with Bank of 
Hawaii for $200,000 with a current borrowing interest 
rate of 8% per year. He does not believe that he can 
calculate a credible weighted average cost of capital 
since he has no stock outstanding and his competitors 
are all also privately held. Since the acquisition would 
use up all his available credit, he wonders if he should 
hedge this transaction exposure. He has the following 
quotes from the Bank of Hawaii:
Spot rate (T$/$)
  33.40
3-month forward rate (T$/$)
  32.40
3-month Taiwan dollar deposit rate
1.500%
3-month dollar borrowing rate
6.500%
3-month call option on T$
not available
Analyze the costs and risks of each alternative, and 
then make a recommendation as to which alternative 
Thomas Carson should choose.
10.	 Mattel Toys. Mattel is a U.S.-based company whose 
sales are roughly two-thirds in dollars (Asia and 
the Americas) and one-third in euros (Europe). 
­In ­September, Mattel delivers a large shipment of 

302
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
The exchange rates shown at the top of this page were 
available to Burton on the dates shown, corresponding 
to the events of this specific export sale. Assume each 
month is 30 days.
a.	 What will be the amount of foreign exchange gain 
(loss) upon settlement?
b.	 If Jason hedges the exposure with a forward con-
tract, what will be the net foreign exchange gain 
(loss) on settlement?
14.	 Micca Metals, Inc. Micca Metals, Inc. is a specialty 
materials and metals company located in Detroit, 
Michigan. The company specializes in specific pre-
cious metals and materials that are used in a variety 
of pigment applications in many industries including 
cosmetics, appliances, and a variety of high tinsel metal 
fabricating equipment. Micca just purchased a ship-
ment of phosphates from Morocco for 6,000,000 dir-
hams, payable in six months.
6-month call options on 6,000,000 dirhams at an 
exercise price of 10.00 dirhams per dollar are available 
from Bank Al-Maghrub at a premium of 2%. 6-month 
put options on 6,000,000 dirhams at an exercise price 
of 10.00 dirhams per dollar are available at a premium 
of 3%. Compare and contrast alternative ways that 
Micca might hedge its foreign exchange transaction 
exposure. What is your recommendation?
Assumption
Value
Shipment of phosphates from
  Morocco, Moroccan dirhams
6,000,000
Micca’s cost of capital (WACC)
14.000% 
Spot exchange rate, dirhams/$
10.00 
6-month forward rate, dirhams/$
10.40 
15.	 Maria Gonzalez and Ganado. Ganado—the ­U.S.-based 
company discussed in this chapter—has concluded 
another large sale of telecommunications equipment 
to Regency (U.K.). Total payment of £3,000,000 is 
average cost of capital. Today’s foreign exchange and 
interest rate quotations are as follows:
Construction payment due in 6 months 
(A/P, quetzals)
8,400,000
Present spot rate (quetzals/$)
  7.0000
6-month forward rate (quetzals/$)
  7.1000
Guatemalan 6-month interest rate  
(per annum)
14.000%
U.S. dollar 6-month interest rate  
(per annum)
6.000%
Farah’s weighted average cost of 
capital (WACC)
20.000%
Farah’s treasury manager, concerned about the 
Guatemalan economy, wonders if Lucky 13 should be 
hedging its foreign exchange risk. The manager’s own 
forecast is as follows:
Expected spot rate in 6-months (quetzals/$)
  Highest expected rate (reflecting a 
significant devaluation)
8.0000
  Expected rate
7.3000
  Lowest expected rate (reflecting a 
strengthening of the quetzal)
6.4000
What realistic alternatives are available to Farah for 
making payments? Which method would you select 
and why?
Problem 13.
Date
Event
Spot Rate ($/£)
Forward Rate ($/£)
Days Forward
February 1
Price quotation for Pegg
  1.7850
1.7771
210
March 1
Contract signed for sale
  1.7465
1.7381
180
Contract amount, pounds
£1,000,000
June 1
Product shipped to Pegg
  1.7689
1.7602
90
August 1
Product received by Pegg
  1.7840
1.7811
30
September 1
Grand Met makes payment
  1.7290
—
—
13.	 Burton Manufacturing. Jason Stedman is the direc-
tor of finance for Burton Manufacturing, a U.S.-based 
manufacturer of handheld computer systems for 
inventory management. Burton’s system combines 
a low-cost active tag that is attached to inventory 
items (the tag emits an extremely low-grade radio 
frequency) with custom-designed hardware and soft-
ware that tracks the low-grade emissions for inventory 
control. Burton has completed the sale of an inven-
tory management system to a British firm, Pegg Met-
ropolitan (U.K.), for a total payment of £1,000,000. 

303
Transaction Exposure    CHAPTER 10 
2.	 Hedge in the money market: Larkin could borrow 
euros from the Frankfurt branch of its U.S. bank at 
8.00% per annum.
3.	 Hedge with foreign currency options: August put 
options were available at strike price of $1.1000/€ 
for a premium of 2.0% per contract, and Novem-
ber put options were available at $1.1000/€ for a 
premium of 1.2%. August call options at $1.1000/€ 
could be purchased for a premium of 3.0%, and 
November call options at $1.1000/€ were available 
at a 2.6% premium.
4.	 Do nothing: Larkin could wait until the sales pro-
ceeds were received in August and November, 
hope the recent strengthening of the euro would 
continue, and sell the euros received for dollars in 
the spot market.
Larkin estimates the cost of equity capital to be 
12% per annum. As a small firm, Larkin Hydrau-
lics is unable to raise funds with long-term debt. 
U.S. T-bills yield 3.6% per annum. What should 
Larkin do?
17.	 Navarro’s Intra-Company Hedging. Navarro was a 
U.S.-based multinational company that manufactured 
and distributed specialty materials for ­soundproofing 
construction. It had recently established a new Euro-
pean subsidiary in Barcelona, Spain, and was now 
in the process of establishing operating rules for 
transactions between the U.S. parent company and 
the Barcelona subsidiary. Ignacio Lopez was Inter-
national Treasurer for Navarro, and was leading the 
effort at establishing commercial policies for the new 
subsidiary.
Navarro’s first shipment of product to Spain was 
upcoming. The first shipment would carry an intracom-
pany invoice amount of $500,000. The company was 
now trying to decide whether to invoice the Spanish 
subsidiary in U.S. dollars or European euros, and in 
turn, whether the resulting transaction exposure should 
be hedged. Ignacio’s idea was to take a recent historical 
period of exchange rate quotes and movements and 
simulate the invoicing and hedging alternatives avail-
able to Navarro to try to characterize the choices.
Ignacio looked at the 90-day period that had 
ended the previous Friday (standard intracompany 
payment terms for transcontinental transactions was 
90 days). The quarter had opened with a spot rate 
of $1.0640/€, with the 90-day forward rate quoted at 
$1.0615/€ the same day. The quarter had closed with a 
spot rate of $1.0980/€.
due in 90 days. Maria Gonzalez has also learned that 
Ganado will only be able to borrow in the United 
Kingdom at 14% per annum (due to credit concerns of 
the British banks). Given the following exchange rates 
and interest rates, what transaction exposure hedge is 
now in Ganado’s best interest?
Assumption
Value
90-day A/R in pounds
£3,000,000.00
Spot rate, US$ per 
pound ($/£)
$1.7620
90-day forward rate, 
US$ per pound ($/£)
$1.7550
3-month U.S. dollar 
investment rate
6.000%
3-month U.S. dollar 
borrowing rate
8.000%
3-month U.K. 
investment interest rate
8.000%
3-month U.K. 
borrowing interest rate
14.000%
Ganado’s WACC
12.000%
Expected spot rate in 
90 days ($/£)
$1.7850
Put options on the 
British pound:
Strike rate 
($/£)
Premium
$1.75
1.500%
$1.71
1.000%
16.	 Larkin Hydraulics. On May 1, Larkin Hydraulics, a 
wholly owned subsidiary of Caterpillar (U.S.), sold 
a 12-megawatt compression turbine to Rebecke-
Terwilleger Company of the Netherlands for 
€4,000,000, payable as €2,000,000 on August 1 and 
€2,000,000 on November 1. Larkin derived its price 
quote of €4,000,000 on April 1 by dividing its normal 
U.S. dollar sales price of $4.320,000 by the then current 
spot rate of $1.0800/€.
By the time the order was received and booked on 
May 1, the euro had strengthened to $1.1000/€, so the sale 
was in fact worth €4,000,000 * $1.1000/€ = $4,400,000. 
Larkin had already gained an extra $80,000 from favor-
able exchange rate movements. Nevertheless, Larkin’s 
director of finance now wondered if the firm should 
hedge against a reversal of the recent trend of the euro. 
Four approaches were possible:
1.	 Hedge in the forward market: The 3-month forward 
exchange quote was $1.1060/€ and the 6-month for-
ward quote was $1.1130/€.

304
CHAPTER 10    Transaction Exposure
Internet Exercises
1.	 Current Volatilities. You wish to price your own options, 
but you need current volatilities on the euro, British 
pound, and Japanese yen. Using the following Web sites, 
collect spot rates and volatilities in order to price forward 
at-the-money put options for your option pricing analysis.
Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York
www.newyorkfed.org/markets/
foreignex.html
RatesFX.com
www.ratesfx.com/
2.	 Hedging Objectives. All multinational companies will 
state the goals and objectives of their currency risk 
management activities in their annual reports. Begin-
ning with the following firms, collect samples of cor-
porate “why hedge?” discussions for a contrast and 
comparison discussion.
Nestlè
www.nestle.com
Disney
www.disney.com
Nokia
www.nokia.com
BP
www.bp.com
3.	 Changing Translation Practices: FASB. The Financial 
Accounting Standards Board promulgates standard 
practices for the reporting of financial results by com-
panies in the United States. It also, however, often leads 
the way in the development of new practices and emerg-
ing issues around the world. One major issue today is 
the valuation and reporting of financial derivatives and 
derivative agreements by firms. Use the FASB’s home 
page and the Web pages of several of the major account-
ing firms and other interest groups around the world 
to see current proposed accounting standards and the 
current state of reaction to the proposed standards.
FASB home page
raw.rutgers.edu/
Treasury 
Management of NY
www.tmany.org/
a.	 Which unit would have suffered the gain (loss) 
on currency exchange if intracompany sales were 
invoiced in U.S. dollars ($), assuming both com-
pletely unhedged and fully hedged?
b.	 Which unit would have suffered the gain (loss) 
on currency exchange if intracompany sales were 
invoiced in euros (€), assuming both completely 
unhedged and fully hedged?
18.	 Korean Airlines. Korean Airlines (KAL) has just 
signed a contract with Boeing to purchase two new 
747-400’s for a total of $60,000,000, with payment in 
two equal tranches. The first tranche of $30,000,000 
has just been paid. The next $30,000,000 is due three 
months from today. KAL currently has excess cash 
of 25,000,000,000 won in a Seoul bank, and it is 
from these funds that KAL plans to make its next 
payment.
The current spot rate is W800/$, and permis-
sion has been obtained for a forward rate (90 days), 
W794/$. The 90-day eurodollar interest rate is 6.000%, 
while the 90-day Korean won deposit rate (there is no 
eurowon rate) is 5.000%. KAL can borrow in Korea 
at 6.250%, and can probably borrow in the U.S. dollar 
market at 9.375%.
A three-month call option on dollars in the over-
the-counter market, for a strike price of W790/$ sells 
at a premium of 2.9%, payable at the time the option 
is purchased. A 90-day put option on dollars, also at 
a strike price of W790/$, sells at a premium of 1.9% 
(assuming a 12% volatility). KAL’s foreign exchange 
advisory service forecasts the spot rate in three months 
to be W792/$.
How should KAL plan to make the payment to 
Boeing if KAL’s goal is to maximize the amount of 
won cash left in the bank at the end of the 3-month 
period? Make a recommendation and defend it.

Ganado, the same U.S.-based firm used throughout the chapter, still possesses a long £1,000,000 
exposure—an account receivable—to be settled in 90 days. Exhibit 10A.1 summarizes the 
assumptions, exposure, and traditional option alternatives to be used throughout this appendix. 
The firm believes that the exchange rate will move in its favor over the 90-day period (the 
British pound will appreciate versus the U.S. dollar). Despite having this directional view or 
currency expectation, the firm wishes downside protection in the event the pound were to 
depreciate instead.
The exposure management zones that are of most interest to the firm are the two oppos-
ing triangles formed by the uncovered and forward rate profiles. The firm would like to retain 
all potential area in the upper-right triangle, but minimize its own potential exposure to the 
bottom-left triangle. The put option’s “kinked-profile” is consistent with what the firm wishes 
if it believes the pound will appreciate.
Chapter 10 Appendix
Complex Option Hedges
1.40
$1,580,000
$1,560,000
$1,540,000
$1,520,000
$1,500,000
$1,480,000
$1,460,000
$1,440,000
$1,420,000
$1,400,000
Ending spot exchange rate ($ = £1.00)
Value in U.S. dollars of  £1,000,000 A/R at end of 90 days
Put option:
$1.44/£ strike
Put option:
$1.47/£ strike
1.41
1.42
1.43
1.44
1.45
1.46
1.47
1.48
1.49
1.50
1.51
1.52
1.53
1.54
1.55
1.56
Put Option
Forward ATM
Out-of-the-money put
Spot rate
90-day forward rate
90-day euro-$ interest rate
90-day euro-£ interest rate
90-day $/£ volatility
$1.4790/£
$1.4700/£
3.250%
5.720%
11.000%
Strike Rate
$1.47
$1.44
Premium
$0.0318/£
$0.0188/£
$1.44/£ Put
$1.47/£ Put
Minimum: $1,437,246
Min: $1,420,636
Forward hedge yields $1,470,000
Uncovered A/R
Exhibit 10A.1
Ganado’s A/R Exposure and Put Option Hedges
305

306
Appendix    Complex Option Hedges
The firm could consider any number of different put option strike prices, depending on what 
minimum assured value—degree of self-insurance—the firm is willing to accept. Exhibit 10A.1 
illustrates two different put option alternatives: a forward-ATM put of strike price $1.4700/£, and a 
forward-OTM put with strike price $1.4400/£. Because foreign currency options are actually priced 
about the forward rate (see Chapter 8), not the spot rate, the correct specification of whether an 
option, put or call, is ITM, ATM, or OTM is in reference to the same maturity forward rate. The 
forward-OTM put provides protection at lower cost, but also at a lower level of protection.
The Synthetic Forward
At a forward rate of $1.4700/£, the proceeds of the forward contract in 90 days will yield 
$1,470,000. A second alternative for the firm would be to construct a synthetic forward using 
options. The synthetic forward requires the firm to combine two options, of equal size and 
maturity, both with strike rates at the forward rate:
1.	 Buy a put option on £ bought at a strike price of $1.4700/£, paying a premium of 
$0.0318/£
2.	 Sell a call option on £ at a strike price of $1.4700/£, earning a premium of $0.0318/£
The purchase of the put option requires a premium payment, and the sale of the call 
option earns the firm a premium payment. If both options are struck at the forward rate 
­( forward-ATM), the premiums should be identical and the net premium payment should have 
a value of zero.
Exhibit 10A.2 illustrates the uncovered position, the basic forward rate hedge, and the 
individual profiles of the put and call options for the possible construction of a synthetic 
forward. The outcome of the combined position is easily confirmed by simply tracing what 
would happen at all exchange rates to the left of $1.4700/£, and what would happen to the 
right of $1.4700/£.
At all exchange rates to the left of $1.4700/£:
1.	 The firm would receive £1,000,000 in 90 days.
2.	 The call option on pounds sold by the firm would expire out-of-the-money.
3.	 The firm would exercise the put option on pounds to sell the pounds received at 
$1.4700/£.
At all exchange rates to the right of $1.4700/£:
1.	 The firm would receive £1,000,000 in 90 days.
2.	 The put option on pounds purchased by the firm would expire out-of-the-money.
3.	 The firm would turnover the £1,000,000 received to the buyer of the call, who now 
exercises the call option against the firm. The firm receives $1.4700/£ from the call 
option buyer.
Thus, at all exchange rates above or below $1.4700/£, the U.S.-based firm nets $1,470,000 
in domestic currency. The combined spot-option position has behaved identically to that of a 
forward contract. A firm with the exact opposite position, a £1,000,00 payable 90 days in the 
future, could similarly construct a synthetic forward using options.2
2A U.S.-based firm possessing a future foreign currency denominated payment of £1 million could construct a syn-
thetic forward hedge by (1) buying a call option on £1 million at a strike price of $1.4700/£; and (2) selling a put 
option on £1 million at the same strike price of $1.4700/£, when 1.47 is the forward rate.

307
Complex Option Hedges    Appendix 
But why would a firm undertake this relatively complex position in order to simply cre-
ate a forward contract? The answer is found by looking at the option premiums earned and 
paid. We have assumed that the option strike prices used were precisely forward-ATM rates, 
and the resulting option premiums paid and earned were exactly equal. But this need not be 
the case. If the option strike prices (remember that they must be identical for both options, 
bought and sold) are not precisely on the forward-ATM, the two premiums may differ by a 
slight amount. The net premium position may then end up as a net premium earning or a net 
premium payment. If positive, this amount would be added to the proceeds from the receivable 
to result in a higher total dollar value received than through the use of a traditional forward 
contract. A second possibility is that the firm, by querying a number of different financial ser-
vice providers offering options, finds attractive pricing that “beats” the forward. Although this 
means that theoretically the options market is out of equilibrium, it happens quite frequently.
Second-Generation Currency Risk Management Products
Second-generation risk management products are constructed from the two basic deriva-
tives used throughout this book: the forward and the option. We will subdivide them into 
two groups: (1) the zero-premium option products, which focus on pricing in and around 
the forward rate and (2) the exotic option products (for want of a better name), which focus 
on alternative pricing targets. Although all of the following derivatives are sold as financial 
products by risk management firms, we will present each as the construction of the position 
1.40
$1,580,000
$1,560,000
$1,540,000
$1,520,000
$1,500,000
$1,480,000
$1,460,000
$1,440,000
$1,420,000
$1,400,000
Ending spot exchange rate ($ = £1.00)
Value in U.S. dollars of £1,000,000 A/R at end of 90 days
$1.47/£ strike
Sell a Call option:
$1.47/£ strike
Maximum:
$1,502,754
Minimum: $1,437,246
Buy a Put option:
$1.47/£ strike
1.41
1.42
1.43
1.44
1.45
1.46
1.47
1.48
1.49
1.50
1.51
1.52
1.53
1.54
1.55
1.56
Put Option
Forward ATM put
Forward ATM call
Spot rate
90-day forward rate
90-day euro-$ interest rate
90-day euro-£ interest rate
90-day $/£ volatility
$1.4790/£
$1.4700/£
3.250%
5.720%
11.000%
Strike Rates
$1.47
$1.44
Premium
$0.0318/£
$0.0188/£
Forward hedge yields $1,470,000
Uncovered A/R
Exhibit 10A.2
Ganado’s Synthetic Forward A/R Exposure Hedge

308
from common building blocks, or LEGO®s, as they have been termed, used in traditional cur-
rency risk management, forwards and options. As a group, they are collectively referred to as 
complex options.
Zero-Premium Option Products
The primary problem with the use of options for risk management in the eyes of the firms is 
the up-front premium payment. Although the premium payment is only a portion of the total 
payoff profile of the hedge, many firms view the expenditure of substantial funds for the pur-
chase of a financial derivative as prohibitively expensive. In comparison, the forward contract 
that eliminates currency risk requires no out-of-pocket expenditure by the firm (and requires 
no real specification of expectations regarding exchange rate movements).
Zero-premium option products (or financially engineered derivative combinations) are 
designed to require no out-of-pocket premium payment at the initiation of the hedge. This set 
of products includes what are most frequently labeled the range forward or option collar and 
the participating forward. Both of these products are (1) priced on the basis of the forward rate; 
(2) constructed to provide a zero-premium payment up-front; and (3) allow the hedger to take 
advantage of expectations of the direction of exchange rate movements. For the case problem 
at hand, this means that all of the following products are applicable to an expectation that the 
U.S. dollar will depreciate versus the pound. If the hedger has no such view, they should turn 
back now (and buy a forward, or nothing at all)!
The Range Forward or Option Collar
The basic range forward has been marketed under a variety of other names, including the 
option collar, flexible forward, cylinder option, option fence or simply fence, mini-max, or 
­zero-cost tunnel. Regardless of which alias it trades under, it is constructed via two steps:
1.	 Buying a put option with a strike rate below the forward rate, for the full amount of 
the long currency exposure (100% coverage)
2.	 Selling a call option with a strike rate above the forward rate, for the full amount 
of the long currency exposure (100% coverage), with the same maturity as the pur-
chased put
The hedger chooses one side of the “range” or spread, normally the downside (put strike 
rate), which then dictates the strike rate at which the call option will be sold. The call option 
must be chosen at an equal distance from the forward rate as the put option strike price from 
the forward rate. The distance from the forward rate for the two strike prices should be calcu-
lated in percentage, as in {3% from the forward rate.
If the hedger believes there is a significant possibility that the currency will move in the 
firm’s favor, and by a sizable degree, the put floor rate may be set relatively low in order for 
the ceiling to be higher or further out from the forward rate and still enjoy a zero net premium. 
How far down the downside protection is set is a difficult issue for the firm to determine. Often 
the firm’s treasurer will determine at what bottom exchange rate the firm would be able to 
recover the minimum necessary margin on the business underlying the cash flow exposure, 
sometimes called the budget rate.
Exhibit 10A.3 illustrates the final outcome of a range forward constructed by buying a put 
with strike price $1.4500/£, paying a premium of $0.0226/£, with selling a call option with strike 
price $1.4900/£, earning a premium of $0.0231/£. The hedger has bounded the range over which 
Appendix    Complex Option Hedges

309
the firm’s A/R value moves as an uncovered position, with a put option floor and a sold call 
option ceiling. Although the put and call option premiums are in this case not identical, they 
are close enough to result in a near zero net premium (a premium expense of $500 in this case):
Net premium = ($0.0226/£ - $0.0231/£) * £1,000,000 = -$500
The benefits of the combined position are readily observable, given that the put option 
premium alone amounts to $22,600. If the strike rates of the options are selected indepen-
dently of the desire for an exact zero net premium up front (still bracketing the forward rate), 
it is termed an option collar or cylinder option.
The Participating Forward
The participating forward, also called a zero-cost ratio option and forward participation agree-
ment, is an option combination that allows the hedger to share in—or participate—potential 
upside movements while providing option-based downside protection—all at a zero net pre-
mium. The participating forward is constructed via two steps:
1.	 Buying a put option with a strike price below the forward rate, for the full amount of 
the long currency exposure (100% coverage)
2.	 Selling a call option with a strike price that is the same as the put option, for a portion 
of the total currency exposure (less than 100% coverage)
1.40
$1,580,000
$1,560,000
$1,540,000
$1,520,000
$1,500,000
$1,480,000
$1,460,000
$1,440,000
$1,420,000
$1,400,000
Ending spot exchange rate ($ = £1.00)
Value in U.S. dollars of £1,000,000 A/R at end of 90 days
Call strike:
$1.49/£
Put strike:
$1.45/£
Minimum: $1,450,000
Buy a Put option:
$1.45/£ strike
1.41
1.42
1.43
1.44
1.45
1.46
1.47
1.48
1.49
1.50
1.51
1.52
1.53
1.54
1.55
1.56
Put Option
Out-of-the-money put
Out-of-the-money call
Spot rate
90-day forward rate
90-day euro-$ interest rate
90-day euro-£ interest rate
90-day $/£ volatility
$1.4790/£
$1.4700/£
3.250%
5.720%
11.000%
Strike Rates
$1.45
$1.49
Premium
$0.0226/£
$0.0231/£
Maximum: $1,490,000
Sell a Call:
$1.49/£ strike
Forward : $1,470,000
Uncovered A/R
Exhibit 10A.3
Ganado’s Range Forward A/R Exposure Hedge
Complex Option Hedges    Appendix 

310
Similar to the range forward, the buyer of a participating forward will choose the put option 
strike rate first. Because the call option strike rate is the same as the put, all that remains is to 
determine the participation rate, the proportion of the exposure sold as a call option.
Exhibit 10A.4 illustrates the construction of a participating forward for the chapter prob-
lem. The firm first chooses the put option protection level, in this case $1.4500/£, with a pre-
mium of $0.0226/£. A call option sold with the same strike rate of $1.4500/£ would earn the firm 
$0.0425/£. The call premium is substantially higher than the put premium because the call option 
is already in-the-money (ITM). The firm’s objective is to sell a call option only on the number 
of pounds needed to fund the purchase of the put option. The total put option premium is
Total put premium = $0.0226/£ * £1,000,000 = $22,600,
which is then used to determine the size of the call option that is needed to exactly offset the 
purchase of the put:
$22,600 = $0.0425/£ * call principal
Solving for the call principal:
Call principal =
$22,600
$0.0425/£ = £531,765.
The firm must therefore sell a call option on £531,765 with a strike rate of $1.4500/£ to 
cover the purchase of the put option. This mismatch in option principals is what gives the 
1.40
$1,580,000
$1,560,000
$1,540,000
$1,520,000
$1,500,000
$1,480,000
$1,460,000
$1,440,000
$1,420,000
$1,400,000
Ending spot exchange rate ($ = £1.00)
Value in U.S. dollars of £1,000,000 A/R at end of 90 days
Put & Call strike:
$1.45/£
Minimum: $1,450,000
Buy a Put option
on £1,000,000
1.41
1.42
1.43
1.44
1.45
1.46
1.47
1.48
1.49
1.50
1.51
1.52
1.53
1.54
1.55
1.56
Participating
Forward
Forward : $1,470,000
Uncovered A/R
Instruments
Strike Rate
Premium
Notional Principal
Buy a put
Sell a call
$1.4500/£
$1.4500/£
$0.0226/£
$0.0425/£
£1,000,000
£531,765
Sell a call option at the same strike rate as the put,
$1.45/£, but on a notional principal of only £531,765;
a participation rate of 46.82% (1-.5318)
Exhibit 10A.4
Ganado’s Participating Forward A/R Exposure Hedge
Appendix    Complex Option Hedges

311
participating forward its unique shape. The ratio of option premiums, as well as the ratio of 
option principals, is termed the percent cover:
Percent cover = $0.026/£
$0.0425/£ =
£531,765
£1,000,000 = 0.5318 = 53.18%.
The participation rate is the residual percentage of the exposure that is not covered by the 
sale of the call option. For example, if the percent cover is 53.18%, the participation rate would 
be 1—the percent cover, or 46.82%. This means that for all favorable exchange rate movements 
(those above $1.4500/£), the hedger would “participate” or enjoy 46.8% of the differential. How-
ever, like all option-based hedges, downside exposure is bounded by the put option strike rate.
The expectations of the buyer are similar to the range forward; only the degree of foreign 
currency bullishness is greater. For the participating forward to be superior in outcome to the 
range forward, it is necessary for the exchange rate to move further in the favorable direction.
Ratio Spreads
One of the older methods of obtaining a zero-premium option combination, and one of the 
most dangerous from a hedger’s perspective, is the ratio spread. This structure leaves the 
hedger with a large uncovered exposure.
Let us assume that Ganado decides that it wishes to establish a floor level of protection by 
purchasing a $1.4700/£ put option (forward-ATM) at a cost of $0.0318/£ (total cost of $31,800). 
This is a substantial outlay of up-front capital for the option premium, and the firm’s risk man-
agement division has no budget funding for this magnitude of expenditures. The firm, feeling 
strongly that the dollar will depreciate against the pound, decides to “finance” the purchase of 
the put with the sale of an OTM call option. The firm reviews market conditions and consid-
ers a number of call option strike prices that are significantly OTM, strike prices of $1.5200/£, 
$1.5400/£, or further out.
It is decided that the $1.5400/£ call option, with a premium of $0.0089/£, is to be written 
and sold to earn the premium and finance the put purchase. However, because the premium 
on the OTM call is so much smaller than the forward-ATM put premium, the size of the call 
option written must be larger. The firm determines the amount of the call by solving the simple 
problem of premium equivalency as follows:
Cost of put premium = Earnings call premium.
Substituting in the put and call option premiums yields
$0.0318/£ * £1,000,000 = $0.0089/£ * £ call.
Solving for the size of the call option to be written as follows:
$31,800
$0.0089/£ = £3,573,034.
The reason that this strategy is called a ratio spread is that the final position, call option size 
to put option size, is a ratio greater than 1 (in this case, £3,573,034 , £1,000,000, or a ratio of 
about 3.57).
The risk to the firm in the use of a ratio spread is, however, dramatic. Although unlikely, 
it is possible that the spot rate could move far enough by the end of the period to put the 
call options written in-the-money. That would mean in our example that the firm would have 
written an uncovered call on £2,573,034, the call option notional principal less the exposure 
(£3,573,034 - £1,000,000). The loss potential in covering this position is unlimited.
Complex Option Hedges    Appendix 

312
An alternative form of the ratio spread is the calendar spread. The calendar spread would 
combine the 90-day put option with the sale of an OTM call option with a maturity that is lon-
ger; for example, 120 or 180 days. The longer maturity of the call option written earns the firm 
larger premium earnings requiring a smaller “ratio.” As a number of firms using this strategy 
have learned the hard way, however, if the expectations of the hedger prove incorrect, and the 
spot rate moves past the strike price of the call option written, the firm is faced with delivering 
a foreign currency that it does not have. In this example, if the spot rate moved above $1.5400/£, 
the firm would have to cover a position of £2,573,034.
The Average Rate Option
These options are normally classified as “path-dependent” currency options because their val-
ues depend on averages of spot rates over some pre-specified period of time. Here we describe 
two examples of path-dependent options, the average rate option and the average strike option:
1.	 Average rate option (ARO), also known as an Asian Option, sets the option strike 
rate up front, and is exercised at maturity if the average spot rate over the period (as 
observed by scheduled sampling) is less than the preset option strike rate.
2.	 Average strike option (ASO) establishes the option strike rate as the average of the 
spot rate experienced over the option’s life, and is exercised if the strike rate is greater 
than the end of period spot rate.
The average rate option is difficult to depict because its value depends not on the ending 
spot rate, but rather the path the spot rate takes over its specified life span. For example, an 
average rate option with strike price $1.4700/£ would have a premium of only $0.0186/£. The 
average rate would be calculated by weekly observations (12 full weeks, the first observation 
occurring 13 days from purchase) of the spot rate. Numerous different averages or paths of 
spot rate movement obviously exist. A few different scenarios aid in understanding how the 
ARO differs in valuation.
1.	 The spot rate moves very little over the first 70 to 80 days of the period, with a sudden 
movement in the spot rate below $1.4700/£ in the days prior to expiration. Although 
the final spot rate is below $1.4700/£, the average for the period is above $1.4700, so 
the option cannot be exercised. The receivable is exchanged at the spot rate (below 
$1.4700/£) and the cost of the option premium is still incurred.
2.	 The dollar slowly and steadily depreciates versus the pound, the rate rising from 
$1.4790/£ to $1.48, $1.49, and on up. At the end of the 90 days the option expires out 
of the money, the receivable is exchanged at the favorable spot rate, and the firm 
has enjoyed average rate option protection at substantially lower premium expense.
A variation on the average rate is the lookback option, with strike and without strike. A 
lookback option with strike is a European-style option with a preset strike rate that on matu-
rity is valued versus the highest or lowest spot rate reached over the option life. A lookback 
option without strike is typically a European-style option that sets the strike rate at maturity 
as the lowest exchange rate achieved over the period for a call option, or the highest exchange 
rate experienced over the period for a put option, and is exercised on the basis of this strike 
rate versus the ending spot rate.
A variety of differing average rate currency option products are sold by financial institu-
tions, each having a distinct payoff structure. Because of the intricacy of the path-dependent 
option’s value, care must be taken in the use of these instruments. As is always the case with 
more and more complex financial derivatives, caveat emptor.
Appendix    Complex Option Hedges

Chapter	 11
Translation Exposure
What gets measured gets managed.
—Anonymous
Translation exposure, the second category of accounting exposures, arises because financial 
statements of foreign subsidiaries—which are stated in foreign currency—must be restated 
in the parent’s reporting currency so that the firm can prepare consolidated financial state-
ments. Foreign subsidiaries of U.S. companies, for example, must restate foreign currency-
denominated financial statements into U.S. dollars so that the foreign values can be added 
to the parent’s U.S. dollar-denominated balance sheet and income statement. Using our 
example U.S. firm, Ganado, this is shown conceptually in Exhibit 11.1. This accounting pro-
cess is called translation. Translation exposure is the potential for an increase or decrease in 
the parent’s net worth and reported net income that is caused by a change in exchange rates 
since the last translation.
Although the main purpose of translation is to prepare consolidated financial statements, 
translated statements are also used by management to assess the performance of foreign sub-
sidiaries. While such assessment by management might be performed using the local currency 
statements, restatement of all subsidiary statements into the single “common denominator” 
of one currency facilitates management comparison. This chapter reviews the predominate 
methods used in translation today, and concludes with the Mini-Case, McDonald’s, Hoover 
Hedges, and Cross-Currency Swaps, illustrating how one major multinational manages its 
investment and translation risks.
Learning Objectives
■
■
Examine how the process of consolidation of a multinational firm’s financial results 
creates translation exposure
■
■
Illustrate both the theoretical and practical differences between the two primary 
methods of translating or remeasuring foreign currency-denominated financial 
statements
■
■
Understand how translation can potentially alter the value of a multinational 
firm
■
■
Explore the costs, benefits, and effectiveness of managing translation exposure
313

314
CHAPTER 11    Translation Exposure
Overview of Translation
There are two financial statements for each subsidiary that must be translated for consolida-
tion: the income statement and the balance sheet. Statements of cash flow are not translated 
from the foreign subsidiaries. The consolidated statement of cash flow is constructed from the 
consolidated statement of income and consolidated balance sheet. Because the consolidated 
results for any multinational firm are constructed from all of its subsidiary operations, includ-
ing foreign subsidiaries, the possibility of a change in consolidated net income or consolidated 
net worth from period to period, as a result of a change in exchange rates, is high.
For any individual financial statement, internally, if the same exchange rate were used 
to remeasure each and every line item on the individual statement—the income statement 
and balance sheet—there would be no imbalances resulting from the remeasurement. But if 
a different exchange rate were used for different line items on an individual statement, an 
imbalance would result. Different exchange rates are used in remeasuring different line items 
because translation principles are a complex compromise between historical and current val-
ues. The question, then, is what is to be done with the imbalance?
Subsidiary Characterization
Most countries specify the translation method to be used by a foreign subsidiary based on its 
business operations. For example, a foreign subsidiary’s business can be categorized as either 
an integrated foreign entity or a self-sustaining foreign entity. An integrated foreign entity is 
one that operates as an extension of the parent company, with cash flows and general business 
lines that are highly interrelated with those of the parent. A self-sustaining foreign entity is 
one that operates in the local economic environment independent of the parent company. The 
differentiation is important to the logic of translation. A foreign subsidiary should be valued 
principally in terms of the currency that is the basis of its economic viability.
After the initial investment in Germany, the German subsidiary’s ﬁnancial results
are consolidated with those of the U.S. parent company over time
Consolidation occurs over time reﬂecting exchange rate movements
1 year
1 year
1 year
1 year
Consolidation
Consolidation
Consolidation
Time
U.S. Parent Company
($)
Establishes
German Subsidiary
(€)
Spot Exchange Rate
1.8
Exchange
rate
movement
over time
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
Exhibit 11.1
 Ganado’s Cross-Border Investments and Consolidation

315
Translation Exposure    CHAPTER 11 
It is not unusual for a single company to have both types of foreign subsidiaries, integrated 
and self-sustaining. For example, a U.S.-based manufacturer, which produces subassemblies in 
the United States that are then shipped to a Spanish subsidiary for finishing and resale in the 
European Union, would likely characterize the Spanish subsidiary as an integrated foreign 
entity. The dominant currency of economic operation is likely the U.S. dollar. That same U.S. 
parent may also own an agricultural marketing business in Venezuela that has few cash flows 
or operations related to the U.S. parent company or U.S. dollar. The Venezuelan subsidiary may 
source all inputs and sell all products in Venezuelan bolivar. Because the Venezuelan subsidi-
ary’s operations are independent of its parent, and its functional currency is the Venezuelan 
bolivar, it would be classified as a self-sustaining foreign entity.
Functional Currency
A foreign subsidiary’s functional currency is the currency of the primary economic environ-
ment in which the subsidiary operates and in which it generates cash flows. In other words, it is 
the dominant currency used by that foreign subsidiary in its day-to-day operations. It is impor-
tant to note that the geographic location of a foreign subsidiary and its functional currency 
may be different. The Singapore subsidiary of a U.S. firm may find that its functional currency 
is the U.S. dollar (integrated subsidiary), the Singapore dollar (self-sustaining subsidiary), or 
a third currency such as the British pound (also a self-sustaining subsidiary).
The United States, rather than distinguishing a foreign subsidiary as either integrated or 
self-sustaining, requires that the functional currency of the subsidiary be determined. Manage-
ment must evaluate the nature and purpose of each of its individual foreign subsidiaries to 
determine the appropriate functional currency for each. If a foreign subsidiary of a U.S.-based 
company is determined to have the U.S. dollar as its functional currency, it is essentially an 
extension of the parent company (equivalent to the integrated foreign entity designation used 
by most countries). If, however, the functional currency of the foreign subsidiary is determined 
to be different from the U.S. dollar, the subsidiary is considered a separate entity from the par-
ent (equivalent to the self-sustaining entity designation).
Translation Methods
Two basic methods for translation are employed worldwide: the current rate method and the 
temporal method. Regardless of which method is employed, a translation method must not 
only designate at what exchange rate individual balance sheet and income statement items 
are remeasured, but also designate where any imbalance is to be recorded, either in current 
income or in an equity reserve account in the balance sheet.
Current Rate Method
The current rate method is the most prevalent in the world today. Under this method, all finan-
cial statement line items are translated at the “current” exchange rate with few exceptions.
■
■
Assets and liabilities.  All assets and liabilities are translated at the current rate of 
exchange; that is, at the rate of exchange in effect on the balance sheet date.
■
■
Income statement items.  All items, including depreciation and cost of goods sold, 
are translated at either the actual exchange rate on the dates the various revenues, 
expenses, gains, and losses were incurred or at an appropriately weighted average 
exchange rate for the period.
■
■
Distributions.  Dividends paid are translated at the exchange rate in effect on the 
date of payment.

316
CHAPTER 11    Translation Exposure
■
■
Equity items.  Common stock and paid-in capital accounts are translated at histori-
cal rates. Year-end retained earnings consist of the original year-beginning retained 
earnings plus or minus any income or loss for the year.
Gains or losses caused by translation adjustments are not included in the calculation of 
consolidated net income. Rather, translation gains or losses are reported separately and accu-
mulated in a separate equity reserve account (on the consolidated balance sheet) with a title 
such as “cumulative translation adjustment” (CTA), but it depends on the country. If a foreign 
subsidiary is later sold or liquidated, translation gains or losses of past years accumulated in 
the CTA account are reported as one component of the total gain or loss on sale or liquida-
tion. The total gain or loss is reported as part of the net income or loss for the period in which 
the sale or liquidation occurs.
Temporal Method
Under the temporal method, specific assets and liabilities are translated at exchange rates con-
sistent with the timing of the item’s creation. The temporal method assumes that a number of 
individual line item assets, such as inventory and net plant and equipment, are restated regularly 
to reflect market value. If these items were not restated, but were instead carried at historical 
cost, the temporal method becomes the monetary/nonmonetary method of translation, a form 
of translation that is still used by a number of countries today. Line items include the following:
■
■
Monetary assets  (primarily cash, marketable securities, accounts receivable, and 
long-term receivables) and monetary liabilities (primarily current liabilities and long-
term debt). These are translated at current exchange rates. Nonmonetary assets and 
liabilities (primarily inventory and fixed assets) are translated at historical rates.
■
■
Income statement items.  These are translated at the average exchange rate for the 
period, except for items such as depreciation and cost of goods sold that are directly 
associated with nonmonetary assets or liabilities. These accounts are translated at 
their historical rate.
■
■
Distributions.  Dividends paid are translated at the exchange rate in effect on the 
date of payment.
■
■
Equity items.  Common stock and paid-in capital accounts are translated at histori-
cal rates. Year-end retained earnings consist of the original year-beginning retained 
earnings plus or minus any income or loss for the year, plus or minus any imbalance 
from translation.
Under the temporal method, gains or losses resulting from remeasurement are carried directly 
to current consolidated income, and not to equity reserves. Hence, foreign exchange gains and 
losses arising from the translation process do introduce volatility to consolidated earnings.
U.S. Translation Procedures
The United States differentiates foreign subsidiaries based on functional currency, not subsidi-
ary characterization. A note on terminology: Under U.S. accounting and translation practices, 
use of the current rate method is termed “translation” while use of the temporal method is 
termed “remeasurement.” The primary principles of U.S. translation are summarized as follows:
■
■
If the financial statements of the foreign subsidiary of a U.S. company are maintained 
in U.S. dollars, translation is not required.
■
■
If the financial statements of the foreign subsidiary are maintained in the local cur-
rency and the local currency is the functional currency, they are translated by the 
current rate method.

317
Translation Exposure    CHAPTER 11 
■
■
If the financial statements of the foreign subsidiary are maintained in the local currency 
and the U.S. dollar is the functional currency, they are remeasured by the temporal method.
■
■
If the financial statements of foreign subsidiaries are in the local currency and neither 
the local currency nor the dollar is the functional currency, then the statements must 
first be remeasured into the functional currency by the temporal method, and then 
translated into dollars by the current rate method.
■
■
U.S. translation practices, summarized in Exhibit 11.2, have a special provision for 
translating statements of foreign subsidiaries operating in hyperinflation countries. 
These are countries where cumulative inflation has been 100% or more over a three-
year period. In this case, the subsidiary must use the temporal method.
A final note: The selection of the functional currency is determined by the economic realities of 
the subsidiary’s operations, and is not a discretionary management decision on preferred proce-
dures or elective outcomes. Since many U.S.-based multinationals have numerous foreign sub-
sidiaries, some dollar-functional and some foreign currency-functional, currency gains and losses 
may be passing through both current consolidated income and/or accruing in equity reserves.
International Translation Practices
Many of the world’s largest industrial countries use International Accounting Standards Com-
mittee (IASC), and therefore the same basic translation procedure. A foreign subsidiary is an 
integrated foreign entity or a self-sustaining foreign entity; integrated foreign entities are typically 
remeasured using the temporal method (or some slight variation thereof); and self-sustaining 
foreign entities are translated at the current rate method, also termed the closing-rate method.
Purpose: Foreign currency ﬁnancial statements must be translated into U.S. dollars
If the ﬁnancial statements of the foreign subsidiary are expressed in a
foreign currency, the following determinations need to be made.
Is the local currency the
functional currency?
Is the dollar the
functional currency?
Remeasure from foreign
currency to functional
(temporal method)
and translate to dollars
(current rate method)
* The term “remeasure” means to translate, as to change the unit of measure, from a foreign
  currency to the functional currency.
Translated to dollars
(current rate method)
Remeasure to dollars
(temporal method)
Yes
No
No
Yes
Exhibit 11.2
 Flow Chart for U.S. Translation Practices

318
CHAPTER 11    Translation Exposure
Ganado Corporation’s Translation Exposure
Ganado Corporation, first introduced in Chapter 1 and shown in Exhibit 11.3, is a U.S.-based cor-
poration with a U.S. business unit as well as foreign subsidiaries in both Europe and China. The 
company is publicly traded and its shares are traded on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE).
Each subsidiary of Ganado—the United States, Europe, and China—will have its own 
set of financial statements. Each set of financials will be constructed in the local currency 
(renminbi, dollar, euro), but the subsidiary income statements and balance sheets will also 
be translated into U.S. dollars, the reporting currency of the company for consolidation and 
reporting. As a U.S.-based corporation whose shares are traded on the NYSE, Ganado will 
report all of its final results in U.S. dollars.
Translation Exposure: Income
Ganado Corporation’s sales and earnings by operating unit for 2009 and 2010 are described 
in Exhibit 11.4.
■
■
Consolidated sales.  For 2010, the company generated $300 million in sales in its 
U.S. unit, $158.4 million in its European subsidiary (€120 million at $1.32/€), and 
$89.6 million in its Chinese subsidiary (Rmb600 million at Rmb6.70/$). Total global 
sales for 2010 were $548.0 million. This constituted sales growth of 2.8% over 2009.
■
■
Consolidated earnings.  The company’s earnings (profits) fell in 2010, dropping to 
$53.1 million from $53.2 million in 2009. Although not a large fall, Wall Street would 
not react favorably to a fall in consolidated earnings.
Ganado
USA
(dollars, $)
Ganado
China
(yuan, YUN)
Income Statement
Balance Sheet 
Statement of Cash Flow
Consolidated Financials
Subsidiary Financials
Ganado
Corporation
(dollars, $)
Ganado Corporation will
have a complete set of ﬁnancial
results for each subsidiary as
well as for the consolidated
company. Consolidated results
are reported to Wall Street.
Income Statement
Balance Sheet 
Statement of Cash Flow
Income Statement
Balance Sheet 
Statement of Cash Flow
Income Statement
Balance Sheet 
Statement of Cash Flow
Ganado
Europe
(euros, €)
Exhibit 11.3
 Ganado Corporation: A U.S. Multinational

319
Translation Exposure    CHAPTER 11 
A closer look at the sales and earnings by country, however, yields some interesting 
insights. Sales and earnings in the U.S. unit rose, sales growing 7.1% and earnings growing 1.4%. 
Since the U.S. unit makes up more than half of the total company’s sales and profits, this is very 
important. The Chinese subsidiary’s sales and earnings were identical in 2009 and 2010 when 
measured in local currency, Chinese renminbi. The Chinese renminbi, however, was revalued 
against the U.S. dollar by the Chinese government, from Rmb6.83/$ to Rmb6.70/$. The result 
was an increase in the dollar value of both Chinese sales and profits.
The European subsidiary’s financial results are even more striking. Sales and earnings 
in Europe in euros grew from 2009 to 2010. Sales grew 1.7% while earnings increased 1.0%. 
But the euro depreciated against the dollar, falling from $1.40/€ to $1.32/€. This depreciation 
of 5.7% resulted in the financial results of European operations falling in dollar terms. As a 
result, Ganado’s consolidated earnings, as reported dollars, fell in 2010. One can imagine the 
discussion and debate within Ganado, and among the analysts who follow the firm, over the 
fall in earnings reported to Wall Street.
Translation Exposure: Balance Sheet
Let us continue the example of Ganado, focusing here on the balance sheet of its European sub-
sidiary. We will illustrate translation by both the temporal method and the current rate method, to 
show the arbitrary nature of a translation gain or loss. The functional currency of Ganado Europe 
is the euro, and the reporting currency of its parent, Ganado Corporation, is the U.S. dollar.
Our analysis assumes that plant and equipment and long-term debt were acquired, and 
common stock issued, by Ganado Europe sometime in the past when the exchange rate was 
$1.2760/€. Inventory currently on hand was purchased or manufactured during the immedi-
ately prior quarter when the average exchange rate was $1.2180/€. At the close of business on 
Monday, December 31, 2010, the current spot exchange rate was $1.2000/€. When business 
reopened on January 3, 2011, after the New Year holiday, the euro had dropped in value versus 
the dollar to $1.0000/€.
Exhibit 11.4
 Ganado Corporation, Selected Financial Results, 2009–2010
Sales  
(millions, local currency)
Average Exchange Rate  
($/€ and YUN/$)
Sales  
(millions of US$)
2009
2010
% Change
2009
2010
% Change
2009
2010
% Change
United 
States
$280
$300
7.1%
—
—
$280.0
$300.0
7.1%
Europe
€118
€120
1.7%
1.4000
1.3200
-5.71%
$165.2
$158.4
-4.1%
China
YUN 600
YUN 600
0.0%
6.8300
6.7000
1.94%
$87.8
$89.6
1.9%
  Total
$533.0
$548.0
2.8%
Earnings  
(millions, local currency)
Average Exchange Rate  
($/€ and YUN/$)
Earnings  
(millions of US$)
2009
2010
% Change
2009
2010
% Change
2009
2010
% Change
United 
States
$28.2
$28.6
1.4%
—
—
$28.2
$28.6
1.4%
Europe
€10.4
€10.5
1.0%
1.4000
1.3200
-5.71%
$14.6
$13.9
-4.8%
China
YUN 71.4
YUN 71.4
0.0%
6.8300
6.7000
1.94%
$10.5
$10.7
1.9%
  Total
$53.2
$53.1
-0.2%

320
CHAPTER 11    Translation Exposure
Current Rate Method. Exhibit 11.5 illustrates translation loss using the current rate method. 
Assets and liabilities on the pre-depreciation balance sheet are translated at the current 
exchange rate of $1.2000/€. Capital stock is translated at the historical rate of $1.2760/€, and 
retained earnings are translated at a composite rate that is equivalent to having each past 
year’s addition to retained earnings translated at the exchange rate in effect that year.
The sum of retained earnings and the CTA account must “balance” the liabilities and 
net worth section of the balance sheet with the asset side. For this example, we have assumed 
the two amounts used for the December 31 balance sheet. As shown in Exhibit 11.5, the “just 
before depreciation” dollar translation reports an accumulated translation loss from prior 
periods of $136,800. This balance is the cumulative gain or loss from translating euro state-
ments into dollars in prior years.
After the depreciation, Ganado Corporation translates assets and liabilities at the new 
exchange rate of $1.0000/€. Equity accounts, including retained earnings, are translated just 
as they were before depreciation, and as a result, the cumulative translation loss increases to 
$1,736,800. The increase of $1,600,000 in this account (from a cumulative loss of $136,800 to a 
new cumulative loss of $1,736,800) is the translation loss measured by the current rate method.
This translation loss is a decrease in equity, measured in the parent’s reporting currency, 
of “net exposed assets.” An exposed asset is an asset whose value drops with the depreciation 
of the functional currency and rises with an appreciation of that currency. Net exposed assets 
in this context are exposed assets minus exposed liabilities. Net exposed assets are positive 
(“long”) if exposed assets exceed exposed liabilities. They are negative (“short”) if exposed 
assets are less than exposed liabilities.
Exhibit 11.5
 Ganado Europe’s Translation Loss after Depreciation of the Euro: Current Rate Method
December 31, 2010
January 2, 2011
Assets
In Euros (€)
Exchange Rate 
(US$/euro)
Translated 
Accounts (US$)
Exchange Rate 
(US$/euro)
Translated 
Accounts (US$)
Cash
1,600,000
1.2000
$  1,920,000
1.0000
$  1,600,000
Accounts receivable
3,200,000
1.2000
3,840,000
1.0000
3,200,000
Inventory
2,400,000
1.2000
2,880,000
1.0000
2,400,000
Net plant & equipment
4,800,000
1.2000
5,760,000
1.0000
4,800,000
  Total
12,000,000
$14,400,000
$12,000,000
Liabilities & Net Worth
Accounts payable
800,000
1.2000
$     960,000
1.0000
$800,000
Short-term bank debt
1,600,000
1.2000
1,920,000
1.0000
1,600,000
Long-term debt
1,600,000
1.2000
1,920,000
1.0000
1,600,000
Common stock
1,800,000
1.2760
2,296,800
1.2760
2,296,800
Retained earnings
6,200,000
1.2000 (a)
7,440,000
1.2000 (b)
7,440,000
Translation adjustment 
(CTA)
—
$    (136,800)
$ (1,736,800)
  Total
12,000,000
$14,400,000
$12,000,000
(a) Dollar retained earnings before depreciation are the cumulative sum of additions to retained earnings of all prior years, translated at exchange rates in 
each year.
(b) Translated into dollars at the same rate as before depreciation of the euro.

321
Translation Exposure    CHAPTER 11 
Temporal Method. Translation of the same accounts under the temporal method shows the 
arbitrary nature of any gain or loss from translation. This is illustrated in Exhibit 11.6. Mon-
etary assets and monetary liabilities in the pre-depreciation euro balance sheet are translated 
at the current rate of exchange, but other assets and the equity accounts are translated at their 
historic rates. For Ganado Europe, the historical rate for inventory differs from that for net 
plant and equipment because inventory was acquired more recently.
Under the temporal method, translation losses are not accumulated in a separate equity 
account but passed directly through each quarter’s income statement. Thus, in the dollar 
balance sheet translated before depreciation, retained earnings were the cumulative result 
of earnings from all prior years translated at historical rates in effect each year, plus transla-
tion gains or losses from all prior years. In Exhibit 11.6, no translation loss appears in the 
pre-depreciation dollar balance sheet because any losses would have been closed to retained 
earnings.
The effect of the depreciation is to create an immediate translation loss of $160,000. 
This amount is shown as a separate line item in Exhibit 11.6 to focus attention on it for this 
example. Under the temporal method, this translation loss of $160,000 would pass through 
the income statement, reducing reported net income and reducing retained earnings. Ending 
retained earnings would, in fact, be $7,711,200 minus $160,000, or $7,551,200. Whether gains 
and losses pass through the income statement under the temporal method depends upon the 
country.
Exhibit 11.6
 Ganado Europe’s Translation Loss after Depreciation of the Euro: Temporal Method
December 31, 2010
January 2, 2011
Assets
In Euros (€)
Exchange 
Rate  
(US$/euro)
Translated 
Accounts 
(US$)
Exchange 
Rate  
(US$/euro)
Translated 
Accounts 
(US$)
Cash
1,600,000
1.2000
$  1,920,000
1.0000
$  1,600,000
Accounts receivable
3,200,000
1.2000
3,840,000
1.0000
3,200,000
Inventory
2,400,000
1.2180
2,923,200
1.2180
2,923,200
Net plant & equipment
4,800,000
1.2760
6,124,800
1.2760
6,124,800
  Total
12,000,000
$14,808,000
$13,848,000
Liabilities & Net Worth
Accounts payable
800,000
1.2000
$960,000
1.0000
$800,000
Short-term bank debt
1,600,000
1.2000
1,920,000
1.0000
1,600,000
Long-term debt
1,600,000
1.2000
1,920,000
1.0000
1,600,000
Common stock
1,800,000
1.2760
2,296,800
1.2760
2,296,800
Retained earnings
6,200,000
1.2437 (a)
7,711,200
1.2437 (b)
7,711,200
Translation gain (loss)
—
(c)
$    (160,000)
  Total
12,000,000
$14,808,000
$13,848,000
(a) Dollar retained earnings before depreciation are the cumulative sum of additions to retained earnings of all prior years, translated at exchange rates 
in each year.
(b) Translated into dollars at the same rate as before depreciation of the euro.
(c) Under the temporal method, the translation loss of $160,000 would be closed into retained earnings through the income statement rather than left 
as a separate line item as shown here. Ending retained earnings would actually be $7,711,200 - $160,000 = $7,551,200.

322
CHAPTER 11    Translation Exposure
In the case of Ganado, the translation gain or loss is larger under the current rate method 
because inventory and net property, plant, and equipment, as well as all monetary assets, are 
deemed exposed. When net exposed assets are larger, gains or losses from translation are 
also larger. If management expects a foreign currency to depreciate, it could minimize transla-
tion exposure by reducing net exposed assets. If management anticipates an appreciation of 
the foreign currency, it should increase net exposed assets to benefit from a gain.
Depending on the accounting method, management might select different assets and 
liabilities for reduction or increase. Thus, “real” decisions about investing and financing might 
be dictated by which accounting technique is used, when in fact, accounting impacts should 
be neutral.
As illustrated in Global Finance in Practice 11.1, transaction, translation, and operating 
exposures can become intertwined in the valuation of business units—in this case, the valua-
tion of a foreign subsidiary.
Managing Translation Exposure
“Covering P&L translation risk is more complex to hedge and therefore not done by 
corporates to the same extent as transactional risk,” says Francois Masquelier, chairman 
of the Association of Corporate Treasurers of Luxembourg. “Of course, reported earn-
ings can have positive or negative effects depending on what the currency does vis-à-vis 
your functional currency. If you have losses in the US then it can reduce those losses 
(when USD is weaker versus EUR), but if you have profit it can reduce that contribu-
tion to the earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation and therefore 
your net profit.”
—“Translation risk hits corporate earnings,” FX Week, 09 May 2014.
The main technique to minimize translation exposure is called a balance sheet hedge. At times, 
some firms have attempted to hedge translation exposure in the forward market. Such action 
The value contribution of a subsidiary of a multinational firm to 
the firm as a whole is a topic of increasing debate in global finan-
cial management. Most multinational companies report the earn-
ings contribution of foreign operations either individually or by 
region when they are significant to the total earnings of the con-
solidated firm. Changes in the value of a subsidiary as a result of 
the change in an exchange rate can be decomposed into those 
changes specific to the income and the assets of the subsidiary.
Subsidiary Earnings
The earnings of the subsidiary, once remeasured into the 
home currency of the parent company, contributes directly to 
the consolidated income of the firm. An exchange rate change 
results in fluctuations in the value of the subsidiary’s income to 
the global corporation. If the individual subsidiary in question 
constitutes a relatively significant or material component of 
consolidated income, the multinational firm’s reported income 
(and earnings per share, EPS) may be seen to change purely 
as a result of translation.
Subsidiary Assets
Changes in the reporting currency value of the net assets of 
the subsidiary are passed into consolidated income or equity. 
If the foreign subsidiary was designated as “dollar functional,” 
remeasurement results in a transaction exposure, which is 
passed through current consolidated income. If the foreign 
subsidiary was designated as “local currency functional,” 
translation results in a translation adjustment and is reported 
in consolidated equity as a translation adjustment. It does not 
alter reported consolidated net income.
Global Finance in Practice 11.1
Foreign Subsidiary Valuation

323
Translation Exposure    CHAPTER 11 
amounts to speculating in the forward market in the hope that a cash profit will be realized 
to offset the noncash loss from translation. Success depends on a precise prediction of future 
exchange rates, for such a hedge will not work over a range of possible future spot rates. In 
addition, the profit from the forward “hedge” (i.e., speculation) is taxable, but the translation 
loss does not reduce taxable income.
Balance Sheet Hedge
A balance sheet hedge requires an equal amount of exposed foreign currency assets and 
liabilities on a firm’s consolidated balance sheet. If this can be achieved for each foreign 
currency, net translation exposure will be zero. A change in exchange rates will change the 
value of exposed liabilities in an equal amount but in a direction opposite to the change 
in value of exposed assets. If a firm translates by the temporal method, a zero net exposed 
position is called “monetary balance.” Complete monetary balance cannot be achieved 
under the current rate method because total assets would have to be matched by an equal 
amount of debt, but the equity section of the balance sheet must still be translated at his-
toric exchange rates.
The cost of a balance sheet hedge depends on relative borrowing costs. If foreign cur-
rency borrowing costs, after adjusting for foreign exchange risk, are higher than parent 
currency borrowing costs, the balance sheet hedge is costly, and vice versa. Normal opera-
tions, however, already require decisions about the magnitude and currency denomination 
of specific balance sheet accounts. Thus, balance sheet hedges are a compromise in which 
the denomination of balance sheet accounts is altered, perhaps at a cost in terms of inter-
est expense or operating efficiency, in order to achieve some degree of foreign exchange 
protection.
To achieve a balance sheet hedge, Ganado Corporation must either (1) reduce exposed 
euro assets without simultaneously reducing euro liabilities, or (2) increase euro liabilities 
without simultaneously increasing euro assets. One way to achieve this is to exchange existing 
euro cash for dollars. If Ganado Europe does not have large euro cash balances, it can bor-
row euros and exchange the borrowed euros for dollars. Another subsidiary could also borrow 
euros and exchange them for dollars. That is, the essence of the hedge is for the parent or any 
of its subsidiaries to create euro debt and exchange the proceeds for dollars.
Current Rate Method. Under the current rate method, Ganado should borrow as much as 
€8,000,000. The initial effect of this first step is to increase both an exposed asset (cash) and 
an exposed liability (notes payable) on the balance sheet of Ganado Europe, with no immedi-
ate effect on net exposed assets. The required follow-up step can take two forms: (1) Ganado 
Europe could exchange the acquired euros for U.S. dollars and hold those dollars itself, or 
(2) it could transfer the borrowed euros to Ganado Corporation, perhaps as a euro dividend 
or as repayment of intracompany debt. Ganado Corporation could then exchange the euros 
for dollars. In some countries, local monetary authorities will not allow their currency to be 
freely exchanged.
An alternative would be for Ganado Corporation or a sister subsidiary to borrow the 
euros, thus keeping the euro debt entirely off Ganado’s books. However, the second step is 
still essential to eliminate euro exposure; the borrowing entity must exchange the euros for 
dollars or other unexposed assets. Any such borrowing should be coordinated with all other 
euro borrowings to avoid the possibility that one subsidiary is borrowing euros to reduce 
translation exposure at the same time as another subsidiary is repaying euro debt. (Note that 
euros can be “borrowed,” by simply delaying repayment of existing euro debt; the goal is to 
increase euro debt, not to borrow in a literal sense.)

324
CHAPTER 11    Translation Exposure
Temporal Method. If translation is by the temporal method, the much smaller amount of only 
€800,000 need be borrowed. As before, Ganado Europe could use the proceeds of the loan to 
acquire U.S. dollars. However, Ganado Europe could also use the proceeds to acquire inven-
tory or fixed assets in Europe. Under the temporal method, these assets are not regarded as 
exposed and do not drop in dollar value when the euro depreciates.
When Is a Balance Sheet Hedge Justified?
If a firm’s subsidiary is using the local currency as the functional currency, the following 
­circumstances could justify when to use a balance sheet hedge:
■
■
The foreign subsidiary is about to be liquidated, so that value of its CTA would be 
realized.
■
■
The firm has debt covenants or bank agreements that state the firm’s debt/equity 
ratios will be maintained within specific limits.
■
■
Management is evaluated based on certain income statement and balance sheet 
­measures that are affected by translation losses or gains.
■
■
The foreign subsidiary is operating in a hyperinflationary environment.
If a firm is using the parent’s home currency as the functional currency of the ­foreign sub-
sidiary, all transaction gains/losses are passed through to the income statement. Hedging this 
consolidated income to reduce its variability may be important to investors and bond rating 
agencies. In the end, accounting exposure is a topic of great concern and complex choices for 
all multinationals. As demonstrated by Global Finance in Practice 11.2, despite the best of 
intentions and structures, business itself may dictate hedging outcomes.
GM Asia, a regional subsidiary of GM Corporation, U.S., 
held major corporate interests in a variety of countries and 
companies, including Daewoo Auto of South Korea. GM had 
acquired control of Daewoo’s automobile operations in 2001. 
The following years had been very good for the Daewoo unit, 
and by 2009, GM Daewoo was selling automobile compo-
nents and vehicles to more than 100 countries.
Daewoo’s success meant that it had expected sales 
(receivables) from buyers all over the world. What was even 
more remarkable was that the global automobile industry now 
used the U.S. dollar more than ever as its currency of contract 
for cross-border transactions. This meant that Daewoo did 
not really have dozens of foreign currencies to manage, just 
one, the U.S. dollar. So Daewoo of Korea had, in late 2007 
and early 2008, entered into a series of forward exchange 
contracts. These currency contracts locked in the Korean 
won value of the many dollar-denominated receivables the 
company expected to receive from international automobile 
sales in the coming year. In the eyes of many, this was a 
conservative and responsible currency hedging policy; that is, 
until the global financial crisis and the following global collapse 
of automobile sales.
The problem for Daewoo was not that the Korean won 
per U.S. dollar exchange rate had moved dramatically; it had 
not. The problem was that Daewoo’s sales, like all other 
automobile industry participants, had collapsed. The sales 
had not taken place, and therefore the underlying exposures, 
the expected receivables in dollars by Daewoo, had not hap-
pened. But GM still had to contractually deliver on the forward 
contracts. It would cost GM Daewoo Won 2,300 billion. GM’s 
Daewoo unit was now broke, its equity wiped out by cur-
rency hedging gone bad. GM Asia needed money, quickly, 
and selling interests in its highly successful Chinese and Indian 
­businesses was the only solution.
Global Finance in Practice 11.2
When Business Dictates Hedging Results

325
Translation Exposure    CHAPTER 11 
Summary Points
■
■
Translation exposure results from translating foreign 
currency-denominated statements of foreign subsidiar-
ies into the parent’s reporting currency to prepare con-
solidated financial statements.
■
■
A foreign subsidiary’s functional currency is the 
­currency of the primary economic environment in 
which the subsidiary operates and in which it gener-
ates cash flows. In other words, it is the dominant cur-
rency used by that foreign subsidiary in its day-to-day 
operations.
■
■
Technical aspects of translation include questions 
about when to recognize gains or losses, the dis-
tinction between functional and reporting currency, 
and the treatment of subsidiaries in hyperinflation 
countries.
■
■
Translation gains and losses can be quite different from 
operating gains and losses, not only in magnitude but 
also in sign. Management may need to determine which 
is of greater significance prior to deciding which expo-
sure is to be managed first.
■
■
The main technique for managing translation expo-
sure is a balance sheet hedge. This calls for having an 
equal amount of exposed foreign currency assets and 
liabilities.
■
■
Even if management chooses to follow an active policy 
of hedging translation exposure, it is nearly impossible 
to offset both transaction and translation exposure 
simultaneously. If forced to choose, most managers will 
protect against transaction losses because they impact 
consolidated earnings.
McDonald’s Corporation (NYSE: MCD) is one of the 
world’s most well known and valuable brands. But as 
McDonald’s has grown and expanded globally, so have 
the investment risks associated with is investment in more 
than 100 countries. Like most multinational firms, it con-
siders its equity investment in foreign affiliates capital at 
risk—risk of loss, nationalization, and currency valuation. 
McDonald’s has been quite innovative in its hedging of 
these combined currency risks over time, finding new ways 
to construct old solutions—Hoover Hedges—but doing so 
with cross-currency swaps.
Hoover Hedges
A multinational firm that establishes a foreign subsidiary 
puts capital at risk, a long-time fundamental of international 
business. Financially, when the parent company creates and 
invests in a foreign subsidiary it creates an asset, its foreign 
investment in a foreign subsidiary, which corresponds to 
the equity investment on the balance sheet of the foreign 
subsidiary. But the equity investment in the foreign subsid-
iary is now in local currency, the currency of the foreign busi-
ness environment. If this is the predominant currency of this 
subsidiary’s business, it is termed the functional currency of 
the subsidiary. Going forward, as the exchange rate between 
the two country currencies changes, the parent company’s 
equity investment is subject to foreign exchange risk.
Many multinationals have attempted to hedge this 
equity investment exposure with what can be described as 
a balance sheet hedge. Since the parent company possesses 
a long-term asset in the foreign currency, the company tries 
to hedge this by creating a matching long-term liability in 
the same currency. A long-term loan in the currency of the 
foreign subsidiary has typically been used. The loan itself is 
often structured as a bullet repayment loan, in which inter-
est payments are made over time but the entire principal 
is due in a single final payment at maturity. In this way, the 
principal on the long-term loan acts as a match to the long-
term equity investment.
McDonald’s, Hoover Hedges, and Cross-Currency Swaps1
Mini-Case
1Copyright © 2015 Thunderbird School of Global Management, Arizona State University. All rights reserved. This case was ­prepared 
by Professor Michael H. Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only and not to indicate either effective or ineffective 
­management. Although McDonald’s is a real company, the actors and actions in this mini-case are fictional.

326
CHAPTER 11    Translation Exposure
These hedges are typically referred to as Hoover Hedges 
following the court case of Hoover Company (a vacuum 
cleaner manufacturer) versus the U.S. Internal Revenue 
Service2. The primary issue in the case was whether the 
gains and losses from short sales in foreign currency that 
the Hoover Company used as hedges were to be consid-
ered ordinary losses, business expenses, or capital losses 
and gains, for tax purposes. Although borrowing in the local 
currency is frequently used, there are a number of other 
potential hedges of equity investments including short sales 
and the use of traditional foreign currency derivatives like 
forward contracts and currency options.
McDonald’s Business Forms
McDonald’s has structured its business in a variety of 
different ways depending on marketplace. In the United 
States the company has utilized a franchising structure 
where it awards a franchise to a private investor. That 
investor then has exclusive rights over the sale and 
distribution of McDonald’s products and services within 
the designated franchise zone. McDonald’s corporation 
will own the land and building, but the franchisee is 
responsible for the investment in all equipment and 
furnishings required for the restaurant under the franchise 
agreement—from the paint-in—as they describe it. This 
structure allows ­McDonald’s to expand with a lower level of 
capital investment (the franchisee is investing a significant 
portion), and at the same time create a financial incentive 
for the franchisee to remain focused and committed to the 
restaurant’s success and profitability. In return McDonald’s 
earns a royalty from the franchise’s sales, typically 5% to 
5.5% of sales.
Alternatively, in markets in which the company wishes 
more direct control, and is willing to make substantially 
larger capital investments itself, it uses the more common 
form of direct ownership. Although having to put up all the 
capital needed for the establishment of the business, it gains 
more direct control over operations. Much of McDonald’s 
international expansion has been structured under this 
more common direct ownership approach, but at the risk 
of substantial amounts of capital as the company sought to 
gain a major presence in a growing number of countries.
The British Subsidiary and Currency Exposure
In the United Kingdom McDonald’s owns the majority 
of its restaurants. These investments create three different 
British pound-denominated currency exposures for the 
parent company.
1.	 The British subsidiary has equity capital, which is a 
British pound-denominated asset of the parent company.
2.	 The parent company provides intracompany debt in 
the form of a four-year loan. The loan is denominated 
in British pounds, and carries a fixed rate of interest.
3.	 The British subsidiary pays a fixed percentage of gross 
sales in royalties to the parent company. This too is 
pound-denominated.
An additional technical detail further complicates the sit-
uation. When the parent company makes an intracompany 
loan to the British subsidiary, it must designate—according 
to U.S. accounting and tax law ­practices—whether the loan 
is considered to be “permanently invested” in that country. 
Although on the surface it seems illogical to consider four 
years permanent, the loan itself could simply be continu-
ally rolled over by the parent company and never actually 
be repaid.
If the loan was not considered permanent, the foreign 
exchange gains and losses related to the loan flow directly 
to the parent company’s income statement, according to 
Financial Accounting Standard #52, the primary standard 
for U.S. foreign currency reporting. If, however, the loan is 
designated as permanent, the foreign exchange gains and 
losses related to the intracompany loan would flow only 
to the cumulative translation adjustment account (CTA), 
a segment of consolidated equity on the company’s con-
solidated balance sheet. To date, McDonald’s has chosen to 
designate the loan as permanent. The functional currency 
of the British subsidiary for consolidation purposes is the 
local currency, the British pound.
Cross-Currency Swap Hedging
Anka Gopi is an assistant manager in Treasury—and a 
McDonald’s shareholder. She is currently reviewing the 
existing hedging strategy employed by McDonald’s against 
the pound exposures.
McDonald’s has been hedging the rather complex 
­British pound exposure by entering into a cross-currency 
U.S. dollar—British pound sterling cross-currency swap. 
The current swap is a seven-year swap to receive dollars 
and pay pounds. Like all cross-currency swaps, the 
agreement requires McDonald’s (U.S.) to make regular 
pound-denominated interest payments and a bullet 
principal repayment (notional principal) at the end of the 
swap agreement.
Exhibit A provides a brief map of how the cross-
currency swap strategy works. The cross-currency swap 
2The Hoover Company, Petitioner v. Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Respondent, 72 T.C. 206 (1979). United States Tax Court, Filed 
April 24, 1979.

327
Translation Exposure    CHAPTER 11 
serves as a hedge of both the regular royalty and interest 
payments in British pounds made to the U.S. parent, and 
the outstanding swap notional principal in British pounds 
serves as a hedge of the equity investment by McDonald’s 
U.S. in the British subsidiary. According to accounting 
practice, a company may elect to take the interest associated 
with a foreign currency-denominated loan and carry that 
directly to the parent company’s consolidated income. This 
had been done in the past and McDonald’s had benefitted 
from the inclusion.
Issues for Discussion
One of Anka’s concerns is that under FAS #133, Account-
ing for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, the 
firm has to mark-to-market the entire cross-currency swap 
position, including principal, and carry this to other com-
prehensive income (OCI). This has proven a bit trouble-
some in the past because cross-currency swaps are subject 
to so much volatility in value when marked-to-market, a 
direct result of the large notional principal bullet repay-
ment feature they typically carry.
Anka wondered how important OCI was to investors. 
OCI was a measure of “below the line income,” income 
required under U.S. GAAP and reported in the footnotes 
to the financial statements. It was below net income (and 
therefore below earnings and earnings per share as reported 
to the markets), and included a variety of adjustments aris-
ing from consolidated equity (such as these gains and losses 
associated with hedging instruments and positions).
Anka Gopi wished to reconsider the current hedging 
strategy. She begins by listing the pros and cons of the current 
strategy, comparing these to alternative strategies, and then 
deciding what if anything should be done about it at this time.
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 How does the cross-currency swap effectively hedge 
the three primary exposures McDonald’s has relative 
to its British subsidiary?
2.	 How does the cross-currency swap hedge the 
­long-term equity position in the foreign subsidiary?
3.	 To what degree, if at all, Should Anka—and 
­McDonald’s—worry about OCI?
Swap
Pay £
Receive $
Existing 
U.S.$ debt
McDonald’s Corporation (U.S.)
McDonald’s U.K.
Assets
Investment in U.K. Subsidiary
(royalties in £)
Loan interest payments in British pounds (£)
Royalty payments and dividends in British pounds (£)
Loan to U.K. Subsidiary
(interest in £)
Equity owned by U.S. Parent Co
(royalties in £)
Loan to U.S. Parent Co
(interest in £)
Liabilities
& Net Worth
Assets
Liabilities
& Net Worth
Because the British subsidiary makes all payments to the U.S. parent company in British pounds, McDonald’s U.S. is long British
pounds. By entering into a swap to pay pounds (£) and receive dollars ($), the swap creates an outﬂow of £ serviced by the $ inﬂows.
But the cross-currency swap has one additional major feature useful to McDonald’s: the cross-currency swap has a large principal
which is outstanding (bullet repayment) which acts as a counterweight–a match–to the long-term investment in the U.K. subsidiary.
Exhibit A
McDonald’s Cross-Currency Swap Strategy for the U.K.
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Translation. What does the word translation mean? 
Why is translation exposure called an accounting 
exposure?
2.	 Causation. What activity gives rise to translation 
exposure?
3.	 Converting Financial Assets. In the context of prepar-
ing consolidated financial statements, are the words 
translate and convert synonyms?
4.	 Subsidiary Characterization. What is the difference 
between a self-sustaining foreign subsidiary and an 
integrated foreign subsidiary?
5.	 Functional Currency. What is a functional currency? 
What do you think a “non-functional currency” would be?
327
Translation Exposure    CHAPTER 11 

328
CHAPTER 11    Translation Exposure
6.	 Functional Currency Designation. Can or should a 
company change the functional currency designation 
of a foreign subsidiary from year to year? If so, when 
would it be justified?
7.	 Translation Methods. What are the two basic methods 
for translation used globally?
8.	 Current Versus Historical. One of the major differ-
ences between translation methods is which balance 
sheet components are translated at which exchange 
rates, current or historical. Why would accounting 
practices ever use historical exchange rates?
9.	 Translating Assets. What are the major differences in 
translating assets between the current rate method 
and the temporal method?
10.	 Translating Liabilities. What are the major differ-
ences in translating liabilities between the current rate 
method and the temporal method?
11.	 Earnings or Equity. Where do you think that most 
companies would prefer currency translation imbal-
ances or adjustments to go—earnings or consolidated 
equity? Why?
12.	 Translation Exposure Management. What are the pri-
mary options firms have to manage translation exposure?
13.	 Accounting or Cash Flow. A U.S.-based multinational 
company generates more than 80% of its profits (earn-
ings) outside the U.S. in the euro zone and Japan, and 
both the euro and the yen fall significantly in value 
versus the dollar as occurred in the second half of 
2014. Is the impact on the firm only accounting or does 
it alter cash flow, or both?
14.	 Balance Sheet Hedge Justification. When is a balance 
sheet hedge justified?
15.	 Realization and Recognition. When would a multina-
tional firm, if ever, realize and recognize the cumula-
tive translation losses recorded over time associated 
with a subsidiary?
16.	 Tax Obligations. How does translation alter the global 
tax liabilities of a firm? If a multinational firm’s con-
solidated earnings increase as a result of consolidation 
and translation, what is the impact on tax liabilities?
17.	 Hyperinflation. What is hyperinflation and what are 
the consequences for translating foreign financial 
statements in countries experiencing hyperinflation?
18.	 Transaction Versus Translation Losses. What are the 
main differences between losses from transaction 
exposure and translation exposure?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Ganado Europe (A). Using facts in the chapter for 
Ganado Europe, assume the exchange rate on January 
2, 2006, in Exhibit 11.4 dropped in value from $1.2000/€ 
to $0.9000/€ (rather than to $1.0000/€). Recalculate 
Ganado Europe’s translated balance sheet for January 
2, 2006, with the new exchange rate using the current 
rate method.
a.	 What is the amount of translation gain or loss?
b.	 Where should it appear in the financial statements?
2.	 Ganado Europe (B). Using facts in the chapter for 
Ganado Europe, assume as in Problem 1 that the 
exchange rate on January 2, 2006, in Exhibit 11.4 
dropped in value from $1.2000/€ to $0.9000/€ (rather 
than to $1.0000/€). Recalculate Ganado Europe’s 
translated balance sheet for January 2, 2006, with 
the  new exchange rate using the temporal rate 
method.
a.	 What is the amount of translation gain or loss?
b.	 Where should it appear in the financial statements?
c.	 Why does the translation loss or gain under the 
temporal method differ from the loss or gain under 
the current rate method?
3.	 Ganado Europe (C). Using facts in the chapter for 
Ganado Europe, assume the exchange rate on January 
2, 2006, in Exhibit 11.4 appreciated from $1.2000/€ to 
$1.500/€. Calculate Ganado Europe’s translated bal-
ance sheet for January 2, 2006, with the new exchange 
rate using the current rate method.
a.	 What is the amount of translation gain or loss?
b.	 Where should it appear in the financial statements?
4.	 Ganado Europe (D). Using facts in the chapter for 
Ganado Europe, assume as in Problem 3 that the 
exchange rate on January 2, 2006, in Exhibit 11.4 
appreciated from $1.2000/€ to $1.5000/€. Calculate 
Ganado Europe’s translated balance sheet for January 
2, 2006, with the new exchange rate using the temporal 
method.
a.	 What is the amount of translation gain or loss?
b.	 Where should it appear in the financial statements?
5.	 Tristan Narvaja, S.A. (A). Tristan Narvaja, S.A., is 
the Uruguayan subsidiary of a U.S. manufacturing 
company. Its balance sheet for January 1 follows. 
The January 1 exchange rate between the U.S. dol-
lar and the peso Uruguayo ($U) is $U20/$. Deter-
mine Tristan Narvaja’s contribution to the translation 
exposure of its parent on January 1, using the current 
rate method.

329
Translation Exposure    CHAPTER 11 
Balance Sheet (thousands of pesos Uruguayo, $U)
Assets
Liabilities & Net Worth
Cash
$U60,000
Current 
liabilities
$U30,000
Accounts 
receivable
120,000
Long-term 
debt
90,000
Inventory
120,000
Capital stock
300,000
Net plant & 
equipment
240,000
Retained 
earnings
120,000
$U540,000
$U540,000
a.	 Determine Montevideo’s contribution to the trans-
lation exposure of its parent on January 1st, using 
the current rate method.
b.	 Calculate Montevideo’s contribution to its parent’s 
translation loss if the exchange rate on December 31st 
is $U20/US$. Assume all peso Uruguayo accounts 
remain as they were at the beginning of the year.
6.	 Tristan Narvaja, S.A. (B). Using the same balance sheet 
as in Problem 5, calculate Tristan Narvaja’s contribu-
tion to its parent’s translation loss if the exchange rate 
on December 31 is $U22/$. Assume all peso accounts 
remain as they were at the beginning of the year.
7.	 Tristan Narvaja, S.A. (C). Calculate Tristan Narvaja’s 
contribution to its parent’s translation gain or loss 
using the current rate method if the exchange rate 
on December 31 is $U12/$. Assume all peso accounts 
remain as they were at the beginning of the year.
8.	 Bangkok Instruments, Ltd. (A). Bangkok Instruments, 
Ltd., the Thai subsidiary of a U.S. corporation, is a seis-
mic instrument manufacturer. Bangkok Instruments 
manufactures instruments primarily for the oil and gas 
industry globally, though with recent commodity price 
increases of all kinds—including copper—its business 
has begun to grow rapidly. Sales are primarily to mul-
tinational companies based in the United States and 
Europe. Bangkok Instruments’ balance sheet in thou-
sands of Thai baht (B) as of March 31 is as follows:
Bangkok Instruments, Ltd.
Balance Sheet, March 1, thousands of Thai bahts
Assets
Liabilities and Net Worth
Cash
B24,000
Accounts 
payable
B18,000
Accounts 
receivable
36,000
Bank loans
60,000
Inventory
48,000
Common 
stock
18,000
Net plant & 
equipment
60,000
Retained 
earnings
72,000
B168,000
B168,000
Exchange rates for translating Siam Toy’s balance 
sheet into U.S. dollars are:
B40.00/$
April 1st exchange rate after 25% 
devaluation.
B30.00/$
March 31st exchange rate, before 25% 
devaluation. All inventory was acquired 
at this rate.
B20.00/$
Historic exchange rate at which plant 
and equipment were acquired.
The Thai baht dropped in value from B30/$ to B40/$ 
between March 31 and April 1. Assuming no change in 
balance sheet accounts between these two days, calcu-
late the gain or loss from translation by both the cur-
rent rate method and the temporal method. Explain 
the translation gain or loss in terms of changes in the 
value of exposed accounts.
9.	 Bangkok Instruments, Ltd. (B). Using the original 
data provided for Bangkok Instruments, assume that 
the Thai baht appreciated in value from B30/$ to B25/$ 
between March 31 and April 1. Assuming no change in 
balance sheet accounts between those two days, calcu-
late the gain or loss from translation by both the cur-
rent rate method and the temporal method. Explain 
the translation gain or loss in terms of changes in the 
value of exposed accounts.
10.	 Cairo Ingot, Ltd. Cairo Ingot, Ltd., is the Egyptian sub-
sidiary of Trans-Mediterranean Aluminum, a British 
multinational that fashions automobile engine blocks 
from aluminum. Trans-Mediterranean’s home report-
ing currency is the British pound. Cairo Ingot’s Decem-
ber 31 balance sheet is shown below. At the date of 
this balance sheet the exchange rate between Egyptian 
pounds and British pounds sterling was £E5.50/UK£.
Assets
Liabilities and Net Worth
Cash
£E  16,500,000
Accounts 
payable
£E  24,750,000
Accounts 
receivable
33,000,000
Long-term 
debt
49,500,000
Inventory
49,500,000
Invested 
capital
90,750,000
Net plant and 
equipment
66,000,000
£E165,000,000
£E165,000,000
What is Cairo Ingot’s contribution to the translation 
exposure of Trans-Mediterranean on December 31, 
using the current rate method? Calculate the translation 
exposure loss to Trans-Mediterranean if the exchange 
rate at the end of the following quarter is £E6.00/£. 
Assume all balance sheet accounts are the same at the 
end of the quarter as they were at the beginning.

330
CHAPTER 11    Translation Exposure
Internet Exercises
1.	 Foreign Source Income. If you are a citizen of the 
United States, and you receive income from outside 
the U.S.—foreign source income—how must you 
report this income? Use the following Internal Rev-
enue Service Web site to determine current reporting 
practices for tax purposes.
U.S. Internal 
Revenue Service
www.irs.gov/Individuals/
International-Taxpayers/ 
Foreign-Currency-and 
-Currency-Exchange-Rates
2.	 Translation in the United Kingdom. What are the 
current practices and procedures for translation of 
financial statements in the United Kingdom? Use the 
following Web site to start your research.
Institute of 
Chartered 
Accountants in 
England and Wales
www.icaew.com/en/technical/
financial-reporting/uk-gaap/
uk-gaap-standards/
3.	 Changing Translation Practices: FASB. The Financial 
Accounting Standards Board (FASB) promulgates 
standard practices for the reporting of financial 
results by companies in the United States. It also, 
however, often leads the way in the development of 
new practices and emerging issues around the world. 
One major issue today is the valuation and reporting 
of financial derivatives and derivative agreements by 
firms. Use the FASB and Treasury Management Asso-
ciation Web pages to see current proposed account-
ing standards and the current state of reaction to the 
proposed standards.
FASB home page
raw.rutgers.edu/raw/fasb/
Treasury Management
www.tma.org/Association
4.	 Yearly Average Exchange Rates. When translating 
foreign currency values into U.S. dollar values for 
individual reporting purposes in the United States, 
which average exchange rates should you use? Use 
the following Web site to find the current average 
rates.
U.S. Internal Revenue 
Service
www.irs.gov/Individuals/
International-Taxpayers/
Yearly-Average-Currency 
-Exchange-Rates

Chapter	 12
Operating Exposure
Coyote is always waiting. And Coyote is always hungry.
—Navajo Folk Saying.
This chapter examines the economic exposure of a firm over time, what we term operating 
exposure. Operating exposure, also referred to as competitive exposure or strategic exposure, 
measures changes in the present value of a firm resulting from changes in future operating 
cash flows caused by unexpected changes in exchange rates. Operating exposure analysis 
assesses the impact of changing exchange rates on a firm’s own operations over subsequent 
months and years and on its competitive position vis-à-vis other firms. The goal is to identify 
strategic moves or operating techniques the firm might wish to adopt to enhance its value in 
the face of unexpected exchange rate changes.
Operating exposure and transaction exposure are related in that they both deal with 
future cash flows. They differ in terms of which cash flows management considers and why 
those cash flows change when exchange rates change. We begin by revisiting the structure 
of our firm, Ganado Corporation, and how its structure dictates its likely operating expo-
sure. The chapter continues with a series of strategies and structures used in the manage-
ment of operating exposure, and concludes with a Mini-Case, Toyota’s European Operating 
Exposure.
A Multinational’s Operating Exposure
The structure and operations of a multinational company determine the nature of its operat-
ing exposure. Ganado Corporation’s basic structure and currencies of operation are described 
in Exhibit 12.1. As a U.S.-based publicly traded company, ultimately all financial metrics and 
values have to be consolidated and expressed in U.S. dollars. That accounting exposure of 
the firm—translation exposure—was described in Chapter 10. Operationally, however, the 
functional currencies of the individual subsidiaries in combination determine the overall 
operating exposure of the firm in total.
Learning Objectives
■
■
Examine how operating exposure arises in a multinational firm through unexpected 
changes in corporate cash flows
■
■
Analyze how to measure operating exposure’s impact on a business unit through the 
sequence of volume, price, cost, and other key variable changes
■
■
Evaluate strategic alternatives to managing operating exposure
■
■
Detail the proactive policies firms use in managing operating exposure
331

332
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
The operating exposure of any individual business or business unit is the net of cash 
inflows and outflows by currency, and how that compares to other companies competing in 
the same markets. Accounts receivable are the cash flow proceeds from sales, and accounts 
payable are all ongoing operating costs associated with the purchase of labor, materials, and 
other inputs. The net result—in general—is in essence the lifeblood of any business and the 
source of value created by the firm over time.
For example, Ganado Germany sells locally and it exports, but all sales are invoiced in 
euros. All operating cash inflows are therefore in its home currency, the euro. On the cost side, 
labor costs are local and in euros, as well as many of its material input purchases being local 
and in euros. Ganado Germany also purchases components from Ganado China, but those 
too are invoiced in euros. Ganado Germany is clearly euro-functional, with all cash inflows 
and outflows in euros.
Ganado Corporation U.S. is similar in structure to Ganado Germany. All cash inflows from 
sales, domestic and international, are in U.S. dollars. All costs, labor, and materials, sourced 
domestically and internationally, are invoiced in U.S. dollars. This includes purchases from 
Ganado China. Ganado U.S. is, therefore, obviously dollar functional.
Ganado China is more complex. Cash outflows, labor and materials, are all domestic and 
paid in Chinese renminbi. Cash inflows, however, are generated across three different curren-
cies as the company sells locally in renminbi, as well as exporting to both Germany in euros 
and the United States in dollars. On net, although having some cash inflows in both dollars 
and euros, the dominant currency cash flow is the renminbi.
Static versus Dynamic Operating Exposure
Measuring the operating exposure of a firm like Ganado requires forecasting and analyzing 
all the firm’s future individual transaction exposures together with the future exposures of all 
Ganado
U.S.A.
(U.S. dollars, $)
Ganado China
(Renminbi, Rmb)
Chinese components to U.S. in $
Ganado Germany
(euros, €)
Chinese components to Germany in €
China & Germany are subsidiaries of Ganado U.S.
Sells domestically in Rmb
Sells domestically & exports in $
Ganado China
Ganado Germany
Ganado U.S.A.
Sells in the EU in €
Material and labor costs are in renminbi (Rmb).
Sales are 50% domestic (Rmb) and 50% export ($ and €). 
Material and labor costs are in euros (€).
Sales are 50% domestic (€) and 50% export (€).
Material and labor costs are in dollars ($).
Sales are 50% domestic ($) and 50% export ($).
Rmb functional
€ functional
$ functional
Exhibit 12.1
Ganado Corporation: Structure and Operations

333
Operating Exposure    CHAPTER 12 
the firm’s competitors and potential competitors worldwide. Exchange rate changes in the 
short term affect current and immediate contracts, generally termed transactions. But over 
the longer term, as prices change and competitors react, the more fundamental economic and 
competitive drivers of the business may alter all cash flows of all units. A simple example will 
clarify the point.
Assume Ganado’s three business units are roughly equal in size. In 2012, the dollar starts 
depreciating in the market against the euro. At the same time, the Chinese government con-
tinues the gradual revaluation of the renminbi. The operating exposure of each individual 
business unit then needs to be examined statically (transaction exposures) and dynamically 
(future business transactions not yet contracted for).
■
■
Ganado China.   Sales in U.S. dollars will result in fewer renminbi proceeds in the 
immediate period. Sales in euros may stay roughly the same in renminbi proceeds 
depending on the relative movement of the Rmb against the euro. General profit-
ability will fall in the short run. In the longer term, depending on the markets for its 
products and the nature of competition, it may need to raise the price at which it sells 
its export products, even to its U.S. parent company.
■
■
Ganado Germany.   Since this business unit’s cash inflows and outflows are all in 
euros, there is no immediate transaction exposure or change. It may suffer some rising 
input costs in the future if Ganado China does indeed eventually push through price 
increases of component sales. Profitability is unaffected in the short term.
■
■
Ganado U.S.   Like Ganado Germany, Ganado U.S. has all local currency cash 
inflows and outflows. A fall in the value of the dollar will have no immediate impact 
(transaction exposure), but may change over the medium to long term as input costs 
from China may rise over time as the Chinese subsidiary tries to regain prior profit 
margins. But, like Germany, short-term profitability is unaffected.
The net result for Ganado is possibly a fall in the total profitability of the firm in the short 
term, primarily from the fall in profits of the Chinese subsidiary; that is, the short-term trans-
action/operating exposure impact. The fall in the dollar in the short term, however, is likely to 
have a positive impact on translation exposure, as profits and earnings in renminbi and euros 
translate into more dollars. Wall Street prefers returns sooner rather than later.
Operating and Financing Cash Flows
The cash flows of the MNE can be divided into operating cash flows and financing cash 
flows. Operating cash flows for Ganado arise from intercompany (between unrelated com-
panies) and intracompany (between units of the same company) receivables and payables, 
rent and lease payments for the use of facilities and equipment, royalty and license fees for 
the use of technology and intellectual property, and assorted management fees for services 
provided.
Financing cash flows are payments for the use of intercompany and intracompany 
loans (principal and interest) and stockholder equity (new equity investments and divi-
dends). Each of these cash flows can occur at different time intervals, in different amounts, 
and in different currencies of denomination, and each has a different predictability of 
occurrence. We summarize cash flow possibilities in Exhibit 12.2 for Ganado China and 
Ganado U.S.
Expected versus Unexpected Changes in Cash Flow
Operating exposure is far more important for the long-run health of a business than changes 
caused by transaction or translation exposure. However, operating exposure is inevitably 

334
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
­subjective because it depends on estimates of future cash flow changes over an arbitrary time 
horizon. Thus, it does not spring from the accounting process but rather from operating analy-
sis. Planning for operating exposure is a total management responsibility depending upon the 
interaction of strategies in finance, marketing, purchasing, and production.
An expected change in foreign exchange rates is not included in the definition of operat-
ing exposure, because both management and investors should have factored this information 
into their evaluation of anticipated operating results and market value. This “expected change” 
arises from differing perspectives as follows:
■
■
From a management perspective, budgeted financial statements already reflect infor-
mation about the effect of an expected change in exchange rates.
■
■
From a debt service perspective, expected cash flow to amortize debt should already 
reflect the international Fisher effect. The level of expected interest and principal 
repayment should be a function of expected exchange rates rather than existing spot 
rates.
■
■
From an investor’s perspective, if the foreign exchange market is efficient, 
­information about expected changes in exchange rates should be widely known 
and thus reflected in a firm’s market value. Only unexpected changes in exchange 
rates, or an inefficient foreign exchange market, should cause market value to 
change.
■
■
From a broader macroeconomic perspective, operating exposure is not just the sen-
sitivity of a firm’s future cash flows to unexpected changes in foreign exchange rates, 
but also its sensitivity to other key macroeconomic variables. This factor has been 
labeled as macroeconomic uncertainty.
We explore this further in Global Finance in Practice 12.1. Chapter 6 described the par-
ity relationships among exchange rates, interest rates, and inflation rates. However, these 
variables are often in disequilibrium with one another. Therefore, unexpected changes in 
interest rates and inflation rates could also have a simultaneous but differential impact on 
future cash flows.
Ganado China
(foreign subsidiary)
Ganado U.S.
(parent company)
A/P
Payments for Components
Liabilities
& Equity
Assets
Liabilities
& Equity
Assets
A/R
Debt Service and Dividends
Cash ﬂows related to the ﬁnancing of the subsidiary are Financial Cash Flows
Cash ﬂows related to the business activities of the subsidiary are Operating Cash Flows
Loan to Sub
Invest in Sub
Debt
Equity
Exhibit 12.2
Financial and Operating Cash Flows Between Parent and Subsidiary

335
Operating Exposure    CHAPTER 12 
Measuring Operating Exposure
An unexpected change in exchange rates impacts a firm’s expected cash flows at four levels, 
depending on the time horizon used, as summarized in Exhibit 12.3.
Short Run. The first level impact is on expected cash flows in the one-year operating budget. 
The gain or loss depends on the currency of denomination of expected cash flows. These are 
both existing transaction exposures and anticipated exposures. The currency of denomination 
cannot be changed for existing obligations, or even for implied obligations such as purchase 
or sales commitments. Apart from real or implied obligations, in the short run it is difficult to 
change sales prices or renegotiate factor costs. Therefore, realized cash flows will differ from 
those expected in the budget. However, as time passes, prices and costs can be changed to 
reflect the new competitive realities caused by a change in exchange rates.
Medium Run: Equilibrium. The second level impact is on expected medium-run cash flows, 
such as those expressed in two- to five-year budgets, assuming parity conditions hold among 
foreign exchange rates, national inflation rates, and national interest rates. Under equilibrium 
conditions, the firm should be able to adjust prices and factor costs over time to maintain the 
expected level of cash flows. In this case, the currency of denomination of expected cash flows 
is not as important as the countries in which cash flows originate. National monetary, fiscal, 
and balance of payments policies determine whether equilibrium conditions will exist and 
whether firms will be allowed to adjust prices and costs.
Key to the understanding of operating exposure is that 
expected change in foreign exchange rates is not included 
in the firm’s operating exposure. The assumption is that the 
market has already taken this value change into account. But 
is that assumption a sound one?
Consider the case of Ford Motor Company. In December 
2013, Ford was very open and public about what it expected to 
happen to the Venezuelan currency—further devaluation—and 
what that would mean for Ford’s financial results. In filings 
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Ford 
reported that it had $802 million in investments in Venezuela, 
that it expected the Venezuelan bolivar to fall from 6.3 to the 
dollar to 12, and that it could end up suffering a $350 million 
financial loss as a result. The company was speaking from 
some experience. Earlier in the year it had lost $186 million 
when Venezuela devalued the bolivar to 6.3 from 4.3 per dollar.
Global Finance in Practice 12.1
Expecting the Devaluation—Ford and Venezuela
Exhibit 12.3
Operating Exposure’s Phases of Adjustment and Response
Phase
Time
Price Changes
Volume Changes
Structural Changes
Short Run
Less than 1 year
Prices are fixed/contracted
Volumes are contracted
No competitive market 
changes
Medium Run: 
Equilibrium
2 to 5 years
Complete pass-through of 
exchange rate changes
Volumes begin a partial 
response to prices
Existing competitors 
begin partial 
responses
Medium Run: 
Disequilibrium
2 to 5 years
Partial pass-through of 
exchange rate changes
Volumes begin a partial 
response to prices
Existing competitors 
begin partial 
responses
Long Run
More than 5 years
Completely flexible
Completely flexible
Threat of new 
entrants and changing 
competitor responses

336
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
If equilibrium exists continuously, and a firm is free to adjust its prices and costs to main-
tain its expected competitive position, its operating exposure may be zero. Its expected cash 
flows would be realized and therefore its market value unchanged since the exchange rate 
change was anticipated. However, it is also possible that equilibrium conditions exist but the 
firm is unwilling or unable to adjust operations to the new competitive environment. In such 
a case, the firm would experience operating exposure because its realized cash flows would 
differ from expected cash flows. As a result, its market value might also be altered.
Medium Run: Disequilibrium. The third level impact is on expected medium-run cash flows 
assuming disequilibrium conditions. In this case, the firm may not be able to adjust prices 
and costs to reflect the new competitive realities caused by a change in exchange rates. The 
primary problem may be the reactions of existing competitors. The firm’s realized cash flows 
will differ from its expected cash flows. The firm’s market value may change because of the 
unanticipated results.
Long Run. The fourth level impact is on expected long-run cash flows, meaning those beyond 
five years. At this strategic level a firm’s cash flows will be influenced by the reactions of 
both existing competitors and potential competitors—possible new entrants—to exchange 
rate changes under disequilibrium conditions. In fact, all firms that are subject to interna-
tional competition, whether they are purely domestic or multinational, are exposed to foreign 
exchange operating exposure in the long run whenever foreign exchange markets are not 
continuously in equilibrium.
Measuring Operating Exposure: Ganado Germany
Exhibit 12.4 presents the dilemma facing Ganado as a result of an unexpected change in the 
value of the euro, the currency of economic consequence for the German subsidiary. Ganado 
derives much of its reported profits—the earnings and earnings per share (EPS) as reported 
Ganado Germany
(euro-based subsidiary)
Ganado’s Customers
Ganado’s Suppliers
Ganado U.S.
(U.S. dollar-based parent)
Will the altered proﬁts of the
German subsidiary, in euro,
translate into more or less in
U.S. dollars?
How will the sales, costs,
and proﬁts of the German
subsidiary change?
USD Reporting
Environment
Euro Competitive
Environment
USD = EUR1.00
Will costs change?
Will prices and sales volume change? How much?
An unexpected depreciation in the value of the euro alters both the competitiveness of the
subsidiary and the ﬁnancial results which are consolidated with the parent company.
Exhibit 12.4
 Ganado and Ganado Germany

337
Operating Exposure    CHAPTER 12 
to Wall Street—from its European subsidiary. If the euro were to unexpectedly fall in value, 
how would the value of Ganado Germany’s business change?
Value, in the world of finance, is generated by operating cash flow. If Ganado wished to 
attempt to measure the operating exposure of Ganado Germany to an unexpected exchange 
rate change, it would do so by evaluating the likely impact of that exchange rate on the oper-
ating cash flows of Ganado Germany. Specifically, how would prices, costs, and volume sales 
change? How would competitors and their respective prices, costs, and volumes change? The 
following section illustrates how those very values might respond in the short run and medium 
run to a fall in the value of the euro against Ganado’s home currency, the dollar.
The Base Case
Ganado Germany manufactures in Germany, sells domestically, and exports; and all sales are 
invoiced in euros. Exhibit 12.5 summarizes the current baseline forecast for Ganado Germany 
income and operating cash flows for the 2014–2018 period (assume it is currently 2013). Sales 
Exhibit 12.5
Ganado Germany’s Valuation: Baseline Analysis
Assumptions
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Sales volume (units)
1,000,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
Sales price per unit
€12.80
€12.80
€12.80
€12.80
€12.80
Direct cost per unit
€9.60
€9.60
€9.60
€9.60
€9.60
German corporate tax rate
29.5%
29.5%
29.5%
29.5%
29.5%
Exchange rate ($/€)
1.2000
1.2000
1.2000
1.2000
1.2000
Income Statement
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Sales revenue
€12,800,000
€12,800,000
€12,800,000
€12,800,000
€12,800,000
  Direct cost of goods sold
-9,600,000
-9,600,000
-9,600,000
-9,600,000
-9,600,000
  Cash operating expenses (fixed)
-890,000
-890,000
-890,000
-890,000
-890,000
  Depreciation
-600,000
-600,000
-600,000
-600,000
-600,000
Pretax profit
€1,710,000
€1,710,000
€1,710,000
€1,710,000
€1,710,000
  Income tax expense 
-504,450
-504,450
-504,450
-504,450
-504,450
Net income
€1,205,550
€1,205,550
€1,205,550
€1,205,550
€1,205,550
Cash Flows for Valuation
Net income
€1,205,550
€1,205,550
€1,205,550
€1,205,550
€1,205,550
Add back depreciation
600,000
600,000
600,000
600,000
600,000
Changes in net working capital
0
0
0
0
0
Free cash flow for valuation, in euros
€1,805,550
€1,805,550
€1,805,550
€1,805,550
€1,805,550
Cash flow from operations, in dollars
$2,166,660
$2,166,660
$2,166,660
$2,166,660
$2,166,660
Present Value @ 15%
$7,262,980
Notes: We assume, to simplify the analysis, that Ganado Germany has no debt and therefore no interest expenses. We also assume there are no 
­additional capital expenditures required over the five years shown. We also assume no terminal value; Ganado is valued on its coming expected five 
years of cash flow only. Net working capital requirements (accounts receivable + inventory - accounts payable) require no additions in the base case 
due to constant sales. In subsequent scenarios it is assumed receivables are maintained at 45 days of sales, inventory at 10 days of cost of goods 
sold, and accounts payable at 38 days of sales.

338
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
volume is assumed to be a constant 1 million units per year, with a per unit sales price of €12.80 
and a per unit direct cost of €9.60. The corporate income tax rate in Germany is 29.5%, and 
the exchange rate is $1.20/€.
These assumptions generate sales of €12,800,000, and €1,205,550 in net income. Adding net 
income to depreciation and changes in net working capital (which are zero in the base case) 
generates €1,805,550 or $2,166,660 in operating cash flow at $1.20/€. Ganado’s management 
values its subsidiaries by finding the present value of these total free cash flows over the com-
ing five-year period, in U.S. dollars, assuming a 15% discount rate. The baseline analysis finds 
a present value of Ganado Germany of $7,262,980.
On January 1, 2014, before any commercial activity begins, the euro unexpectedly 
drops from $1.2000/€ to $1.0000/€. Operating exposure depends on whether an unexpected 
change in exchange rates causes unanticipated changes in sales volume, sales prices, or 
operating costs.
Following a euro depreciation, Ganado Germany might choose to maintain its domestic 
sales prices constant in euro terms, or it might try to raise domestic prices because compet-
ing imports are now priced higher in Europe. The firm might choose to keep export prices 
constant in terms of foreign currencies, in terms of euros, or somewhere in between (partial 
pass-through). The strategy undertaken depends to a large measure on management’s opin-
ion about the price elasticity of demand, which would also include management’s assessment 
of competitor response. On the cost side, Ganado Germany might raise prices because of 
more expensive imported raw material or components, or perhaps because all domestic 
prices in Germany have risen and labor is now demanding higher wages to compensate for 
domestic inflation.
Ganado Germany’s domestic sales and costs might also be partly determined by the 
effect of the euro depreciation on demand. To the extent that the depreciation, by making 
prices of German goods initially more competitive, stimulates purchases of European goods 
in import-competing sectors of the economy as well as exports of German goods, German 
national income should increase. This assumes that the favorable effect of a euro depreciation 
on comparative prices is not immediately offset by higher domestic inflation. Thus, Ganado 
Germany might be able to sell more goods domestically because of price and income effects 
and internationally because of price effects.
To illustrate the effect of various post-depreciation scenarios on Ganado Germany’s 
­operating exposure, consider four simple cases.
Case 1: Depreciation (all variables remain constant)
Case 2: Increase in sales volume (other variables remain constant)
Case 3: Increase in sales price (other variables remain constant)
Case 4: Sales price, cost, and volume increase
To calculate the changes in value under each of the scenarios, we will use the same five-year 
horizon for any change in cash flow induced by the change in the dollar/euro exchange rate.
Case 1: Depreciation—All Variables Remain Constant
Assume that in the five years ahead no changes occur in sales volume, sales price, or operating 
costs. Profits for the coming year in euros will be as expected, and cash flow from operations 
will still be €1,805,550. There is no change in NWC because all results in euros remain the same. 
The exchange rate change, however, means that operating cash flows measured in U.S. dollars 
decline to $1,805,550. The present value of this series of operating cash flows is $6,052,483, a 
fall in Ganado Germany’s value—when measured in U.S. dollars—of $1,210,497.

339
Operating Exposure    CHAPTER 12 
Case 2: Volume Increases—Other Variables Remain Constant
Assume that, following the depreciation in the euro, sales within Europe increase by 40%, to 
1,400,000 units (assume all other variables remain constant). The depreciation has now made 
German-made telecom components more competitive with imports. Additionally, export vol-
ume increases because German-made components are now cheaper in countries whose curren-
cies have not weakened. The sales price is kept constant in euro terms because management of 
Ganado Germany has not observed any change in local German operating costs and because 
it sees an opportunity to increase market share.
Ganado Germany’s net income rises to €2,107,950, and operating cash flows the first year 
rise to €2,504,553, after a one-time increase in net working capital of €203,397 (using a por-
tion of the increased cash flows). Operating cash flow is €2,707,950 per year for the following 
four years. The present value of Ganado Germany has risen by $1,637,621 over baseline to 
$8,900,601.
Case 3: Sales Price Increases—Other Variables Remain Constant
Assume the euro sales price is raised from €12.80 to €15.36 per unit to maintain the same U.S. 
dollar-equivalent price (the change offsets the depreciation of the euro) and that all other 
variables remain constant.
Before
After
Price in euro
€12.80
€15.36
Exchange rate
$1.20/€
$1.00/€
Price in US$
$15.36
$15.36
Also assume that volume remains constant (the baseline 1,000,000 units) in spite of this 
price increase; that is, customers expect to pay the same dollar-equivalent price, and local costs 
do not change.
Ganado Germany is now better off following the depreciation than it was before because 
the sales price, which is pegged to the international price level, increased. And volume did not 
drop. Net income rises to €3,010,350 per year, with operating cash flow rising to €3,561,254 
in 2014 (after a working capital increase of €49,096) and €3,610,350 per year in the following 
four years. Ganado Germany has now increased in value to $12,059,761.
Case 4: Price, Cost, and Volume Increases
The final case we examine, illustrated in Exhibit 12.6, is a combination of possible outcomes. 
Price increases by 10% to €14.08, direct cost per unit increases by 5% to €10.00, and volume 
rises by 10% to 1,100,000 units. Revenues rise by more than costs, and net income for Ganado 
Germany rises to €2,113,590. Operating cash flow rises to €2,623,683 in 2014 (after NWC 
increase), and €2,713,590 for each of the following four years. Ganado Germany’s present 
value is now $9,018,195.
Other Possibilities
If any portion of sales revenues were incurred in other currencies, the situation would be dif-
ferent. Ganado Germany might leave the foreign sales price unchanged, in effect raising the 
euro-equivalent price. Alternatively, it might leave the euro-equivalent price unchanged, thus 
lowering the foreign sales price in an attempt to gain volume. Of course, it could also position 
itself between these two extremes. Depending on elasticities and the proportion of foreign to 
domestic sales, total sales revenue might rise or fall.

340
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
Assumptions
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Sales volume (units)
1,100,000
1,100,000
1,100,000
1,100,000
1,100,000
Sales price per unit
€14.08
€14.08
€14.08
€14.08
€14.08
Direct cost per unit
€10.00
€10.00
€10.00
€10.00
€10.00
German corporate tax rate
29.5%
29.5%
29.5%
29.5%
29.5%
Exchange rate ($/€)
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Income Statement
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Sales revenue
€15,488,000
€15,488,000
€15,488,000
€15,488,000
€15,488,000
  Direct cost of goods sold
-11,000,000 -11,000,000
-11,000,000
-11,000,000 -11,000,000
  Cash operating expenses (fixed)
-890,000
-890,000
-890,000
-890,000
-890,000
  Depreciation
-600,000
-600,000
-600,000
-600,000
-600,000
Pretax profit
€2,998,000
€2,998,000
€2,998,000
€2,998,000
€2,998,000
  Income tax expense
-884,410
-884,410
-884,410
-884,410
-884,410
Net income
€2,113,590
€2,113,590
€2,113,590
€2,113,590
€2,113,590
Cash Flows for Valuation
Net income
€2,113,590
€2,113,590
€2,113,590
€2,113,590
€2,113,590
Add back depreciation
600,000
600,000
600,000
600,000
600,000
Changes in net working capital
-89,907
0
0
0
0
Free cash flow for valuation, in euros
€2,623,683
€2,713,590
€2,713,590
€2,713,590
€2,713,590
Cash flow from operations, in dollars
$2,623,683
$2,713,590
$2,713,590
$2,713,590
$2,713,590
Present Value @ 15%
$9,018,195
Exhibit 12.6
Ganado Germany: Case 4—Sales Price, Volume, and Costs Increase
If some or all raw material or components were imported and paid for in hard currencies, 
euro operating costs would increase after the depreciation of the euro. Another possibility is 
that local (not imported) euro costs would rise after a depreciation.
Measurement of Loss
Exhibit 12.7 summarizes the change in Ganado Germany’s value across our small set of simple 
cases given an instantaneous and permanent change in the value of the euro from $1.20/€ to 
$1.00/€. These cases estimate Ganado Germany’s operating exposure by measuring the change 
in the subsidiary’s value as measured by the present value of its operating cash flows over the 
coming five-year period.
In Case 1, in which the euro depreciates (all variables remain constant), Ganado’s ­German 
subsidiary’s value falls by the percent change in the exchange rate, -16.7%. In Case 2, in 
which volume increased by 40% as a result of increasing price competitiveness, the German 
subsidiary’s value increased 22.5%. In Case 3, in which the change in the exchange rate was 
completely passed through to a higher sales price, resulting in a massive 66% increase in 
subsidiary value. The final case, Case 4, combined increases in all three income drivers. The 
resulting change in subsidiary valuation of 24.2%, may be creeping toward a “realistic out-
come,” but there are obviously an infinite number of possibilities, which subsidiary manage-
ment should be able to narrow. In the end, although the measurement of operating exposure 

341
Operating Exposure    CHAPTER 12 
is indeed difficult, it is not impossible—and may be worth the time and effort—in progressive 
financial management.
Strategic Management of Operating Exposure
The objective of managing both operating and transaction exposure is to anticipate and influ-
ence the effect of unexpected changes in exchange rates on a firm’s future cash flows, rather 
than merely hoping for the best. To meet this objective, management can diversify the firm’s 
operating and financing base. Management can also change the firm’s operating and financing 
policies if it is concerned. Global Finance in Practice 12.2 highlights one of the challenges to 
management awareness—fixed exchange rates.
It has long been argued that when firms know the exchange 
rate cannot or will not change, they will conduct their business 
as if currency exposure—at least against the major currency(s) 
to which their home currency is fixed—will not occur. As one 
study of currency risk in India noted, “These results support 
the hypothesis that pegged exchange rates induce moral haz-
ard and increase financial fragility.”
Moral hazard is the concept that a party—an agent, 
an individual, or a firm—will take on more risk when it either 
knows or believes that a second party will handle, accom-
modate, or insure the negative repercussions of the firm’s 
risk-taking decisions. In other words, a firm may take more 
risk when it knows that someone else will pick up the tab. In a 
fixed or managed exchange rate regime, that “someone else” 
is represented by the central bank, which tells all those under-
taking cross-currency contractual obligations and exposures 
that the exchange rate will not change.
Although there is still scant research on this specific 
practice for most of the emerging markets, it could prove to 
be a significant issue in the years to come, as many emerg-
ing markets become the object of major new international 
capital flows—the so-called globalization of finance. If com-
mercial firms in those markets are not aware of the risk that 
the country itself may be taking by opening the door to inter-
national capital flows, both in and out of the country, and 
the impact they may have on the country’s exchange rate, 
those firms may be in for a wild ride in the immediate years 
to come.
Sources: “Does the currency regime shape unhedged currency ­exposure?,” 
by Ila Patnaik and Ajay Shah, Journal of International Money and Finance, 
29, 2010, pp. 760–769. See also “Moral Hazard, Financial Crises, and 
the Choice of Exchange Rate Regimes,” Apanard ­Angkinand and Thomas 
­Willett, June 2006; and “Exchange-Rate Regimes for Emerging Markets: 
Moral Hazard and International Borrowing,” by Ronald I. McKinnon and 
Huw Pill, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 15, No. 3, 1999.
Global Finance in Practice 12.2
Do Fixed Exchange Rates Increase Corporate  
Currency Risk in Emerging Markets?
Case
Exchange 
Rate
Price
Volume
Cost
Valuation
Change  
in Value
Percent 
Change 
in Value
Baseline
$1.20/€
€12.80
1,000,000
€9.60
$7,262,980
—
1: No variable changes
$1.00/€
€12.80
1,000,000
€9.60
$6,052,483
($1,210,497)
-16.7%
2: Volume increases
$1.00/€
€12.80
1,400,000
€9.60
$8,900,601
$1,637,621
22.5%
3: Sales price increases
$1.00/€
€15.60
1,000,000
€9.60
$12,059,761
$4,796,781
66.0%
4: Price, cost, volume increase
$1.00/€
€14.08
1,100,000
€10.00
$9,018,195
$1,755,215
24.2%
Exhibit 12.7
Summary of Ganado Germany Value Changes to Depreciation of the Euro

342
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
The key to managing operating exposure at the strategic level is for management to rec-
ognize a disequilibrium in parity conditions when it occurs and to be pre-positioned to react 
most appropriately. This task can best be accomplished if a firm diversifies internationally both 
its operating and its financing bases. Diversifying operations means diversifying sales, location 
of production facilities, and raw material sources. Diversifying the financing base means raising 
funds in more than one capital market and in more than one currency.
A diversification strategy permits the firm to react either actively or passively, depending 
on management’s risk preference, to opportunities presented by disequilibrium conditions in 
the foreign exchange, capital, and product markets. Such a strategy does not require manage-
ment to predict disequilibrium but only to recognize it when it occurs. It does require man-
agement to consider how competitors are pre-positioned with respect to their own operating 
exposures. This knowledge should reveal which firms would be helped or hurt competitively 
by alternative disequilibrium scenarios.
Diversifying Operations
Diversification of operations is one structural strategy to pre-positioning the firm for manag-
ing operating exposure. Consider the case in which purchasing power parity is temporarily in 
disequilibrium. Although the disequilibrium may have been unpredictable, management can 
often recognize its symptoms as soon as they occur. For example, management might notice 
a change in comparative costs in the firm’s plants located in different countries. It might also 
observe changed profit margins or sales volume in one area compared to another, depending 
on price and income elasticities of demand and competitors’ reactions.
Recognizing a temporary change in worldwide competitive conditions permits man-
agement to make changes in operating strategies. Management might make marginal shifts 
in sourcing raw materials, components, or finished products. If spare capacity exists, pro-
duction runs can be lengthened in one country and reduced in another. The marketing 
effort can be strengthened in export markets where the firm’s products have become more 
price competitive because of the disequilibrium condition. The challenge of course is to 
know when the change is temporary or semi-permanent, as Global Finance in Practice 12.3 
describes.
Even if management does not actively alter normal operations when exchange rates 
change, the firm should experience some beneficial portfolio effects. The variability of its cash 
flows is probably reduced by international diversification of its production, sourcing, and sales 
because exchange rate changes under disequilibrium conditions are likely to increase the firm’s 
competitiveness in some markets while reducing it in others. In that case, operating exposure 
would be neutralized.
In contrast to the internationally diversified MNE, a purely domestic firm might be 
subject to the full impact of foreign exchange operating exposure even though it does not 
have foreign currency cash flows. For example, it could experience intense import competi-
tion in its domestic market from competing firms producing in countries with undervalued 
currencies.
A purely domestic firm does not have the option to react to an international disequilib-
rium condition in the same manner as an MNE. In fact, a purely domestic firm will not be 
positioned to recognize that a disequilibrium exists because it lacks comparative data from its 
own internal sources. By the time external data are available, it is often too late to react. Even 
if a domestic firm recognizes the disequilibrium, it cannot quickly shift production and sales 
into foreign markets in which it has had no previous presence.
Constraints exist that may limit the feasibility of diversifying production locations. 
The technology of a particular industry may require large economies of scale. For example, 

343
Operating Exposure    CHAPTER 12 
The United Kingdom’s largest trading partner is the European 
Union, and although the two have been heavily intertwined 
for many years, the U.K. has not joined the euro. Keeping a 
separate currency, the British pound, and the associated abil-
ity to define its own monetary policy and currency has been a 
fundamental pillar of British pride and independence. But that 
independence has come at a price—what might be termed 
trans-channel (think English Channel) currency shifts.
The past 20 years have seen at least three different cur-
rency eras of relative strength between the pound and the 
euro. Prior to the launch of the euro there was a relatively 
“weak pound” period. But in 1996 there was a seismic shift—
roughly from GBP0.80 = EUR1.00 to GBP0.65—and this 
shift persisted for more than a decade. During this period 
all things British became relatively more expensive on the 
Continent. British export prices were decidedly less com-
petitive, while European exports to the U.K. gained at the 
U.K.’s expense. As has been the case so many times around 
the globe, this basic terms of trade shift altered fundamental 
national economies.
Global Finance in Practice 12.3
The United Kingdom and Europe: Trans-Channel Currency Shifts
British pounds (GBP) = 1.00 European euro (EUR)
The Trans-Channel Eras of Currency Shift
0.50
Jan-94
Aug-94
Mar-95
Oct-95
May-96
Dec-96
Jul-97
Feb-98
Sep-98
Apr-99
Nov-99
Jun-00
Jan-01
Aug-01
Mar-02
Oct-02
May-03
Dec-03
Jul-04
Feb-05
Sep-05
Apr-06
Nov-06
Jun-07
Jan-08
Aug-08
Mar-09
Oct-09
May-10
Dec-10
Jul-11
Feb-12
Sep-12
Apr-13
Nov-13
Jun-14
Jan-15
0.55
0.60
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
With the global ﬁnancial crisis of Fall 2008, the pound weakened
dramatically against the euro, settling around 0.85 GBP = 1.00
EUR. In 2014, however, it started to strengthen once again
Pre-Euro period in which the pound
traded against the multiple currencies
of the European Monetary System
Following a steep appreciation of the pound in 1996, it
continued to trade stronger and stronger against the euro after
the euro’s introduction in 1999, holding between 0.60 an 0.70
GBP = 1.00 EUR until 2008
But the tectonic plates moved once again in 2008, 
with a new trans-channel currency shift moving the Brit-
ish pound weaker once again. Now the pound weak-
ened from GBP0.65 = EUR1.00 to a more volatile, but 
seemingly medium to long-term fundamental path around 
GBP0.85 = EUR1.00. British products and services—those 
priced in British pounds—were once again highly affordable to 
customers on the continent. How long this new era will last is 
anyone’s guess, but it has already persisted for seven years. 
The ways in which individual multinational firms on either side 
of the Channel have managed this periodic trans-channel cur-
rency shift is operating exposure management at work.
high-tech firms, such as Intel, prefer to locate in places where they have easy access to high-
tech suppliers, a highly educated workforce, and one or more leading universities. Their R&D 
efforts are closely tied to initial production and sales activities.

344
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
Diversifying Financing
If a firm diversifies its financing sources, it will be pre-positioned to take advantage of tempo-
rary deviations from the international Fisher effect. If interest rate differentials do not equal 
expected changes in exchange rates, opportunities to lower a firm’s cost of capital will exist. 
However, to be able to switch financing sources, a firm must already be well known in the 
international investment community, with banking contacts firmly established. Again, this is 
not typically an option for a domestic firm.
As we will demonstrate in Chapter 13, diversifying sources of financing, regardless of the 
currency of denomination, can lower a firm’s cost of capital and increase its availability of capi-
tal. The ability to source capital from outside of a segmented market is especially important 
for firms resident in emerging markets.
Proactive Management of Operating Exposure
Operating and transaction exposures can be partially managed by adopting operating or financ-
ing policies that offset anticipated foreign exchange exposures. Five of the most commonly 
employed proactive policies are (1) matching currency cash flows; (2) risk-sharing agreements; 
(3) back-to-back or parallel loans; (4) cross-currency swaps, and (5) contractual approaches.
Matching Currency Cash Flows
One way to offset an anticipated continuous long-term exposure to a particular currency is 
to acquire debt denominated in that currency. Exhibit 12.8 depicts the exposure of a U.S. firm 
with continuing export sales to Canada. In order to compete effectively in Canadian markets, 
the firm invoices all export sales in Canadian dollars. This policy results in a continuing receipt 
of Canadian dollars month after month. If the export sales are part of a continuing supplier 
relationship, the long Canadian dollar position is relatively predictable and constant. This 
U.S.
Corporation
Canadian 
Corporation
(buyer of goods)
Canadian 
Bank
(loans funds)
Payment for goods
in Canadian dollars
Principal and interest
payments on debt
in Canadian dollars
U.S. Corp. borrows
Canadian dollar debt
from Canadian bank
Exports
goods to
Canada
Exposure: The sale of goods to Canada creates a foreign
currency exposure from the inﬂow of Canadian dollars.
Hedge: The Canadian dollar debt payments act as a ﬁnancial
hedge by requiring debt service, an outﬂow of Canadian dollars.
Exhibit 12.8
Debt Financing as a Financial Hedge

345
Operating Exposure    CHAPTER 12 
endless series of transaction exposures could of course be continually hedged with forward 
contracts or other contractual hedges, as discussed in Chapter 9.
But what if the firm sought out a continual use—an outflow—for its continual inflow of 
Canadian dollars? If the U.S. firm were to acquire part of its debt-capital in the Canadian dol-
lar markets, it could use the relatively predictable Canadian dollar cash inflows from export 
sales to service the principal and interest payments on Canadian dollar debt and be cash flow 
matched. The U.S.-based firm has hedged an operational cash inflow by creating a financial 
cash outflow, and so it does not have to actively manage the exposure with contractual financial 
instruments such as forward contracts. This form of hedging, sometimes referred to as match-
ing, is effective in eliminating currency exposure when the exposure cash flow is relatively 
constant and predictable over time.
The list of potential matching strategies is nearly endless. A second alternative would be 
for the U.S. firm to seek out potential suppliers of materials or components in Canada as a 
substitute for U.S. or other foreign firms. The firm would then possess both an operational 
Canadian dollar cash inflow—a receivable—and a Canadian dollar operational cash outflow—
a payable. If the cash flows were roughly the same in magnitude and timing, the strategy would 
be a natural hedge, the term “natural” referring to operating-based activities.
A third alternative, often referred to as currency switching, would be to pay foreign sup-
pliers with Canadian dollars. For example, if the U.S. firm imported components from Mexico, 
the Mexican firms themselves might welcome payment in Canadian dollars because they are 
short Canadian dollars in their multinational cash flow network.
Risk-Sharing Agreements
An alternative arrangement for managing a long-term cash flow exposure between firms with 
a continuing buyer-supplier relationship is risk-sharing. Risk-sharing is a contractual arrange-
ment in which the buyer and seller agree to “share” or split currency movement impacts on 
payments between them. If the two firms are interested in a long-term relationship based on 
product quality and supplier reliability, and not on the whims of the currency markets, a coop-
erative agreement to share the burden of currency risk may be in order.
If Ford’s North American operations import automotive parts from Mazda (Japan) every 
month, year after year, major swings in exchange rates can benefit one party at the expense of 
the other. (Ford is a major stockholder of Mazda, but it does not exert control over its opera-
tions. Therefore, the risk-sharing agreement is particularly appropriate; transactions between 
the two are both intercompany and intracompany in nature. A risk-sharing agreement solidi-
fies the partnership.) One potential solution would be for Ford and Mazda to agree that 
all purchases by Ford will be made in Japanese yen at the current exchange rate, as long as 
the spot rate on the date of invoice is between, say, ¥115/$ and ¥125/$. If the exchange rate 
is between these values on the payment dates, Ford agrees to accept whatever transaction 
exposure exists (because it is paying in a foreign currency). If, however, the exchange rate 
falls outside this range on the payment date, Ford and Mazda will share the difference equally.
For example, Ford has an account payable of ¥25,000,000 for the month of March. If the 
spot rate on the date of invoice is ¥110/$, the Japanese yen would have appreciated versus the 
dollar, causing Ford’s costs of purchasing automotive parts to rise. Since this rate falls outside 
the contractual range, Mazda would agree to accept a total payment in Japanese yen that 
would result from a difference of ¥5/$ (i.e., ¥115 - ¥110). Ford’s payment would be as follows:
C
¥25,000,000
¥115.00/$ - a ¥5.00/$
2
b S
= ¥25,000,000
¥112.50/$
= $222,222.22.

346
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
At a spot rate of ¥110/$, Ford’s costs for March would be $227,272.73 without the risk-­
sharing agreement. With the agreement, however, Ford’s payment is calculated using an 
exchange rate of ¥112.50/$, a payment of $222,222.22. The risk-sharing agreement constitutes 
a savings for Ford of $5,050.51 (this “savings” is a reduction in a cost increase, not a true cost 
reduction). Both parties therefore incur costs and benefits from exchange rate movements 
outside the specified band. Note that the movement could just as easily have been in Mazda’s 
favor if the spot rate had moved to ¥130/$.
The risk-sharing arrangement is intended to smooth the impact on both parties of vola-
tile and unpredictable exchange rate movements. Of course, a sustained appreciation of one 
currency versus the other would require the negotiation of a new sharing agreement, but the 
ultimate goal of the agreement is to alleviate currency pressures on the continuing business 
relationship.
Risk-sharing agreements like these have been in use for nearly 50 years on world mar-
kets. They became something of a rarity during the 1960s when exchange rates were rela-
tively stable under the Bretton Woods Agreement. But with the return to floating exchange 
rates in the 1970s, firms with long-term customer-supplier relationships across borders have 
returned to some old ways of maintaining mutually beneficial long-term trade. Global 
Finance in ­Practice 12.4 describes how one U.S.-based firm, Harley-Davidson, has used 
risk-sharing.
Harley-Davidson (U.S.) is representative of a company with 
centralized manufacturing (all in the United States with costs 
in U.S. dollars) and global sales (predominantly in U.S. dol-
lars, European euros, Australian dollars, and Japanese yen). 
Dealerships in individual companies therefore purchase from 
Harley and sell into the local market in local currency. The 
foreign dealerships need to be assured of stable product 
costs—in local currency and at a predictable purchase price 
of the hogs from Harley (U.S.)—in order to offer stable and 
competitive prices in-country. The figure below illustrates how 
a risk-sharing structure can be devised by Harley to provide 
the desired stability to its Australian dealerships.
Global Finance in Practice  12.4
Hedging Hogs: Risk-Sharing at Harley-Davidson
As long as the spot rate during the period stays within the 
Neutral Zone, Harley would be responsible for managing the 
currency exposures that it would incur on the corporate level. If 
the spot rate moves into the Sharing Zone during the period, the 
exchange rate used in pricing is adjusted to “share” the change 
equally. If the spot rate moves beyond the Sharing Zone into the 
Renegotiation Zone during the period, Harley will work with for-
eign distributors to establish a new central rate moving forward.
+10.0%
+4.0%
Spot
rate
–4.0%
–10.0%
AUD1.0909
Renegotiation Zone
Sharing Zone
Neutral Zone
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
AUD1.1538
AUD1.2500
AUD1.3333
Time
Central Rate
AUD1.2000 = USD1.00

347
Operating Exposure    CHAPTER 12 
Back-to-Back or Parallel Loans
A back-to-back loan, also referred to as a parallel loan or credit swap, occurs when two busi-
ness firms in separate countries arrange to borrow each other’s currency for a specific period 
of time. At an agreed terminal date they return the borrowed currencies. The operation is 
conducted outside the foreign exchange markets, although spot quotations may be used as 
the reference point for determining the amount of funds to be swapped. Such a swap creates a 
covered hedge against exchange loss, since each company, on its own books, borrows the same 
currency it repays. Back-to-back loans are also used at a time of actual or anticipated legal 
limitations on the transfer of investment funds to or from either country.
The structure of a typical back-to-back loan is illustrated in Exhibit 12.9. A British parent 
firm that wants to invest funds in its Dutch subsidiary locates a Dutch parent firm that wants to 
invest funds in the United Kingdom. Avoiding the exchange markets entirely, the British parent 
lends pounds to the Dutch subsidiary in the United Kingdom, while the Dutch parent lends 
euros to the British subsidiary in the Netherlands. The two loans would be for equal values at 
the current spot rate and for a specified maturity. At maturity, the two separate loans would each 
be repaid to the original lender, again without any need to use the foreign exchange markets. 
Neither loan carries any foreign exchange risk, and neither loan normally needs the approval of 
any governmental body regulating the availability of foreign exchange for investment purposes.
Parent company guarantees are not needed on the back-to-back loans because each loan 
carries the right of offset in the event of default of the other loan. A further agreement can 
provide for maintenance of principal parity in case of changes in the spot rate between the two 
countries. For example, if the pound dropped by more than, say, 6% for as long as 30 days, the 
British parent might have to advance additional pounds to the Dutch subsidiary to bring the 
principal value of the two loans back to parity. A similar provision would protect the British if 
British Parent
Firm
Dutch Firm’s
British Subsidiary
1. British ﬁrm wishes to invest funds
in its Dutch subsidiary
3. British ﬁrm loans British pounds
directly to the Dutch ﬁrm’s British
subsidiary
Direct loan
in pounds
Dutch Parent
Firm
British Firm’s
Dutch Subsidiary
2. British ﬁrm identiﬁes a Dutch ﬁrm wishing
to invest funds in its British subsidiary
4. British ﬁrm’s Dutch subsidiary loans
euros from the Dutch parent
The back-to-back loan provides a method for parent-subsidiary cross-border ﬁnancing
without incurring direct currency exposure.
Direct loan
in euros
Indirect
Financing
Exhibit 12.9
Back-to-Back Loans for Currency Hedging

348
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
the euro should weaken. Although this parity provision might lead to changes in the amount of 
home currency each party must lend during the period of the agreement, it does not increase 
foreign exchange risk, because at maturity all loans are repaid in the same currency loaned.
There are two fundamental impediments to widespread use of the back-to-back loan. First, 
it is difficult for a firm to find a partner, termed a counterparty, for the currency, amount, and 
timing desired. Second, a risk exists that one of the parties will fail to return the borrowed 
funds at the designated maturity—although this risk is minimized because each party to the 
loan has, in effect, 100% collateral, albeit in a different currency. These disadvantages have led 
to the rapid development and wide use of the cross-currency swap.
Cross-Currency Swaps
A cross-currency swap resembles a back-to-back loan except that it does not appear on a firm’s 
balance sheet. As detailed in Chapter 8, the term swap is used in a variety of ways in interna-
tional finance, and care should be used to identify the exact use in a specific case. In a currency 
swap, a firm and a swap dealer (or swap bank) agree to exchange an equivalent amount of 
two different currencies for a specified period of time. Currency swaps can be negotiated for 
a wide range of maturities up to 30 years in some cases. The swap dealer or swap bank acts as 
a middleman in setting up the swap agreement.
A typical currency swap first requires two firms to borrow funds in markets and curren-
cies in which they are well known. For example, a Japanese firm would typically borrow yen 
on a regular basis in its home market. If, however, the Japanese firm were exporting to the 
United States and earning U.S. dollars, it might wish to construct a matching cash flow hedge 
that would allow it to use the U.S. dollars earned to make regular debt-service payments on 
U.S. dollar debt. If, however, the Japanese firm is not well known in the U.S. financial markets, 
it may have no ready access to U.S. dollar debt.
One way in which this Japanese firm could, in effect, borrow dollars, is to participate in a 
cross-currency swap as seen in Exhibit 12.10. The firm could swap its yen-denominated debt 
Both the Japanese corporation and the U.S. corporation would like to enter into a cross-currency 
swap which would allow them to use foreign currency cash inﬂows to service debt.
Wishes to enter into a swap to
“pay dollars” and “receive yen.”
Wishes to enter into a swap to
“pay yen” and “receive dollars.”
Swap Dealer
Sales to U.S.
Debt in yen
Receive
yen
Pay
yen
Inﬂow
of US$
Sales to Japan
Debt in US$
Inﬂow
of yen
Pay
dollars
Receive
dollars
Assets
Liabilities 
and Equity
Assets
Liabilities 
and Equity
Japanese
Corporation
United States
Corporation
Exhibit 12.10
Using Cross-Currency Swaps

349
Operating Exposure    CHAPTER 12 
service payments with another firm that has U.S. dollar-debt service payments. This swap 
would have the Japanese firm “paying dollars” and “receiving yen.” The Japanese firm would 
then have dollar debt service without actually borrowing U.S. dollars. Simultaneously, a U.S. 
corporation would actually be entering into a cross-currency swap in the opposite direction—
“paying yen” and “receiving dollars.” The swap dealer takes the role of a middleman. Swap 
dealers arrange most swaps on a “blind basis,” meaning that the initiating firm does not know 
who is on the other side of the swap arrangement—the counterparty. The initiating firm views 
the dealer or bank as its counterparty. Because the swap markets are dominated by the major 
money center banks worldwide, the counterparty risk is acceptable. Because the swap dealer’s 
business is arranging swaps, the dealer can generally arrange for the currency, amount, and 
timing of the desired swap.
Accountants in the United States treat the currency swap as a foreign exchange transac-
tion rather than as debt and they treat the obligation to reverse the swap at some later date 
as a forward exchange contract. Forward exchange contracts can be matched against assets, 
but they are entered in a firm’s footnotes rather than as balance sheet items. The result is that 
both translation and operating exposures are avoided, and neither a long-term receivable nor 
a long-term debt is created on the balance sheet.
Contractual Approaches: Hedging the Unhedgeable
Some MNEs now attempt to hedge their operating exposure with contractual strategies. A 
number of firms like Merck (U.S.) have undertaken long-term currency option positions—
hedges designed to offset lost earnings from adverse exchange rate changes. This hedging of 
what many of these firms refer to as strategic exposure or competitive exposure seems to fly 
in the face of traditional theory.
The ability of firms to hedge the “unhedgeable” is dependent upon predictability: 
(1) the predictability of the firm’s future cash flows, and (2) the predictability of the firm’s 
competitor’s responses to exchange rate changes. Although the management of many firms 
may believe they are capable of predicting their own cash flows, in practice few feel capable 
of accurately predicting competitor response. Many firms still find timely measurement of 
exposure challenging.
Merck is an example of a firm whose management feels capable of both. The company 
possesses relatively predictable long-run revenue streams due to the product-niche nature of 
the pharmaceuticals industry. As a U.S.-based exporter to foreign markets, markets in which 
sales levels by product are relatively predictable and prices are often regulated by govern-
ment, Merck can accurately predict net long-term cash flows in foreign currencies five and 
ten years into the future. Merck has a relatively undiversified operating structure, and it is 
highly centralized in terms of where research, development, and production costs are located. 
Merck’s managers feel the company has no real alternatives but contractual hedging if it is to 
weather long-term unexpected exchange rate changes. Merck has purchased over-the-counter 
(OTC) long-term put options on foreign currencies versus the U.S. dollar as insurance against 
potential lost earnings from exchange rate changes.
A significant question remains as to the true effectiveness of hedging operating 
exposure with contractual hedges. The fact remains that even after feared exchange rate 
movements and put option position payoffs have occurred, the firm is competitively disad-
vantaged. The capital outlay required for the purchase of such sizeable put option positions 
is capital not used for the potential diversification of operations, which in the long run 
might have more effectively maintained the firm’s global market share and international 
competitiveness.

350
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
Summary Points
■
■
Operating exposure measures the change in value of the 
firm that results from changes in future operating cash 
flows caused by an unexpected change in exchange rates.
■
■
Operating strategies for the management of operating 
exposure emphasize the structuring of firm operations 
in order to create matching streams of cash flows by 
currency.
■
■
The objective of operating exposure management is 
to anticipate and influence the effect of unexpected 
changes in exchange rates on a firm’s future cash flow, 
rather than being forced into passive reaction to such 
changes.
■
■
Proactive policies include matching currency cash flows, 
currency risk-sharing clauses, back-to-back loan struc-
tures, and cross-currency swap agreements.
■
■
Contractual approaches (i.e., options and forwards) 
have occasionally been used to hedge operating 
­exposure but are costly and possibly ineffectual.
It was January 2002, and Toyota Motor Europe Manu-
facturing (TMEM) had a problem. More specifically, Mr. 
Toyoda Shuhei, the new President of TMEM, had a prob-
lem. He was on his way to Toyota Motor Company’s (Japan) 
corporate offices outside Tokyo to explain the continuing 
losses of the European manufacturing and sales operations. 
The CEO of Toyota Motor Company, Mr. ­Hiroshi Okuda, 
was expecting a proposal from Mr. Shuhei to reduce and 
eventually eliminate the European losses. The situation 
was intense given that TMEM was the only major Toyota 
­subsidiary suffering losses.
Toyota and Auto Manufacturing
Toyota Motor Company was the number one automobile 
manufacturer in Japan, the third largest manufacturer in the 
world by unit sales (5.5 million units or one auto every six 
seconds), but number eight in sales in Continental Europe. 
The global automobile manufacturing industry had been 
experiencing, like many industries, continued consolidation 
in recent years as margins were squeezed, economies of 
scale and scope pursued, and global sales slowed.
Toyota was no different. It had continued to rational-
ize its manufacturing along regional lines. Toyota had 
continued to increase the amount of local manufacturing 
in North America. In 2001, over 60% of Toyota’s North 
American sales were locally manufactured. But Toyota’s 
European sales were nowhere close to this yet. Most of 
Toyota’s automobile and truck manufacturing for Europe 
was still done in Japan. In 2001, only 24% of the autos 
sold in Europe were manufactured in Europe (including 
the United Kingdom). The remainder was imported from 
Japan (see Exhibit A).
Toyota Motor Europe sold 634,000 automobiles in 
2000. This was the second largest foreign market for 
Toyota, second only to North America. TMEM expected 
significant growth in European sales, and was planning to 
expand European manufacturing and sales to 800,000 units 
by 2005. But for fiscal 2001, the unit reported operating 
losses of ¥9.897 billion ($82.5 million at ¥120/$). TMEM 
had three assembly plants in the United Kingdom, one 
plant in Turkey, and one plant in Portugal. In November 
2000, Toyota Motor Europe announced publicly that it 
would not generate positive profits for the next two years 
due to the weakness of the euro.
Toyota had recently introduced a new model to the 
European market, the Yaris, which was proving very suc-
cessful. The Yaris, a super-small vehicle with a 1,000cc 
engine, had sold more than 180,000 units in 2000. Although 
the Yaris had been specifically designed for the European 
market, the decision had been made early on to manufac-
ture it in Japan.
Currency Exposure
The primary source of the continuing operating losses suf-
fered by TMEM was the falling value of the euro. Over 
the recent two-year period, the euro had fallen in value 
Toyota’s European Operating Exposure1
Mini-Case
1Copyright © 2005 Thunderbird School of Global Management. All rights reserved. This case was prepared by Professor 
Michael H. Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only, and not to indicate effective or ineffective management.

351
Operating Exposure    CHAPTER 12 
Toyota Motor Europe
Manufacturing
Continental
European Sales (€)
United Kingdom (£)
Portugal (€)
Turkey (Lira)
Toyota Japan
Manufacturing
The problem: The euro had been 
falling continuously against both the
Japanese yen and the British pound.
26% of
total sales
in Europe
74% of
total sales
in Europe
Key subcomponents (¥)
Complete autos (¥)
Exhibit A
 Toyota’s European Currency Operating Structure
Exhibit B
  Japanese yen per Euro Spot Rate (weekly, 1999–2001)
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Japanese yen per euro (¥/€)
1/6/1999
2/6/1999
3/6/1999
4/6/1999
5/6/1999
6/6/1999
7/6/1999
8/6/1999
9/6/1999
10/6/1999
11/6/1999
12/6/1999
1/6/2000
2/6/2000
3/6/2000
4/6/2000
5/6/2000
6/6/2000
7/6/2000
8/6/2000
9/6/2000
10/6/2000
11/6/2000
12/6/2000
1/6/2001
2/6/2001
3/6/2001
4/6/2001
5/6/2001
6/6/2001
7/6/2001
8/6/2001
9/6/2001
10/6/2001
11/6/2001
12/6/2001
against both the Japanese yen and the British pound. 
As ­demonstrated in Exhibit A, the cost base for most of 
the autos sold within the Continental European market 
was the Japanese yen. Exhibit B illustrates the slide of the 
euro against the Japanese yen.
As the yen rose against the euro, costs increased signifi-
cantly when measured in euros. If Toyota wished to pre-
serve its price competitiveness in the European market, 
it had to absorb most of the exchange rate changes and 
suffer reduced margins on both completed cars and key 

352
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
United Kingdom manufacturing operations. TMEM wished 
to decrease the number of key components imported 
from Toyota Japan in order to reduce the currency expo-
sure of the U.K. unit. But again, the continuing problem 
of the ­British pound’s value against the euro, as shown in 
Exhibit C, reduced the effectiveness of even this solution.
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 Why do you think Toyota waited so long to move much 
of its manufacturing for European sales to Europe?
2.	 If the British pound were to join the European 
­Monetary Union would the problem be resolved? 
How likely do you think this is?
3.	 If you were Mr. Shuhei, how would you categorize 
your problems and solutions? What was a short-term 
problem? What was a long-term problem?
4.	 What measures would you recommend that Toyota 
Europe take to resolve the continuing operating 
losses?
subcomponents shipped to its European manufacturing 
centers. Deciding to manufacture the Yaris in Japan had 
only exacerbated the situation.
Management Response
Toyota management was not sitting passively by. In 2001, 
they had initiated some assembly operations in Valenci-
ennes, France. Although accounting for a relatively small 
percentage of total European sales as of January 2002, 
Toyota planned to continue to expand its European capac-
ity and capabilities and to source about 25% of European 
sales by 2004. Relocation of Yaris assembly to Valenciennes 
was scheduled for 2002. The continuing problem, however, 
was that it was an assembly facility, meaning that many of 
the expensive value-added components of the autos being 
assembled were still based in either Japan or the United 
Kingdom.
Mr. Shuhei, with the approval of Mr. Okuda, had also 
initiated a local sourcing and procurement program for the 
0.56
0.58
0.60
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68
0.70
0.72
1/6/1999
2/6/1999
3/6/1999
4/6/1999
5/6/1999
6/6/1999
7/6/1999
8/6/1999
9/6/1999
10/6/1999
11/6/1999
12/6/1999
1/6/2000
2/6/2000
3/6/2000
4/6/2000
5/6/2000
6/6/2000
7/6/2000
8/6/2000
9/6/2000
10/6/2000
11/6/2000
12/6/2000
1/6/2001
2/6/2001
3/6/2001
4/6/2001
5/6/2001
6/6/2001
7/6/2001
8/6/2001
9/6/2001
10/6/2001
11/6/2001
12/6/2001
British pounds per euro (£/€)
Exhibit C
British Pounds per Euro Spot Rate (weekly, 1999–2001)

353
Operating Exposure    CHAPTER 12 
12.	 Matching Currency Exposure. Explain how matching 
currency cash flows can offset operating exposure.
13.	 Risk Sharing. An alternative arrangement for manag-
ing operating exposure between firms with a continu-
ing buyer-supplier relationship is risk sharing. Explain 
how risk sharing works.
14.	 Back-to-Back Loans. Explain how back-to-back 
loans can hedge foreign exchange operating expo-
sure. Would firms have any specific worries about their 
partner in a back-to-back loan arrangement?
15.	 Currency Swaps. Explain how currency swaps can 
hedge foreign exchange operating exposure. What are 
the accounting advantages of currency swaps?
16.	 Hedging the Unhedgeable. How do some firms 
attempt to hedge their long-term operation exposure 
with contractual hedges? What assumptions do they 
make in order to justify contractual hedging of their 
operating exposure? How effective is such contractual 
hedging in your opinion?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Mauna Loa Macadamia. Mauna Loa Macadamia, a 
macadamia nut subsidiary of Hershey’s with planta-
tions on the slopes of its namesake volcano in Hilo, 
Hawaii, exports macadamia nuts worldwide. The 
Japanese market is its biggest export market, with 
average annual sales invoiced in yen to Japanese cus-
tomers of ¥1,200,000,000. At the present exchange 
rate of ¥125/$, this is equivalent to $9,600,000. Sales 
are relatively equally distributed throughout the year. 
They show up as a ¥250,00,000 account receivable 
on Mauna Loa’s balance sheet. Credit terms to each 
customer allow for 60 days before payment is due. 
Monthly cash collections are typically ¥100,000,000.
Mauna Loa would like to hedge its yen receipts, 
but it has too many customers and transactions to 
make it practical to sell each receivable forward. It 
does not want to use options because they are consid-
ered to be too expensive for this particular purpose. 
Therefore, they have decided to use a “matching” 
hedge by borrowing yen.
a.	 How much should Mauna Loa borrow in yen?
b.	 What should be the terms of payment on the yen 
loan?
2.	 Acuña Leather Goods. DeMagistris Fashion Com-
pany, based in New York City, imports leather coats 
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Exposure Definitions. Define operating exposure, 
economic exposure, and competitive exposure. Can 
you provide any insights into what may be behind the 
use of the different terms?
2.	 Operating Exposure versus Translation Exposure. 
What do you see as the primary difference between 
operating exposure and translation exposure? Would 
this have the same meaning to a private firm as a pub-
licly traded firm?
3.	 Unexpected Exchange Rate Changes. Why do unex-
pected exchange rate changes contribute to operating 
exposure, but expected exchange rate changes do not?
4.	 Time Horizon. Explain the time horizons used to ana-
lyze and measure unexpected changes in exchange 
rates.
5.	 Static versus Dynamic. What are examples of static 
exposures versus dynamic exposures?
6.	 Operating versus Financing Cash Flows. According to 
financial theory, which is more important to the value 
of the firm, financing or operating cash flows?
7.	 Macroeconomic Uncertainty. Explain how the con-
cept of macroeconomic uncertainty expands the scope 
of analyzing operating exposure.
8.	 Strategic Response. The objective of both operating 
and transaction exposure management is to antici-
pate and influence the effect of unexpected changes 
in exchange rates on a firm’s future cash flows. What 
strategic alternative policies exist to enable manage-
ment to manage these exposures?
9.	 Managing Operating Exposure. The key to manag-
ing operating exposure at the strategic level is for 
management to recognize a disequilibrium in parity 
conditions when it occurs and to be pre-positioned to 
react most appropriately. How can this task best be 
accomplished?
10.	 Diversification. How can a multinational firm diver-
sify operations? How can it diversify its financing? 
Do you believe these are effective ways of managing 
operating exposure?
11.	 Proactive Management. Operating exposures can be 
partially managed by adopting operating or financing 
policies that offset anticipated foreign exchange expo-
sures. What are four of the most commonly employed 
proactive policies?

354
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
If Manitowoc Crane raises the yuan price so as to 
maintain its dollar price, volume will increase at only 
1% per annum for eight years, starting from the lower 
initial base of 9,000 units. Again, dollar costs will not 
change, and at the end of eight years Manitowoc Crane 
will stop exporting to China. Manitowoc’s weighted 
average cost of capital is 10%. Given these consider-
ations, what should be Manitowoc’s pricing policy?
5.	 MacLoren Automotive. MacLoren Automotive man-
ufactures British sports cars, a number of which are 
exported to New Zealand for payment in pounds 
sterling. The distributor sells the sports cars in New 
Zealand for New Zealand dollars. The New Zea-
land distributor is unable to carry all of the foreign 
exchange risk, and would not sell MacLoren models 
unless MacLoren could share some of the foreign 
exchange risk.
MacLoren has agreed that sales for a given model 
year will initially be priced at a “base” spot rate between 
the New Zealand dollar and pound sterling set to be 
the spot mid-rate at the beginning of that model year. 
As long as the actual exchange rate is within {5% of 
that base rate, payment will be made in pounds sterling. 
That is, the New Zealand distributor assumes all for-
eign exchange risk. However, if the spot rate at time of 
shipment falls outside of this {5% range, MacLoren 
will share equally (i.e., 50/50) the difference between 
the actual spot rate and the base rate. For the current 
model year the base rate is NZ$1.6400/£.
a.	 What are the outside ranges within which the New 
Zealand importer must pay at the then current spot 
rate?
b.	 If MacLoren ships 10 sports cars to the New Zea-
land distributor at a time when the spot exchange 
rate is NZ$1.7000/£, and each car has an invoice 
cost £32,000, what will be the cost to the distribu-
tor in New Zealand dollars? How many pounds 
will MacLoren receive, and how does this compare 
with MacLoren’s expected sales receipt of £32,000 
per car?
c.	 If MacLoren Automotive ships the same 10 cars 
to New Zealand at a time when the spot exchange 
rate is NZ$1.6500/£, how many New Zealand dol-
lars will the distributor pay? How many pounds 
will MacLoren Automotive receive?
d.	 Does a risk-sharing agreement such as this one 
shift the currency exposure from one party of the 
transaction to the other?
e.	 Why is such a risk-sharing agreement of benefit to 
MacLoren? Why is it of benefit to the New Zealand 
distributor?
from Acuña Leather Goods, a reliable and longtime 
supplier, based in Buenos Aires, Argentina. Payment is 
in Argentine pesos. When the peso lost its parity with 
the U.S. dollar in January 2002, it collapsed in value to 
Ps4.0/$ by October 2002. The outlook was for a further 
decline in the peso’s value. Since both DeMagistris and 
Acuña wanted to continue their longtime relationship, 
they agreed on a risk-sharing arrangement. As long 
as the spot rate on the date of an invoice is between 
Ps3.5/$ and Ps4.5/$, DeMagistris will pay based on 
the spot rate. If the exchange rate falls outside this 
range, they will share the difference equally with 
Acuña Leather Goods. The risk-sharing agreement 
will last for six months, at which time the exchange 
rate limits will be reevaluated. DeMagistris contracts 
to import leather coats from Acuña for Ps8,000,000 or 
$2,000,000 at the current spot rate of Ps4.0/$ during 
the next six months.
a.	 If the exchange rate changes immediately to 
Ps6.00/$, what will be the dollar cost of six months 
of imports to DeMagistris?
b.	 At Ps6.00/$, what will be the peso export sales of 
Acuña Leather Goods to DeMagistris Fashion 
Company?
3.	 Manitowoc Crane (A). Manitowoc Crane (U.S.) 
exports heavy crane equipment to several Chinese 
dock facilities. Sales are currently 10,000 units per year 
at the yuan equivalent of $24,000 each. The Chinese 
yuan (renminbi) has been trading at Yuan8.20/$, but a 
Hong Kong advisory service predicts the renminbi will 
drop in value next week to Yuan9.00/$, after which it 
will remain unchanged for at least a decade. Accepting 
this forecast as given, Manitowoc Crane faces a pric-
ing decision in the face of the impending devaluation. 
It may either (1) maintain the same yuan price and 
in effect sell for fewer dollars, in which case Chinese 
volume will not change; or (2) maintain the same dol-
lar price, raise the yuan price in China to offset the 
devaluation, and experience a 10% drop in unit vol-
ume. Direct costs are 75% of the U.S. sales price.
a.	 What would be the short-run (one-year) impact of 
each pricing strategy?
b.	 Which do you recommend?
4.	 Manitowoc Crane (B). Assume the same facts as 
in Problem 3. Additionally, financial management 
believes that if it maintains the same yuan sales price, 
volume will increase at 12% per annum for eight 
years. Dollar costs will not change. At the end of 10 
years, Manitowoc’s’ patent expires and it will no lon-
ger export to China. After the yuan is devalued to 
Yuan9.20/$, no further devaluations are expected. 

355
Operating Exposure    CHAPTER 12 
Problem 8.
(a)
Date
1Q 2007
2Q 2007
3Q 2007
4Q 2007
1Q 2008
2Q 2008
Price (millions of pounds, £)
£22.50
£22.50
£22.50
£22.50
£22.50
£22.50
Spot rate (euro = 1.00 pound)
1.4918
1.4733
1.4696
1.4107
1.3198
1.2617
Price (millions of euros, €)
€33.57
______
______
______
______
______
Date
3Q 2008
4Q 2008
1Q 2009
2Q 2009
3Q 2009
4Q 2009
Price (millions of pounds, £)
£22.50
£22.50
£22.50
£22.50
£22.50
£22.50
Spot rate (euro = 1.00 pound)
1.2590
1.1924
1.1017
1.1375
1.1467
1.1066
Price (millions of euros, €)
______
______
______
______
______
______
Problem 8.
(b)
1Q 2007
1Q 2008
1Q 2009
% Chg
Price (in millions of £)
£22.50
£22.50
£22.50
______
Spot rate (€/£)
1.4918
1.3198
1.1017
Price (in millions of €)
€33.57
€29.70
€24.79
______
Sales volume (engines)
200
220
240
20.0%
Total cost to Airbus (millions of €)
€6,713.10
€6,533.01
€5,949.18
______
Total revenue to RR (millions of £)
£4,500.00
£4,950.00
£5,400.00
______
6.	 Ganado Germany—All Domestic Competitors. Using 
the Ganado Germany analysis in Exhibits 12.5 and 
12.6 where the euro depreciates, how would prices, 
costs, and volumes change if Ganado Germany was 
operating in a mature mostly-domestic market with 
major domestic competitors
7.	 Ganado Germany—All Foreign Competitors. Ganado 
Germany is now competing in a number of interna-
tional (export) markets, growth markets, in which 
most of its competitors are foreign. Now how would 
you expect Ganado Germany’s operating exposure to 
respond to the depreciation of the euro?
8.	 Rolls-Royce Turbine Engines. Rolls-Royce is strug-
gling with its pricing strategy with a number of its 
major customers in Continental Europe, particularly 
Airbus. Since Rolls-Royce is a British company with 
most manufacturing of the Airbus engines in the 
United Kingdom, costs are predominantly denomi-
nated in British pounds. But in the period shown in 
table (a) at the top of this page, 2007–2009, the pound 
steadily weakened against the euro. Rolls-Royce has 
traditionally denominated its sales contracts with Air-
bus in Airbus’ home currency, the euro. After complet-
ing the table answer the following questions:
a.	 Assuming each Rolls-Royce engine marketed to 
Airbus is initially priced at £22.5 million each, how 
has the price of that engine changed over the period 
shown when priced in euros at the current spot rate?
b.	 What is the cumulative percentage change in the 
price of the engine in euros for the three-year period?
c.	 If the price elasticity of demand for Rolls-Royce 
turbine sales to Airbus is relatively inelastic, and 
the price of the engine in British pounds never 
changes over the period, what does this price 
change mean for Rolls-Royce’s total sales revenue 
on sales to Airbus of this engine?
d.	 Compare the prices and volumes for the first 
quarter of each of the three years shown in table 
(b) below. Who has benefitted the most from the 
exchange rate changes?
9.	 Hurte-Paroxysm Products, Inc. (A). Hurte-Paroxysm 
Products, Inc. (HP) of the United States, exports com-
puter printers to Brazil, whose currency, the reais (R$) 
has been trading at R$3.40/US$. Exports to ­Brazil are 
currently 50,000 printers per year at the reais equivalent 
of $200 each. A strong rumor exists that the reais will be 
devalued to R$4.00/$ within two weeks by the Brazilian 
government. Should the devaluation take place, the reais 
is expected to remain unchanged for another decade.

356
CHAPTER 12    Operating Exposure
Internet Exercises
1.	 Operating Exposure: Recent Examples. Using the 
following major periodicals as starting points, find 
a current example of a firm with a substantial oper-
ating exposure problem. To aid in your search, you 
might focus on businesses that have major opera-
tions in countries with recent currency crises, either 
through depreciation or major home currency 
appreciation.
Financial Times
www.ft.com/
The Economist
www.economist.com/
The Wall Street Journal
www.wsj.com/
2.	 SEC Edgar Files. To analyze an individual firm’s 
operating exposure more carefully, it is necessary 
to have more detailed information available than 
in the normal annual report. Choose a specific firm 
with substantial international operations, for exam-
ple, Coca-Cola or PepsiCo, and search the Security 
and Exchange Commission’s Edgar Files for more 
detailed financial reports of their international 
operations.
Search SEC EDGAR 
Archives
www.sec.gov/cgi-bin/
srch-edgar
Accepting this forecast as given, HP faces a pric-
ing decision that must be made before any actual 
devaluation: HP may either (1) maintain the same 
reais price and in effect sell for fewer dollars, in which 
case Brazilian volume will not change, or (2) maintain 
the same dollar price, raise the reais price in Brazil 
to compensate for the devaluation, and experience a 
20% drop in volume. Direct costs in the United States 
are 60% of the U.S. sales price. What would be the 
short-run (one-year) implication of each pricing strat-
egy? Which do you recommend?
10.	 Hurte-Paroxysm Products, Inc. (B). Assume the same 
facts as in Problem 9. HP also believes that if it main-
tains the same price in Brazilian reais as a permanent 
policy, volume will increase at 10% per annum for six 
years, costs will not change. At the end of six years, 
HP’s patent expires and it will no longer export to 
Brazil. After the reais is devalued to R$4.00/US$, no 
further devaluation is expected. If HP raises the price 
in reais so as to maintain its dollar price, volume will 
increase at only 4% per annum for six years, starting 
from the lower initial base of 40,000 units. Again, dol-
lar costs will not change, and at the end of six years, 
HP will stop exporting to Brazil. HP’s weighted aver-
age cost of capital is 12%. Given these considerations, 
what do you recommend for HP’s pricing policy? 
­Justify your recommendation.

357
Part  4 
Financing the 
Global Firm
Chapter 13 
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
Chapter 14 
Raising Equity and Debt Globally
Chapter 15 
Multinational Tax Management
Chapter 16 
International Trade Finance

The Global Cost 
and Availability of Capital
Capital must be propelled by self-interest; it cannot be enticed by benevolence.
—Walter Bagehot, 1826–1877.
How can firms tap global capital markets for the purpose of minimizing their cost of capital 
and maximizing capital’s availability? Why should they do so? Is global capital cheaper? This 
chapter explores these questions, concluding with the Mini-Case, Novo Industri A/S (Novo), 
which details one of the most influential corporate financial strategies ever executed.
Financial Globalization and Strategy
Global integration of capital markets has given many firms access to new and cheaper 
sources of funds, beyond those available in their home markets. These firms can then accept 
more long-term projects and invest more in capital improvements and expansion. If a firm is 
located in a country with illiquid and/or segmented capital markets, it can achieve this lower 
global cost and greater availability of capital through a properly designed and implemented 
strategy. The dimensions of the cost and availability of capital are presented in Exhibit 13.1.
A firm that must source its long-term debt and equity in a highly illiquid domestic secu-
rities market will probably have a relatively high cost of capital and will face limited avail-
ability of such capital, which in turn will lower its competitiveness both internationally and 
vis-à-vis foreign firms entering its home market. This category of firms includes both firms 
resident in emerging countries, where the capital market remains undeveloped, and firms too 
small to gain access to their own national securities markets. Many family-owned firms find 
themselves in this category because they choose not to utilize securities markets to source 
their long-term capital needs.
Learning Objectives
■
■
Explore the evolution of how corporate strategy and financial globalization may 
align
■
■
Examine how the cost of capital in the capital asset pricing model changes for the 
multinational
■
■
Evaluate the effect of market liquidity and segmentation on the cost of capital
■
■
Compare the weighted average cost of capital for an MNE with its domestic 
counterpart
Chapter    13
358

359
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
Firms resident in industrial countries with small capital markets often source their long-
term debt and equity at home in these partially liquid domestic securities markets. The firms’ 
cost and availability of capital is better than that of firms in countries with illiquid capital mar-
kets. However, if these firms can tap the highly liquid global markets, they can also strengthen 
their competitive advantage in sourcing capital.
Firms resident in countries with segmented capital markets must devise a strategy to 
escape dependence on that market for their long-term debt and equity needs. A national 
capital market is segmented if the required rate of return on securities in that market differs 
from the required rate of return on securities of comparable expected return and risk traded 
in other securities markets. Capital markets become segmented because of such factors as 
excessive regulatory control, perceived political risk, anticipated foreign exchange risk, lack 
of transparency, asymmetric availability of information, cronyism, insider trading, and many 
other market imperfections. Firms constrained by any of these conditions must develop a 
strategy to escape their own limited capital markets and source some of their long-term 
capital abroad.
Cost of Capital
A domestic firm normally finds its cost of capital by evaluating where and from whom it will 
raise its capital. The cost will obviously differ on the mix of investors interested in the firm, 
investors willing and able to buy its equity shares, and the debt available to the firm, raised 
from the domestic bank and debt market.
Segmented domestic securities
market that prices shares
according to domestic standards
Access to global securities market
that prices shares according to
international standards
Firm's securities appeal
only to domestic investors
Firm's securities appeal to
international portfolio investors
Local Market Access
Global Market Access
Illiquid domestic securities market
and limited international liquidity
Highly liquid domestic market and
broad international participation
Firm-Speciﬁc Characteristics
Market Liquidity for Firm's Securities
Eﬀect of Market Segmentation on Firm's Securities and Cost of Capital
Exhibit 13.1
Dimensions of the Cost and Availability of Capital Strategy

360
CHAPTER 13    The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
The firm then calculates its weighted average cost of capital (WACC) by combining the 
cost of equity with the cost of debt in proportion to the relative weight of each in the firm’s 
optimal long-term financial structure. More specifically,
kWACC = ke E
V + kd (1 - t) D
V
where kWACC = weighted average after-tax cost of capital
ke = risk@adjusted cost of equity
kd = before@tax cost of debt
t = marginal tax rate
E = market value of the firm’s equity
D = market value of the firm’s debt
V = market value of the firm’s securities (D + E)
Cost of Equity
The most widely accepted and used method of calculating the cost of equity for a firm today 
is the capital asset pricing model (CAPM). CAPM defines the cost of equity to be the sum of 
a risk-free interest component and a firm-specific spread, over and above that risk-free com-
ponent, as seen in the following formula:
ke = krf + bj (km - krf)
where ke = expected (required) rate of return on equity
krf = rate of interest on risk-free bonds (Treasury bonds, for example)
bj = coefficient of systematic risk for the firm (beta)
km = expected (required) rate of return on the market portfolio of stocks
The key component of CAPM is beta (bj), the measure of systematic risk. Systematic risk 
is a measure of how the firm’s returns vary with those of the market in which it trades. Beta is 
calculated as a function of the total variability of expected returns of the firm’s stock relative 
to the market index (km) and the degree to which the variability of expected returns of the 
firm is correlated to the expected returns on the market index. More formally,
bj =
rjmsj
sm
where bj (beta) = measure of systematic risk for security j
r (rho) = correlation between security j and the market
sj (sigma) = standard deviation of the return on firm j
sm (sigma) = standard deviation of the market return
Beta will have a value of less than 1.0 if the firm’s returns are less volatile than the market, 
1.0 if the firm’s returns are the same as the market, or greater than 1.0 if its returns are more 
volatile—or risky—than the market. CAPM analysis assumes that the required return esti-
mated is an indication of what more is necessary to keep an investor’s capital invested in the 
equity considered. If the equity’s return does not reach the expected return, CAPM assumes 
that individual investors will liquidate their holdings.
CAPM’s biggest challenge is that, for a beta to be most useful, it should be an indicator 
of the future rather than the past. A prospective investor is interested in how the individual 

361
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
firm’s returns will vary in the coming periods. Unfortunately, since the future is not known, 
the beta used in any firm’s estimate of equity cost is based on evidence from the recent past.
Cost of Debt
Firms acquire debt in either the form of loans from commercial banks—the most common 
form of debt—or as securities sold to the debt markets, such as instruments like notes and 
bonds. The normal procedure for measuring the cost of debt requires a forecast of interest rates 
for the next few years, the proportions of various classes of debt the firm expects to use, and 
the corporate income tax rate. The interest costs of the different debt components are then 
averaged according to their proportion in the debt structure. This before-tax average, kd, is 
then adjusted for corporate income taxes by multiplying it by the expression (1 - tax rate), 
to obtain kd (1 - t), the weighted average after-tax cost of debt.
The weighted average cost of capital is normally used as the risk-adjusted discount rate 
whenever a firm’s new projects are in the same general risk class as its existing projects. On 
the other hand, a project-specific required rate of return should be used as the discount rate 
if a new project differs from existing projects in business or financial risk.
International Portfolio Theory and Diversification
The potential benefits to companies from raising capital on global markets are based on inter-
national portfolio theory, the benefits of international diversification. We briefly review these 
principles before examining the costs and capacities for raising capital in the global market.
Portfolio Risk Reduction
The risk of a portfolio is measured by the ratio of the variance of the portfolio’s return relative 
to the variance of the market return. This is the beta of the portfolio. As an investor increases 
the number of securities in a portfolio, the portfolio’s risk declines rapidly at first, and then 
asymptotically approaches the level of systematic risk of the market. The total risk of any 
portfolio is therefore composed of systematic risk (the market) and unsystematic risk (the 
individual securities). Increasing the number of securities in the portfolio reduces the unsys-
tematic risk component but leaves the systematic risk component unchanged. A fully diversi-
fied domestic portfolio would have a beta of 1.0. This is standard—domestic—financial theory.
Exhibit 13.2 illustrates the incremental gains of diversifying both domestically and interna-
tionally. The lower line in Exhibit 13.2 (portfolio of international stocks) represents a portfolio 
in which foreign securities have been added. It has the same overall risk shape as the U.S. stock 
portfolio, but it has a lower portfolio beta. This means that the international portfolio’s market 
risk is lower than that of a domestic portfolio. This situation arises because the returns on the 
foreign stocks are not perfectly correlated with U.S. stocks.
Foreign Exchange Risk
The foreign exchange risks of a portfolio, whether it is a securities portfolio or the general port-
folio of activities of the MNE, are reduced through international diversification. The construc-
tion of internationally diversified portfolios is both the same as and different from creating a 
traditional domestic portfolio. Internationally diversified portfolios are the same in principle 
because the investor is attempting to combine assets that are less than perfectly correlated, 
reducing the total risk of the portfolio. In addition, by adding assets from outside the home 
market—assets that previously were not available to be averaged into the portfolio’s expected 
returns and risks—the investor is tapping into a larger pool of potential investments.
But international portfolio construction is also different in that when the investor acquires 
assets or securities from outside the investor’s host-country market, the investor may also be 

362
CHAPTER 13    The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
acquiring a foreign currency-denominated asset1. Thus, the investor has actually acquired two 
additional assets—the currency of denomination and the asset subsequently purchased with 
the currency—one asset in principle, but two in expected returns and risks.
Japanese Equity Example. A numerical example can illustrate the difficulties associated 
with international portfolio diversification and currency risk. A U.S.-based investor takes 
$1,000,000 on January 1, and invests in shares traded on the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE). 
The spot exchange rate on January 1 is ¥130.00/$. The $1 million therefore yields ¥130,000,000. 
The investor uses ¥130,000,000 to acquire shares on the Tokyo Stock Exchange at ¥20,000 per 
share, acquiring 6,500 shares, and holds the shares for one year.
At the end of one year the investor sells the 6,500 shares at the market price, which is now 
¥25,000 per share; the shares have risen ¥5,000 per share in price. The 6,500 shares at ¥25,000 
per share yield proceeds of ¥162,500,000.
The Japanese yen are then changed back into the investor’s home currency, the U.S. dol-
lar, at the spot rate of ¥125.00/$ now in effect. This results in total U.S. dollar proceeds of 
$1,300,000.00. The total return on the investment is then
$1,300,000 - $1,000,000
$1,000,000
= 30.00%
1This is not always the case. For example, many U.S.-based investors routinely purchase and hold Eurodollar bonds 
on the secondary market only (illegal during primary issuance), which would not pose currency risk to the  
U.S.-based investor for they are denominated in the investor’s home currency.
 1
50
20
40
10
30
100
80
60
40
20
 
27%
12%
When the portfolio is diversiﬁed internationally, the portfolio’s beta—the level of systematic risk which cannot be diversiﬁed away—is lowered.
Number of Stocks in Portfolio
Percent Risk
Portfolio of
U.S. Stocks
Portfolio of International Stocks
Exhibit 13.2
Market Liquidity, Segmentation, and the Marginal Cost of Capital

363
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
The total U.S. dollar return is actually a combination of the return on the Japanese yen 
(which in this case was positive) and the return on the shares listed on the Tokyo Stock 
Exchange (which was also positive). This value is expressed by isolating the percentage 
change in the share price (rshares) in combination with the percentage change in the currency 
value (r¥/$):
R$ = [(1 + r¥/$)(1 + rshares, ¥)] - 1
In this case, the value of the Japanese yen, in the eyes of a U.S.-based investor, rose 4.00% 
(from ¥130/$ to ¥125/$—see percentage change calculation in Chapter 5), while the shares 
traded on the Tokyo Stock Exchange rose 25.00%. The total investment return in U.S. dollars 
is therefore
R$ = [(1 + .0400)(1 + .2500)] - 1 = .3000 or 30.00%
Obviously, the risk associated with international diversification, when it includes currency 
risk, is inherently more complex than that of domestic investments. You should also see, how-
ever, that the presence of currency risk may alter the correlations associated with securities 
in different countries and currencies, providing new portfolio composition and diversification 
possibilities. In conclusion:
■
■
International diversification benefits induce investors to demand foreign securities 
(the so-called “buy-side”).
■
■
If the addition of a foreign security to the portfolio of the investor aids in the reduc-
tion of risk for a given level of return, or if it increases the expected return for a given 
level of risk, then the security adds value to the portfolio.
■
■
Any security that adds value will be in demand by investors. Given the limits of the 
potential supply of securities, increased demand will bid up the price of the security, 
resulting in a lower cost of capital for the firm. The firm issuing the security, the 
­“sell-side,” is therefore able to raise capital at a lower cost.
International CAPM (ICAPM)
The traditional form of CAPM, the domestic CAPM discussed earlier, assumes the firm’s 
equity trades in a purely domestic market. The beta and market risk premium (km - krf ) used 
in the cost of equity calculation, therefore, were based on a purely domestic market of securi-
ties and choices. But what if globalization has opened up the global markets, integrating them, 
and allowing investors to choose among stocks of a global portfolio?
International CAPM (ICAPM) assumes that there is a global market in which the firm’s 
equity trades, and estimates of the firm’s beta, b
 
j
g  and the market risk premium, (km
g - krf
g  ), 
must then reflect this global portfolio.
k e
global = k rf
g + bj
g (k m
g - krf
g  )
The value of the risk-free rate, krf
g , may not change (so that krf
g = krf), as a U.S. Treasury 
note may be the risk-free rate for a U.S.-based investor regardless of the domestic or interna-
tional portfolio. The market return, km
g , will change, reflecting average expected global market 
returns for the coming periods. The firm’s beta, b
 
j
g , will most assuredly change, as it will now 
reflect the expected variations against a greater global portfolio. How that beta will change, 
however, depends.

364
CHAPTER 13    The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
Sample Calculation: Ganado’s Cost of Capital
Maria Gonzalez, Ganado’s Chief Financial Officer, wants to calculate the company’s weighted 
average cost of capital in both forms, the traditional CAPM and also ICAPM.
Maria assumes the risk-free rate of interest (krf) as 4%, using the U.S. government 10-year 
Treasury bond rate. The expected rate of return of the market portfolio (km) is assumed to be 
9%, the expected rate of return on the market portfolio held by a well-diversified domestic 
investor. Ganado’s estimate of its own systematic risk—its beta—against the domestic portfo-
lio is 1.2. Ganado’s cost of equity (sometimes termed the price of equity) is then
ke = krf + b (km - krf ) = 4.00% + 1.2 (9.00% - 4.00%) = 10.00%.
Ganado’s cost of debt (kd) the before tax cost of debt estimated by observing the current 
yield on Ganado’s outstanding bonds combined with bank debt, is 8%. Using 35% as the 
­corporate income tax rate for the United States, Ganado’s after-tax cost of debt is then
kd (1 - t ) = 8.00 (1 - 0.35 ) = 8.00 (0.65 ) = 5.20%.
Ganado’s long-term capital structure is 60% equity (E/V) and 40% debt (D/V), where V is 
Ganado’s total market value. Ganado’s weighted average cost of capital kWACC is then
kWACC = ke E
V + kd (1 - t ) D
V = 10.00%(.60 ) + 5.20%(.40 ) = 8.08%.
This is Ganado’s cost of capital using the traditional domestic CAPM estimate of the cost of 
equity.
But Maria Gonzalez wonders if this is the proper approach for Ganado. As Ganado has 
globalized its own business activities, the investor base that owns Ganado’s shares has also 
globally diversified. Ganado’s shares are now listed in London and Tokyo, in addition to their 
home listing on the New York Stock Exchange. Over 40% of Ganado’s stock is now held in 
the globally diversified portfolios of foreign investors (outside the United States).
A second calculation of Ganado’s cost of equity, this time using the ICAPM, yields differ-
ent results. Ganado’s beta, when calculated against a larger global equity market index, which 
includes these foreign markets and their investors, is a lower 0.90. The expected market return 
of 8.00% for a larger globally integrated equity market is lower as well. The ICAPM cost of 
equity is a much lower value of 7.60%.
ke
global = krf
g + b
 
j
g(km
g - krf
g  ) = 4.00% + 0.90 (8.00% - 4.00%) = 7.60%
Maria now recalculates Ganado’s WACC using the ICAPM estimate of equity costs, 
assuming the same debt and equity proportions and the same cost of current debt. Ganado’s 
WACC is now estimated at a lower cost of 6.64%.
kWACC
ICAPM = ke
global  E
V + kd (1 - t ) D
V = 7.60%(.60 ) + 5.20%(.40 ) = 6.64%
Maria believes that this is a more appropriate estimate of Ganado’s cost of capital. It is 
fully competitive with Ganado’s main rivals in the telecommunications hardware industry 
segment worldwide, which are mainly headquartered in the United States, the United King-
dom, Canada, Finland, Sweden, Germany, Japan, and the Netherlands. The key to Ganado’s 
favorable global cost and availability of capital going forward is its ability to attract and hold 
the international portfolio investors that own its stock.

365
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
ICAPM Considerations
In theory, the primary distinction in the estimation of the cost of equity for an individual firm 
using an internationalized version of the CAPM is the definition of the “market” and a recal-
culation of the firm’s beta for that market. The three basic components of the CAPM model 
must then be reconsidered.
Nestlé, the Swiss-based multinational firm that produces and distributes a variety of con-
fectionary products, serves as an excellent example of how the international investor may 
view the global cost of capital differently from a domestic investor, and what that means for 
Nestlé’s estimate of its own cost of equity2. The numerical example for Nestlé is summarized 
in Exhibit 13.3.
In the case of Nestlé, a prospective Swiss investor might assume a risk-free return in Swiss 
francs of 3.3%—the rate of return on an index of Swiss government bond issues. That same 
Swiss investor might also assume an expected market return in Swiss francs of 10.2%—an 
average return on a portfolio of Swiss equities, the Financial Times Swiss index. Assuming 
a risk-free rate of 3.30%, an expected market return of 10.2%, and a bNestlé of 0.885, a Swiss 
investor would expect Nestlé to yield 9.4065% for the coming year.
ke
 Nestlé = kRF + (KM - kRF) bNestlé = 3.3 + (10.2 - 3.3) 0.885 = 9.4065%.
But what if Swiss investors held internationally diversified portfolios instead? Both the 
expected market return and the beta estimate for Nestlé itself would be defined and deter-
mined differently. For the same period as before, a global portfolio index such as the Financial 
Times index in Swiss francs (FTA-Swiss) would show a market return of 13.7% (as opposed to 
the domestic Swiss index return of 10.2%). In addition, a beta for Nestlé estimated on Nestlé’s 
returns versus the global portfolio index would be much smaller, 0.585 (as opposed to the 0.885 
2René Stulz, “The Cost of Capital in Internationally Integrated Markets: The Case of Nestlé,” European Financial 
Management, Vol. 1, No. 1, March 1995, pp. 11–22.
 The Cost of Equity for Nestlé of Switzerland
Exhibit 13.3
Nestlé’s estimate of its cost of equity will depend upon whether a Swiss investor is thought to hold a domestic 
portfolio of equity securities or a global portfolio.
Domestic Portfolio for Swiss Investor
Global Portfolio for Swiss Investor
kRF = 3.3% (Swiss bond index yield)
kRF = 3.3% (Swiss bond index yield)
kM = 10.2% (Swiss market portfolio in SF)
kM = 13.7% (Financial Times Global index in SF)
bNestlé = 0.885 (Nestlé versus Swiss market portfolio)
bNestlé = 0.585 (Nestlé versus FTA-Swiss index)
kNestlé = kRF + BNestlé(kM - kRF)
Required return on Nestlé:
Required return on Nestlé:
ke
 Nestlé = 9.4065%
ke
 Nestlé = 9.3840%
Source: All values are taken from René Stulz, “The Cost of Capital in Internationally Integrated Markets: The Case of Nestlé,” European Financial Management, 
Vol. 1, No. 1, March 1995, pp. 11–22.

366
CHAPTER 13    The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
found previously). An internationally diversified Swiss investor would expect the following 
return on Nestlé:
ke
 Nestlé = kRF + (kM - kRF) bNestlé = 3.3 + (13.7 - 3.3) 0.585 = 9.3840%.
Admittedly, this is not a lot of difference in the end. However, given the magnitude of 
change in both the values of the market return average and the beta for the firm, it is obvious 
that the result could easily have varied by several hundred basis points. The proper construc-
tion of the investor’s portfolio and the proper portrayal of the investor’s perceptions of risk 
and opportunity cost are clearly important to identifying the global cost of a company’s equity 
capital. In the end, it all depends on the specific case—the firm, the country-market, and the 
global portfolio.
We follow the practice here of describing the internationally diversified portfolio as the 
global portfolio rather than the world portfolio. The distinction is important. The world port-
folio is an index of all securities in the world. However, even with the increasing trend of 
deregulation and financial integration, a number of securities markets still remain segmented 
or restricted in their access. Those securities actually available to an investor are the global 
portfolio.
There are, in fact, a multitude of different proposed formulations for calculating the inter-
national cost of capital. The problems with both formulation and data expand dramatically as 
the analysis is extended to rapidly developing or emerging markets. Harvey (2005) serves as 
a first place to start if you wish to expand your reading and research.3
Global Betas
International portfolio theory typically concludes that adding international securities to a 
domestic portfolio will reduce the portfolio’s risks. Although this idea is fundamental to much 
of international financial theory, it still depends on individual firms in individual markets. 
Nestlé’s beta went down when calculated using a global portfolio of equities, but that may not 
always be the case. Depending on the firm, its business line, the country it calls home, and the 
industry domestically and globally in which it competes, the global beta may go up or down.
One company often noted by researchers is Petrobrás, the national oil company of Brazil. 
Although government controlled, the company is publicly traded. Its shares are listed in São 
Paulo and New York. It operates in a global oil market in which prices and values are set in 
U.S. dollars. As a result, its domestic or home beta has been estimated at 1.3, but its global beta 
higher, at 1.74. This is only one example of many.
Although it seems obvious to some that the returns to the individual firm should become 
less correlated to those of the market as the market is redefined ever-larger, it turns out to be 
more of a case of empirical analysis, not preconceived notions of correlation and covariance.
Equity Risk Premiums
In practice, calculating a firm’s equity risk premium is much more controversial. Although the 
capital asset pricing model (CAPM) has now become widely accepted in global business as 
the preferred method of calculating the cost of equity for a firm, there is rising debate over 
what numerical values should be used in its application, especially the equity risk premium. 
3“12 Ways to Calculate the International Cost of Capital,” Campbell R. Harvey, Duke University, unpublished, 
October 14, 2005.
4The Real Cost of Capital, Tim Ogier, John Rugman, and Lucinda Spicer, Financial Times Prentice Hall, Pearson 
Publishing, 2005, p. 139.

367
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
The equity risk premium is the average annual return of the market expected by investors over 
and above riskless debt, the term (km - krf ).
The field of finance does agree that a cost of equity calculation should be forward looking, 
meaning that the inputs to the equation should represent what is expected to happen over 
the relevant future time horizon. As is typically the case, however, practitioners use historical 
evidence as the basis for their forward-looking projections. The current debate begins with a 
debate over what has happened in the past.
In a large study completed in 2001 by Dimson, Marsh, and Stanton (updated in 2003), 
the authors estimated the equity risk premium in 16 different developed countries for the 
1900–2002 period. The study found significant differences in equity returns over bill and bond 
returns (proxies for the risk-free rate) over time by country. For example, Italy was found to 
have had the highest equity risk premium, 10.3%, followed by Germany with 9.4% and Japan 
at 9.3%. Denmark had the lowest at 3.8%.
The debate over which equity risk premium to use in practice was highlighted in this 
same study by looking at what equity risk premiums are being recommended for the United 
States by a variety of different sources. As illustrated in Exhibit 13.4, a hypothetical firm with 
a beta of 1.0 (estimated market risk equal to that of the market) might have a cost of equity 
as low as 9.000% and as high as 12.800% using this set of alternative values. Note that here 
the authors used geometric returns, not arithmetic returns. Fernandez and del Campo (2010), 
in their annual survey of market risk premiums used by analysts and academics, found the 
average risk premium used by U.S. and Canadian analysts is 5.1%, European analysts 5.0%, 
and British analysts 5.6%.
How important is it for a company to accurately predict its cost of equity? The corpora-
tion must annually determine which potential investments it will accept and reject due to its 
limited capital resources. If the company is not accurately estimating its cost of equity, and 
therefore its general cost of capital, it will not be accurately estimating the net present value 
of potential investments.
The Demand for Foreign Securities:  
The Role of International Portfolio Investors
Gradual deregulation of equity markets during the past three decades not only elicited 
increased competition from domestic players but also opened up markets to foreign com-
petitors. International portfolio investment and the cross-listing of equity shares on foreign 
markets have become commonplace.
Alternative Estimates of Cost of Equity for a Hypothetical U.S. Firm Assuming  
B 5 1 and krf = 4%
Exhibit 13.4
Source
Equity Risk Premium
( km - krf)
Cost of Equity
krf + b  ( km - krf)
Differential
Ibbotson
8.800%
12.800%
3.800%
Finance textbooks
8.500%
12.500%
3.500%
Investor surveys
7.100%
11.100%
2.100%
Dimson, et al.
5.000%
9.000%
Baseline
Source: Equity risk premium quotes from “Stockmarket Valuations: Great Expectations,” The Economist, January 31, 2002.

368
CHAPTER 13    The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
What motivates portfolio investors to purchase and hold foreign securities in their port-
folios? The answer lies in an understanding of “domestic” portfolio theory and how it has 
been extended to handle the possibility of global portfolios. More specifically, it requires an 
understanding of the principles of portfolio risk reduction, portfolio rate of return, and foreign 
currency risk.
Both domestic and international portfolio managers are asset allocators. Their objective 
is to maximize a portfolio’s rate of return for a given level of risk, or to minimize risk for a 
given rate of return. International portfolio managers can choose from a larger bundle of assets 
than portfolio managers limited to domestic-only asset allocations. As a result, internationally 
diversified portfolios often have a higher expected rate of return, and they nearly always have 
a lower level of portfolio risk, since national securities markets are imperfectly correlated 
with one another.
Portfolio asset allocation can be accomplished along many dimensions depending on 
the investment objective of the portfolio manager. For example, portfolios can be diversi-
fied according to the type of securities. They can be composed of stocks only or bonds only 
or a combination of both. They also can be diversified by industry or by size of capitalization 
(small-cap, mid-cap, and large-cap stock portfolios).
For our purposes, the most relevant dimensions are diversification by country, geographic 
region, stage of development, or a combination of these (global). An example of diversification 
by country is the Korea Fund. It was at one time the only vehicle allowing foreign investors 
to hold South Korean securities, but foreign ownership restrictions have more recently been 
liberalized. A typical regional diversification would be one of the many Asian funds. These 
performed exceptionally well until the “bubble” burst in Japan and Southeast Asia during the 
second half of the 1990s. Portfolios composed of emerging market securities are examples of 
diversification by stage of development. They are composed of securities from different coun-
tries, geographic regions, and stage of development.
The Link Between Cost and Availability of Capital
Ganado’s weighted average cost of capital (WACC) was calculated assuming that equity 
and debt capital would always be available at the same required rate of return even if 
Ganado’s capital budget expands. This is a reasonable assumption considering Ganado’s 
excellent access through the NYSE to international portfolio investors in global capital 
markets. It is a bad assumption, however, for firms resident in illiquid or segmented capital 
markets, small domestic firms, and family-owned firms resident in any capital market. We 
will now examine how market liquidity and market segmentation can affect a firm’s cost 
of capital.
Improving Market Liquidity
Although no consensus exists about the definition of market liquidity, we can observe market 
liquidity by noting the degree to which a firm can issue a new security without depressing the 
existing market price. In the domestic case, an underlying assumption is that total availability 
of capital to a firm at any time is determined by supply and demand in the domestic capital 
markets.
A firm should always expand its capital budget by raising funds in the same proportion as 
its optimal financial structure. As its budget expands in absolute terms, however, its marginal 
cost of capital will eventually increase. In other words, a firm can only tap the capital market 
for some limited amount in the short run before suppliers of capital balk at providing further 
funds, even if the same optimal financial structure is preserved. In the long run, this may not 
be a limitation, depending on market liquidity.

369
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
In the multinational case, a firm is able to improve market liquidity by raising funds in 
the euromarkets (money, bond, and equity), by selling security issues abroad, and by tapping 
local capital markets through foreign subsidiaries. Such activities should logically expand the 
capacity of an MNE to raise funds in the short run over what might have been raised if the 
firm were limited to its home capital market. This situation assumes that the firm preserves 
its optimal financial structure.
Market Segmentation
If all capital markets are fully integrated, securities of comparable expected return and risk 
should have the same required rate of return in each national market after adjusting for foreign 
exchange risk and political risk. This definition applies to both equity and debt, although it 
often happens that one or the other may be more integrated than its counterpart.
Capital market segmentation is a financial market imperfection caused mainly by govern-
ment constraints, institutional practices, and investor perceptions. The following are the most 
important imperfections:
■
■
Asymmetric information between domestic and foreign-based investors
■
■
Lack of transparency
■
■
High securities transaction costs
■
■
Foreign exchange risks
■
■
Political risks
■
■
Corporate governance differences
■
■
Regulatory barriers
Market imperfections do not necessarily imply that national securities markets are inef-
ficient. A national securities market can be efficient in a domestic context and yet segmented 
in an international context. According to finance theory, a market is efficient if security prices 
in that market reflect all available relevant information and adjust quickly to any new relevant 
information. Therefore, the price of an individual security reflects its “intrinsic value,” and any 
price fluctuations will be “random walks” around this value. Market efficiency assumes that 
transaction costs are low, that many participants are in the market, and that these participants 
have sufficient financial strength to move security prices. Empirical tests of market efficiency 
show that most major national markets are reasonably efficient.
An efficient national securities market might very well correctly price all securities traded 
in that market on the basis of information available to the investors who participate in that 
market. However, if that market is segmented, foreign investors would not be participants.
Availability of capital depends on whether a firm can gain liquidity for its debt and equity 
securities and a price for those securities based on international rather than national standards. 
In practice, this means that the firm must define a strategy to attract international portfolio 
investors and thereby escape the constraints of its own illiquid or segmented national market.
The Effect of Market Liquidity and Segmentation
The degree to which capital markets are illiquid or segmented has an important influence on 
a firm’s marginal cost of capital and thus on its weighted average cost of capital. The marginal 
cost of capital is the weighted average cost of the next currency unit raised. This is illustrated 
in Exhibit 13.5, which shows the transition from a domestic to a global marginal cost of capital.
Exhibit 13.5 shows that the MNE has a given marginal return on capital at different budget 
levels, represented in the line MRR. This demand is determined by ranking potential projects 
according to net present value or internal rate of return. Percentage rate of return to both users 

370
CHAPTER 13    The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
and suppliers of capital is shown on the vertical scale. If the firm is limited to raising funds in 
its domestic market, the line MCCD shows the marginal domestic cost of capital (vertical axis) 
at various budget levels (horizontal axis). Remember that the firm continues to maintain the 
same debt ratio as it expands its budget, so that financial risk does not change. The optimal 
budget in the domestic case is $40 million, where the marginal return on capital (MRR) just 
equals the marginal cost of capital (MCCD). At this budget, the marginal domestic cost of 
capital, kD, would be equal to 20%.
If the MNE has access to additional sources of capital outside an illiquid domestic capital 
market, the marginal cost of capital should shift to the right (the line MCCF). In other words, 
foreign markets can be tapped for long-term funds at times when the domestic market is satu-
rated because of heavy use by other borrowers or equity issuers, or when it is unable to absorb 
another issue of the MNE in the short run. Exhibit 13.5 shows that by a tap of foreign capital 
markets the firm has reduced its marginal international cost of capital, to 15%, even while it 
raises an additional $10 million. This statement assumes that about $20 million is raised abroad, 
since only about $30 million could be raised domestically at a 15% marginal cost of capital.
If the MNE is located in a capital market that is both illiquid and segmented, the line 
represents the decreased marginal cost of capital if it gains access to other equity markets. As 
a result of the combined effects of greater availability of capital and international pricing of 
the firm’s securities, the marginal cost of capital, kU, declines to 13% and the optimal capital 
budget climbs to $60 million.
Most of the tests of market segmentation suffer from the usual problem for models—
namely, the need to abstract from reality in order to have a testable model. In our opinion, 
a realistic test would be to observe what happens to a single security’s price when, after it 
has been traded only in a domestic market, it is “discovered” by foreign investors, and is 
then traded in a foreign market. Arbitrage should keep the market price equal in both mar-
kets. However, if during the transition we observe a significant change in the security’s price, 
10
60
30
50
20
40
MCCD
MCCU
MRR
20%
15%
13%
10%
Budget (millions of US$)
Marginal Cost of Capital
and Rate of Return (percentage)
MCCF
kU
kF
kD
Exhibit 13.5
Market Liquidity, Segmentation, and the Marginal Cost of Capital

371
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
uncorrelated with price movements in either of the underlying securities markets, we can infer 
that the domestic market was segmented.
In academic circles, tests based on case studies are often considered to be “casual empiri-
cism,” since no theory or model exists to explain what is being observed. Nevertheless, something 
may be learned from such cases, just as scientists learn from observing nature in an uncontrolled 
environment. Furthermore, case studies that preserve real-world complications may illustrate 
specific kinds of barriers to market integration and ways in which they might be overcome.
Unfortunately, few case studies have been documented in which a firm has “escaped” 
from a segmented capital market. In practice, escape usually means being listed on a foreign 
stock market such as New York or London, and/or selling securities in foreign capital markets. 
We will explore one firm’s escape from a segmented market with a discussion of Novo in the 
Mini-Case at the end of the chapter.
Globalization of Securities Markets
During the 1980s, numerous Nordic and other European firms cross-listed on major foreign 
exchanges such as London and New York. They placed equity and debt issues in major securi-
ties markets. In most cases, they were successful in lowering their WACC and increasing its 
availability. This is the subject of this chapter’s Mini-Case.
During the 1990s, national restrictions on cross-border portfolio investment were gradually 
eased under pressure from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD), a consortium of most of the world’s most industrialized countries. Liberalization 
of European securities markets was accelerated because of the European Union’s efforts to 
develop a single European market without barriers. Emerging nation markets followed suit, 
as did the former Eastern Bloc countries after the breakup of the Soviet Union. Emerging 
national markets have often been motivated by the need to source foreign capital to finance 
large-scale privatization.
Now, market segmentation has been significantly reduced, although the liquidity of indi-
vidual national markets remains limited. Most observers believe that for better or for worse, 
we have achieved a global market for securities. The good news is that many firms have been 
assisted to become MNEs because they now have access to a global cost and availability of 
capital. The bad news is that the correlation among securities markets has increased, thereby 
reducing, but not eliminating, the benefits of international portfolio diversification. Globaliza-
tion of securities markets has also led to more volatility and speculative behavior, as shown 
by the emerging market crises of the 1995–2001 period, and the 2008–2009 global credit crisis.
Corporate Governance and the Cost of Capital. Would global investors be willing to pay a 
premium for a share in a good corporate governance company? A recent study of Norwegian 
and Swedish firms measured the impact of foreign board membership (Anglo-American) on 
firm value. They summarized their findings as follows:5
Using a sample of firms with headquarters in Norway or Sweden the study indicates a 
­significantly higher value for firms that have outsider Anglo-American board member(s), 
after a variety of firm-specific and corporate governance related factors have been con-
trolled for. We argue that this superior performance reflects the fact that these companies 
have successfully broken away from a partly segmented domestic capital market by 
“importing” an Anglo-American corporate governance system. Such an “import” signals 
a willingness on the part of the firm to expose itself to improved corporate governance 
and enhances its reputation in the financial market.
5Lars Oxelheim and Trond Randøy, “The impact of foreign board membership on firm value,” Journal of Banking 
and Finance, Vol. 27, No. 12, 2003, p. 2369.

372
CHAPTER 13    The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
Strategic Alliances
Strategic alliances are normally formed by firms that expect to gain synergies from joint efforts. 
For example, allied firms might share the cost of developing technology or pursue comple-
mentary marketing activities. These firms might gain economies of scale or scope or a variety 
of other commercial advantages. However, one synergy that may sometimes be overlooked is 
the possibility for a financially strong firm to help a financially weak firm to lower its cost of 
capital by providing attractively priced equity or debt financing.
The Cost of Capital for MNEs Compared to Domestic Firms
Is the weighted average cost of capital for MNEs higher or lower than for their domestic 
counterparts? The answer is a function of the marginal cost of capital, the relative after-tax 
cost of debt, the optimal debt ratio, and the relative cost of equity.
Availability of Capital
Earlier in this chapter, we saw that international availability of capital to MNEs, or to other 
large firms that can attract international portfolio investors, may allow them to lower their 
cost of equity and debt compared with most domestic firms. In addition, international avail-
ability permits an MNE to maintain its desired debt ratio, even when significant amounts of 
new funds must be raised. In other words, an MNE’s marginal cost of capital is constant for 
considerable ranges of its capital budget. This statement is not true for most domestic firms. 
They must either rely on internally generated funds or borrow in the short and medium term 
from commercial banks.
Financial Structure, Systematic Risk, and the Cost of Capital for MNEs
Theoretically, MNEs should be in a better position than their domestic counterparts to sup-
port higher debt ratios because their cash flows are diversified internationally. The probability 
of a firm’s covering fixed charges under varying conditions in product, financial, and foreign 
exchange markets should improve if the variability of its cash flows is minimized.
By diversifying cash flows internationally, the MNE might be able to achieve the same 
kind of reduction in cash flow variability as portfolio investors receive from diversifying their 
security holdings internationally. The same argument applies to cash flow diversification—
namely that returns are not perfectly correlated between countries. For example, in 2000 Japan 
was in recession, but the United States was experiencing rapid growth. Therefore, we might 
have expected returns, on either a cash flow or an earnings basis, to be depressed in Japan 
and favorable in the United States. An MNE with operations located in both these countries 
could rely on its strong U.S. cash inflow to cover debt obligations, even if its Japanese subsidi-
ary produced weak net cash inflows.
Despite the theoretical elegance of this hypothesis, empirical studies have come to the 
opposite conclusion.6 Despite the favorable effect of international diversification of cash flows, 
bankruptcy risk was only about the same for MNEs as for domestic firms. However, MNEs 
faced higher agency costs, political risk, foreign exchange risk, and asymmetric information. 
These have been identified as the factors leading to lower debt ratios and even a higher cost of 
long-term debt for MNEs. Domestic firms rely much more heavily on short and intermediate 
debt, which lie at the low cost end of the yield curve.
6Kwang Chul Lee, and Chuck C.Y. Kwok, “Multinational Corporations vs. Domestic Corporations: International 
Environmental Factors and Determinants of Capital Structure,” Journal of International Business Studies, Summer 
1988, pp. 195–217.

373
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
Even more surprising, one study found that MNEs have a higher level of systematic risk 
than their domestic counterparts.7 The same factors caused this phenomenon as caused the 
lower debt ratios for MNEs. The study concluded that the increased standard deviation of cash 
flows from internationalization more than offset the lower correlation from diversification.
As we stated earlier, the systematic risk term, bj, is defined as
bj =
rjmsj
sm
where rjm is the correlation coefficient between security j and the market; sj is the standard 
deviation of the return on firm j; and sm is the standard deviation of the market return. The 
MNE’s systematic risk could increase if the decrease in the correlation coefficient, rjm, due to 
international diversification, is more than offset by an increase in sj, the standard deviation 
due to the aforementioned risk factors. This conclusion is consistent with the observation 
that many MNEs use a higher hurdle rate to discount expected foreign project cash flows. 
In essence, they are accepting projects they consider to be riskier than domestic projects, 
thus potentially skewing upward their perceived systematic risk. At the least, MNEs need 
to earn a higher rate of return than their domestic equivalents in order to maintain their 
market value.
Other studies have found that internationalization actually allows emerging market MNEs 
to carry a higher level of debt and lower their systematic risk. This occurs because the emerg-
ing market MNEs are investing in more stable economies abroad, a strategy that lowers their 
operating, financial, foreign exchange, and political risks. The reduction in risk more than off-
sets increased agency costs and allows the firms to enjoy higher leverage and lower systematic 
risk than their U.S.-based MNE counterparts.
The Riddle: Is the Cost of Capital Higher for MNEs?
The riddle is that the MNE is supposed to have a lower marginal cost of capital (MCC) than a 
domestic firm because of the MNE’s access to a global cost and availability of capital. On the 
other hand, the empirical studies we mentioned show that the MNE’s weighted average cost 
of capital (WACC) is actually higher than for a comparable domestic firm because of agency 
costs, foreign exchange risk, political risk, asymmetric information, and other complexities of 
foreign operations.
The answer to this riddle lies in the link between the cost of capital, its availability, and the 
opportunity set of projects. As the opportunity set of projects increases, eventually the firm 
needs to increase its capital budget to the point where its marginal cost of capital is increasing. 
The optimal capital budget would still be at the point where the rising marginal cost of capital 
equals the declining rate of return on the opportunity set of projects. However, this would be 
at a higher weighted average cost of capital than would have occurred for a lower level of the 
optimal capital budget.
To illustrate this linkage, Exhibit 13.6 shows the marginal cost of capital given different 
optimal capital budgets. Assume that there are two different demand schedules based on the 
opportunity set of projects for both the multinational enterprise (MNE) and domestic coun-
terpart (DC).
The line MRRDC depicts a modest set of potential projects. It intersects the line MCCMNE 
at 15% and a $100 million budget level. It intersects the MCCDC at 10% and a $140 ­million 
budget level. At these low budget levels the MCCMNE has a higher MCC and probably 
7 David M. Reeb, Chuck C.Y. Kwok, and H. Young Back, “Systematic Risk of the Multinational Corporation,” Jour-
nal of International Business Studies, Second Quarter 1998, pp. 263–279.

374
CHAPTER 13    The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
weighted average cost of capital than its domestic counterpart (DC), as discovered in the 
recent empirical studies.
The line MRRMNE depicts a more ambitious set of projects for both the MNE and its domes-
tic counterpart. It intersects the line MCCMNE still at 15% and a $350 million budget. However, it 
intersects the MCCDC at 20% and a budget level of $300 million. At these higher budget levels, 
the MCCMNE has a lower MCC and probably weighted average cost of capital than its domestic 
counterpart, as predicted earlier in this chapter. In order to generalize this conclusion, we would 
need to know under what conditions a domestic firm would be willing to undertake the optimal 
capital budget despite its increasing the firm’s marginal cost of capital. At some point the MNE 
might also have an optimal capital budget at the point where its MCC is rising.
Empirical studies show that neither mature domestic firms nor MNEs are typically willing 
to assume the higher agency costs or bankruptcy risk associated with higher MCCs and capital 
budgets. In fact, most mature firms demonstrate some degree of corporate wealth maximizing 
behavior. They are somewhat risk averse and tend to avoid returning to the market to raise 
fresh equity. They prefer to limit their capital budgets to what can be financed with free cash 
flows. Indeed, they have a so-called pecking order that determines the priority of which sources 
of funds they will tap and in what order. This behavior motivates shareholders to monitor man-
agement more closely. They tie management’s compensation to stock performance (options). 
They may also require other types of contractual arrangements that are collectively part of 
agency costs.
In conclusion, if both MNEs and domestic firms do actually limit their capital budgets to 
what can be financed without increasing their MCC, then the empirical findings that MNEs 
have higher WACC stands. If the domestic firm has such good growth opportunities that it 
chooses to undertake growth despite an increasing marginal cost of capital, then the MNE 
would have a lower WACC. Exhibit 13.7 summarizes these conclusions.
Budget (millions of US$)
Marginal Cost of Capital
and Rate of Return (percentage)
100
140
300
350
400
20%
15%
10%
5% 
MCCDC
MCCMNE
MRRMNE
MRRDC
Exhibit 13.6
 The Cost of Capital for MNE and Domestic Counterpart Compared

375
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
Summary Points
■
■
Gaining access to global capital markets should allow 
a firm to lower its cost of capital. This can be achieved 
by increasing the market liquidity of its shares and 
by escaping from segmentation of its home capital 
market.
■
■
The cost and availability of capital is directly linked to 
the degree of market liquidity and segmentation. Firms 
having access to markets with high liquidity and a low 
level of segmentation should have a lower cost of capital 
and greater ability to raise new capital.
■
■
A firm is able to increase its market liquidity by rais-
ing debt in the euromarket—by selling security issues 
in individual national capital markets and as euroequi-
ties—and tapping local capital markets through foreign 
subsidiaries. Increased market liquidity causes the mar-
ginal cost of capital line to “flatten out to the right.” This 
results in the firm being able to raise more capital at a 
lower marginal cost.
■
■
A national capital market is segmented if the required 
rate of return on securities in that market differs from 
the required rate of return on securities of compara-
ble expected return and risk that are traded on other 
national securities markets.
■
■
Capital market segmentation is a financial market 
imperfection caused by government constraints and 
investor perceptions. Segmentation results in a higher 
cost of capital and less availability of capital.
■
■
If a firm is resident in a segmented capital market, it can 
still escape from this market by sourcing its debt and 
equity abroad. The result should be a lower marginal 
cost of capital, improved liquidity for its shares, and a 
larger capital budget.
■
■
Whether or not MNEs have a lower cost of capital than 
their domestic counterparts depends on their opti-
mal financial structures, systematic risk, availability of 
­capital, and the optimal capital budget.
Is MNEWACC > or < DomesticWACC ?
Empirical studies indicate that MNEs have a lower
debt/capital ratio than domestic counterparts, indicating
that MNEs have a higher cost of capital.
And indications are that MNEs have a lower average 
cost of debt than domestic counterparts, indicating that 
MNEs have a lower cost of capital.
The cost of equity required by investors is higher for multinational ﬁrms than for domestic
ﬁrms. Possible explanations are higher levels of political risk, foreign exchange risk, and higher
agency costs of doing business in a multinational managerial environment. However, at
relatively high levels of the optimal capital budget, the MNE would have a lower cost of capital.
kWACC = ke
Equity
Value
+             kd (1–t )
Debt
Value
Exhibit 13.7
 Do MNEs Have a Higher or Lower Cost of Capital Than Their Domestic Counterparts?

376
CHAPTER 13    The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
Novo is a Danish multinational firm that produces indus-
trial enzymes and pharmaceuticals (mostly insulin). In 1977, 
Novo’s management decided to “internationalize” its capi-
tal structure and sources of funds. This decision was based 
on the observation that the Danish securities market was 
both illiquid and segmented from other capital markets. In 
particular, the lack of availability and high cost of equity 
capital in Denmark resulted in Novo having a higher cost 
of capital than its main multinational competitors, such as 
Eli Lilly (U.S.), Miles Laboratories (U.S.—a subsidiary of 
Bayer, Germany), and Gist Brocades (the Netherlands).
Apart from the cost of capital, Novo’s projected growth 
opportunities signaled the eventual need to raise new long-
term capital beyond what could be raised in the illiquid 
Danish market. Since Novo is a technology leader in its 
specialties, planned capital investments in plant, equip-
ment, and research could not be postponed until internal 
financing from cash flow became available. Novo’s com-
petitors would preempt any markets not served by Novo.
Even if an equity issue of the size required could have 
been raised in Denmark, the required rate of return would 
have been unacceptably high. For example, Novo’s price/
earnings ratio was typically around 5; that of its foreign 
competitors was well over 10. Yet Novo’s business and 
financial risk appeared to be about equal to that of its com-
petitors. A price/earnings ratio of 5 appeared appropriate 
for Novo only within a domestic Danish context when com-
pared with other domestic firms of comparable business 
and financial risk.
If Denmark’s securities markets were integrated with 
world markets, one would expect foreign investors to rush in 
and buy “undervalued” Danish securities. In that case, firms 
like Novo would enjoy an international cost of capital com-
parable to that of its foreign competitors. Strangely enough, 
no Danish governmental restrictions existed that would have 
prevented foreign investors from holding Danish securities. 
Therefore, one must look for investor perception as the main 
cause of market segmentation in Denmark at that time.
At least six characteristics of the Danish equity market 
were responsible for market segmentation: (1) asymmetric 
information base of Danish and foreign investors, (2) taxa-
tion, (3) alternative sets of feasible portfolios, (4) financial 
risk, (5) foreign exchange risk, and (6) political risk.
Asymmetric Information
Certain institutional characteristics of Denmark caused 
Danish and foreign investors to lack information about 
one another’s equity securities. The most important infor-
mation barrier was a Danish regulation that prohibited 
Danish investors from holding foreign private sector 
securities. Therefore, Danish investors had no incentive 
to follow developments in foreign securities markets or 
to factor such information into their evaluation of Danish 
securities. As a result, Danish securities might have been 
priced ­correctly in the efficient market sense relative to 
one another, considering the Danish information base, 
but priced incorrectly considering the combined foreign 
and Danish information base. Another detrimental effect 
of this regulation was that foreign securities firms did not 
locate offices or personnel in Denmark, since they had 
no product to sell there. Lack of a physical presence in 
­Denmark reduced the ability of foreign security analysts 
to follow Danish securities.
A second information barrier was that there were too 
few Danish security analysts following Danish securities. 
Only one professional Danish securities analysis ser-
vice was published (Børsinformation), and that was in 
the Danish language. A few Danish institutional inves-
tors employed in-house analysts, but their findings were 
not available to the public. Almost no foreign security 
analysts followed Danish securities because they had 
no product to sell and the Danish market was too small 
(small-country bias).
Other information barriers included language and 
accounting principles. Naturally, financial information was 
normally published in the Danish language using Danish 
accounting principles. A few firms, such as Novo, published 
English versions, but almost none used U.S. or British 
accounting principles or attempted to show any reconcili-
ation with such principles.
Taxation
Danish taxation policy had all but eliminated investment 
in common stock by individuals. Until a tax law change in 
July 1981, capital gains on shares held for over two years 
were taxed at a 50% rate. Shares held for less than two 
Novo Industri A/S (Novo)8
Mini-Case
8This is a condensed version of Arthur Stonehill and Kåre B. Dullum, Internationalizing the Cost of Capital in Theory and Practice: The 
Novo Experience and National Policy Implications (Copenhagen: Nyt Nordisk Forlag Arnold Busck, 1982; and New York: Wiley, 1982). 
Reprinted with permission.

377
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
Grenfell, Novo’s British investment banker, advised Novo 
to maintain a debt ratio (debt/total capitalization) closer 
to 50% rather than the traditional Danish 65% to 70%.
Foreign investors in Danish securities are subject to 
foreign exchange risk. Whether this factor is a plus or 
minus depends on the investor’s home currency, percep-
tions about the future strength of the Danish krone, and its 
impact on a firm’s operating exposure. Through personal 
contacts with foreign investors and bankers, Novo’s man-
agement did not believe foreign exchange risk was a factor 
in Novo’s stock price because its operations were perceived 
as being well diversified internationally. Over 90% of its 
sales were to customers located outside of Denmark.
With respect to political risk, Denmark was perceived 
as a stable Western democracy but with the potential to 
cause periodic problems for foreign investors. In particu-
lar, ­Denmark’s national debt was regarded as too high for 
comfort, although this judgment had not yet shown up in 
the form of risk premiums on Denmark’s eurocurrency 
syndicated loans.
The Road to Globalization
Although Novo’s management in 1977 wished to escape 
from the shackles of Denmark’s segmented and illiquid 
capital market, many barriers had to be overcome. It is 
worthwhile to explore some of these obstacles, because 
they typify the barriers faced by other firms from 
­segmented markets that wish to internationalize their 
capital sources.
Closing the Information Gap. Novo had been a family-
owned firm from its founding in the 1920s by the two 
Pedersen brothers. Then in 1974, it went public and listed 
its “B” shares on the Copenhagen Stock Exchange. The “A” 
shares were held by the Novo Foundation, and these shares 
were sufficient to maintain voting control. However, Novo 
was essentially unknown in investment circles outside of 
Denmark. To overcome this disparity in the information 
base, Novo increased the level of its financial and technical 
disclosure in both Danish and English versions.
The information gap was further closed when Morgan 
Grenfell successfully organized a syndicate to underwrite 
and sell a $20 million convertible eurobond issue for Novo 
in 1978. In connection with this offering, Novo listed its 
shares on the London Stock Exchange to facilitate con-
version and to gain visibility. These twin actions were the 
key to dissolving the information barrier and, of course, 
they also raised a large amount of long-term capital on 
favorable terms, which would have been unavailable in 
Denmark.
Despite the favorable impact of the eurobond issue 
on availability of capital, Novo’s cost of capital actually 
years, or for “speculative” purposes, were taxed at personal 
income tax rates, with the top marginal rate being 75%. In 
contrast, capital gains on bonds were tax-free. This situation 
resulted in bonds being issued at deep discounts because 
the redemption at par at maturity was considered a capital 
gain. Thus, most individual investors held bonds rather than 
stocks. This factor reduced the liquidity of the stock market 
and increased the required rate of return on stocks if they 
were to compete with bonds.
Feasible Portfolios
Because of the prohibition on foreign security ownership, 
Danish investors had a very limited set of securities from 
which to choose a portfolio. In practice, Danish institu-
tional portfolios were composed of Danish stocks, govern-
ment bonds, and mortgage bonds. Since Danish stock price 
movements are closely correlated with each other, Danish 
portfolios possessed a rather high level of systematic risk. 
In addition, government policy had been to provide a rela-
tively high real rate of return on government bonds after 
adjusting for inflation. The net result of taxation policies on 
individuals, and attractive real yields on government bonds 
was that required rates of return on stocks were relatively 
high by international standards.
From a portfolio perspective, Danish stocks provided 
an opportunity for foreign investors to diversify interna-
tionally. If Danish stock price movements were not closely 
correlated with world stock price movements, inclusion 
of Danish stocks in foreign portfolios would reduce those 
portfolios’ systematic risk. Furthermore, foreign investors 
were not subject to the high Danish income tax rates, due 
to protections provided by tax treaties that typically limit 
foreign investor tax rates to 15% on dividends and capital 
gains. As a result of the international diversification poten-
tial, foreign investors might have required a lower rate of 
return on Danish stocks than the rate required by Danish 
investors, other things being equal. However, other things 
were not equal because foreign investors perceived Danish 
stocks to carry more financial, foreign exchange, and politi-
cal risk than their own domestic securities.
Financial, Foreign Exchange,  
and Political Risks
Financial leverage utilized by Danish firms was relatively 
high by U.S. and U.K. standards but not abnormal for 
­Scandinavia, Germany, Italy, or Japan. In addition, most 
of the debt was short term with variable interest rates. 
The way in which foreign investors viewed financial risk 
in ­Danish firms depended on what norms they followed 
in their home countries. We know from Novo’s experi-
ence in tapping the eurobond market in 1978, that Morgan 

378
CHAPTER 13    The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
The more serious barriers were caused by a variety of 
institutional and governmental regulations in Denmark. 
The latter were never designed so that firms could issue 
shares at market value, since Danish firms typically issued 
stock at par value with preemptive rights. By this time, how-
ever, Novo’s share price, driven by continued foreign buy-
ing, was so high that virtually nobody in Denmark thought 
it was worth the price that foreigners were willing to pay. 
In fact, prior to the time of the share issue in July 1981, 
Novo’s share price had risen to over Dkr1500, before set-
tling down to a level around Dkr1400. Foreign ownership 
had increased to over 50% of Novo’s shares outstanding!
Stock Market Reactions. One final piece of evidence 
on market segmentation can be gleaned from the way 
Danish and foreign investors reacted to the announcement 
of the proposed $61 million U.S. share issue on May 29, 
1981. Novo’s share price dropped 156 points the next 
trading day in Copenhagen, equal to about 10% of its 
market value. As soon as trading started in New York, 
the stock price immediately recovered all of its loss. The 
Copenhagen reaction was typical for an illiquid market. 
Investors worried about the dilution effect of the new 
share issue, because it would increase the number of shares 
outstanding by about 8%. They did not believe that Novo 
could invest the new funds at a rate of return that would 
not dilute future earnings per share. They also feared that 
the U.S. shares would eventually flow back to Copenhagen 
if biotechnology lost its glitter.
The U.S. reaction to the announcement of the new share 
issue was consistent with what one would expect in a liq-
uid and integrated market. U.S. investors viewed the new 
issue as creating additional demand for the shares as Novo 
became more visible due to the selling efforts of a large 
aggressive syndicate. Furthermore, the marketing effort 
was directed at institutional investors who were previously 
underrepresented among Novo’s U.S. investors. They had 
been underrepresented because U.S. institutional investors 
want to be assured of a liquid market in a stock in order to 
be able to get out, if desired, without depressing the share 
price. The wide distribution effected by the new issue, plus 
SEC registration and a New York Stock Exchange listing, 
all added up to more liquidity and a global cost of capital.
Effect on Novo’s Weighted Average Cost of Capital. 
During most of 1981 and the years thereafter, Novo’s 
share price was driven by international portfolio investors 
transacting on the New York, London, and Copenhagen 
stock exchanges. This reduced Novo’s weighted average 
cost of capital and lowered its marginal cost of capital. 
Novo’s systematic risk was reduced from its previous level, 
which was determined by nondiversified (internationally) 
increased when Danish investors reacted negatively to the 
potential dilution effect of the conversion right. During 
1979, Novo’s share price declined from around Dkr300 per 
share to around Dkr220 per share.
The Biotechnology Boom. During 1979, a fortuitous event 
occurred. Biotechnology began to attract the interest of 
the U.S. investment community, with several sensationally 
oversubscribed stock issues by such start-up firms as 
Genentech and Cetus. Thanks to the aforementioned 
domestic information gap, Danish investors were unaware 
of these events and continued to value Novo at a low 
price/earnings ratio of 5, compared with over 10 for its 
established competitors and 30 or more for these new 
potential competitors.
In order to profile itself as a biotechnology firm with 
a proven track record, Novo organized a seminar in New 
York City on April 30, 1980. Soon after the seminar a 
few sophisticated individual U.S. investors began buying 
Novo’s shares and convertibles through the London Stock 
Exchange. Danish investors were only too happy to supply 
this foreign demand. Therefore, despite relatively strong 
demand from U.S. and British investors, Novo’s share price 
increased only gradually, climbing back to the Dkr300 level 
by midsummer. However, during the following months, for-
eign interest began to snowball, and by the end of 1980 
Novo’s stock price had reached the Dkr600 level. More-
over, foreign investors had increased their proportion of 
share ownership from virtually nothing to around 30%. 
Novo’s price/earnings ratio had risen to around 16, which 
was now in line with that of its international competitors 
but not with the Danish market. At this point one must 
conclude that Novo had succeeded in internationalizing its 
cost of capital. Other Danish securities remained locked in 
a segmented capital market.
Directed Share Issue in the United States. During 
the first half of 1981, under the guidance of ­Goldman 
Sachs and with the assistance of Morgan Grenfell and 
Copenhagen Handelsbank, Novo prepared a prospectus 
for SEC registration of a U.S. share offering and eventual 
listing on the New York Stock Exchange. The main barriers 
encountered in this effort, which would have general 
applicability, were connected with preparing financial 
statements that could be reconciled with U.S. accounting 
principles and the higher level of disclosure required by 
the SEC. In particular, industry segment reporting was 
a problem both from a disclosure perspective and an 
accounting perspective because the accounting data were 
not available internally in that format. As it turned out, 
the investment barriers in the U.S. were relatively tractable, 
although expensive and time consuming to overcome.

379
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
Danish institutional investors and the Novo Foundation. 
However, its appropriate debt ratio level was also reduced 
to match the standards expected by international portfolio 
investors trading in the United States, United Kingdom, 
and other important markets. In essence, the U.S. dollar 
became Novo’s functional currency when being evaluated 
by international investors. Theoretically, its revised 
weighted average cost of capital should have become a 
new reference hurdle rate when evaluating new capital 
investments in Denmark or abroad.
Other firms that follow Novo’s strategy are also likely 
to have their weighted average cost of capital become a 
function of the requirements of international portfolio 
investors. Firms resident in some of the emerging market 
countries have already experienced “dollarization” of trade 
and financing for working capital. This phenomenon might 
be extended to long-term financing and the weighted aver-
age cost of capital.
The Novo experience can be a model for other firms 
wishing to escape from segmented and illiquid home equity 
markets. In particular, MNEs based in emerging markets 
often face barriers and lack of visibility similar to what 
Novo faced. They could benefit by following Novo’s pro-
active strategy employed to attract international portfolio 
investors. However, a word of caution is advised. Novo 
had an excellent operating track record and a very strong 
worldwide market niche in two important industry sectors, 
insulin and industrial enzymes. This record continues to 
attract investors in Denmark and abroad. Other companies 
aspiring to achieve similar results would also need to have 
such a favorable track record to attract foreign investors.
Globalization of Securities Markets. During the 1980s, 
numerous other Nordic and other European firms followed 
Novo’s example. They cross-listed on major foreign 
exchanges such as London and New York. They placed 
equity and debt issues in major securities markets. In most 
cases, they were successful in lowering their WACC and 
increasing its availability.
During the 1980s and 1990s, national restrictions on 
cross-border portfolio investment were gradually eased 
under pressure from the Organization for Economic Coop-
eration and Development (OECD), a consortium of most 
of the world’s most industrialized countries. Liberalization 
of European securities markets was accelerated because of 
the European Union’s efforts to develop a single ­European 
market without barriers. Emerging nation markets ­followed 
suit, as did the former Eastern Bloc countries after the 
breakup of the Soviet Union. Emerging national markets 
have often been motivated by the need to source foreign 
capital to finance large-scale privatization.
Now, market segmentation has been significantly 
reduced, although the liquidity of individual national mar-
kets remains limited. Most observers believe that for better 
or for worse, we have achieved a global market for securi-
ties. The good news is that many firms have been assisted 
to become MNEs because they now have access to a global 
cost and availability of capital. The bad news is that the cor-
relation among securities markets has increased, thereby 
reducing, but not eliminating, the benefits of international 
portfolio diversification. Globalization of securities mar-
kets has also led to more volatility and speculative behavior 
as shown by the emerging market crises of the 1995–2001 
period.
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 What were the impacts on Novo as a result of operat-
ing in a segmented market?
2.	 What were the primary causes of the market 
segmentation?
3.	 Ultimately, what actions did Novo take to escape its 
segmented market?
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Segmented Market. What are the most common chal-
lenges a firm resident in a segmented market faces in 
regards to its access to capital?
2.	 Dimensions of Capital. Global integration has given 
many firms access to new and cheaper sources of funds 
beyond those available in their home markets. What 
are the dimensions of a strategy to capture this lower 
cost and greater availability of capital?
3.	 Cost of Capital Benefits. What are the benefits of 
achieving a lower cost and greater availability of capital?
4.	 Equity Cost and Risk. What are the classifications used in 
defining risk in the estimation of a firm’s cost of equity?
5.	 Equity Risk Premiums. What is an equity risk pre-
mium? For an equity risk premium to be truly useful, 
what need it do?
6.	 Portfolio Investors. Both domestic and international 
portfolio managers are asset allocators. What is their 
portfolio management objective?

380
CHAPTER 13    The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
presented in this chapter in “Sample Calculation: 
Ganado’s Cost of Capital.” For both the domestic 
CAPM and ICAPM, calculate the following:
a.	 Ganado’s cost of equity
b.	 Ganado’s cost of debt
c.	 Ganado’s weighted average cost of capital
2.	 Ganado and Equity Risk Premiums. Using the origi-
nal weighted average cost of capital data for Ganado 
used in the chapter in “Sample Calculation: Gana-
do’s Cost of Capital,” calculate both the CAPM and 
ICAPM weighted average costs of capital for the fol-
lowing equity risk premium estimates.
a.	 8.00%
b.	 7.00%
c.	 5.00%
d.	 4.00%
3.	 Thunderhorse Oil. Thunderhorse Oil is a U.S. oil com-
pany. Its current cost of debt is 7%, and the 10-year 
U.S. Treasury yield, the proxy for the risk-free rate 
of interest, is 3%. The expected return on the mar-
ket portfolio is 8%. The company’s effective tax rate 
is 39%. Its optimal capital structure is 60% debt and 
40% equity.
a.	 If Thunderhorse’s beta is estimated at 1.1, what is 
Thunderhorse’s weighted average cost of capital?
b.	 If Thunderhorse’s beta is estimated at 0.8, significantly 
lower because of the continuing profit prospects in 
the global energy sector, what is Thunderhorse’s 
weighted average cost of capital?
4.	 Nestlé of Switzerland Revisited. Nestlé of Switzerland 
is revisiting its cost of equity analysis in 2014. As a result 
of extraordinary actions by the Swiss Central Bank, the 
Swiss bond index yield (10-year maturity) has dropped 
to a record low of 0.520%. The Swiss  equity mar-
kets have been averaging 8.400% returns, while the 
­Financial Times global equity market returns, indexed 
back to Swiss francs, is at 8.820%. Nestlé’s corporate 
treasury staff has estimated the company’s domestic 
beta at 0.825, but its global beta (against the larger 
global equity market portfolio) at .515.
a.	 What is Nestlé’s cost of equity based on the domes-
tic portfolio of a Swiss investor?
b.	 What is Nestlé’s cost of equity based on a global 
portfolio for a Swiss investor?
5.	 Corcovado Pharmaceuticals. Corcovado Pharmaceuti-
cal’s cost of debt is 7%. The risk-free rate of interest 
is 3%. The expected return on the market portfolio 
is 8%. After effective taxes, Corcovado’s effective tax 
rate is 25%. Its optimal capital structure is 60% debt 
and 40% equity.
7.	 International Portfolio Management. What is the main 
advantage that international portfolio managers have 
compared to portfolio managers limited to domestic-
only asset allocation?
8.	 International CAPM. What are the fundamental dis-
tinctions that the international CAPM tries to capture, 
which traditional domestic CAPM does not?
9.	 Dimensions of Asset Allocation. Portfolio asset allo-
cation can be accomplished along many dimensions 
depending on the investment objective of the portfolio 
manager. Identify the various dimensions.
10.	 Market Liquidity. What is meant by the term market 
liquidity? What are the main disadvantages for a firm 
to be located in an illiquid market?
11.	 Market Segmentation. What is market segmenta-
tion, and what are the six main causes of market 
segmentation?
12.	 Market Liquidity. What is the effect of market liquid-
ity and segmentation on a firm’s cost of capital?
13.	 Emerging Markets. Firms located in illiquid and seg-
mented emerging markets would benefit from nation-
alizing their own cost of capital. What do they need to 
do, and what conditions must exist for their efforts to 
succeed?
14.	 Cost of Capital for MNEs. Do multinational firms 
have a higher or lower cost of capital than their 
domestic counterparts? Is this surprising?
15.	 Multinational Use of Debt. Do multinational firms 
use relatively more or less debt than their domestic 
counterparts? Why?
16.	 Multinationals and Beta. Do multinational firms have 
higher/lower betas than their domestic counterparts?
17.	 The “Riddle.” What is the riddle?
18.	 Emerging Market Listings. Why might emerging 
­market multinationals list their shares abroad?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Ganado’s Cost of Capital. Maria Gonzalez now esti-
mates the risk-free rate to be 3.60%, the company’s 
credit risk premium is 4.40%, the domestic beta is 
estimated at 1.05, the international beta is estimated 
at 0.85, and the company’s capital structure is now 
30% debt. All other values remain the same as those 

381
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
Assumptions
Symbol
Goldman 
Sachs
Bank of 
New York
Estimate of 
correlation between 
security and market
b
0.90
0.85
Estimate of 
standard deviation 
of Kashmiri’s 
returns
rjm
24.0%
30.0%
Estimate of 
standard deviation 
of market’s return
sj
18.0%
22.0%
Risk-free rate of 
interest
krf
3.0%
3.0%
Estimate of 
Kashmiri’s cost of 
debt in U.S. market
kd
7.5%
7.8%
Estimate of 
market return, 
forward-looking
km
9.0%
12.0%
Corporate tax rate
t
35.0%
35.0%
Proportion of debt
D/V
35%
40%
Proportion of 
equity
E/V
65%
60%
8.	 Cargill’s Cost of Capital. Cargill is generally considered 
to be the largest privately held company in the world. 
Headquartered in Minneapolis, Minnesota, the 
company has been averaging sales of over $113 billion 
per year over the past five-year period. Although 
the company does not have publicly traded shares, 
it is still extremely important for it to calculate its 
weighted average cost of capital properly in order to 
make rational decisions on new investment proposals. 
Assuming a risk-free rate of 4.50%, an effective tax rate 
of 48%, and a market risk premium of 5.50%, estimate 
the weighted average cost of capital first for Companies 
A and B, and then make a “guesstimate” of what you 
believe a comparable WACC would be for Cargill.
Company A
Company B
Cargill
Company sales
$10.5 billion
$45 billion
$113 billion
Company’s beta
0.83
0.68
??
Credit rating
AA
A
AA
Weighted 
average cost  
of debt
6.885%
7.125%
6.820%
Debt to total 
capital
34%
41%
28%
International 
sales/Sales
11%
34%
54%
a.	 If Corcovado’s beta is estimated at 1.1, what is its 
weighted average cost of capital?
b.	 If Corcovado’s beta is estimated at 0.8, significantly 
lower because of the continuing profit prospects in 
the global energy sector, what is its weighted aver-
age cost of capital?
6.	 WestGas Conveyance, Inc. WestGas Conveyance, 
Inc., is a large U.S. natural gas pipeline company that 
wants to raise $120 million to finance expansion. 
WestGas wants a capital structure that is 50% debt 
and 50% equity. Its corporate combined federal and 
state income tax rate is 40%. WestGas finds that it can 
finance in the domestic U.S. capital market at the rates 
listed below. Both debt and equity would have to be 
sold in multiples of $20 million, and these cost figures 
show the component costs, each, of debt and equity if 
raised half by equity and half by debt.
A London bank advises WestGas that U.S. dollars 
could be raised in Europe at the following costs, also in 
multiples of $20 million, while maintaining the 50/50 
capital structure.
Each increment of cost would be influenced by 
the total amount of capital raised. That is, if WestGas 
first borrowed $20 million in the European market at 
6% and matched this with an additional $20 million 
of equity, additional debt beyond this amount would 
cost 12% in the United States and 10% in Europe. The 
same relationship holds for equity financing.
a.	 Calculate the lowest average cost of capital for 
each increment of $40 million of new capital, where 
WestGas raises $20 million in the equity market 
and an additional $20 in the debt market at the 
same time.
b.	 If WestGas plans an expansion of only $60 million, 
how should that expansion be financed? What will 
be the weighted average cost of capital for the 
expansion?
7.	 Kashmiri’s Cost of Capital. Kashmiri is the largest 
and most successful specialty goods company based 
in Bangalore, India. It has not yet entered the North 
American marketplace, but is considering establish-
ing both manufacturing and distribution facilities in 
the United States through a wholly owned subsidiary. 
It has approached two different investment banking 
advisors, Goldman Sachs and Bank of New York, for 
estimates of what its costs of capital would be sev-
eral years into the future when it planned to list its 
­American subsidiary on a U.S. stock exchange. Using 
the following assumptions by the two different advi-
sors, calculate the prospective costs of debt, equity, and 
the WACC for Kashmiri (U.S.):

382
CHAPTER 13    The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
Brazilian Economic Performance
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
Inflation rate (IPC)
23.20%
10.00%
4.80%
1.00%
10.50%
Bank lending rate
53.10%
27.10%
24.70%
29.20%
30.70%
Exchange rate (reais/$)
0.972
1.039
1.117
1.207
1.700
Equity returns  
(São Paulo Bovespa)
16.0%
28.0%
30.2%
33.5%
151.9%
compensation for the risk taken going into the invest-
ment. If he doesn’t end up getting it, and that was hap-
pening here, then he pulls his capital out and walks.”
Curly is the theoretician. “Ladies, this is not about 
empirical results; it is about the fundamental concept of 
risk-adjusted returns. An investor in equities knows he 
will reap returns only after all compensation has been 
made to debt providers. He is therefore always subject to 
a higher level of risk to his return than debt instruments, 
and as the capital asset pricing model states, equity inves-
tors set their expected returns as a risk-adjusted factor 
over and above the returns to risk-free instruments.”
9.	 The Tombs. You have joined your friends at the local 
watering hole, The Tombs, for your weekly debate on 
international finance. The topic this week is whether 
the cost of equity can ever be cheaper than the cost of 
debt. The group has chosen Brazil in the mid-1990s as 
the subject of the debate. One of the group members 
has torn a table of data out of a book (shown below), 
which is then the subject of the analysis.
Larry argues, “It’s all about expected versus 
delivered. You can talk about what equity investors 
expect, but they often find that what is delivered for years 
at a time is so small—even sometimes negative—that in 
effect, the cost of equity is cheaper than the cost of debt.”
Moe interrupts, “But you’re missing the point. 
The cost of capital is what the investor requires in 
At this point, Larry and Moe simply stare at Curly—
pause—and order more beer. Using the Brazilian data 
presented, comment on this week’s debate at The Tombs.
Genedak-Hogan
Use the table below to answer Problems 10 through 12. Genedak-Hogan is an American conglomerate that is actively 
debating the impacts of international diversification of its operations on its capital structure and cost of capital. The firm 
is planning on reducing consolidated debt after diversification.
Assumptions
Symbol
Before 
Diversification
After  
Diversification
Correlation between G-H and the market
rjm
0.88
0.76
Standard deviation of G-H’s returns
sj
28.0%
26.0%
Standard deviation of market’s returns
sm
18.0%
18.0%
Risk-free rate of interest
krf
3.0%
3.0%
Additional equity risk premium for internationalization
RPM
0.0%
3.0%
Estimate of G-H’s cost of debt in U.S. market
kd
7.2%
7.0%
Market risk premium
km - krf
5.5%
5.5%
Corporate tax rate
t
35.0%
35.0%
Proportion of debt
D/V
38%
32%
Proportion of equity
E/V
62%
68%

383
The Global Cost and Availability of Capital    CHAPTER 13 
b.	 Determine how international funds have been 
performing, in U.S. dollar terms, relative to mutual 
funds offering purely domestic portfolios
Fidelity
www.fidelity.com
T. Rowe Price
www.troweprice.com
Merrill Lynch
www.ml.com
Kemper
www.kempercorporation.com
2.	 Novo Industri. Novo Industri A/S merged with Nor-
disk Gentofte in 1989. Nordisk Gentofte was Novo’s 
main European competitor. The combined company, 
now called Novo Nordisk, has become the leading 
producer of insulin worldwide. Its main competitor is 
Eli Lilly of the United States. Using standard inves-
tor information, and the Web sites for Novo Nordisk 
and Eli Lilly, determine if, during the most recent five 
years, Novo Nordisk has maintained a cost of capital 
competitive with Eli Lilly. In particular, examine the 
P/E ratios, share prices, debt ratios, and betas. Try to 
calculate each firm’s actual cost of capital.
Novo Nordisk
www.novonordisk.com
Eli Lilly and 
Company
www.lilly.com
BigCharts.com
www.bigcharts.com
Yahoo! Finance
www.finance.yahoo.com
3.	 Cost of Capital Calculator. Ibbotson and Associates, 
a unit of Morningstar, is one of the leading providers 
of quantitative estimates of the cost of capital across 
markets. Use the Ibbotson and Associates Web site—
specifically the Cost of Capital Center—to prepare 
an overview of the major theoretical approaches and 
numerical estimates for cross-border costs of capital 
by Ibbotson and Associates.
Ibbotson and 
Associates
corporate.morningstar.com
10.	 Genedak-Hogan Cost of Equity. Senior management 
at Genedak-Hogan are actively debating the implica-
tions of diversification on its cost of equity. All agree 
that the company’s returns will be less correlated with 
the reference market return in the future, the financial 
advisors believe that the market will assess an addi-
tional 3.0% risk premium for “going international” to 
the basic CAPM cost of equity. Calculate Genedak-
Hogan’s cost of equity before and after international 
diversification of its operations, with and without the 
hypothetical additional risk premium, and comment 
on the discussion.
11.	 Genedak-Hogan’s WACC. Calculate the weighted 
average cost of capital for Genedak-Hogan before and 
after international diversification.
a.	 Did the reduction in debt costs reduce the firm’s 
weighted average cost of capital? How would you 
describe the impact of international diversification 
on its costs of capital?
b.	 Adding the hypothetical risk premium to the cost 
of equity introduced in Problem 10 (an added 3.0% 
to the cost of equity because of international diver-
sification), what is the firm’s WACC?
12.	 Genedak-Hogan’s WACC and Effective Tax Rate. 
Many MNEs have greater ability to control and reduce 
their effective tax rates when expanding international 
operations. If Genedak-Hogan was able to reduce its 
consolidated effective tax rate from 35% to 32%, what 
would be the impact on its WACC?
Internet Exercises
1.	 International Diversification via Mutual Funds. All 
major mutual fund companies now offer a variety of 
internationally diversified mutual funds. The degree of 
international composition across funds, however, dif-
fers significantly. Use the Web sites listed, and others 
of interest, to
a.	 Distinguish between international funds, global 
funds, worldwide funds, and overseas funds

Raising Equity 
and Debt Globally
Do what you will, the capital is at hazard. All that can be required of a trus-
tee to invest, is, that he shall conduct himself faithfully and exercise a sound 
discretion. He is to observe how men of prudence, discretion, and intelligence 
manage their own affairs, not in regard to speculation, but in regard to the 
permanent disposition of their funds, considering the probable income, as 
well as the probable safety of the capital to be invested.
—Prudent Man Rule, Justice Samuel Putnam, 1830.
Chapter 13 analyzed why gaining access to global capital markets should lower a firm’s cost 
of capital, increase its access to capital, and improve the liquidity of its shares by overcoming 
market segmentation. A firm pursuing this lofty goal, particularly a firm from a segmented or 
emerging market, must first design a financial strategy that will attract international investors. 
This involves choosing among alternative paths to access global capital markets.
This chapter focuses on firms that reside in less liquid, segmented, or emerging markets. 
They are the ones that need to tap liquid and unsegmented markets in order to attain the 
global cost and availability of capital. Firms resident in large and highly industrialized coun-
tries already have access to their own domestic, liquid, and unsegmented markets. Although 
they too source equity and debt abroad, it is unlikely to have as significant an impact on 
their cost and availability of capital. In fact, for these firms, sourcing funds abroad is often 
Learning Objectives
■
■
Design a strategy to source capital equity globally
■
■
Examine the potential differences in the optimal financial structure of the 
multinational firm compared to that of the domestic firm
■
■
Describe the various financial instruments that can be used to source equity in the 
global equity markets
■
■
Understand the different forms of foreign listings—depositary receipts—in 
U.S. markets
■
■
Analyze the unique role private placement enjoys in raising global capital
■
■
Evaluate the different goals and considerations relevant to a firm pursuing foreign 
equity listing and issuance
■
■
Explore the different structures that can be used to source debt globally
Chapter	 14
384

385
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
motivated solely by the need to fund large foreign acquisitions rather than to fund existing 
operations.
This chapter begins with the design of a financial strategy to source both equity and debt 
globally. It then analyzes the optimal financial structure for an MNE and its subsidiaries, one 
that minimizes its cost of capital. We then explore the alternative paths that a firm may follow 
in raising capital in global markets. The chapter concludes with the Mini-Case, Petrobrás of 
Brazil and the Cost of Capital, which examines how the international markets discriminate in 
their treatment of multinational firms by home and industry.
Designing a Strategy to Source Capital Globally
Designing a capital sourcing strategy requires management to agree upon a long-run financial 
objective and then choose among the various alternative paths to get there. Exhibit 14.1 is a 
visual presentation of alternative paths to the ultimate objective of attaining a global cost and 
availability of capital.
Normally, the choice of paths and implementation is aided by an early appointment of an 
investment bank as official advisor to the firm. Investment bankers are in touch with the poten-
tial foreign investors and their current requirements. They can also help navigate the various 
Domestic Financial Market Operations
Euroequity Issue — Global Markets
International Bond Issue —
Less Prestigious Markets
International Bond Issue —
Target Market or Eurobond Market
Equity Listings — Less Prestigious Markets
Equity Issue — Less Prestigious Markets
Equity Listing — Target Market
Source:Oxelhiem, Stonehill, Randøy, Vikkula, Dullum, and Modén, Corporate Strategies in Internationalizing
the Cost of Capital, Copenhagen: Copenhagen Business School Press, 1998, p. 119.
Exhibit 14.1
Alternative Paths to Globalize the Cost and Availability of Capital

386
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
institutional requirements and barriers that must be satisfied. Their services include advising 
if, when, and where a cross-listing should be initiated. They usually prepare the required pro-
spectus if an equity or debt issue is desired, help to price the issue, and maintain an aftermarket 
to prevent the share price from falling below its initial price.
Most firms raise their initial capital in their own domestic market (see Exhibit 14.1). Next, 
they are tempted to skip all the intermediate steps and drop to the bottom line, a euroequity 
issue in global markets. This is the time when a good investment bank advisor will offer a 
“reality check.” Most firms that have only raised capital in their own domestic market are not 
sufficiently well known to attract foreign investors. Remember from Chapter 12 that Novo 
was advised by its investment bankers to start with a convertible eurobond issue and simulta-
neously cross-list their shares and their bonds in London. This was despite the fact that Novo 
had an outstanding track record of financial and business performance.
Exhibit 14.1 shows that most firms should start sourcing abroad with an international 
bond issue. It could be placed on a less prestigious foreign market. This could be followed 
by an international bond issue in a target market or in the eurobond market. The next step 
might be to cross-list and issue equity in one of the less prestigious markets in order to attract 
the attention of international investors. The next step could then be to cross-list shares on a 
highly liquid prestigious foreign stock exchange such as London (LSE), NYSE, Euronext, or 
NASDAQ. The ultimate step would be to place a directed equity issue in a prestigious target 
market or a euroequity issue in global equity markets.
Optimal Financial Structure
After many years of debate, finance theorists now agree that there is an optimal financial 
structure for a firm, and practically, they agree on how it is determined. The great debate 
between the so-called traditionalists and the Modigliani and Miller school of thought has 
ended in compromise:
When taxes and bankruptcy costs are considered, a firm has an optimal financial struc-
ture determined by that particular mix of debt and equity that minimizes the firm’s cost 
of capital for a given level of business risk.
If the business risk of new projects differs from the risk of existing projects, the optimal mix 
of debt and equity would change to recognize trade-offs between business and financial 
risks.
Exhibit 14.2 illustrates how the cost of capital varies with the amount of debt employed. 
As the debt ratio, defined as total debt divided by total assets at market values, increases, the 
after-tax weighted average cost of capital (kWACC) decreases because of the heavier weight of 
low-cost debt [kd(1 - t)] compared to high-cost equity (ke). The low cost of debt is, of course, 
due to the tax deductibility of interest shown by the term (1 - t).
Partly offsetting the favorable effect of more debt, is an increase in the cost of equity (ke), 
because investors perceive greater financial risk. Nevertheless, the after-tax weighted average 
cost of capital (kWACC) continues to decline as the debt ratio increases, until financial risk 
becomes so serious that investors and management alike perceive a real danger of insolvency. 
This result causes a sharp increase in the cost of new debt and equity, thereby increasing the 
weighted average cost of capital. The low point on the resulting U-shaped cost of capital curve, 
14% in Exhibit 14.2, defines the debt ratio range in which the cost of capital is minimized.
Most theorists believe that the low point is actually a rather broad flat area encompass-
ing a wide range of debt ratios, 30% to 60% in Exhibit 14.2, where little difference exists in 
the cost of capital. They also generally agree that, at least in the United States, the range of the 

387
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
flat area and the location of a particular firm’s debt ratio within that range are determined by 
such variables as (1) the industry in which it competes; (2) volatility of its sales and operating 
income; and (3) the collateral value of its assets.
Optimal Financial Structure and the Multinational
The domestic theory of optimal financial structures needs to be modified by four more vari-
ables in order to accommodate the case of the multinational enterprise. These variables are 
(1) availability of capital; (2) diversification of cash flows; (3) foreign exchange risk; and (4) 
expectations of international portfolio investors.1
Availability of Capital
Chapter 13 demonstrated that access to capital in global markets allows an MNE to lower its 
cost of equity and debt compared with most domestic firms. It also permits an MNE to main-
tain its desired debt ratio, even when significant amounts of new funds must be raised. In other 
words, a multinational firm’s marginal cost of capital is constant for considerable ranges of its 
capital budget. This statement is not true for most small domestic firms because they do not 
have access to the national equity or debt markets. They must either rely on internally gener-
ated funds or borrow for the short and medium terms from commercial banks.
Multinational firms domiciled in countries that have illiquid capital markets are in almost 
the same situation as small domestic firms unless they have gained a global cost and availability 
1An excellent recent study on the practical dimensions of optimal capital structure can be found in “An ­Empirical 
Model of Optimal Capital Structure,” Jules H. Binsbergen, John R. Graham, and Jie Yang, Journal of Applied 
­Corporate Finance, Vol. 23, No. 4, Fall 2011, pp. 34–59.
20
0
60
40
80
100
30
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Cost of Capital (%)
ke = cost of equity
kWACC = weighted
average after-tax
cost of capital
kd(1 – x) = after-tax
cost of debt
Debt Ratio (%) = Total Debt (D)
Total Assets (V )
Minimum cost
of capital range
Exhibit 14.2
The Cost of Capital and Financial Structure

388
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
of capital. They must rely on internally generated funds and bank borrowing. If they need to 
raise significant amounts of new funds to finance growth opportunities, they may need to bor-
row more than would be optimal from the viewpoint of minimizing their cost of capital. This 
is equivalent to saying that their marginal cost of capital is increasing at higher budget levels.
Diversification of Cash Flows
As explained in Chapter 13, the theoretical possibility exists that multinational firms are in a 
better position than domestic firms to support higher debt ratios because their cash flows are 
diversified internationally. The probability of a firm’s covering fixed charges under varying 
conditions in product, financial, and foreign exchange markets should increase if the variability 
of its cash flows is minimized.
By diversifying cash flows internationally, the MNE might be able to achieve the same 
kind of reduction in cash flow variability as portfolio investors receive from diversifying their 
security holdings internationally. Returns are not perfectly correlated between countries. In 
contrast, a domestic German firm, for example, would not enjoy the benefit of international 
cash flow diversification. Instead, it would need to rely entirely on its own net cash inflow from 
domestic operations. Perceived financial risk for the German firm would be greater than for 
a multinational firm because the variability of its German domestic cash flows could not be 
offset by positive cash flows elsewhere in the world.
As discussed in Chapter 13, the diversification argument has been challenged by empirical 
research findings that MNEs in the United States actually have lower debt ratios than their 
domestic counterparts. The agency costs of debt were higher for the MNEs, as were political 
risks, foreign exchange risks, and asymmetric information.
Foreign Exchange Risk and the Cost of Debt
When a firm issues foreign currency-denominated debt, its effective cost equals the after-tax 
cost of repaying the principal and interest in terms of the firm’s own currency. This amount 
includes the nominal cost of principal and interest in foreign currency terms, adjusted for any 
foreign exchange gains or losses.
For example, if a U.S.-based firm borrows SF1,500,000 for one year at 5.00% interest, and 
during the year the Swiss franc appreciates from an initial rate of SF1.5000/$ to SF1.4400/$, 
what is the dollar cost of this debt (kd
$)? The dollar proceeds of the initial borrowing are cal-
culated at the current spot rate of SF1.5000/$:
SF1,500,000
SF1.5000/$ = $1,000,000.
At the end of one year the U.S.-based firm is responsible for repaying the SF1,500,000 princi-
pal plus 5.00% interest, or a total of SF1,575,000. This repayment, however, must be made at 
an ending spot rate of SF1.4400/$:
SF1,500,000 * 1.05
SF1.4400/$
= $1,093,750.
The actual dollar cost of the loan’s repayment is not the nominal 5.00% paid in Swiss franc 
interest, but 9.375%:
c $1,093,750
$1,000,000 d - 1 = 0.09375 ≈9.375%
The dollar cost is higher than expected due to appreciation of the Swiss franc against the 
U.S. dollar. This total home-currency cost is actually the result of the combined percentage 

389
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
cost of debt and percentage change in the foreign currency’s value. We can find the total cost 
of borrowing Swiss francs by a U.S.-dollar based firm, kd
$, by multiplying one plus the Swiss 
franc interest expense, kd
 SF, by one plus the percentage change in the SF/$ exchange rate, s:
kd
$ = [(1 + kd
 SF ) * (1 + s)] - 1,
where kd
 SF = 5.00% and s = 4.1667%. The percentage change in the value of the Swiss franc 
versus the U.S. dollar, when the home currency is the U.S. dollar, is
S1 - S2
S2
* 100 = SF1.5000/$ - SF1.4400/$
SF1.4400/$
* 100 = +4.1667%.
The total expense, combining the nominal interest rate and the percentage change in the 
exchange rate, is
kd
$ = [(1 + .0500) * (1 + .041667 )] - 1 = .09375 ≈9.375%.
The total percentage cost of capital is 9.375%, not simply the foreign currency interest 
payment of 5%. The after-tax cost of this Swiss franc denominated debt, when the U.S. income 
tax rate is 34%, is
kd
$
 (1 - t ) = 9.375% * 0.66 = 6.1875%.
The firm would report the added 4.1667% cost of this debt in terms of U.S. dollars as a 
foreign exchange transaction loss, and it would be deductible for tax purposes.
Expectations of International Portfolio Investors
Chapter 13 highlighted the fact that the key to gaining a global cost and availability of capital 
is attracting and retaining international portfolio investors. Those investors’ expectations for 
a firm’s debt ratio and overall financial structures are based on global norms that have devel-
oped over the past 30 years. Because a large proportion of international portfolio investors 
and based in the most liquid and unsegmented capital markets, such as the United States and 
the United Kingdom, their expectations tend to predominate and override individual national 
norms. Therefore, regardless of other factors, if a firm wants to raise capital in global markets, it 
must adopt global norms that are close to the U.S. and U.K. norms. Debt ratios up to 60% appear 
to be acceptable. Higher debt ratios are more difficult to sell to international portfolio investors.
Raising Equity Globally
Once a multinational firm has established its financial strategy and considered its desired and 
target capital structure, it then proceeds to raise capital outside of its domestic market—both 
debt and equity—using a variety of capital raising paths and instruments.
Exhibit 14.3 describes three key critical elements to understanding the issues that any firm 
must confront when seeking to raise equity capital. Although the business press does not often 
make a clear distinction, there is a fundamental distinction between an equity issuance and an 
equity listing. A firm seeking to raise equity capital is ultimately in search of an issuance—the 
IPO or SPO described in Exhibit 14.3. This generates cash proceeds to be used for funding and 
executing the business. But often issuances must be preceded by listings, in which the shares are 
traded on an exchange and, therefore, in a specific country market, gaining name recognition, 
visibility, and hopefully preparing the market for an issuance.
That said, an issuance need not be public. A firm, public or private, can place an issue with 
private investors, a private placement. (Note that private placement may refer to either equity 
or debt.) Private placements can take a variety of different forms, and the intent of investors 

390
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
may be passive (e.g., Rule 144A investors) or active (e.g., private equity, where the investor 
intends to control and change the firm).
Publicly traded companies, in addition to raising equity capital, are also in pursuit of 
greater market visibility and reaching ever-larger potential investor audiences. The expectation 
is that the growing investor audience will result in higher share prices over time—increasing 
the returns to owners. Privately held companies are more singular in their objective: to raise 
greater quantities of equity at the lowest possible cost—privately.  As discussed in Chapter 4, 
ownership trends in the industrialized markets have tended toward more private ownership, 
while many multinational firms from emerging market countries have shown growing interest 
in going public.
Exhibit 14.4 provides an overview of the four major equity alternatives available to mul-
tinational firms today. A firm wishing to raise equity capital outside of its home market may 
take a public pathway or a private one. The public pathway includes a directed public share 
issue or a euroequity issue. Alternatively, and one that has been used with greater frequency 
over the past decade, is a private pathway—private placements, private equity, or a private 
share sale under strategic alliance.
Initial Public Offering (IPO)
A private firm initiates public ownership of the company through an initial public offering, 
or IPO. Most IPOs begin with the organization of an underwriting and syndication group 
Equity Issuance
■
■
Initial Public Offering (IPO)—the initial sale of shares to the public of a private company. IPOs raise capital and typically use 
underwriters.
■
■
Seasoned Public Offering (SPO)—a subsequent sale of additional shares in the publicly traded company, raising additional 
equity capital.
■
■
Euroequity—the initial sale of shares in two or more markets and countries simultaneously.
■
■
Directed Issue—the sale of shares by a publicly traded company to a specific target investor or market, public or private, often 
in a different country.
Equity Listing
■
■
Shares of a publicly traded firm are listed for purchase or sale on an exchange. An investment banking firm is typically retained 
to make a market in the shares.
■
■
Cross-listing is the listing of a company’s shares on an exchange in a different country market. It is intended to expand the 
potential market for the firm’s shares to a larger universe of investors.
■
■
Depositary receipt (DR)—a certificate of ownership in the shares of a company issued by a bank, representing a claim on underly-
ing foreign securities. In the United States they are termed American Depositary Receipts (ADRs), and when sold globally, Global 
Depositary Receipts (GDRs).
Private Placement
■
■
The sale of a security (equity or debt) to a private investor. The private investors are typically institutions such as pension funds, 
insurance companies, or high net-worth private entities.
■
■
SEC Rule 144A private placement sales are sales of securities to qualified institutional buyers (QIBs) in the United States without 
SEC registration. QIBs are nonbank firms that own and invest in $100 million or more on a discretionary basis.
■
■
Private Equity—equity investments in firms by large limited partnerships, institutional investors, or wealthy private investors, with 
the intention of taking the subject firms private, revitalizing their businesses, and then selling them publicly or privately in one to 
five years.
Exhibit 14.3
Equity Avenues, Activities, and Attributes

391
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
comprised of investment banking service providers. This group then assists the company in 
preparing the regulatory filings and disclosures required, depending on the country and stock 
exchange the firm is using. The firm will, in the months preceding the IPO date, publish a pro-
spectus. The prospectus will provide a description of the company’s history, business, operating 
and financing results, associated business, financial or political risks, and the company’s busi-
ness plan for the future, all to aid prospective buyers in their assessment of the firm.
The initial issuance of shares by a company typically represents somewhere between 15% 
and 25% of the ownership in the firm (although a number in recent years have been as little 
as 6% to 8%). The company may follow the IPO with additional share sales called seasoned 
offerings or follow-on offerings (FOs) in which more of the firm’s ownership is sold in the 
public market. The total shares or proportion of shares traded in the public market is often 
referred to as the public float or free float.
Once a firm has “gone public,” it is open to a considerably higher level of public scrutiny. 
This scrutiny arises from the detailed public disclosures and financial filings it must make 
periodically as required by government security regulators and individual stock exchanges. 
This continuous disclosure is not trivial in either cost or competitive implications. Public firm 
financial disclosures can be seen as divulging a tremendous amount of information that cus-
tomers, suppliers, partners, and competitors may use in their relationship with the firm. Private 
firms have a distinct competitive advantage in this arena.2
An added distinction about the publicly traded firm’s shares is that they only raise capital 
for the firm upon issuance. Although the daily rise and fall of share prices drives the returns 
to the owners of those shares, that daily price movement does not change the capital of the 
company.
2A publicly traded firm like Walmart will produce hundreds of pages of operational details, financial results, and 
management discussion on a quarterly basis. That is in comparison to large private firms like Cargill or Koch, where 
finding a full single page of financial results would be an achievement.
Raise Equity Capital
Private placement of public shares 
Private placement of private interest  
Private equity 
Strategic Partner/Alliance 
Private Placement 
Directed Public/Private Issue 
Shares sold to a speciﬁc
market or exchange 
Shares sold to a speciﬁc set
of private interests 
Euroequity  Issue 
Shares issued on two or more
exchanges, in two or more
countries, simultaneously  
Initial Public Oﬀering (IPO) 
Shares of a private company sold to
the public market for the ﬁrst time  
Seasoned oﬀering – additional
shares issued later
Depositary receipts – foreign
corporate issuance
Exhibit 14.4
Equity Alternatives in the Global Market

392
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
Euroequity Issue
A euroequity or euroequity issue is an initial public offering on multiple exchanges in 
multiple countries at the same time. Almost all euroequity issues are underwritten by an 
international syndicate. The term “euro” in this context does not imply that the issuers or 
investors are located in Europe, nor does it mean the shares are denominated in euros. 
It is a generic term for international securities issues originating and being sold anywhere 
in the world. The euroequity seeks to raise more capital in its issuance by reaching as 
many different investors as possible. Two examples of high-profile euroequity issues would 
be those of British Telecommunications and the famous Italian luxury goods producer, 
Gucci.
The largest and most spectacular issues have been made in conjunction with a wave of 
privatizations of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). The Thatcher government in the United 
Kingdom created the model when it privatized British Telecom in December 1984. That issue 
was so large that it was necessary and desirable to sell tranches to foreign investors in addition 
to the sale to domestic investors. (A tranche is an allocation of shares, typically to underwriters 
that are expected to sell to investors in their designated geographic markets.) The objective is 
both to raise the funds and to ensure post-issue worldwide liquidity.
Euroequity privatization issues have been particularly popular with international portfolio 
investors because most of the firms are very large, with excellent credit ratings and profitable 
quasi-government monopolies at the time of privatization. The British privatization model 
has been so successful that numerous others have followed like the Deutsche Telecom initial 
public offering of $13 billion in 1996.
State-owned enterprises (SOEs)—government-owned firms from emerging markets—have 
successfully implemented large-scale privatization programs with these foreign tranches. Tel-
efonos de Mexico, the giant Mexican telephone company, completed a $2 billion euroequity 
issue in 1991 and has continued to have an extremely liquid listing on the NYSE.
One of the largest euroequity offerings by a firm resident in an illiquid market was the 
1993 sale of $3 billion in shares by YPF Sociedad Anónima, Argentina’s state-owned oil com-
pany. About 75% of its shares were placed in tranches outside of Argentina, with 46% in 
the United States alone. Its underwriting syndicate represented a virtual “who’s who” of the 
world’s leading investment banks.
Directed Public Share Issues
A directed public share issue or directed issue is defined as one that is targeted at investors 
in a single country and underwritten in whole or in part by investment institutions from that 
country. The issue may or may not be denominated in the currency of the target market and is 
typically combined with a cross-listing on a stock exchange in the target market.3
A directed issue might be motivated by a need to fund acquisitions or major capital invest-
ments in a target foreign market. This is an especially important source of equity for firms that 
reside in smaller capital markets and that have outgrown that market.
Nycomed, a small but well-respected Norwegian pharmaceutical firm, was an example 
of this type of motivation for a directed issue combined with cross-listing. Its commercial 
strategy for growth was to leverage its sophisticated knowledge of certain market niches and 
technologies within the pharmaceutical field by acquiring other promising firms—primarily 
firms in Europe and the United States—that possessed relevant technologies, personnel, or 
3The share issue by Novo in 1981(Chapter 12) was a good example of a successful directed share issue that both 
improved the liquidity of Novo’s shares and lowered its cost of capital.

393
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
market niches. The acquisitions were paid for partly with cash and partly with shares. The 
company funded its acquisition strategy by selling two directed issues abroad. In 1989 it 
cross-listed on the London Stock Exchange (LSE) and raised $100 million in equity from 
foreign investors. Nycomed followed its LSE listing and issuance with a cross-listing and 
issuance on the NYSE, raising another $75 million from U.S. investors. Global Finance in 
Practice 14.1 offers another example of a directed issue, in this case, a publicly traded firm 
in Sweden and Norway issuing a euroequity to partially fund the development of a recent 
oil property acquisition.
Depositary Receipts
Depositary receipts (DRs) are negotiable certificates issued by a bank to represent the underly-
ing shares of stock that are held in trust at a foreign custodian bank. Global depositary receipts 
(GDRs) refer to certificates traded outside of the United States, and American depositary 
receipts (ADRs) refer to certificates traded in the United States and denominated in U.S. 
dollars. For a company that is incorporated outside the United States and that wants to be 
listed on a U.S. stock exchange, the primary way of doing so is through an ADR program. For 
a company incorporated anywhere in the world that wants to be listed in any foreign market, 
this is done via a GDR program.
ADRs are sold, registered, and transferred in the U.S. in the same manner as any share 
of stock, with each ADR representing either a multiple or portion of the underlying foreign 
share. This multiple/portion allows ADRs to carry a price per share appropriate for the U.S. 
market (typically under $20 per share), even if the price of the foreign share is inappropriate 
when converted to U.S. dollars directly. A number of ADRs, like the ADR of Telefonos de 
Mexico (TelMex) of Mexico shown in Exhibit 14.5, have been some of the most active shares 
on U.S. exchanges for many years.
The first ADR program was created for a British company, Selfridges Provincial Stores 
Limited, a famous British retailer, in 1927. Created by J.P. Morgan, the shares were listed on 
the New York Curb Exchange, which in later years was transformed into the American Stock 
Exchange. As with many financial innovations, depositary receipts were created to defeat a reg-
ulatory restriction. In this case, the British government had prohibited British companies from 
registering their shares on foreign markets without British transfer agents. Depositary receipts, 
in essence, create a synthetic share abroad, and therefore do not require actual ­registration of 
shares outside Britain.
One example of the use of directed public share issues was the 
2005 issuance of PA Resources (PAR.ST), a Swedish oil and 
gas reserve acquisition and development firm. First listed on 
the Oslo, Norway, stock exchange in 2001, PAR announced 
in 2005 a potential private placement of up to 7 million shares 
that were specifically directed at Norwegian and international 
investors (non-U.S. investors). The proceeds of the issuance 
were expected to partially fund the development of recent oil 
and gas reserve acquisitions made by the company in the 
North Sea and Tunisia.
The directed issue was reportedly heavily oversubscribed 
following the announcement. Like many directed issuances 
outside the United States the offer expressly stated that the 
securities would not be offered or sold in the U.S., as the issue 
had not and would not be registered in the U.S. under the U.S. 
Securities Act of 1933.
Global Finance in Practice 14.1
The Planned Directed Equity Issue of PA Resources of Sweden

394
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
Exhibit 14.5
TelMex’s American Depositary Receipt (Sample)
ADR Mechanics
Exhibit 14.6 illustrates the issuance process of a DR program, in this case a U.S.-based investor 
purchasing shares in a publicly traded Brazilian company—an American depositary receipt 
or ADR program:
1.	 The U.S. investor instructs his broker to make a purchase of shares in the publicly 
traded Brazilian company.
2.	 The U.S. broker contacts a local broker in Brazil (either through the broker’s inter-
national offices or directly), placing the order.
3.	 The Brazilian broker purchases the desired ordinary shares and delivers them to a 
custodian bank in Brazil.
4.	 The U.S. broker converts the U.S. dollars received from the investor into Brazilian 
reais to pay the Brazilian broker for the shares purchased.
5.	 On the same day that the shares are delivered to the Brazilian custodian bank, the 
custodian notifies the U.S. depositary bank of their deposit.
6.	 Upon notification, the U.S. depositary bank issues and delivers DRs for the Brazilian 
company shares to the U.S. broker.
7.	 The U.S. broker then delivers the DRs to the U.S. investor.

395
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
The DRs are now held and tradable like any other common stock in the United States. In addi-
tion to the process just described, it is possible for the U.S. broker to obtain the DRs for the U.S. 
investor by purchasing existing DRs, not requiring a new issuance. Exhibit 14.6 also describes 
the alternative process mechanics of a sale or cancellation of ADRs.
Once the ADRs are created, they are tradable in the U.S. market like any other U.S. secu-
rity. ADRs can be sold to other U.S. investors by simply transferring them from the existing 
ADR holder (the seller) to another DR holder (the buyer). This is termed intra-market trad-
ing. This transaction would be settled in the same manner as any other U.S. transaction, with 
settlement in U.S. dollars on the third business day after the trade date and typically using the 
depository trust company (DTC). Intra-market trading accounts for nearly 95% of all DR 
trading today.
ADRs can be exchanged for the underlying foreign shares, or vice versa, so arbitrage keeps 
foreign and U.S. prices of any given share the same after adjusting for transfer costs. For exam-
ple, investor demand in one market will cause a price rise there, which will cause an arbitrage 
rise in the price on the other market even when investors there are not as bullish on the stock.
ADRs convey certain technical advantages to U.S. shareholders. Dividends paid by a 
foreign firm are passed to its custodial bank and then to the bank that issued the ADR. The 
issuing bank exchanges the foreign currency dividends for U.S. dollars and sends the dollar 
dividend to the ADR holders. ADRs are in registered form, rather than in bearer form. Trans-
fer of ownership occurs in the United States in accordance with U.S. laws and procedures. 
Normally, trading costs are lower than when buying or selling the underlying shares in their 
Instruction 
Conﬁrmation 
U.S.
Market 
Release
Shares
Deposit
Shares
Buy Shares 
Issue
ADRs
Cancel
ADRs
Sell Shares 
Sell Shares 
Buy Shares 
Sell ADRs
Buy ADRs
U.S. Market 
Brazilian Market
Local 
Custodian 
Depositary 
Bank 
Source: Based on Depositary Receipts Reference Guide, JPMorgan, 2005, p. 33.
U.S.
Broker 
Local 
Broker 
Local 
Market 
Local 
Broker 
U.S.
Broker 
Standard Issuance
U.S. Investor
Standard Cancellation
U.S. Investor
Exhibit 14.6
The Structural Execution of ADRs

396
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
home market, and settlement is faster. Withholding taxes is simpler because it is handled by 
the depositary bank.
ADR Program Structures
The previous section described the issuance of a DR (an ADR in this case) on a Brazilian 
company’s shares resulting from the desire of a U.S.-based investor to buy shares in a Brazilian 
company. But DR programs can also be viewed from the perspective of the Brazilian com-
pany—as part of its financial strategy to reach investors in the United States.
ADR programs differ in whether they are sponsored and in their certification level. 
­Sponsored ADRs are created at the request of a foreign firm wanting its shares listed or 
traded in the United States. The firm applies to the U.S. SEC and a U.S. bank for registration 
and issuance of ADRs. The foreign firm pays all costs of creating such sponsored ADRs. If a 
foreign firm does not seek to have its shares listed in the United States but U.S. investors are 
interested, a U.S. securities firm may initiate creation of the ADRs—an unsponsored ADR 
program. Unsponsored ADRs are still required by the SEC to obtain approval of the firms 
whose shares are to be listed. Unsponsored programs represent a relatively small portion of 
all DR programs.
The second dimension of ADR differentiation is certification level, described in detail in 
Exhibit 14.7. The three general levels of commitment are distinguished by degree of disclosure, 
listing alternatives, whether they may be used to raise capital (issue new shares), and the time 
typically taken to implement the programs. (SEC Rule 144A programs are described in detail 
later in this chapter.)
Level I (over-the-counter or pink sheets) DR Programs. Level I programs are the easiest and 
fastest programs to execute. A Level I program allows the foreign securities to be purchased 
and held by U.S. investors without being registered with the SEC. It is the least costly approach 
but might have a minimal favorable impact on liquidity.
Level II DR Programs. Level II applies to firms that want to list existing shares on a U.S. stock 
exchange. They must meet the full registration requirements of the SEC and the rules of the 
specific exchange. This also means reconciling their financial accounts with those used under 
U.S. GAAP, raising the cost considerably.
 American Depositary Receipt (ADR) Programs by Level
Exhibit 14.7
Type
Description
Degree of 
Disclosure
Listing 
Alternatives
Ability to Raise 
Capital
Implementation 
Timetable
Level I
Over-the-Counter 
ADR Program
None: home 
country 
standards apply
Over-the-counter 
(OTC)
—
6 weeks
Level I GDR
Rule 144A/Reg. 
S GDR Program
None
Not listed
Yes, available 
only to QIBs
3 weeks
Level II
U.S.-Listed ADR 
Program
Detailed 
Sarbanes Oxley
U.S. stock 
exchange listings
—
13 weeks
Level II GDR
Rule 144A/Reg. 
S GDR Program
None
DIFX
None
2 weeks
Level III
U.S.-Listed ADR 
Program
Rigorous 
Sarbanes Oxley
U.S. stock 
exchange listings
Yes, public 
offering
14 weeks
Level III GDR
Rule 144A/Reg. 
S GDR Program
EU Prospectus 
Directive and/or 
U.S. Rule 144A
London, 
Luxembourg, 
U.S. Portal
Yes, available 
to QIBs
2 weeks

397
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
Level III DR Programs. Level III applies to the sale of a new equity issued in the United 
States—raising equity capital. It requires full registration with the SEC and an elaborate stock 
prospectus. This is the most expensive alternative, but is the most fruitful for foreign firms 
wishing to raise capital in the world’s largest capital markets and possibly generate greater 
returns for all shareholders.
DR Markets Today: Who, What, and Where
The rapid growth in emerging markets in recent years has been partly a result of the ability 
of companies from these countries to both list their shares and issue new shares on global 
equity markets. Their desire to access greater pools of affordable capital, as well as the desire 
for many of their owners to monetize existing value, has led to an influx of emerging market 
companies into the DR market.
The Who. The Who of global DR programs today is a mix of major multinationals from all 
over the world, but in recent years participation has shifted back toward industrial country 
companies. For example, in 2013 the largest issues came from established multinationals like 
BP, Vodafone, Royal Dutch Shell, and Nestlé, but also included Lukoil and Gazprom of Russia 
and Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing of Taiwan. The oil and gas sector was clearly the 
largest in both 2012 and 2013, but followed closely by pharmaceutical and telecommunications 
firms. It’s also important to note that in recent years, as illustrated by Exhibit 14.8, the market 
has clearly been in decline.
The What. The What of the global DR market today is a fairly even split between IPO and 
follow-on offerings or FOs (additional offerings of equity shares post-IPO). It does appear 
that IPOs continue to make up the majority of DR equity-raising activity.
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
$50
$60
Billions of US$
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
IPOs
FOs
Source: “Depositary Receipts, Year in Review 2013,” JPMorgan, p. 5. Data derived by JPMorgan from other depositary banks, Bloomberg, and stock
exchanges, 2014.
19.4 
11.2 
2.6 
5.7 
2.8 
4.9 
6.1 
4.1 
6.4 
3.2 
8.5 
12.8 
27.6 
15 
35.8 
21.5 
4.7 
10 
8.6 
9.5 
7.9 
14 
7.1 
8.1 
6.8
5.8
5.1
4.3
Exhibit 14.8
 Equity Capital Raised Through Depositary Receipts

398
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
The Where. Given the dominance of emerging market companies in DR markets today, it 
is not surprising that the Where of the DR market is dominated by New York and London. 
By the end of 2013 there were more than 2,300 sponsored DR programs from more than 86 
countries. Of those 2,300, just over half were U.S. programs (ADRs), with the remainder being 
GDR programs split between the London and Luxembourg stock exchanges.
Even more important than the number of programs participating in the DR markets is the 
capital that has been raised by companies via DR programs globally. Exhibit 14.8 distinguishes 
between equity capital raised through initial equity share offerings (IPOs) and seasoned offer-
ings (follow-on). The DR market has periodically proved very fruitful as an avenue for raising 
capital. It is also obvious which years have been better for equity issuances—years like 2000 
and 2006–2007.
Global Registered Shares (GRS)
A global registered share (GRS) is a share of equity that is traded across borders and markets 
without conversion, where one share on the home exchange equals one share on the foreign 
exchange. The identical share is listed on different stock exchanges, but listed in the currency 
of the exchange. GRSs can theoretically be traded “with the sun”—following markets as they 
open and close around the globe and around the clock. The shares are traded electronically, 
eliminating the specialized forms and depositaries required by share issuances like DRs.
The differences between GRSs and GDRs can be seen in the following example. Assume 
a German multinational has shares listed on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, and those shares 
are currently trading at €4.00 per share. If the current spot rate is $1.20/€, those same shares 
would be listed on the NYSE at $4.80 per share.
€4.00 * $1.20/€ = $4.80
This would be a standard GRS. But $4.80 per share is an extremely low share price for the 
NYSE and the U.S. equity market.
If, however, the German firm’s shares were listed in New York as ADRs, they would be 
converted to a value that was strategically priced for the target market—the United States. 
Strategic pricing in the U.S. means having share prices that are generally between $10 and 
$20 per share, a price range long-thought to maximize buyer interest and liquidity. The ADR 
would then be constructed so that each ADR represented four shares in the company on the 
home market, or:
$4.80 * 4 = $19.20 per share
Does this distinction matter? Clearly the GRS is much more similar to ordinary shares 
than depositary receipts, and it allows easier comparison and analysis. But if target pricing is 
important in key markets like that of the U.S., then the ADR offers better opportunities for a 
foreign firm to gain greater presence and activity.4
There are two fundamental arguments used by proponents of GRSs over ADRs, both 
based on pure forces of globalization:
1.	 Investors and markets alike will continue to grow in their desire for securities, which 
are increasingly identical across markets—taking on the characteristics of com-
modity—like securities, changing only by the currency of denomination of the local 
exchange.
4 GRSs are not a new innovation, as they are identical to the structure used for cross-border trading of Canadian 
equities in the United States for many years. More than 70 Canadian firms are listed on the NYSE-Euronext. Of 
course, one could argue that has been facilitated by near-parity of the U.S. and Canadian dollar for years as well.

399
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
2.	 Regulations governing security trading across country markets will continue to con-
verge toward a common set of global principles, eliminating the need for securities 
customized for local market attributes or requirements.
Other potential distinctions include the possibility of retaining all voting rights (GRSs do, 
by definition, while some ADRs may not) and the general principle that ADRs are designed 
for one singular cultural and legal environment—the United States. All argument aside, at least 
to date, the GRS has not replaced the ADR or GDR.
Private Placement
Raising equity through private placement is increasingly common across the globe. Publicly 
traded and private firms alike raise private equity capital on occasion. A private placement is 
the sale of a security to a small set of qualified institutional buyers. The investors are tradition-
ally insurance companies and investment companies. Since the securities are not registered 
for sale to the public, investors have typically followed a “buy and hold” policy. In the case of 
debt, terms are often custom designed on a negotiated basis. Private placement markets now 
exist in most countries.
SEC Rule 144A
In 1990, the SEC approved Rule 144A. It permits qualified institutional buyers (QIBs) to 
trade privately placed securities without the previous holding period restrictions and without 
requiring SEC registration.
A QIB is an entity (except a bank or a savings and loan) that owns and invests on a dis-
cretionary basis $100 million in securities of non-affiliates. Banks and savings and loans must 
meet this test but also must have a minimum net worth of $25 million. The SEC has estimated 
that about 4,000 QIBs exist, mainly investment advisors, investment companies, insurance 
companies, pension funds, and charitable institutions. Simultaneously, the SEC modified its 
regulations to permit foreign issuers to tap the U.S. private placement market through an SEC 
Rule 144A issue, also without SEC registration. A trading system called PORTAL was estab-
lished to support the distribution of primary issues and to create a liquid secondary market 
for these issues.
Since SEC registration has been identified as the main barrier to foreign firms wishing to 
raise funds in the United States, SEC Rule 144A placements are proving attractive to foreign 
issuers of both equity and debt securities. Atlas Copco, the Swedish multinational engineering 
firm, was the first foreign firm to take advantage of SEC Rule 144A. It raised $49 million in the 
United States through an ADR equity placement as part of its larger $214 million euroequity 
issue in 1990. Since then, several billion dollars have been raised each year by foreign issuers 
with private equity placements in the United States. However, it does not appear that such 
placements have a favorable effect on either liquidity or stock price.
Private Equity Funds
Private equity funds are usually limited partnerships of institutional and wealthy investors, such 
as college endowment funds, that raise capital in the most liquid capital markets. They are best 
known for buying control of publicly owned firms, taking them private, improving manage-
ment, and then reselling them after one to three years. They are resold in a variety of ways 
including selling the firms to other firms, to other private equity funds, or by taking them public 
once again. The private equity funds themselves are frequently very large, but may also utilize 
a large amount of debt to fund their takeovers. These “alternatives” as they are called, demand 
fees of 2% of assets plus 20% of profits. Equity funds have had some highly visible successes.

400
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
Many mature family-owned firms resident in emerging markets are unlikely to qualify 
for a global cost and availability of capital even if they follow the strategy suggested in this 
chapter. Although they might be consistently profitable and growing, they are still too small, 
too invisible to foreign investors, lacking in managerial depth, and unable to fund the up-front 
costs of a globalization strategy. For these firms, private equity funds may be a solution.
Private equity funds differ from traditional venture capital funds. The latter usually oper-
ate mainly in highly developed countries. They typically invest in start-up firms with the goal 
of exiting the investment with an initial public offering (IPO) placed in those same highly 
liquid markets. Very little venture capital is available in emerging markets, partly because it 
would be difficult to exit with an IPO in an illiquid market. The same exiting problem faces 
the private equity funds, but they appear to have a longer time horizon. They invest in already 
mature and profitable companies. They are content with growing companies through better 
management and mergers with other firms.
Foreign Equity Listing and Issuance
According to the alternative equity pathways in the global market illustrated earlier in 
Exhibit 14.1, a firm needs to choose one or more stock market on which to cross-list its shares 
and sell new equity. Just where to go depends mainly on the firm’s specific motives and the 
willingness of the host stock market to accept the firm. By cross-listing and selling its shares on 
a foreign exchange, a firm typically tries to accomplish one or more of the following objectives:
■
■
Improve the liquidity of its shares and support a liquid secondary market for new 
equity issues in foreign markets
■
■
Increase its share price by overcoming mispricing in a segmented and illiquid home 
capital market
■
■
Increase the firm’s visibility and acceptance to its customers, suppliers, creditors, and 
host governments
■
■
Establish a liquid secondary market for shares used to acquire other firms in the host 
market and to compensate local management and employees of foreign subsidiaries5
Improving Liquidity
Quite often foreign investors have acquired a firm’s shares through normal brokerage chan-
nels, even though the shares are not listed in the investor’s home market or are not traded in 
the investor’s preferred currency. Cross-listing is a way to encourage such investors to continue 
to hold and trade these shares, thus marginally improving secondary market liquidity. This is 
usually done through ADRs.
Firms domiciled in countries with small illiquid capital markets often outgrow those mar-
kets and are forced to raise new equity abroad. Listing on a stock exchange in the market in 
which these funds are to be raised is typically required by the underwriters to ensure post-issue 
liquidity in the shares.
The first section of this chapter suggested that firms start by cross-listing in a less liquid 
market, followed by an equity issue in that market (see Exhibit 14.1). In order to maximize 
liquidity, however, the firm ideally should cross-list and issue equity in a more liquid market 
and eventually offer a global equity issue.
5 A recent example of this trading expansion opportunity is Kosmos Energy. Following the company’s IPO in the 
United States in May 2011 (NYSE: KOS), the company listed its shares on the Ghanaian Stock Exchange. Ghana 
was the country in which the oil company had made its major discoveries and generated nearly all of its income.

401
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
In order to maximize liquidity, it is desirable to cross-list and/or sell equity in the most 
liquid markets. Stock markets have, however, been subject to two major forces in recent years, 
which are changing their very behavior and liquidity—demutualization and diversification.
Demutualization is the ongoing process by which the small controlling seat owners on a 
number of exchanges have been giving up their exclusive powers. As a result, the actual owner-
ship of the exchanges has become increasingly public. Diversification represents the growing 
diversity of both products (derivatives, currencies, etc.) and foreign companies/shares being 
listed. This has increased the activities and profitability of many exchanges while simultane-
ously offering a more global mix for reduced cost and increased service.
Stock Exchanges. With respect to stock exchanges, New York and London are clearly the 
most liquid. The recent merger of the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and Euronext, which 
itself was a merger of stock exchanges in Amsterdam, Brussels, and Paris, has extended the 
NYSE’s lead over both the NASDAQ (New York) and the London Stock Exchange (LSE). 
Tokyo has declined a bit over the past 20 years in terms of trading value globally, as many 
foreign firms chose to delist from the Tokyo exchange. Few foreign firms remain cross-listed 
now in Tokyo. Deutsche Börse (Germany) has a fairly liquid market for domestic shares but a 
much lower level of liquidity for trading foreign shares. On the other hand, it is an appropriate 
target market for firms resident in the European Union, especially those that have adopted 
the euro. It is also used as a supplementary cross-listing location for firms that are already 
cross-listed on the LSE, NYSE, or NASDAQ.
Why are New York and London so dominant? They offer what global financial firms 
are looking for: plenty of skilled people, ready access to capital, good infrastructure, attrac-
tive regulatory and tax environments, and low levels of corruption. Location and the use of 
­English, increasingly acknowledged as the language of global finance, are also important 
factors.
Electronic Trading. Most exchanges have moved heavily into electronic trading in recent 
years. In fact, the U.S. stock market is now a network of 50 different venues connected 
by an electronic system of published quotes and sales prices. This shift to electronic trad-
ing has had broad-reaching effects. For example, the role of the specialist on the floor of 
the NYSE has been greatly reduced with a corresponding reduction in employment by 
­specialist firms. Specialists are no longer responsible for ensuring an orderly movement for 
their stocks, but they are still important in making more liquid markets for the less-traded 
shares. The same fate has reduced the importance of market makers on the London Stock 
Exchange (LSE).
Electronic trading has allowed hedge funds and other high-frequency traders to dominate 
the market. High-frequency traders now account for 60% of daily volumes. Conversely, volume 
controlled by the NYSE fell from 80% in 2005 to 25% in 2010. Trades are executed immedi-
ately by computer. Spreads between buy and sell orders are now in decimal points as low as 
a penny a share instead of an eighth of a point. Liquidity has greatly increased but so has the 
risk of unexpected swings in prices. For example, on May 6, 2010, the Dow Jones Average fell 
9.2% at one point but eventually recovered by the end of the day. During that single day of 
trading, nineteen billion shares were bought and sold.
Promoting Shares and Share Prices
Although cross-listing and equity issuance can occur together, their impacts are separable and 
significant in and of themselves.
Cross-Listing. Does merely cross-listing on a foreign stock exchange have a favorable impact 
on share prices? It depends on the degree to which markets are segmented.

402
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
If a firm’s home capital market is segmented, the firm could theoretically benefit by cross-
listing in a foreign market if that market values the firm or its industry more than does the 
home market. This was certainly the situation experienced by Novo when it listed on the NYSE 
in 1981 (see Chapter 12). However, most capital markets are becoming more integrated with 
global markets. Even emerging markets are less segmented than they were just a few years ago.
Equity Issuance. It is well known that the combined impact of a new equity issue undertaken 
simultaneously with a cross-listing has a more favorable impact on stock price than cross-
listing alone. This occurs because the new issue creates an instantly enlarged shareholder base. 
Marketing efforts by the underwriters prior to the issue engender higher levels of visibility. 
Post-issue efforts by the underwriters to support at least the initial offering price also reduce 
investor risk.
Increasing Visibility and Political Acceptance
MNEs list in markets where they have substantial physical operations. Commercial objectives 
are to enhance corporate image, advertise trademarks and products, get better local press cov-
erage, and become more familiar with the local financial community in order to raise working 
capital locally.
Political objectives might include the need to meet local ownership requirements for a 
multinational firm’s foreign joint venture. Local ownership of the parent firm’s shares might 
provide a forum for publicizing the firm’s activities and how they support the host country.
Establish Liquid Secondary Markets
The establishment of a local liquid market for the firm’s equity may aid in financing acquisi-
tions and in the creation of stock-based management compensation programs for subsidiaries.
Funding Growth by Acquisitions. Firms that follow a strategy of growth by acquisition are 
always looking for creative alternatives to cash for funding these acquisitions. Offering their 
shares as partial payment is considerably more attractive if those shares have a liquid second-
ary market. In that case, the target’s shareholders have an easy way to convert their acquired 
shares to cash if they prefer cash to a share swap. However, a share swap is often attractive as 
a tax-free exchange.
Compensating Management and Employees. If an MNE wishes to use stock options and 
share purchase compensation plans as a component of the compensation scheme for local 
management and employees, local listing on a liquid secondary market would enhance the 
perceived value of such plans. It should reduce transaction and foreign exchange costs for the 
local beneficiaries.
Barriers to Cross-Listing and Selling Equity Abroad
Although a firm may decide to cross-list and/or sell equity abroad, certain barriers exist. The 
most serious barriers are the future commitment to providing full and transparent disclosure 
of operating results and balance sheets as well as a continuous program of investor relations.
The Commitment to Disclosure and Investor Relations. A decision to cross-list must be 
balanced against the implied increased commitment to full disclosure and a continuing inves-
tor relations program. For firms resident in the Anglo-American markets, listing abroad might 
not appear to be much of a barrier. For example, the SEC’s disclosure rules for listing in the 
United States are so stringent and costly that any other market’s rules are mere child’s play. 
Reversing the logic, however, non-U.S. firms must consider disclosure requirements carefully 
before cross-listing in the United States. Not only are the disclosure requirements breathtak-
ing, timely quarterly information is also required by U.S. regulators and investors. As a result, 

403
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
the foreign firm must maintain a costly continuous investor relations program for its U.S. 
shareholders, including frequent “road shows” and the time-consuming personal involvement 
of top management.
Disclosure Is a Double-Edged Sword. The U.S. school of thought presumes that the world-
wide trend toward more comprehensive, more transparent, and more standardized financial 
disclosure of operating results and financial positions will have the desirable effect of lowering 
the cost of equity capital. As we observed in 2002 and 2008, lack of full and accurate disclosure 
and poor transparency contributed to the U.S. stock market decline as investors fled to safer 
securities such as U.S. government bonds. This action increased the equity cost of capital for 
all firms.
The opposing school of thought—the other edge of the sword—is that the U.S. level of 
required disclosure is an onerous, costly burden. It discourages many potential listers, and 
thereby narrows the choice of securities available to U.S. investors at reasonable transaction 
costs.
Raising Debt Globally
The international debt markets offer the borrower a variety of different maturities, repayment 
structures, and currencies of denomination. The markets and their many different instruments 
vary by source of funding, pricing structure, maturity, and subordination or linkage to other 
debt and equity instruments.
Exhibit 14.9 provides an overview of the three basic categories described in the following 
sections, along with their primary components as issued or traded in the international debt 
markets today. As shown in the exhibit, the three major sources of debt funding on the inter-
national markets are the international bank loans and syndicated credits, euronote market, 
and international bond market.
International Bank Loans
Eurocredits
Syndicated Credits
Euronotes and Euronote Facilities
Eurocommercial Paper (ECP)
Euro Medium-Term Notes (EMTNs)
Eurobond
    • straight ﬁxed-rate issue
    • ﬂoating-rate note (FRN)
    • equity-related issue
Foreign Bond
Bank Loans and
Syndications
(ﬂoating-rate,
short- to medium-term)
Euronote
Market
(ﬂoating-rate,
short- to medium-term)
International
Bond Market
(ﬁxed and ﬂoating-rate
medium- to long-term)
Exhibit 14.9
 International Debt Markets and Instruments

404
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
Bank Loans and Syndications
International Bank Loans. International bank loans have traditionally been sourced in the 
eurocurrency loan markets. Eurodollar bank loans are also called “eurodollar credits” or sim-
ply “eurocredits.” The latter title is broader because it encompasses nondollar loans in the 
eurocurrency loan market. The key factor attracting both depositors and borrowers to the 
eurocurrency loan market is the narrow interest rate spread within that market. The difference 
between deposit and loan rates is often less than 1%.
Eurocredits. Eurocredits are bank loans to MNEs, sovereign governments, international 
institutions, and banks denominated in eurocurrencies and extended by banks in coun-
tries other than the country in whose currency the loan is denominated. The basic bor-
rowing interest rate for eurocredits has long been tied to the London Interbank Offered 
Rate (LIBOR), which is the deposit rate applicable to interbank loans within London. 
­Eurocredits are lent for both short- and medium-term maturities, with maturities for six 
months or less regarded as routine. Most eurocredits are for a fixed term with no provision 
for early repayment.
Syndicated Credits. The syndication of loans has enabled banks to spread the risk of large 
loans among a number of banks. Syndication is particularly important because many large 
MNEs need credit in excess of a single bank’s loan limit. A syndicated bank credit is arranged 
by a lead bank on behalf of its client. Before finalizing the loan agreement, the lead bank 
seeks the participation of a group of banks, with each participant providing a portion of the 
total funds needed. The lead bank will work with the borrower to determine the amount of 
the total credit, the floating-rate base and spread over the base rate, maturity, and fee structure 
for managing the participating banks. There are two elements to the periodic expenses of the 
syndicated credit:
1.	 Actual interest expense of the loan, normally stated as a spread in basis points over 
a variable-rate base such as LIBOR
2.	 Commitment fees paid on any unused portions of the credit—the spread paid over 
LIBOR by the borrower is considered the risk premium, reflecting the general busi-
ness and financial risk applicable to the borrower’s repayment capability
Euronote Market
The euronote market is the collective term used to describe short- to medium-term debt instru-
ments sourced in the eurocurrency markets. Although a multitude of differentiated finan-
cial products exists, they can be divided into two major groups—underwritten facilities and 
­nonunderwritten facilities. Underwritten facilities are used for the sale of euronotes in a number 
of different forms. Nonunderwritten facilities are used for the sale and distribution of euro-
commercial paper (ECP) and euro medium-term notes (EMTNs).
Euronotes and Euronote Facilities. A major development in international money markets 
was the establishment of underwriting facilities for the sale of short-term, negotiable, promis-
sory notes—euronotes. Among the facilities for their issuance were revolving underwriting 
facilities (rufs), note issuance facilities (nifs), and standby note issuance facilities (snifs). These 
facilities were provided by international investment and commercial banks. The euronote was 
a substantially cheaper source of short-term funds than were syndicated loans because the 
securitized and underwritten form allowed the ready establishment of liquid secondary mar-
kets, allowing the notes to be placed directly with the investing public. The banks received 
substantial fees initially for their underwriting and placement services.

405
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
Eurocommercial Paper (ECP). Eurocommercial paper (ECP), like commercial paper issued 
in domestic markets around the world, is a short-term debt obligation (nonunderwritten) of 
a corporation or bank. Maturities are typically one, three, and six months. The paper is sold 
normally at a discount or occasionally with a stated coupon. Although the market is capable 
of supporting issues in any major currency, over 90% of issues outstanding are denominated 
in U.S. dollars.
Euro Medium-Term Notes (EMTNs). The euro medium-term note (EMTN) market effec-
tively bridges the maturity gap between ECP and the longer-term and less flexible interna-
tional bond. Although many of these notes were initially underwritten, most EMTNs are now 
nonunderwritten.
The rapid initial growth of the EMTN market followed directly on the heels of the same 
basic instrument that began in the U.S. domestic market when the U.S. SEC instituted SEC 
Rule #415, allowing companies to obtain shelf registrations for debt issues. Once such a reg-
istration was obtained, the corporation could issue notes on a continuous basis without the 
need to obtain new registrations for each additional issue. This, in turn, allowed a firm to sell 
short- and medium-term notes through a much cheaper and more flexible issuance facility 
than ordinary bonds.
The EMTN’s basic characteristics are similar to those of a bond, with principal, maturity, 
coupon structures, and rates being comparable. The EMTN’s typical maturities range from as 
little as nine months to a maximum of 10 years. Coupons are typically paid semiannually, and 
coupon rates are comparable to similar bond issues. The EMTN does, however, have three 
unique characteristics: (1) the EMTN is a facility, allowing continuous issuance over a period 
of time, unlike a bond issue that is essentially sold all at once; (2) because EMTNs are sold 
continuously, in order to make debt service (coupon redemption) manageable, coupons are 
paid on set calendar dates regardless of the date of issuance; (3) EMTNs are issued in relatively 
small denominations, from $2 million to $5 million, making medium-term debt acquisition 
much more flexible than the large minimums customarily needed in the international bond 
markets.
International Bond Market
The international bond market sports a rich array of innovative instruments created by imagi-
native investment bankers who are unfettered by the usual controls and regulations governing 
domestic capital markets. Indeed, the international bond market rivals the international bank-
ing market in terms of the quantity and cost of funds provided to international borrowers. All 
international bonds fall within two generic classifications, eurobonds and foreign bonds. The 
distinction between categories is based on whether the borrower is a domestic or a foreign 
resident, and whether the issue is denominated in the local currency or a foreign currency.
Eurobonds. A Eurobond is underwritten by an international syndicate of banks and other 
securities firms, and is sold exclusively in countries other than the country in whose currency 
the issue is denominated. For example, a bond issued by a firm resident in the United States, 
denominated in U.S. dollars, and sold to investors in Europe and Japan (but not to investors 
in the United States), is a eurobond.
Eurobonds are issued by MNEs, large domestic corporations, sovereign governments, 
governmental enterprises, and international institutions. They are offered simultaneously in a 
number of different national capital markets, but not in the capital market or to residents of the 
country in whose currency the bond is denominated. Almost all eurobonds are in bearer form 
with call provisions (the ability of the issuer to call the bond in prior to maturity) and sinking 
funds (required accumulations of funds by the firms to assure repayment of the obligation).

406
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
The syndicate that offers a new issue of eurobonds might be composed of underwriters 
from a number of countries, including European banks, foreign branches of U.S. banks, banks 
from offshore financial centers, investment and merchant banks, and nonbank securities firms. 
There are three types of eurobond issues:
■
■
The Straight Fixed-Rate Issue.   The straight fixed-rate issue is structured like most 
domestic bonds, with a fixed coupon, set maturity date, and full principal repayment 
upon final maturity. Coupons are normally paid annually, rather than semiannually, 
primarily because the bonds are bearer bonds and annual coupon redemption is more 
convenient for the holders.
■
■
The Floating-Rate Note.   The floating-rate note (FRN) normally pays a semiannual 
coupon that is determined using a variable-rate base. A typical coupon would be set 
at some fixed spread over LIBOR. This structure, like most variable-rate interest-
bearing instruments, was designed to allow investors to shift more of the interest-
rate risk of a financial investment to the borrower. Although many FRNs have fixed 
maturities, in recent years many issues are perpetuities, with no principal repayment, 
taking on the characteristics of equity.
■
■
The Equity-Related Issue.   The equity-related international bond resembles the 
straight fixed-rate issue in practically all price and payment characteristics, with the 
added feature that it is convertible to stock prior to maturity at a specified price per 
share (or alternatively, number of shares per bond). The borrower is able to issue debt 
with lower coupon payments due to the added value of the equity conversion feature.
Foreign Bonds. A foreign bond is underwritten by a syndicate composed of members from a 
single country, sold principally within that country, and denominated in the currency of that 
country. The issuer, however, is from another country. A bond issued by a firm resident in 
Sweden, denominated in U.S. dollars, and sold in the United States to U.S. investors by U.S. 
investment bankers, is a foreign bond. Foreign bonds have nicknames: foreign bonds sold in the 
United States are Yankee bonds; foreign bonds sold in Japan are Samurai bonds; and foreign 
bonds sold in the United Kingdom are Bulldogs.
Unique Characteristics of Eurobond Markets
Although the eurobond market evolved at about the same time as the eurodollar market, 
the two markets exist for different reasons, and each could exist independently of the other. 
The eurobond market owes its existence to several unique factors: the absence of regulatory 
interference, less stringent disclosure practices, favorable tax treatment, and ratings.
Absence of Regulatory Interference. National governments often impose tight controls on 
foreign issuers of securities denominated in the local currency and sold within their national 
boundaries. However, governments in general have less stringent limitations for securities 
denominated in foreign currencies and sold within their markets to holders of those foreign 
currencies. In effect, eurobond sales fall outside the regulatory domain of any single nation.
Less Stringent Disclosure. Disclosure requirements in the eurobond market are much less 
stringent than those of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for sales within 
the United States. U.S. firms often find that the registration costs of a eurobond offering are 
less than those of a domestic issue and that less time is needed to bring a new issue to mar-
ket. Non-U.S. firms often prefer eurodollar bonds over bonds sold within the United States 
because they do not wish to undergo the costs and disclosure needed to register with the 

407
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
Muslims, the followers of Islam, now make up roughly one-
fourth of the world’s population. The countries of the world 
that are predominantly Muslim create roughly 10% of global 
GDP and comprise a large share of the emerging marketplace. 
Islamic law speaks to many dimensions of the individual 
and organizational behaviors for its practitioners—including 
business. Islamic finance, the specific area of our interest, 
imposes a number of restrictions on Muslims, which have 
a dramatic impact on the funding and structure of Muslim 
businesses.
The Islamic form of finance is as old as the religion of 
Islam itself. The basis for all Islamic finance lies in the principles 
of the Sharia, or Islamic Law, which is taken from the Qur’an. 
Observance of these principles precipitates restrictions on 
business and finance practices as follows:
■
■Making money from money is not permissible
■
■Earning interest is prohibited
■
■Profit and loss should be shared
■
■Speculation (gambling) is prohibited
■
■Investments should support only halal activities
For the conduct of business, the key to understanding the 
Sharia prohibition on earning interest is to understand that 
profitability from traditional Western investments arises from 
the returns associated with carrying risk. For example, a tra-
ditional Western bank may extend a loan to a business. It is 
agreed that the bank will receive its principal and interest in 
return regardless of the ultimate profitability of the business 
(the borrower). In fact, the debt is paid off before returns to 
equity occur. Similarly, an individual who deposits money in 
a Western bank will receive interest earnings on that deposit 
regardless of the profitability of the bank and of the bank’s 
associated investments.
Under Sharia law, however, an Islamic bank cannot pay 
interest to depositors. Therefore, the depositors in an Islamic 
bank are, in effect, shareholders (much like credit unions in 
the West), and the returns they receive are a function of the 
profitability of the bank’s investments. Their returns cannot be 
fixed or guaranteed, because that would break the principle 
of profit and loss being shared.
Recently, however, a number of Islamic banking institu-
tions have opened in Europe and North America. A Muslim 
now can enter into a sequence of purchases that allows him 
to purchase a home without departing from Islamic principles. 
The buyer selects the property, which is then purchased by 
an Islamic bank. The bank in turn resells the house to the pro-
spective buyer at a higher price. The buyer is allowed to pay 
off the purchase over a series of years. Although the difference 
in purchase prices is, by Western thinking, implicit interest, 
this structure does conform to Sharia law. Unfortunately, in 
both the United States and the United Kingdom, this “implicit 
interest” is not a tax-deductible expense for the homeowner 
as interest would be.
Global Finance in Practice 14.2
Islamic Finance
SEC. However, the SEC has relaxed disclosure requirements for certain private placements 
(Rule #144A), which has improved the attractiveness of the U.S. domestic bond and equity 
markets.
Favorable Tax Treatment. Eurobonds offer tax anonymity and flexibility. Interest paid on 
eurobonds is generally not subject to an income withholding tax. As one might expect, euro-
bond interest is not always reported to tax authorities. Eurobonds are usually issued in bearer 
form, meaning that the name and country of residence of the owner is not on the certificate. 
To receive interest, the bearer cuts an interest coupon from the bond and turns it in at a bank-
ing institution listed on the issue as a paying agent. European investors are accustomed to the 
privacy provided by bearer bonds and are very reluctant to purchase registered bonds, which 
require holders to reveal their names before they receive interest. It follows, then, that bearer 
bond status is often tied to tax avoidance.
Access to debt capital is obviously impacted by everything from the legal and tax envi-
ronments to basic societal norms. Indeed, even religion plays a part in the use and availability 
of debt capital. Global Finance in Practice 14.2 illustrates one area rarely seen by Westerners, 
Islamic finance.

408
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
Ratings. Rating agencies, such as Moody’s and Standard and Poor’s (S&P), provide ratings 
for selected international bonds for a fee. Moody’s ratings for international bonds imply the 
same creditworthiness as for domestic bonds of U.S. issuers. Moody’s limits its evaluation to 
the issuer’s ability to obtain the necessary currency to repay the issue according to the origi-
nal terms of the bond. The agency excludes any assessment of risk to the investor caused by 
changing exchange rates.
Moody’s rates international bonds at the request of the issuer. Based on supporting finan-
cial statements and other material obtained from the issuer, it makes a preliminary rating and 
then informs the issuer who has an opportunity to comment. After Moody’s determines its 
final rating, the issuer may decide not to have the rating published. Consequently, a dispro-
portionately large number of published international ratings fall into the highest categories, 
since issuers that receive a lower rating do not allow publication.
Purchasers of eurobonds do not rely only on bond-rating services or on detailed analyses 
of financial statements. The general reputation of the issuing corporation and its underwriters 
has been a major factor in obtaining favorable terms. For this reason, larger and better-known 
MNEs, state enterprises, and sovereign governments are able to obtain the lowest interest 
rates. Firms whose names are better known to the general public, possibly because they manu-
facture consumer goods, are often believed to have an advantage over equally qualified firms 
whose products are less widely known.
Summary Points
■
■
Designing a capital sourcing strategy requires man-
agement to design a long-run financial strategy. The 
firm must then choose among the various alternative 
paths to achieve its goals, including where to cross-list 
its shares, and where to issue new equity, and in what 
form.
■
■
A multinational firm’s marginal cost of capital is con-
stant for considerable ranges of its capital budget. This 
statement is not true for most small domestic firms.
■
■
By diversifying cash flows internationally, the MNE may 
be able to achieve the same kind of reduction in cash 
flow variability that portfolio investors receive from 
diversifying their portfolios internationally.
■
■
When a firm issues foreign currency-denominated debt, 
its effective cost equals the after-tax cost of repaying the 
principal and interest in terms of the firm’s own cur-
rency. This amount includes the nominal cost of princi-
pal and interest in foreign currency terms, adjusted for 
any foreign exchange gains or losses.
■
■
There is a variety of different equity pathways that firms 
may choose between when pursuing global sources 
of equity, including euroequity issues, direct foreign 
issuances, depositary receipt programs, and private 
placements.
■
■
Depositary receipt programs, either American or global, 
provide an extremely effective way for firms from outside 
of the established industrial country markets to improve 
the liquidity of their existing shares, or issue new shares.
■
■
Private placement is a growing segment of the market, 
allowing firms from emerging markets to raise capital in the 
largest of capital markets with limited disclosure and cost.
■
■
The international debt markets offer the borrower a 
variety of different maturities, repayment structures, 
and currencies of denomination. The markets and their 
many different instruments vary by source of funding, 
pricing structure, maturity, and subordination or linkage 
to other debt and equity instruments.
■
■
Eurocurrency markets serve two valuable purposes: 
(1) eurocurrency deposits are an efficient and conve-
nient money market device for holding excess corporate 
liquidity, and (2) the eurocurrency market is a major 
source of short-term bank loans to finance ­corporate 
working capital needs, including the financing of 
imports and exports.

409
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
The national oil company of Brazil, Petrobrás, suffered 
from an ailment common in emerging markets—a high 
and uncompetitive cost of capital. Despite being widely 
considered the global leader in deepwater technology 
(the ability to drill and develop oil and gas fields more 
than a mile below the ocean’s surface), unless it could 
devise a strategy to lower its cost of capital, it would 
be unable to exploit its true organizational competitive 
advantage.
Many market analysts argued that the Brazilian com-
pany should follow the strategy employed by a number of 
Mexican companies and buy its way out of its dilemma. 
If Petrobrás were to acquire one of the many indepen-
dent North American oil and gas companies, it might 
transform itself from being wholly “Brazilian” to partially 
­“American” in the eyes of capital markets, and possibly 
lower its weighted average cost of capital (WACC) to 
between 6% and 8%.
Petróleo Brasileiro S.A. (Petrobrás) was an integrated 
oil and gas company founded in 1954 by the Brazilian 
government as the national oil company of Brazil. The 
company was listed publicly in São Paulo in 1997 and on 
the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE: PBR) in 2000. 
Despite the equity listings, the Brazilian government con-
tinued to be the controlling shareholder, with 33% of the 
total capital and 55% of the voting shares. As the national 
oil company of Brazil, the company’s singular purpose 
was the reduction of Brazil’s dependency on imported 
oil. A side effect of this focus, however, had been a lack 
of international diversification. Many of the company’s 
critics argued that being both Brazilian and undiversi-
fied internationally resulted in an uncompetitive cost of 
capital.
Need for Diversification
Petrobrás in 2002 was the largest company in Brazil, and 
the largest publicly traded oil company in Latin America. 
It was not, however, international in its operations. This 
inherent lack of international diversification was apparent 
to international investors, who assigned the company the 
same country risk factors and premiums they did to all 
other Brazilian companies. The result was a cost of capital 
in 2002, as seen in Exhibit A, that was 6% higher than the 
other firms shown.
Petrobrás embarked on a globalization strategy, with 
several major transactions heading up the process. In 
December 2001, Repsol-YPF of Argentina and Petrobrás 
concluded an exchange of operating assets valued at $500 
million. In the exchange, Petrobrás received 99% interest 
in the Eg3 S.A. service station chain, while Repsol-YPF 
gained a 30% stake in a refinery, a 10% stake in an offshore 
oil field, and a fuel resale right to 230 service stations in 
Brazil. The agreement included an eight-year guarantee 
against currency risks.
In October 2002, Petrobrás purchased Perez Companc 
(Pecom) of Argentina. Pecom had quickly come into play 
following the Argentine financial crisis in January 2002. 
Although Pecom had significant international reserves 
and production capability, the combined forces of a deval-
ued Argentine peso, a largely dollar-denominated debt 
portfolio, and a multitude of Argentine government regu-
lations that hindered its ability to hold and leverage hard 
currency resources, the company had moved quickly to 
find a buyer to refund its financial structure. Petrobrás 
took advantage of the opportunity. Pecom’s ownership 
had been split between its original controlling family 
owners and their foundation, 58.6%, and public flotation 
of the remaining 41.4%. Petrobrás had purchased the 
controlling interest, the full 58.6% interest, outright from 
the family.
Over the next three years, Petrobrás focused on 
restructuring much of its debt (and the debt it had 
acquired via the Pecom acquisition) and investing in its 
own growth. But progress toward revitalizing its financial 
structure came slowly, and by 2005 there was renewed 
discussion of a new equity issuance to increase the firm’s 
equity capital.7 But at what cost? What was the company’s 
cost of capital?
7By 2005, the company’s financial strategy was showing significant diversification. Total corporate funding was well-balanced: bonds, 
$4 billion; BNDES (bonds issued under the auspices of a Brazilian economic development agency), $3 billion; project finance, 
$5 ­billion; other, $4 billion.
Petrobrás of Brazil and the Cost of Capital6
6Copyright © 2008 Thunderbird School of Global Management. All rights reserved. This case was prepared by Professor Michael H. 
Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only and not to indicate either effective or ineffective management.
Mini-Case

410
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
Country Risk
Exhibit A presented the cost of capital of a number of 
major oil and gas companies across the world, including 
Petrobrás in 2002. This comparison could occur only if 
all capital costs were calculated in a common currency, in 
this case, the U.S. dollar. The global oil and gas markets 
had long been considered “dollar-denominated,” and any 
company operating in these markets, regardless of where it 
actually operated in the world, was considered to have the 
dollar as its functional currency. Once that company listed 
its shares in a U.S. equity market, the dollarization of its 
capital costs became even more accepted.
But what was the cost of capital—in dollar terms—
for a Brazilian business? Brazil has a long history of 
bouts with high inflation, economic instability, and cur-
rency devaluations and depreciations (depending on 
the regime de jure). One of the leading indicators of 
the global market’s ­opinion of Brazilian country risk 
was the sovereign spread, the additional yield or cost of 
dollar funds that the Brazilian government had to pay 
on global markets over and above that which the U.S. 
Treasury paid to borrow dollar funds. As illustrated in 
Exhibit B, the Brazilian sovereign spread had been both 
high and volatile over the past decade.8 The spread was 
sometimes as low as 400 basis points (4.0%), as in recent 
years, or as high as 2,400 basis points (24%), during the 
2002 financial crisis in which the real was first devalued 
then floated. And that was merely the cost of debt for 
the government of Brazil. How was this sovereign spread 
reflected in the cost of debt and equity for a Brazilian 
company like Petrobrás?
One approach to the estimation of Petrobrás’ cost of 
debt in U.S. dollar terms (kd
 $) was to build it up: the govern-
ment of Brazil’s cost of dollar funds adjusted for a private 
corporate credit spread.
kd
 $ = U.S. Treasury + Brazilian + Petrobrás
risk@free rate
sovereign
credit
spread
spread
 
kd
 $ = 4.000% + 4.000% + 1.000% = 9.000%
If the U.S. Treasury risk-free rate was estimated using 
the Treasury 10-year bond rate (yield), a base rate in August 
2005 could be 4.0%. The Brazilian sovereign spread, as 
seen in Exhibit B, appeared to be 400 basis points, or an 
additional 4.0%. Even if Petrobrás’ credit spread was only 
BP
Chevron Texaco
Noble Aﬃliates
Shell
Exxon Mobil
Kerr Mcgee
Ocean Energy
Petrobrás
16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
7.6%
8.1%
8.5%
15.0%
Source: MorganStanley Research, January 18, 2002, p. 5.
8.8%
9.0%
9.0%
8.9%
Exhibit A
Petrobrás’ Uncompetitive Cost of Capital
8 The measure of sovereign spread presented in Exhibit B is that calculated by JPMorgan in its Emerging Market Bond Index Plus 
(EMBI+) index. This is the most widely used measure of country risk by practitioners.

411
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
1.0%, the company’s current cost of dollar debt would be 
9%. This cost was clearly higher than the cost of debt for 
most of the world’s oil majors who were probably paying 
only 5% on average for debt in late 2005.
Petrobrás’ cost of equity would be similarly affected by 
the country risk-adjusted risk-free rate of interest. Using 
a simple expression of the Capital Asset Pricing Model 
(CAPM) to estimate the company’s cost of equity capital 
in dollar terms (ke
 $):
k e
 $ = risk@free rate
+(bPetrobrás * market risk premium) = 8.000%
+(1.10 * 5.500%) = 14.05%
This calculation assumed the same risk-free rate as used 
in the cost of debt previously, with a beta (NYSE basis) 
of 1.10 and a market risk premium of 5.500%. Even with 
these relatively conservative assumptions (many would 
argue that the company’s beta was actually higher or lower, 
and that the market risk premium was 6.0% or higher), the 
company’s cost of equity was 14%.
WACC = (debt/capital * kd
 $ * (1 - tax rate))
+(equity/capital * ke
 $)
Assuming a long-term target capital structure of one-third 
debt and two-thirds equity, and an effective corporate tax 
rate of 28% (after special tax concessions, surcharges, and 
incentives for the Brazilian oil and gas industry), Petrobrás’ 
WACC was estimated at a little over 11.5%:
WACC = (0.333 * 9.000% * 0.72)
                                +(0.667 * 14.050%) = 11.529%.
So, after all of the efforts to internationally diversify 
the firm and internationalize its cost of capital, why was 
Petrobrás’ cost of capital still so much higher than its global 
counterparts? Not only was the company’s weighted aver-
age cost of capital high compared to other major global 
players, this was the same high cost of capital used as the 
basic discount rate in evaluating many potential invest-
ments and acquisitions.
A number of the investment banking firms that covered 
Petrobrás noted that the company’s share price had shown 
a very high correlation with the EMBI+ sovereign spread 
for Brazil (shown in Exhibit B), hovering around 0.84 for a 
number of years. Similarly, Petrobrás’ share price was also 
historically correlated—inversely—with the Brazilian reais/
U.S. dollar exchange rate. This correlation had averaged 
Dec-97
Dec-98
Dec-99
Dec-00
Dec-01
Dec-02
Dec-03
Dec-04
2,400
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
1,800
Basis Point Spread over United States
2,000
2,200
Global
Brazil
Source: JPMorgan’s EMBI+ Spread, as quoted by Latin Focus, www.latin-focus.com/latinfocus/countries/brazilbisprd.htm, August 2005.
Exhibit B
The Brazilian Sovereign Spread

-0.88 over the 2000–2004 period. Finally, the question of 
whether Petrobrás was considered an oil company or a Bra-
zilian company was also somewhat in question:
Petrobrás’ stock performance appears more highly cor-
related to the Brazilian equity market and credit spreads 
based on historical trading patterns, suggesting that one’s 
view on the direction of the broad Brazilian market is 
important in making an investment decision on the com-
pany. If the historical trend were to hold, an improve-
ment in Brazilian risk perception should provide a fillip 
to Petrobrás’ share price performance.
—“Petrobrás: A Diamond in the Rough,” 
JPMorgan Latin American Equity Research, 
June 18, 2004, pp. 26–27.
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 Why do you think Petrobrás’ cost of capital is so high? 
Are there better ways, or other ways, of calculating its 
weighted average cost of capital?
2.	 Does this method of using the sovereign spread also 
compensate for currency risk?
3.	 The final quote on “one’s view on the direction of the 
broad Brazilian market” suggests that potential inves-
tors consider the relative attractiveness of Brazil in their 
investment decision. How does this perception show up 
in the calculation of the company’s cost of capital?
4.	 Is the cost of capital really a relevant factor in the 
competitiveness and strategy of a company like Petro-
brás? Does the corporate cost of capital really affect 
competitiveness?
412
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Equity Sourcing Strategy. Why does the strategic path 
to sourcing equity start with debt?
2.	 Optimal Financial Structure. If the cost of debt is less 
than the cost of equity, why doesn’t the firm’s cost of 
capital continue to decrease with the use of more and 
more debt?
3.	 Multinationals and Cash Flow Diversification. 
How does the multinational’s ability to diversify its 
cash flows alter its ability to use greater amounts 
of debt?
4.	 Foreign Currency-Denominated Debt. How does bor-
rowing in a foreign currency change the risk associated 
with debt?
5.	 Three Keys to Global Equity. What are the three key 
elements related to raising equity capital in the global 
marketplace?
6.	 Global Equity Alternatives. What are the alternative 
structures available for raising equity capital on the 
global market?
7.	 Directed Public Issues. What is a directed public 
issue? What is the purpose of this kind of international 
equity issuance?
8.	 Depositary Receipts. What is a depositary receipt? 
Give examples of equity shares listed and issued in 
foreign equity markets in this form?
9.	 GDRs, ADRs, and GRSs. What is the difference 
between a GDR, ADR, and GRS? How are these dif-
ferences significant?
10.	 Sponsored and Unsponsored. ADRs and GDRs can 
be sponsored or unsponsored. What does this mean 
and will it matter to investors purchasing the shares?
11.	 ADR Levels. Distinguish between the three levels of 
commitment for ADRs traded in the United States.
12.	 IPOs and FOs. What is the significance of IPOs versus 
FOs?
13.	 Foreign Equity Listing and Issuance. Give five reasons 
why a firm might cross-list and sell its shares on a very 
liquid stock exchange.
14.	 Cross-Listing Abroad. What are the main reasons for 
firms to cross-list abroad?
15.	 Barriers to Cross-Listing. What are the main barriers 
to cross-listing abroad?
16.	 Private Placement. What is a private placement? What 
are the comparative pros and cons of private place-
ment versus a pubic issue?
17.	 Private Equity. What is private equity and how do 
private equity funds differ from traditional venture 
capital firms?
18.	 Bank Loans versus Securitized Debt. For multina-
tional corporations, what is the advantage of securi-
tized debt instruments sold on a market versus bank 
borrowing?
19.	 International Debt Instruments. What are the primary 
alternative instruments available for raising debt on 
the international marketplace?
20.	 Eurobond versus Foreign Bonds. What is the differ-
ence between a eurobond and a foreign bond and why 
do two types of international bonds exist?

413
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
for one year to finance working capital. The airline has 
two alternatives for borrowing:
a.	 Borrow US$25,000,000 in Eurodollars in London 
at 7.250% per annum
b.	 Borrow HK$39,000,000 in Hong Kong at 7.00% 
per annum, and exchange these Hong Kong ­dollars 
at the present exchange rate of HK$7.8/US$ for 
U.S. dollars.
At what ending exchange rate would Morning Star 
Air be indifferent between borrowing U.S. dollars and 
borrowing Hong Kong dollars?
5.	 Pantheon Capital, S.A. If Pantheon Capital, S.A. is 
raising funds via a euro-medium-term note with the 
following characteristics, how much in dollars will Pan-
theon receive for each $1,000 note sold?
Coupon rate: 8.00% payable semiannually on June 30 
and December 31
Date of issuance: February 28, 2011
Maturity: August 31, 2011
6.	 Westminster Insurance Company. Westminster 
­Insurance Company plans to sell $2,000,000 of 
­eurocommercial paper with a 60-day maturity and 
discounted to yield 4.60% per annum. What will be 
the immediate proceeds to Westminster Insurance?
7.	 Sunrise Manufacturing, Inc. Sunrise Manufacturing, Inc., 
a U.S. multinational company, has the following debt 
components in its consolidated capital section. Sunrise’s 
finance staff estimates their cost of equity to be 20%. 
Current exchange rates are also listed below. Income 
taxes are 30% around the world after allowing for cred-
its. Calculate Sunrise’s weighted average cost of capital. 
Are any assumptions implicit in your calculation?
Assumption
Value
Tax rate
30.00%
10-year eurobonds (euros)
6,000,000
20-year yen bonds (yen)
750,000,000
Spot rate ($/euro)
1.2400
Spot rate ($/pound)
1.8600
Spot rate (yen/$)
109.00
8.	 Petrol Ibérico. Petrol Ibérico, a European gas com-
pany, is borrowing US$650,000,000 via a syndicated 
eurocredit for six years at 80 basis points over LIBOR. 
LIBOR for the loan will be reset every six months. The 
funds will be provided by a syndicate of eight lead-
ing investment bankers, which will charge up-front 
fees totaling 1.2% of the principal amount. What is 
the effective interest cost for the first year if LIBOR 
is 4.00% for the first six months and 4.20% for the 
second six months.
21.	 Funding Foreign Subsidiaries. What are the primary 
methods of funding foreign subsidiaries, and how do 
host government concerns affect those choices?
22.	 Local Norms. Should foreign subsidiaries of multina-
tional firms conform to the capital structure norms 
of the host country or to the norms of their parent’s 
country?
23.	 Internal Financing of Foreign Subsidiaries. What is the 
difference between “internal” financing and ­“external” 
financing for a subsidiary?
24.	 External Financing of Foreign Subsidiaries. What are 
the primary alternatives for the external financing of 
a foreign subsidiary?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Copper Mountain Group (U.S.). The Copper Moun-
tain Group, a private equity firm headquartered in 
Boulder, Colorado, borrows £5,000,000 for one year 
at 7.375% interest.
a.	 What is the dollar cost of this debt if the pound 
depreciates from $2.0260/£ to $1.9460/£ over 
the year?
b.	 What is the dollar cost of this debt if the pound 
appreciates from $2.0260/£ to $2.1640/£ over 
the year?
2.	 Foreign Exchange Risk and the Cost of Borrow-
ing Swiss Francs. The chapter demonstrated that a 
firm borrowing in a foreign currency could poten-
tially end up paying a very different effective rate 
of interest than what it expected. Using the same 
baseline values of a debt principal of SF1.5 million, a 
one year period, an initial spot rate of SF1.5000/$, a 
5.000% cost of debt, and a 34% tax rate, what is the 
effective cost of debt for one year for a U.S. dollar-
based company if the exchange rate at the end of the 
period was:
a.	 SF1.5000/$
b.	 SF1.4400/$
c.	 SF1.3860/$
d.	 SF1.6240/$
3.	 McDougan Associates (U.S.). McDougan Associ-
ates, a U.S.-based investment partnership, borrows 
€80,000,000 at a time when the exchange rate is 
$1.3460/€. The entire principal is to be repaid in three 
years, and interest is 6.250% per annum, paid annually 
in euros. The euro is expected to depreciate vis-à-vis 
the dollar at 3% per annum. What is the effective cost 
of this loan for McDougan?
4.	 Morning Star Air (China). Morning Star Air, head-
quartered in Kunming, China, needs US$25,000,000 

414
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
9.	 Adamantine Architectonics. Adamantine Archi-
tectonics consists of a U.S. parent and wholly 
owned subsidiaries in Malaysia (A-Malaysia) and 
­Mexico (A-Mexico). Selected portions of their 
non-­consolidated balance sheets, translated into U.S. 
­dollars, are shown in the table below. What are the 
debt and equity proportions in Adamantine’s consoli-
dated balance sheet?
A-Malaysia (accounts in ringgits)
A-Mexico (accounts in pesos)
Long-term debt
RM11,400,000
Long-term debt
PS20,000,000
Shareholders’ equity
RM15,200,000
Shareholders’ equity
PS60,000,000
Adamantine Architectonics
(Nonconsolidated Balance Sheet—Selected Items Only)
Investment in subsidiaries
Parent long-term debt
$12,000,000
  In A-Malaysia
$4,000,000
Common stock
5,000,000
  In A-Mexico
6,000,000
Retained earnings
20,000,000
Current exchange rates:
  Malaysia
RM3.80/$
  Mexico
PS10/$
 
Petrobrás of Brazil: Estimating its Weighted Average Cost of Capital
Petrobrás Petróleo Brasileiro S.A. or Petrobras is the national oil company of Brazil. It is publicly traded, but the govern-
ment of Brazil holds the controlling share. It is the largest company in the Southern Hemisphere by market capitalization 
and the largest in all of Latin America. As an oil company, the primary product of its production has a price set on global 
markets—the price of oil—and much of its business is conducted the global currency of oil, the U.S. dollar. Problems 10–15 
examine a variety of different financial institutions’ attempts to estimate the company’s cost of capital.
10.	 JPMorgan. JPMorgan’s Latin American Equity 
Research department produced the following WACC 
calculation for Petrobrás of Brazil versus Lukoil of 
Russia in their June 18, 2004, report. Evaluate the 
methodology and assumptions used in the calculation. 
Assume a 28% tax rate for both companies.
Petrobrás
Lukoil
Risk-free rate
4.8%
4.8%
Sovereign risk
7.0%
3.0%
Equity risk premium
4.5%
5.7%
Market cost of equity
16.3%
13.5%
Beta (relevered)
0.87
1.04
Cost of debt
8.4%
6.8%
Debt/capital ratio
0.333
0.475
WACC
14.7%
12.3%
11.	 UNIBANCO. UNIBANCO estimated the weighted 
average cost of capital for Petrobrás to be 13.2% 
in Brazilian reais in August of 2004. Evaluate 
the methodology and assumptions used in the 
calculation.
Risk-free rate
4.5%
Cost of debt 
(after-tax)
5.7%
Beta
0.99
Tax rate
34%
Market premium
6.0%
Debt/total 
capital
40%
Country risk 
premium
5.5%
WACC (R$)
13.2%
Cost of equity 
(US$)
15.9%
12.	 Citigroup SmithBarney (Dollar). Citigroup regularly 
performs a U.S. dollar-based discount cash flow (DCF) 
valuation of Petrobrás in its coverage. That DCF analy-
sis requires the use of a discount rate, which they base 
on the company’s weighted average cost of capital. 
Evaluate the methodology and assumptions used in the 
2003 Actual and 2004 Estimates of Petrobrás’ WACC 
shown in the table on the next page.

415
Raising Equity and Debt Globally    CHAPTER 14 
July 28, 2005
March 8, 2005
Capital Cost Components
2003A
2004E
2003A
2004E
Risk-free rate
9.400%
9.400%
9.000%
9.000%
Levered beta
1.07
1.09
1.08
1.10
Risk premium
5.500%
5.500%
5.500%
5.500%
Cost of equity
15.285%
15.395%
14.940%
15.050%
Cost of debt
8.400%
8.400%
9.000%
9.000%
Tax rate
28.500%
27.100%
28.500%
27.100%
Cost of debt, after-tax
6.006%
6.124%
6.435%
6.561%
Debt/capital ratio
32.700%
32.400%
32.700%
32.400%
Equity/capital ratio
67.300%
67.600%
67.300%
67.600%
WACC
12.20%
12.30%
12.10%
12.30%
13.	 Citigroup SmithBarney (Reais). In a report dated June 
17, 2003, Citigroup SmithBarney calculated a WACC 
for Petrobrás denominated in Brazilian reais (R$). 
Evaluate the methodology and assumptions used in 
this cost of capital calculation.
Risk-free rate (Brazilian C-Bond)
9.90%
Petrobrás levered beta
1.40
Market risk premium
5.50%
Cost of equity
17.60%
Cost of debt
10.00%
Brazilian corporate tax rate
34.00%
Long-term debt ratio (% of capital)
50.60%
WACC (R$)
12.00%
14.	 BBVA Investment Bank. BBVA utilized a rather 
innovative approach to dealing with both country and 
currency risk in their December 20, 2004, report on 
Petrobrás. Evaluate the methodology and assumptions 
used in this cost of capital calculation.
2003
Estimate
2004
Estimate
Cost of Capital Component
U.S. 10-year risk-free rate 
(in US$)
4.10%
4.40%
Country risk premium (in US$)
6.00%
4.00%
Petrobrás premium 
“adjustment”
1.00%
1.00%
Petrobrás risk-free rate 
(in US$)
9.10%
7.40%
Market risk premium 
(in US$)
6.00%
6.00%
Petrobrás beta
0.80
0.80
2003
Estimate
2004
Estimate
Cost of Capital Component
Cost of equity (in US$)
13.90%
12.20%
Projected 10-year currency 
devaluation
2.50%
2.50%
Cost of equity (in R$)
16.75%
14.44%
Petrobrás cost of debt  
after-tax (in R$)
5.50%
5.50%
Long-term equity ratio 
(% of capital)
69%
72%
Long-term debt ratio  
(% of capital)
31%
28%
WACC (in R$)
13.30%
12.00%
15.	 Petrobrás’ WACC Comparison. The various esti-
mates of the cost of capital for Petrobrás of Brazil 
appear to be very different, but are they? Reorga-
nize your answers to Problems 10–14 into those 
costs of capital that are in U.S. dollars versus Brazil-
ian reais. Use the estimates for 2004 as the basis of 
comparison.
16.	 Grupo Modelo S.A.B. de C.V. Grupo Modelo, a 
brewery out of Mexico that exports such well-known 
varieties as Corona, Modelo, and Pacifico, is Mexican 
by incorporation. However, the company evaluates 
all business results, including financing costs, in U.S. 
dollars. The company needs to borrow $10,000,000 or 
the foreign currency equivalent for four years. For all 
issues, interest is payable once per year, at the end of 
the year. Available alternatives are as follows:
a.	 Sell Japanese yen bonds at par yielding 3% per 
annum. The current exchange rate is ¥106/$, and 
the yen is expected to strengthen against the dollar 
by 2% per annum.
Problem 12.

416
CHAPTER 14    Raising Equity and Debt Globally
b.	 Sell euro-denominated bonds at par yielding 
7%  per annum. The current exchange rate is 
$1.1960/€, and the euro is expected to weaken 
against the ­dollar by 2% per annum.
c.	 Sell U.S. dollar bonds at par yielding 5% per 
annum.
Which course of action do you recommend Grupo 
Modelo take and why?
Internet Exercises
1.	 Global Equities. Bloomberg provides extensive cover-
age of the global equity markets 24 hours a day. Using 
the Bloomberg site listed here, note how different the 
performance indices are on the same equity markets at 
the same point in time all around the world.
Bloomberg
www.bloomberg.com/markets/stocks/
world-indexes/
2.	 JPMorgan and Bank of New York Mellon. JPMor-
gan and Bank of New York Mellon provide up to 
the minute performance of American Depositary 
Receipts in the U.S. marketplace. The site highlights 
the high-performing equities of the day.
a.	 Prepare a briefing for senior management in your 
firm encouraging them to consider internation-
ally diversifying the firm’s liquid asset portfolio 
with ADRs.
b.	 Identify whether the ADR program level (I, II, III, 
144A) has any significance to which securities you 
believe the firm should consider.
JPMorgan ADRs
www.adr.com
Bank of New York Mellon
www.adrbnymellon.com
3.	 London Stock Exchange. The London Stock Exchange 
(LSE) lists many different global depositary receipts 
among its active equities. Use the LSE’s Internet site 
to track the performance of the largest GDRs active 
today.
London Stock 
Exchange
www.londonstockexchange 
.com/traders-and-brokers/
security-types/gdrs/gdrs.htm

If we accept the theory that minimizing the cost of capital for a given level of business risk 
and capital budget is an objective that should be implemented from the perspective of the 
consolidated MNE, then the financial structure of each subsidiary is relevant only to the extent 
that it affects this overall goal. In other words, an individual subsidiary does not really have 
an independent cost of capital. Therefore, its financial structure should not be based on the 
objective of minimizing its cost of capital.
Financial structure norms for firms vary widely from one country to another but vary 
less for firms domiciled in the same country. This statement is the conclusion of a long 
line of empirical studies that have investigated the question of what factors drive financial 
structure. Most of these international studies concluded that country-specific environmental 
variables are key determinants of debt ratios. These variables include historical develop-
ment, taxation, corporate governance, bank influence, existence of a viable corporate bond 
market, attitude toward risk, government regulation, availability of capital, and agency costs, 
to name a few.
Local Norms
Within the constraint of minimizing its consolidated worldwide cost of capital, should an MNE 
take differing country debt ratio norms into consideration when determining its desired debt 
ratio for foreign subsidiaries? For definition purposes the debt considered here should include 
only funds borrowed from sources outside the MNE. This debt would include local and foreign 
currency loans as well as eurocurrency loans.
The reason for this definition is that parent loans to foreign subsidiaries are often 
regarded as equivalent to equity investment both by host country and by investing firms. 
A parent loan is usually subordinated to other debt and does not create the same threat 
of insolvency as an external loan. Furthermore, the choice of debt or equity investment is 
often considered ­arbitrary (by some) and subject to negotiation between host country and 
parent firm.
The main advantages of a finance structure for foreign subsidiaries that conforms to local 
debt norms are as follows:
■
■
A localized financial structure reduces criticism of foreign subsidiaries that have 
been operating with too high a proportion of debt (judged by local standards), often 
resulting in the accusation that they are not contributing a fair share of risk capital 
to the host country.
■
■
A localized financial structure helps management evaluate return on equity invest-
ment relative to local competitors in the same industry.
■
■
In economies where interest rates are relatively high because of a scarcity of ­capital, 
the high cost of local funds reminds management that return on assets needs to 
exceed the local price of capital.
Chapter 14 Appendix
Financial Structure of Foreign 
Subsidiaries
417

418
Appendix    Financial Structure of Foreign Subsidiaries
The main disadvantages of localized financial structures are as follows:
■
■
An MNE is expected to have a comparative advantage over local firms in overcoming 
imperfections in national capital markets through better availability of capital and 
the ability to diversify risk.
■
■
If each foreign subsidiary of an MNE localizes its financial structure, the resulting 
consolidated balance sheet might show a financial structure that does not conform 
to any particular country’s norm.
■
■
The debt ratio of a foreign subsidiary is only cosmetic, because lenders ultimately 
look  to the parent and its consolidated worldwide cash flow as the source of 
repayment.
In our opinion, a compromise position is possible. Both multinational and domestic firms 
should try to minimize their overall weighted average cost of capital for a given level of 
business risk and capital budget, as finance theory suggests. However, if debt is available to 
a foreign subsidiary at equal cost to that which could be raised elsewhere, after adjusting for 
foreign exchange risk, then localizing the foreign subsidiary’s financial structure should incur 
no cost penalty and would also enjoy the advantages listed above.
Financing the Foreign Subsidiary
In addition to choosing an appropriate financial structure for foreign subsidiaries, financial 
managers of multinational firms need to choose among alternative sources of funds—internal 
and external to the multinational—with which to finance foreign subsidiaries.
Ideally, the choice among the sources of funds should minimize the cost of external funds 
after adjusting for foreign exchange risk. The firm should choose internal sources in order to 
minimize worldwide taxes and political risk, while ensuring that managerial motivation in the 
foreign subsidiaries is geared toward minimizing the firm’s consolidated worldwide cost of 
capital, rather than the subsidiary’s cost of capital.
Internal Sources of Funding
Exhibit 14A.1 provides an overview of the internal sources of financing for foreign subsidiaries. 
In general, although a minimum amount of equity capital from the parent company is required, 
multinationals often strive to minimize the amount of equity in foreign subsidiaries in order 
to limit risks of losing that capital. Equity investment can take the form of either cash or real 
goods (machinery, equipment, inventory, etc.).
While debt is the preferable form of subsidiary financing, access to local host coun-
try debt is limited in the early stages of a foreign subsidiary’s life. Without a history of 
proven operational capability and debt service capability, the foreign subsidiary may need 
to acquire its debt from the parent company or from unrelated parties with a parental 
guarantee (after operations have been initiated). Once the operational and financial capa-
bilities of the subsidiary have been established, it may then actually enjoy preferred access 
to debt locally.

419
Financial Structure of Foreign Subsidiaries    Appendix
External Sources of Funding
Exhibit 14A.2 provides an overview of the sources of foreign subsidiary financing external to 
the MNE. The sources are first decomposed into three categories: (1) debt from the parent’s 
country; (2) debt from countries outside the parent’s country; and (3) local equity.
Debt acquired from external parties in the parent’s country reflects the lenders’ familiar-
ity with and confidence in the parent company itself, although the parent is in this case not 
providing explicit guarantees for the repayment of the debt. Local currency debt is particularly 
valuable to the foreign subsidiary that has substantial local currency cash inflows arising from 
its business activities. In the case of some emerging markets, however, local currency debt is 
in short supply for all borrowers, local or foreign.
Funds
from
within
the
Multinational
Enterprise
(MNE)
Funds Generated Internally by the
Foreign Subsidiary
Funds from
parent company
Funds from
sister subsidiaries
Subsidiary borrowing with parent guarantee
Depreciation and noncash charges
Retained earnings
Leads and lags on intraﬁrm payables
Debt—cash loans
Leads and lags on intraﬁrm payables
Debt—cash loans
Equity
Cash
Real goods
Exhibit 14A.1
Internal Financing of the Foreign Subsidiary

420
Funds
external
to the
Multinational
Enterprise
(MNE)
Local equity
Borrowing from
sources in
parent country
Borrowing from
sources outside of
parent country
Individual local shareholders
Joint venture partners
Local currency debt
Banks and other ﬁnancial institutions
Security or money markets
Eurocurrency debt
Third-country currency debt
Exhibit 14A.2
External Financing of the Foreign Subsidiary
Appendix    Financial Structure of Foreign Subsidiaries

Chapter	 15
Multinational Tax 
Management
Over and over again courts have said that there is nothing sinister in so 
arranging one’s affairs as to keep taxes as low as possible. Everybody does 
so, rich and poor, and all do right, for nobody owes any public duty to pay 
more than the law demands: taxes are enforced extractions, not voluntary 
contributions. To demand more in the name of morals is mere cant.
—Judge Learned Hand, Commissioner v. Newman, 159 F.2d 848 (CA-2, 1947).
Tax planning for multinational operations is an extremely complex but vitally important aspect 
of international business. To plan effectively, MNEs must understand not only the intricacies 
of their own operations worldwide, but also the different structures and interpretations of tax 
liabilities across countries. The primary objective of multinational tax planning is the minimiza-
tion of the firm’s worldwide tax burden. This objective, however, must not be pursued without 
full recognition that decision-making within the firm must always be based on the economic 
fundamentals of the firm’s line of business, and not on convoluted policies undertaken purely 
for the reduction of tax liability. As evident from previous chapters, taxes have a major impact 
on corporate net income and cash flow through their influence on foreign investment decisions, 
financial structure, cost of capital, foreign exchange management, and financial control.
This chapter provides an overview of how taxes are applied to MNEs globally; how the 
United States taxes the global earnings of U.S.-based multinationals; and how ­U.S.-based 
MNEs manage their global tax liabilities. We do this in four parts. The first section acquaints 
the reader with the overall international tax environment. The second part examines how a 
multinational firm manages its global tax liabilities. Although we use U.S. taxes as illustrations, 
Learning Objectives
■
■
Identify the differences between tax systems employed by government around the 
globe and how they affect multinational enterprises
■
■
Explore the unique characteristics of multinational tax management
■
■
Illustrate the use of offshore international financial centers for multinational tax 
reduction
■
■
Analyze how Google has creatively repositioned its global profits for tax ­management 
purposes
■
■
Examine the process and motivations for re-incorporating outside the United States, 
the so-called corporate inversion
421

422
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
our intention is not to make this chapter or this book U.S.-centric; most U.S. practices have 
close parallels in other countries, modified to fit their specific national systems. The third 
section of the chapter examines the use of tax-haven subsidiaries and international offshore 
financial centers. This is followed by an illustrative case about Google, which explores how 
profit positioning is used to reduce global taxes. The fifth and final part explores the rapidly 
expanding area of corporate inversions. The chapter concludes with the Mini-Case, Apple’s 
Global iTax Strategy.
Tax Principles
The sections that follow explain the most important aspects of the international tax environ-
ments and specific features that affect MNEs. Before we explain the specifics of multinational 
taxation in practice, however, it is necessary to introduce two fundamental tax principles: tax 
morality and tax neutrality.
Tax Morality
The MNE faces not only a morass of foreign taxes, but also an ethical question. In many 
countries, taxpayers—corporate or individual—do not voluntarily comply with the tax laws. 
This is termed tax morality. Smaller domestic firms and individuals are the chief violators. 
The MNE must decide whether to follow a practice of full disclosure to tax authorities or 
adopt the ­philosophy of “when in Rome, do as the Romans do.” Given the local promi-
nence of most ­foreign subsidiaries, most MNEs follow the full disclosure practice. Some 
firms, ­however, believe that their competitive position would be eroded if they did not avoid 
taxes to the same extent as their domestic competitors. There is obviously no prescriptive 
answer to the problem, since business ethics are partly a function of cultural heritage and 
historical development.
Some countries have imposed what seem to be arbitrary punitive tax penalties on MNEs 
for violations of local tax laws. Property or wealth tax assessments are sometimes perceived 
by the foreign firm to be excessively large when compared with those levied on locally owned 
firms. The problem then is how to respond to tax penalties that are punitive or discriminatory. 
Other countries have sought to make the question of tax morality compliance more difficult 
by increasing the transparency associated with tax payment.
Tax Neutrality
When a government decides to levy a tax, it must consider not only the potential revenue 
from the tax and how efficiently it can be collected, but also the effect the proposed tax can 
have on private economic behavior. For example, the U.S. government’s policy on taxation of 
foreign-source income does not have as its sole objective the raising of revenue; rather it has 
multiple objectives, including the following:
■
■
Neutralizing tax incentives that might favor (or disfavor) U.S. private investment in 
developed countries
■
■
Providing an incentive for U.S. private investment in developing countries
■
■
Improving the U.S. balance of payments by removing the advantages of artificial tax 
havens and encouraging repatriation of funds
■
■
Raising revenue
The ideal tax should not only raise revenue efficiently but also have as few negative effects 
on economic behavior as possible. Some theorists argue that the ideal tax should be completely 

423
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
neutral in its effect on private decisions and completely equitable among taxpayers. This is 
tax neutrality. However, other theorists claim that national policy objectives such as balance of 
payments or investment in developing countries should be encouraged through an active tax 
incentive policy, as opposed to requiring taxes to be neutral and equitable. Most tax systems 
compromise between these two viewpoints.
One way to view neutrality is to require that the burden of taxation on each dollar, euro, 
pound, or yen of profit earned in home-country operations by an MNE be equal to the bur-
den of taxation on each currency-equivalent of profit earned by the same firm in its foreign 
operations. This is called domestic tax neutrality. A second way to view neutrality is to require 
that the tax burden on each foreign subsidiary of the firm be equal to the tax burden on its 
competitors in the same country. This is called foreign tax neutrality. The later interpretation 
is often supported by MNEs because it focuses more on the competitiveness of the individual 
firm in individual country markets.
Tax neutrality is not to be confused with tax equity. In theory, an equitable tax is one that 
imposes the same total tax burden on all taxpayers who are similarly situated and located in 
the same tax jurisdiction. In the case of foreign investment income, the U.S. Treasury argues 
that since the United States uses the nationality principle to claim tax jurisdiction, U.S.-owned 
foreign subsidiaries are in the same tax jurisdiction as U.S. domestic subsidiaries. Therefore, 
a dollar earned in foreign operations should be taxed at the same rate and paid at the same 
time as a dollar earned in domestic operations.
National Tax Environments
Despite the fundamental objectives of national tax authorities, it is widely agreed that taxes 
do affect economic decisions made by MNEs. Tax treaties between nations, and differen-
tial tax structures, rates, and practices all result in a less than level playing field for the 
MNEs competing on world markets. Different countries use different categorizations of 
income (e.g., distributed versus undistributed profits), use different tax rates, and have radi-
cally different tax regimes, all of which drive different global tax management strategies by 
­multinational firms.
Nations structure their tax systems along two basic approaches: the worldwide approach 
or the territorial approach. Both approaches are attempts to determine which firms, foreign or 
domestic by incorporation, or which incomes, foreign or domestic in origin, are subject to the 
taxation of host-country tax authorities.
Worldwide Approach. The worldwide approach, also referred to as the residential approach 
or national approach, levies taxes on the income earned by firms that are incorporated in the 
host country, regardless of where the income was earned (domestically or abroad). An MNE 
earning income both at home and abroad would therefore find its worldwide income taxed 
by its host-country tax authorities.
For example, the United States taxes the income earned by firms based in the U.S. regard-
less of whether the income earned by the firm is domestically sourced or foreign sourced. In 
the U.S., ordinary foreign-sourced income is taxed only as remitted to the parent firm. As with 
all questions of tax, however, numerous conditions and exceptions exist. The primary problem 
is that this does not address the income earned by foreign firms operating within the United 
States. Countries like the U.S. then apply the principle of territorial taxation to foreign firms 
within their legal jurisdiction, taxing all income earned by foreign firms in the United States.
Territorial Approach. The territorial approach, also termed the source approach, focuses on the 
income earned by firms within the legal jurisdiction of the host country, not on the country of 
firm incorporation. Countries like Germany, which follow the territorial approach, apply taxes 

424
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
equally to foreign or domestic firms on income earned within the country, but in ­principle not 
on income earned outside the country. The territorial approach, like the worldwide approach, 
results in a major gap in coverage if resident firms earn income outside the country, but are 
not taxed by the country in which the profits are earned (operations in a so-called tax haven). 
In this case, tax authorities extend tax coverage to income earned abroad if it is not currently 
covered by foreign tax jurisdictions. Once again, a mix of the two tax approaches is necessary 
for full coverage of income.
As illustrated by Exhibit 15.1, 28 of 34 countries within the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD) currently utilize a territorial tax system. The pre-
dominance of territorial systems has grown rapidly, as more than half of these same OECD 
countries used worldwide systems only 10 years ago. In 2009 alone, both Japan and the United 
Kingdom switched from worldwide to territorial systems.
Tax Deferral. If the worldwide approach to international taxation were followed to the letter, 
it would end the tax-deferral privilege for many MNEs. Foreign subsidiaries of MNEs pay host-
country corporate income taxes, but many parent countries defer claiming additional income 
taxes on that foreign-source income until it is remitted to the parent firm—this is called tax 
deferral. For example, U.S. corporate income taxes on some types of foreign-source income of 
U.S.-owned subsidiaries incorporated abroad are deferred until the earnings are remitted to 
the U.S. parent. However, the ability to defer corporate income taxes is highly restricted and 
has been the subject of many of the tax law changes in the past three decades.
The deferral privilege has been challenged a number of times in recent U.S. presidential 
elections. A number of different candidates have argued that tax deferrals create an incentive 
for outsourcing abroad—so-called offshoring—of certain manufacturing and service activi-
ties by U.S. firms. The added concern to the potential loss of American jobs was the potential 
reduction in tax collections in the United States, enlarging the already sizeable U.S. govern-
ment fiscal deficit.
Tax Treaties
A network of bilateral tax treaties, many of which are modeled after one proposed by the 
OECD, provides a means of reducing double taxation. Tax treaties normally define whether 
taxes are to be imposed on income earned in one country by the nationals of another, and if 
Exhibit 15.1
Tax Regimes of the OECD 34 Countries
Territorial Taxation
Worldwide Taxation
Australia
France
Netherlands
Sweden
Chile
Austria
Germany
New Zealand
Switzerland
Ireland
Belgium
Greece
Norway
Turkey
Israel
Canada
Hungary
Poland
United Kingdom
Korea (South)
Czech Republic
Iceland
Portugal
Mexico
Denmark
Italy
Slovakia
United States
Estonia
Japan
Slovenia
Finland
Luxembourg
Spain
Source: Data drawn from Evolution of Territorial Tax Systems in the OECD, PWC, April 2, 2013.

425
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
so, how. Tax treaties are bilateral, with the two signatories specifying what rates are applicable 
to which types of income between the two countries.
Individual bilateral tax jurisdictions as specified through tax treaties are particularly 
important for firms that are primarily exporting to another country rather than doing business 
in that country via a “permanent establishment” (for example, a manufacturing plant). A firm 
that only exports would not want any of its other worldwide income taxed by the importing 
country. Tax treaties define what is a “permanent establishment” and what constitutes a limited 
presence for tax purposes. Tax treaties also typically result in reduced withholding tax rates 
between the two signatory countries, the negotiation of the treaty itself serving as a forum for 
opening and expanding business relationships between the two countries.
Tax Types
Taxes are classified as direct taxes if they are applied directly to income or indirect taxes if 
they are based on some other measurable performance characteristic of the firm. Exhibit 15.2 
­illustrates the wide range of corporate income tax rates and indirect rates across the world 
today.
Income Tax. Most governments rely on income taxes, both personal and corporate, for their 
primary revenue source. Corporate income tax rates differ widely globally, and take a variety 
of different forms. Some countries, for example, impose different corporate tax rates on dis-
tributed income (often lower) versus undistributed income (often higher), in an attempt to 
motivate companies to distribute greater portions of their income to their owners. Corporate 
income taxes—statutory tax rates—have been declining for more than a decade. That decline, 
however, now seems to have leveled off. Many governments amongst the industrialized coun-
tries are now under pressure to increase their tax revenues, leading to a variety of changes in 
indirect taxation.
These differences reflect a rapidly changing global tax environment. Corporate income 
taxes have been falling rapidly and widely over the past two decades. On average, the non-
OECD countries have relatively lower rates on average. The highly industrialized world, for 
better or worse, has been reluctant to reduce corporate income tax rates as aggressively as 
many emerging market nations. Corporate income tax rates, like any burden on the profit-
ability of commercial enterprise, has become a competitive element used by many coun-
tries to attempt to promote inward investment from abroad. And if corporate tax rates are 
indeed an element of competition, as illustrated in Exhibit 15.3, the United States is losing 
this competitive battle, with the highest corporate tax rate among the 30 countries shown. 
In 2011, for the first time in the past 50 years, the global average corporate income tax rate 
fell below 23%.
Withholding Tax. Passive income (such as dividends, interest, and royalties) earned by a resi-
dent of one country within the tax jurisdiction of a second country, are normally subject to a 
withholding tax in the second country. The reason for the institution of withholding taxes is 
actually quite simple: governments recognize that most international investors will not file a 
tax return in each country in which they invest. The government, therefore, wishes to ensure 
that a minimum tax payment is received. As the term “withholding” implies, taxes are withheld 
by the corporation from the payment made to the investor, and those withheld taxes are then 
turned over to government authorities. Withholding taxes is a major subject of bilateral tax 
treaties and generally range between 0 and 25%.
Value-Added Tax. One type of tax that has achieved great prominence is the value-added tax. 
The value-added tax is a type of national sales tax collected at each stage of production or 
sale of consumption goods in proportion to the value added during that stage. In general, 

426
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
Exhibit 15.2
Corporate and Indirect Tax Rates for Selected Countries
Country
Corporate
Indirect
Afghanistan
20%
na
Albania
15%
20%
Algeria
19%
17%
Angola
35%
10%
Argentina
35%
21%
Armenia
20%
20%
Aruba
28%
1.5%
Australia
30%
10%
Austria
25%
20%
Bahamas
0%
na
Bahrain
0%
na
Bangladesh
27.5%
15.0%
Barbados
25%
17.5%
Belarus
18%
20%
Belgium
33.99%
21%
Bermuda
0%
na
Bolivia
25%
13%
Bonaire, St. 
Eustatius, 
Saba
0%
8%
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
10%
17%
Botswana
22%
12%
Brazil
34%
*
Bulgaria
10%
20%
Cambodia
20%
10%
Canada
26.5%
**
Cayman Islands
0%
na
Chile
20%
19%
China
25%
**
Colombia
25%
16%
Costa Rica
30%
13%
Croatia
20%
25%
Curacao
27.5%
6%
Cyprus
12.5%
19%
Czech Republic
19%
21%
Denmark
24.5%
25%
Dominican 
Republic
28%
18%
Ecuador
22%
12%
Egypt
25%
10%
El Salvador
30%
13%
Estonia
21%
20%
Fiji
20%
15%
Finland
20%
24%
France
33.33%
20%
Georgia
15%
18%
Germany
29.58%
19%
Country
Corporate
Indirect
Ghana
25%
17.5%
Gibraltar
10%
na
Greece
26%
23%
Guatemala
28%
12%
Guernsey
0%
na
Honduras
30%
15%
Hong Kong
16.5%
na
Hungary
19%
27%
Iceland
20%
25.5%
India
33.99%
**
Indonesia
25%
10%
Iran
15%
na
Ireland
12.5%
23%
Isle of Man
0%
20%
Israel
26.5%
18%
Italy
31.4%
22%
Jamaica
25%
16.5%
Japan
35.64%
8%
Jersey
0%
5%
Jordan
14%
16%
Kazakhstan
20%
12%
Kenya
30%
16%
Kuwait
15%
na
Latvia
15%
21%
Lebanon
15%
10%
Libya
20%
na
Liechtenstein
12.5%
8%
Lithuania
15%
21%
Luxembourg
29.22%
15%
Macau
12%
na
Macedonia
10%
18%
Malawai
30%
16.5%
Malaysia
25%
10%
Malta
35%
18%
Mauritius
15%
15%
Mexico
30%
16%
Montenegro
9%
19%
Morocco
30%
20%
Mozambique
32%
17%
Namibia
33%
15%
Netherlands
25%
21%
New Zealand
28%
15%
Nigeria
30%
5%
Norway
27%
25%
Oman
12%
na
Pakistan
34%
17%
Panama
25%
7%
Country
Corporate
Indirect
Papua New 
Guinea
30%
10%
Paraguay
10%
10%
Peru
30%
18%
Philippines
30%
12%
Poland
19%
23%
Portugal
23%
23%
Qatar
10%
na
Romania
16%
24%
Russia
20%
18%
St. Maarten
34.5%
5%
Samoa
27%
15%
Saudi Arabia
20%
na
Serbia
15%
20%
Sierra Leone
30%
15%
Singapore
17%
7%
Slovak 
Republic
22%
20%
Slovenia
17%
22%
South Africa
28%
14%
South Korea
24.2%
10%
Spain
30%
21%
Sri Lanka
28%
12%
Sudan
35%
17%
Sweden
22%
25%
Switzerland
17.92%
8%
Syria
22%
na
Taiwan
17%
5%
Tanzania
30%
18%
Thailand
20%
7%
Trinidad & 
Tobago
25%
15%
Tunisia
25%
18%
Turkey
20%
18%
Uganda
30%
18%
Ukraine
18%
20%
United Arab 
Emirates
55%
na
United 
Kingdom
21%
20%
United States
40%
**
Uruguay
25%
22%
Vanuatu
0%
12.5%
Venezuela
34%
12%
Vietnam
22%
10%
Yemen
20%
5%
Zambia
35%
16%
Zimbabwe
25.75%
15%
  
Source: KPMG’s Corporate and Indirect Tax Rate Survey, 2014.*Bonaire, St. Eustatius, and Saba are grouped together as per ISO standards. 
**Countries impose indirect taxes at also state, provincial, municipal (or similar) level, making determination of a specific rate case specific.

427
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
United States
Japan
Belgium
France
Italy
Australia
Spain
Mexico
Germany
Luxembourg
New Zealand
Norway
Canada
Greece
Austria
Netherlands
Denmark
Korea
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Sweden
United Kingdom
Finland
Iceland
Turkey
Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland
Switzerland
Ireland
Source: KPMG Survey of Direct and Indirect Corporate Taxation, 2014.
40%
36%
33%
31% 30% 30% 30% 30% 29%
28% 27% 27% 26% 25% 25% 25%
22% 22% 21%
20% 20% 20% 19% 19% 19%
18%
13%
34%
24%
23%
Exhibit 15.3
 Comparative OECD Corporate Tax Rates, 2014
production goods such as plant and equipment have not been subject to the value-added tax. 
Certain necessities—such as medicines and other health-related expenses, education and reli-
gious activities—are usually exempt or taxed at lower rates.
The value-added tax has been adopted as the main source of revenue from indirect taxa-
tion by all members of the EU, most non-EU countries in Europe, a number of Latin American 
countries, Canada, and scattered other countries.
Other National Taxes. There are other national taxes, which vary in importance from country 
to country. The turnover tax (tax on the purchase or sale of securities in some countries) and 
higher taxes on undistributed profits (a higher income tax rate on retained earnings of firms) 
are examples of other national taxes. Property and inheritance taxes, also termed transfer taxes, 
are imposed in a variety of ways to achieve intended social redistribution of income and wealth 
as much as to raise revenue. There are other “red-tape charges” for public services that are in 
reality user taxes. Sometimes foreign exchange purchases or sales are in effect hidden taxes 
inasmuch as the government earns revenue rather than just regulating imports and exports 
for balance of payments reasons.
Controlled Foreign Corporations
The rule that U.S. shareholders do not pay U.S. taxes on foreign-source income until that 
income is remitted to the United States was amended in 1962 by the creation of special 
Subpart F income. The revision was designed to prevent the use of arrangements between 
operating companies and base companies located in tax havens as a means of deferring 
U.S. taxes and to encourage greater repatriation of foreign incomes. The Tax Reform Act 
of 1986 retained the concept of Subpart F income but made a number of changes that 
expanded ­categories of income subject to taxation, reduced exceptions, and raised or 
­lowered thresholds.

428
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
Several definitions are needed to understand Subpart F income:
■
■
A controlled foreign corporation (CFC) is any foreign corporation in which U.S. 
shareholders, including corporate parents, own more than 50% of the combined 
­voting power or total value.
■
■
A U.S. shareholder is a U.S. person owning 10% or more of the voting power of a 
controlled foreign corporation. A U.S. person is a citizen or resident of the United 
States, a domestic partnership, a domestic corporation, or any nonforeign trust or 
estate. The required percentages are based on constructive ownership, under which an 
individual is deemed to own shares registered in the names of other family members, 
trusts, and so on.
Under these definitions, a more-than-50% owned “subsidiary” of a U.S. corporation would 
be a controlled foreign corporation (CFC), and the U.S. parent would be taxed on certain 
undistributed income—Subpart F income—of that controlled foreign corporation.
Subpart F income, which is subject to immediate U.S. taxation even when it is not remit-
ted, is income of a type otherwise easily shifted offshore to avoid current taxation. It includes 
(1) passive income received by the foreign corporation such as dividends, interest, rents, 
­royalties, net foreign currency gains, net commodities gains, and income from the sale of non-
income-producing property; (2) income from the insurance of U.S. risks; (3) financial service 
income; (4) shipping income; (5) oil-related income; and (6) certain related-party sales and 
service income.
Subpart F, restated, provides that if a foreign corporation is considered to be a controlled 
foreign corporation, each U.S. shareholder owning 10% or more of that CFC must include 
the shareholder’s pro rated share of the CFC’s Subpart F income in the shareholder’s gross 
income. Thus, Subpart F income is subject to current U.S. taxation at the shareholder level even 
though not remitted to the United States. Exhibit 15.4 illustrates the mechanics of how a U.S. 
European Subsidiary
(Spain)
Virgin Gorda Holdings
(British Virgin Islands)
Spanish proﬁts are taxable in the U.S. only when remitted.
The U.S. company could create
a ﬁnancial subsidiary in the British Virgin
Islands that would own its European
subsidiary. This would be categorized as a
Controlled Foreign Corporation (CFC).
If the Spanish subsidiary was owned by Virgin
Gorda Holdings, the income to Virgin Gorda
Holdings—dividends, interest, royalties—would
be categorized as passive income by the U.S.
Spanish subsidiary manufactures product for sale in Europe.
This is categorized as active income by U.S. tax authorities.
The British Virgin Islands is a low-tax
jurisdiction, imposing a very low corporate
income tax on foreign source earnings.
Under Subpart F rules passive income
to a CFC is immediately taxable in the
U.S. regardless of when or if it is remitted.
U.S. Parent Company
(United States)
Exhibit 15.4
 U.S. Taxation of Foreign Source Income and Subpart F

429
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
corporation attempting to use a financial subsidiary in the British Virgin Islands (one which 
has no economic function other than to own for tax purposes) would be treated under Subpart 
F income principles.
Multinational Tax Management
The operational goal of the multinational enterprise is the maximization of consolidated after-
tax income. This requires the MNE to minimize its effective global tax burden. Since multina-
tional firms incorporated in a worldwide tax country like the United States are taxed on their 
worldwide income, and not just their income in-country (territorial taxation), they will devise 
and pursue tax structures and strategies to minimize tax payments across all countries in which 
they operate. This section will focus on those strategies, and specifically on those employed 
by U.S. multinational firms.
The following tax structures and strategies are not illegal, but rather may be considered 
extremely aggressive efforts to reduce tax liabilities—tax avoidance. Whereas illegal activities 
are termed tax evasion, tax avoidance is used to describe extremely aggressive strategies and 
structures used by business to reduce taxes far below what most governments expect. This lat-
ter category would include the use of offshore tax havens. The question that remains, however, 
is whether the MNEs are also pursuing the nonfinancial interests or responsibilities of the firm 
equitably or ethically.
There are a variety of different strategies, structures, and practices which are used in tax 
avoidance. Most methods are premised on shifting taxable profits to low tax environments 
while minimizing taxable income in higher tax jurisdictions. We will focus our discussion on 
five international tax management practices: allocation of debt, foreign tax credits, transfer 
pricing, cross-crediting, and check-the-box.
Allocation of Debt and Earnings Stripping
A multinational firm may allocate debt differently across its various foreign subsidiaries 
to reduce tax liabilities in high tax environments. Units in high tax environments may be 
assigned very high debt obligations in an attempt to maximize the interest deductibility 
provisions offered in that country. Often termed earnings stripping, this method is typi-
cally limited by host government requirements for minimum equity capitalizations—thin 
­capitalization rules.
The United States defines thin capitalization as a debt-to-equity ratio above 1.5 to 1.0, 
with net interest exceeding 50% of adjusted taxable income (taxable income plus interest plus 
depreciation). Interest expenses that exceed 50% that are paid to a related corporation are 
not deductible toward U.S. tax liabilities.
Foreign Tax Credits and Deferral
To prevent double taxation of the same income, most countries grant a foreign tax credit for 
income taxes paid to the host country. Countries differ on how they calculate the foreign tax 
credit and what kinds of limitations they place on the total amount claimed. Normally foreign 
tax credits are also available for withholding taxes paid to other countries on dividends, royal-
ties, interest, and other income remitted to the parent. The value-added tax and other sales 
taxes are not eligible for a foreign tax credit but are typically deductible from pre-tax income 
as an expense.

430
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
A tax credit is a direct reduction of taxes that would otherwise be due and payable. It dif-
fers from a deductible expense, which is an expense used to reduce taxable income before the 
tax rate is applied. A $100 tax credit reduces taxes payable by the full $100, whereas a $100 
deductible expense reduces taxable income by $100 and taxes payable by $100 * t, where t 
is the tax rate. Tax credits are more valuable on a dollar-for-dollar basis than are deductible 
expenses.
If there were no credits for foreign taxes paid, sequential taxation by the host government 
and then by the home government would result in a very high cumulative tax rate. For example, 
assume the wholly owned foreign subsidiary of an MNE earns $10,000 before local income 
taxes and pays a dividend equal to all of its after-tax income. The host-country income tax rate 
is 30%, and the home country of the parent tax rate is 35%, assuming no withholding taxes. 
Total taxation with and without tax credits is shown in Exhibit 15.5.
If tax credits are not allowed, sequential levying of both a 30% host-country tax and then 
a 35% home-country tax on the income that remains results in an effective 54.5% tax as a 
percentage of the original before tax income, a cumulative rate that would make many MNEs 
uncompetitive with local firms. The effect of allowing tax credits is to limit total taxation on 
the original before-tax income to no more than the highest single rate among jurisdictions. 
In the case depicted in Exhibit 15.5, the effective overall tax rate of 35% with foreign tax 
credits is equivalent to the higher tax rate of the home country (and is the tax rate payable if 
the income had been earned at home, domestically sourced income). The $500 of additional 
home-country tax under the tax credit system in Exhibit 15.5 is the amount needed to bring 
total taxation ($3,000 already paid plus the additional $500) up to but not beyond 35% of the 
original $10,000 of before-tax foreign income.
The problem, however, is that if this company repatriates the profits of its foreign busi-
nesses to the parent company, it owes more taxes. Period. If it leaves those profits in that for-
eign country, it enjoys what is referred to as deferral—it is able to defer incurring additional 
parent-country taxes on the foreign-source income until it does repatriate those earnings. As 
shown in Global Finance in Practice 15.1, this has motivated some countries like the U.S. to 
try periodically to provide tax incentives for repatriating profits.
Exhibit 15.5
Foreign Tax Credits
Without Foreign  
Tax Credits
With Foreign 
Tax Credits
Before-tax foreign income
$10,000
$10,000
Less foreign tax @ 30%
-3,000
-3,000
Available to parent and paid as dividend
$ 7,000
$ 7,000
Less additional parent-country tax at 35%
-2,450
—
Less incremental tax (after credits)
—
-500
Profit after all taxes
$ 4,550
$ 6,500
Total taxes, both jurisdictions
$ 5,450
$ 3,500
Effective overall tax rate (total taxes paid , foreign income)
54.5%
35.0%

431
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
Transfer Pricing
The pricing of goods, services, and technology transferred to a foreign subsidiary from an affili-
ated company—transfer pricing—is the first and foremost method of transferring funds out 
of a foreign subsidiary. These costs enter directly into the cost of goods sold component of the 
subsidiary’s income statement. This is a particularly sensitive problem for MNEs. Even purely 
domestic firms find it difficult to reach agreement on the best method for setting prices on 
transactions between related units. In the multinational case, managers must balance conflict-
ing considerations. These include fund positioning and income taxes.
It is estimated that U.S.-based multinationals have one trillion 
dollars in un-repatriated profits offshore. Repatriating those 
profits, given the relatively higher effective corporate income 
tax rate in the U.S. compared to many other countries, would 
trigger significant additional tax charges in the U.S. In an 
effort to facilitate repatriation of those profits in 2004, the 
U.S. government passed the Homeland Investment Act of 
2004. The Act provided a window of opportunity in 2005 in 
which profits could be repatriated with only an additional tax 
obligation of 5.25%.
The temporary tax law change clearly had the desired 
impact of stimulating the repatriation of profits, as illustrated 
in the exhibit. Dividend repatriations skyrocketed in 2005 to 
over $360 billion from $60 billion the previous year. After the 
temporary tax revision expired, repatriated dividends returned 
to trend.
Global Finance in Practice 15.1
Offshore Profits and Dividend Repatriation
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
$350
$400
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Joint Committee on Taxation, Congressional Research Service.
Homeland Investment Act of 2004
provided an 85% deduction of U.S. tax
on qualiﬁed repatriations of foreign
income to U.S. parent companies
U.S. Dividend Repatriations, 1994–2010 (billions of U.S. dollars)
The apparent political motivation for the original tax 
holiday was jobs creation in the United States by U.S. 
companies. However, evidence indicates that U.S. par-
ent companies used the repatriated profits for a variety 
of purposes, such as returning money to shareholders via 
dividends and share repurchases, but not for creating new 
jobs. As discussions get underway regarding another tax 
holiday aimed at repatriating over one trillion dollars in cor-
porate profits held offshore, these same debates are rising 
once again.

432
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
Fund Positioning Effect. A parent firm wishing to transfer funds out of a particular country 
can charge higher prices on goods sold to its subsidiary in that country—to the degree that 
government regulations allow. A foreign subsidiary can be financed by the reverse technique, 
a lowering of transfer prices. Payment by the subsidiary for imports from its parent or sister 
subsidiary transfers funds out of the subsidiary. A higher transfer price permits funds to be 
accumulated in the selling country. Multiple sourcing of component parts on a worldwide basis 
allows the act of switching between suppliers from within the corporate family to function as 
a device to transfer funds.
Income Tax Effect. A major consideration in setting a transfer price is the income tax effect. 
The firm’s global profits can be influenced when transfer prices are set to minimize taxable 
income in a country with a high income tax rate and to maximize taxable income in a country 
with a low income tax rate. A parent wishing to reduce the taxable profits of a subsidiary in 
a high-tax environment may set transfer prices at a higher point to increase the costs of the 
subsidiary, thereby reducing taxable income.
The income tax effect is illustrated in the hypothetical example presented in Exhibit 15.6. 
Ganado Europe is operating in a relatively high-tax environment, assuming German corporate 
income taxes of 45%. Ganado U.S. is in a significantly lower tax environment, assuming a U.S. 
corporate income tax rate of 35%, motivating Ganado to charge Ganado Europe a higher 
transfer price on goods produced in the United States and sold to Ganado Europe.
If Ganado Corporation adopts a high-markup policy by “selling” its merchandise at an 
intracompany sales price of $1,700,000, the same $800,000 of pre-tax consolidated income is 
allocated more heavily to low-tax Ganado U.S. and less heavily to high-tax Ganado Europe. 
Exhibit 15.6
Effect of Low versus High Transfer Price on Ganado Europe’s Net Income  
(thousands of U.S. dollars)
Ganado U.S. 
(subsidiary)
Ganado Europe 
(subsidiary)
Europe and U.S. 
Combined
Low-Markup Policy
Sales
$1,400
$2,000
$2,000
Less cost of goods sold*
 (1,000)
   (1,400)
   (1,000)
Gross profit
$   400
$   600
$1,000
Less operating expenses
  (100)
  (100)
  (200)
Taxable income
$   300
$   500
$   800
Less income taxes
35%  (105)
45%  (225)
  (330)
Net income
 $   195
 $   275
 $   470
High-Markup Policy
Sales
$1,700
$2,000
$2,000
Less cost of goods sold*
 (1,000)
 (1,700)
 (1,000)
Gross profit
$   700
$   300
$1,000
Less operating expenses
  (100)
  (100)
  (200)
Taxable income
$   600
$   200
$   800
Less income taxes
35%  (210)
45%    (90)
  (300)
Net income
 $   390
 $   110
 $   500
*Ganado U.S. sales price becomes cost of goods sold for Ganado Europe.

433
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
(Note that it is Ganado Corporation, the corporate parent that must adopt a transfer ­pricing 
policy that directly alters the profitability of each of the individual subsidiaries, not the sub-
sidiary itself.) As a consequence, total taxes drop by $30,000 and consolidated net income 
increases by $30,000 to $500,000. All while total sales remain constant.
Ganado would naturally prefer the high-markup policy for sales from the United States to 
Europe. Needless to say, government tax authorities are aware of the potential income distor-
tion from transfer price manipulation. A variety of regulations exist on the reasonableness of 
transfer prices, including fees and royalties as well as prices set for merchandise. Government 
taxing authorities obviously have the right to reject transfer prices deemed inappropriate.
U.S. IRS regulations provide three methods to establish arm’s length prices: comparable 
uncontrolled prices, resale prices, and cost-plus calculations. All three of these methods are 
recommended for use in member countries by the OECD Committee on Fiscal Affairs. In 
some cases, combinations of these three methods are used.
Section 482 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code is typical of laws covering transfer prices. 
Under this authority, the IRS can reallocate gross income, deductions, credits, or allowances 
between related corporations in order to prevent tax evasion or to reflect more clearly a proper 
allocation of income. The burden of proof is on the taxpaying firm to show that the IRS has 
been arbitrary or unreasonable in reallocating income. This “guilty until proved innocent” 
approach means that MNEs must keep good documentation of the logic and costs behind 
their transfer prices. The “correct price” according to the guidelines is the one that reflects an 
arm’s length price; a sale of the same goods or service to a comparable unrelated customer.
Managerial Incentives and Evaluation. When a firm is organized with decentralized profit 
centers, transfer pricing between centers can disrupt evaluation of managerial performance. 
This problem is not unique to MNEs; it is also a controversial issue in the “centralization 
versus decentralization” debate in domestic circles. In the domestic case, however, a modicum 
of coordination at the corporate level can alleviate some of the distortion that occurs when 
any profit center suboptimizes its profit for the corporate good. Also, in most domestic cases, 
the company can file a single (for that country) consolidated tax return, so the issue of cost 
allocation between affiliates is not critical from a tax-payment point of view.
For the multinational, coordination is often hindered by longer and less-efficient chan-
nels of communication, the need to consider the unique variables that influence international 
pricing, and separate taxation. Even with the best of intent, a manager in one country finds it 
difficult to know what is best for the firm as a whole when buying at a negotiated price from 
related companies in another country. If corporate headquarters establishes transfer prices 
and sourcing alternatives, one of the main advantages of a decentralized profit center system 
disappears: local management loses the incentive to act for its own benefit.
Exhibit 15.6 illustrated a transfer pricing example where an increase in the transfer price 
led to a worldwide income gain: Ganado Corporation’s income rose by $195,000 (from $195,000 
to $390,000) while Ganado Europe’s income fell by only $165,000 (from $275,000 to $110,000), 
for a net gain of $30,000. Should the managers of the European subsidiary lose their bonuses 
(or their jobs) because of their “sub-par” performance? Bonuses are usually determined by 
a company-wide formula based in part on the profitability of individual subsidiaries, but in 
this case, Ganado Europe “sacrificed” for the greater good of the whole. Arbitrarily changing 
transfer prices can create measurement problems.
Transferring profit from high-tax Ganado Europe to low-tax Ganado Corporation in the 
U.S. changes a multitude of cash flows and performance metrics for one or both companies:
■
■
Import tariffs paid (importer only) and hence profit levels
■
■
Measurements of foreign exchange exposure, such as the amount of net exposed 
assets, because of changes in amounts of cash and receivables

434
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
■
■
Liquidity tests, such as the current ratio, receivables turnover, and inventory turnover
■
■
Operating efficiency, as measured by the ratio of gross profit to either sales or to 
total assets
■
■
Income tax payments
■
■
Profitability, as measured by the ratio of net income to either sales or capital invested
■
■
Dividend payout ratio, in that a constant dividend will show as a varied payout ratio 
as net income changes (alternatively, if the payout ratio is kept constant, the amount 
of dividend is changed by a change in transfer price)
■
■
Internal growth rate, as measured by the ratio of retained earnings to existing owner-
ship equity
Effect on Joint-Venture Partners. Joint ventures pose a special problem in transfer pricing, 
because serving the interest of local stockholders by maximizing local profit may be sub-­
optimal from the overall viewpoint of the MNE. Often, the conflicting interests are irreconcil-
able. Indeed, the local joint venture partner could be viewed as a potential “Trojan horse” if 
they complain to local authorities about the transfer pricing policy.
Cross-Crediting
One of the most valuable management methods available to companies in a worldwide tax 
system like that of the United States is the ability to cross-credit foreign tax credits with foreign 
tax deficits in the same period. If a U.S. multinational remits profits from two different coun-
tries, one in a high-tax environment (relative to the U.S.) and the other in low-tax environment 
(relative to the U.S.), if the income is from one of the two major “baskets” of foreign source 
income (active or passive), the excess foreign tax credits from one can be cross-credited against 
the foreign tax deficits of the other.
Exhibit 15.7 summarizes how our U.S.-based multinational, Ganado, may manage divi-
dend remittances from two of its foreign subsidiaries using cross-crediting. Ganado’s dividend 
remittances from its two foreign subsidiaries create two different and offsetting tax credit 
positions.
■
■
Because corporate income tax rates in Germany (40%) are higher than those in the 
United States (35%), dividends remitted to the U.S. parent from Ganado Germany 
result in excess foreign tax credits. Any applicable withholding taxes on dividends 
between Germany and the U.S. only increase the amount of the excess credit.
■
■
Because corporate income tax rates in Brazil (25%) are lower than those in the 
United States (35%), dividends remitted to the U.S. parent from Ganado Brazil result 
in deficit foreign tax credits. If there are withholding taxes applied to the dividends 
by Brazil on remittances to the United States, this will reduce the size of the deficit, 
but not eliminate it.
Ganado’s management would like to manage the two dividend remittances in order to match 
the deficits with the credits. The most straightforward method of doing this would be to 
adjust the amount of dividend distributed from each foreign subsidiary so that, after all 
applicable income and withholding taxes have been applied, Ganado’s excess foreign tax 
credits from Ganado Germany exactly match the excess foreign tax deficits from Ganado 
Brazil. There are a number of other methods of managing the global tax liabilities of Ganado, 
so-called repositioning of funds, where firms strive to structure global operations to record 
their profits in a low-tax environment, as shown in the Mini-Case on Apple at the end of 
this chapter.

435
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
Check-the-Box and Hybrid Entities
The U.S. Treasury’s attempt to stop the repositioning of profits by U.S.-based multinationals 
in low-tax jurisdictions took a major step backward in 1997 when Treasury introduced what 
is called check-the-box subsidiary characterization. In an attempt to allow simplification 
of taxation, the U.S. Treasury changed its required filing practices to allow multinational 
firms to categorize subsidiaries for taxation purposes by simply “checking-the-box” on a 
single form.
One of the box choices offered, a disregarded entity, allowed the unit to “disappear” for 
tax purposes, as its results would be consolidated with those of its parent company. These 
combined units are termed hybrid entities. In the end, it allowed U.S. multinationals that have 
tiered ownership of offshore units to once again begin repositioning profits in low-tax environ-
ments and gain essentially permanent deferral for those earnings. In 2007, the U.S. Treasury 
codified this process in what is now referred to as the look-through-rules on this tax treatment 
of disregarded entities. The Mini-Case at the end of this chapter on Apple Computer’s use of 
this structure provides additional detail.
Tax Havens and International Offshore Financial Centers
Many MNEs have foreign subsidiaries that act as tax havens for corporate funds awaiting rein-
vestment or repatriation. Tax-haven subsidiaries, categorically referred to as International Off-
shore Financial Centers, are partially a result of tax-deferral features on earned foreign income 
Ganado Brazil
Pays corporate income taxes
in Brazil of 25%
Ganado USA
Pays corporate income taxes
in the United States of 35%
Declares a dividend
to its U.S. parent
Eﬃcient management
of Ganado’s foreign tax
position requires it to
try to balance tax credits
 
Deﬁcit Foreign Tax
Credits against
Excess Foreign Tax Credits
Withholding taxes are deducted
from the dividend before leaving
Brazil of an additional 5%
Dividend remitted after-tax
Ganado Germany
Pays corporate income taxes
in Germany of 40%
Declares a dividend
to its U.S. parent
Withholding taxes are deducted
from the dividend before leaving
Germany of an additional 10%
Dividend remitted after-tax
Has paid less than U.S. tax
requirement of 35% on income
Deﬁcit Foreign Tax Credit
Has paid more than U.S. tax
requirement of 35% on income
Excess Foreign Tax Credit
Note: Ganado pays taxes to the U.S. government separately on domestic-source income and foreign-source income.
Exhibit 15.7
Ganado’s Cross-Crediting of Foreign Tax Credits

436
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
allowed by some of the parent countries. Tax-haven subsidiaries are typically ­established in a 
country that can meet the following requirements:
■
■
A low tax on foreign investment or sales income earned by resident corporations and 
a low dividend withholding tax on dividends paid to the parent firm.
■
■
A stable currency that allows easy conversion of funds into and out of the local 
currency. This requirement can be met by permitting and facilitating the use of 
eurocurrencies.
■
■
The facilities to support financial services; for example, good communications, profes-
sional qualified office workers, and reputable banking services.
■
■
A stable government that encourages the establishment of foreign-owned financial 
and service facilities within its borders.
Exhibit 15.8 provides a map of most of the world’s major offshore financial centers. The 
typical tax-haven subsidiary owns the common stock of its related operating foreign subsidiar-
ies. There might be several tax-haven subsidiaries scattered around the world. The tax-haven 
subsidiary’s equity is typically 100% owned by the parent firm. All transfers of funds might 
go through the tax-haven subsidiaries, including dividends and equity financing. Thus, the par-
ent country’s tax on foreign-source income, which might normally be paid when a dividend is 
declared by a foreign subsidiary, could continue to be deferred until the tax-haven subsidiary 
itself pays a dividend to the parent firm. This event can be postponed indefinitely if foreign 
operations continue to grow and require new internal financing from the tax-haven subsidiary. 
Dublin
Bermuda
Bahamas
Belize
Panama
Cayman 
Isles
Aruba
Netherlands
Antilles
Luxembourg
Liechtenstein
Switzerland
Cyprus
Dubai
Bahrain
Hong Kong
Labuan
Vanuatu
Cook
Islands
Mauritius
Singapore
Alderney
Turks and Caicos
Virgin Isles
Montserrat
Barbados
Antigua
Anguilla
Jersey and
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Western
Samoa
Monaco
Malta
Gibraltar
Exhibit 15.8
International Offshore Financial Centers

437
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
Thus, MNEs are able to operate a corporate pool of funds for foreign operations without 
­having to repatriate foreign earnings through the parent country’s tax machine.
For U.S. MNEs, the tax-deferral privilege enjoyed by foreign subsidiaries (it is considered a 
privilege because they do not pay tax on the foreign income until they remit dividends back to the 
parent company) was not originally a tax loophole. On the contrary, it was granted by the U.S. gov-
ernment to allow U.S. firms to expand overseas and to place those firms on par with foreign com-
petitors, which also enjoy similar types of tax deferral and export subsidies of one type or another. 
Exhibit 15.9 provides a categorization of the primary activities of offshore financial centers.
Unfortunately, some firms distorted the original intent of tax deferral into tax evasion. 
Transfer prices on goods and services bought from or sold to foreign affiliates were artificially 
rigged to leave all the income from the transaction in the tax-haven subsidiary. This manipula-
tion was accomplished by routing the legal title to the goods or services through the tax-haven 
subsidiary, even though physically the goods or services never entered the tax-haven country. 
Needless to say, tax authorities of both exporting and importing countries were dismayed by 
the lack of taxable income in such transactions.
One purpose of the U.S. Internal Revenue Act of 1962 was to eliminate the tax advantages 
of these “paper” foreign corporations without destroying the tax-deferral privilege for those 
foreign manufacturing and sales subsidiaries that were established for business and economic 
motives rather than tax motives. Although the tax motive has been removed, some firms have 
found these subsidiaries useful as finance control centers for foreign operations.
Google: An Illustrative Case of Profit Repositioning
It’s called capitalism.	
—Eric Schmidt, Chairman, Google, 2012.
Google, the dominant Internet search engine famous for encouraging all employees to Do 
no evil in the company code of conduct, has been the subject of much scrutiny over its global 
Offshore financial centers provide financial management services to foreign users in exchange for foreign exchange earnings. There 
are several comparative advantages for clients, including very low tax rates, minimal administrative formalities, and confidentiality 
and discretion. This environment allows wealthy international clients to minimize potential tax liability while protecting income and 
assets from political, fiscal, and legal risks. There are many vehicles through which offshore financial services can be provided. 
They include the following:
■
■
Offshore banking, which can handle foreign exchange operations for corporations or banks. These operations are not subject 
to capital, corporate, capital gains, dividend, or interest taxes or to exchange controls.
■
■
International business corporations, which are often tax-exempt, limited-liability companies used to operate businesses or 
raise capital through issuing shares, bonds, or other instruments.
■
■
Offshore insurance companies, which are established to minimize taxes and manage risk.
■
■
Asset management and protection, which allows individuals and corporations in countries with fragile banking systems or 
unstable political regimes to keep assets offshore to protect against the collapse of domestic currencies and banks.
■
■
Tax planning, which means multinationals may route transactions through offshore centers to minimize taxes through transfer 
pricing. Individuals can make use of favorable tax regimes offered by offshore centers through trusts and foundations.
The tax concessions and secrecy offered by offshore financial centers can be used for many legitimate purposes, but they have 
also been used for illegitimate ends, including money laundering and tax evasion.
Exhibit 15.9
The Activities of Offshore Financial Centers

438
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
tax strategy in recent years. It is representative of the challenges for all companies and all 
­governments in an increasingly complex world of digital commerce in which it is often dif-
ficult to determine where a taxable event occurred or where a taxable activity was performed.
Google’s offshore tax strategy, the Double-Irish-Dutch Sandwich, is based on repositioning 
the ownership of much of its intellectual property to a subsidiary in a low-tax environment 
like Ireland (see Exhibit 15.10), and then establishing high transfer prices on various forms 
of services and overheads to other units, positioning most of the profits in the near-zero tax 
environment of Bermuda. The company negotiated for years with U.S. tax authorities, even-
tually gaining consent in an advanced pricing agreement. The agreement, as yet undisclosed, 
established allowable transfer prices and practices between the various Google-owned units 
used to minimize global taxes.
What is core to Google’s structure shown in Exhibit 15.10 is known as permanent estab-
lishment (PE). Permanent establishment rules allow firms such as Google to fix a tax base in 
a low-tax country like Ireland, while generating lots of business in a country where tax rates 
are higher, like France. Companies in principle are taxed not on “where they do business,” 
but on “where they finalize their business deals with customers”—the country or jurisdiction 
where the final contract is signed. In the case of Google, that means most sales throughout 
the European Union are finalized in Ireland. It is estimated that 75% of the top 50 U.S. soft-
ware, Internet, and computer hardware companies use similar PE structures that help them 
avoid taxes.
Basis Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS)
The increasingly aggressive structures and strategies used by multinational firms all over the 
world—not just by U.S. multinationals—to avoid or delay paying taxes has led to a call by 
Google
Ireland Ltd.
Google’s
U.K. Sales
Google
Ireland Holdings
Google
Bermuda
Google
Netherlands
Costs are charged back through Ireland Holdings
and the Netherlands (“Dutch Sandwich”), legally,
to take advantage of bilateral tax treaties.
Bermuda does not tax foreign-source income
earned by Google Bermuda. The Proﬁt.
Ireland’s costs are based on services and intellectual property
assigned and provided by Google Bermuda. Those payments,
primarily royalties, result in few taxespaid – anywhere.
Actual advertising sales by U.K.-based customers of
Google are signed, ﬁnalized, and booked in Ireland.
Google’s original research and development for intellectual property and
software capabilities is performed in the United States
Exhibit 15.10
Google’s Global Tax Structure and U.K. Sales

439
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
the finance ministers of the G20 in conjunction with the OECD to create an action plan to 
stop basis erosion and profit shifting (BEPS). Interestingly, this is not an effort to stop illegal 
­activity—for most of the repositioning of profits and reduction in tax liabilities in total is legal—
but to explore new initiatives to change tax laws and practices globally to reassert taxing powers.
The debate that has raged in recent years about Google, Apple, and many other multina-
tional companies is that they are generating massive profits around the world and often paying 
few corporate income taxes—anywhere to anyone. All the while many other multinationals 
continue to pay effective tax rates in the high 20s to low 30s (percentage of consolidated 
pre-tax income). If that is indeed the case, it is not a level playing field, and one that many 
traditional manufacturers, who cannot move their products and property digitally around the 
globe, feel is biased against them.
Corporate Inversion
A corporate inversion is the changing of a company’s country of incorporation. Its purpose 
is to reduce its effective global tax liabilities by re-incorporating in a lower-tax jurisdiction, 
typically a country using a territorial tax regime. Although the company’s operations may be 
completely unchanged, and its corporate headquarters may remain in the original country of 
incorporation, it will now have a new corporate home, and its old country of incorporation will 
now be only one of many countries in which the firm operates foreign subsidiaries.
The typical transaction is one in which a U.S. corporation and its foreign subsidiary in 
another country, like Bermuda, exchange ownership shares. As a result of the exchange, the 
U.S. company becomes the U.S. subsidiary of a Bermudian corporation. There is no change in 
the control of the corporation, only its place of incorporation. This is colloquially referred to 
as a naked inversion. Such inversions enjoyed a short period of popularity in the late 1990s and 
early 2000s (Ingersoll Rand, Tyco, and Foster Wheeler among others successfully reincorpo-
rated outside the U.S.), but after one particularly tumultuous attempt—that of Stanley Works 
in 2002, which was not completed—the U.S. passed the American Jobs Creation Act (AJCA) 
of 2004 which altered the rules governing inversions in two important ways:
First, if the new foreign parent corporation is still 80% or more owned and controlled by 
the former parent company’s stockholders, the company would continue to be treated as a 
domestic or U.S. incorporated company. This means that it would continue to be taxed on its 
worldwide income, and its U.S. “subsidiary” would be treated as its effective parent company. 
This is referred to as the 80% rule.
Second, if the new foreign parent corporation is still at least 60% controlled by former 
parent company shareholders, but less than 80%, the new company is not allowed any tax 
credits on gains (toll taxes) on the legal transfer of assets from the old company to the new. 
This made many naked inversions financially unattractive even when there was a substantial 
change in ownership structure.
Today there are three basic types of corporate inversions in use: (1) the substantial busi-
ness presence; (2) merger with a larger foreign firm; and (3) merger with a smaller foreign firm.
Substantial Business Presence
The AJCA elements addressing corporate inversions are specifically structured to stop cor-
porate inversions undertaken purely for tax reduction purposes. The Act, however, does not 
hinder inversions when the re-incorporation takes place in a country in which the company 
does indeed have a “substantial business presence,” defined as the company having 25% of its 
assets, income, and employees in the country to which it is moving. This will, therefore, rarely 
include a traditional tax haven.

440
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
Merger with Larger Foreign Firm
The second major form of inversion is when a U.S. company is merged with a large foreign firm 
and the new combined entity is incorporated in the foreign country. The added stipulation is 
that the previous U.S. ownership must have a minority position (less than 50% ownership) in 
the new combined entity. One high-profile example of this was the combination of two major 
deep-water oil drilling firms, Pride (U.S.) with Ensco (U.K.) in 2011.
Merger with Smaller Foreign Firm
The third form of corporate inversion is when a U.S. corporation merges with a smaller foreign 
firm, often one incorporated in Ireland, the United Kingdom, or Luxembourg. The control 
of the newly created company remains with the previous U.S. stockholders, so it does not 
fulfill the 80% rule. However, because the new corporate home is still often a low-tax juris-
diction, the ability of the U.S. to impose worldwide tax principles to the new firm is limited. 
Combining Easton (U.S.) and Cooper Industries (Ireland) in 2012, thereby creating a new Irish 
corporation, is one such example.
The rapid evolution of corporate inversions for U.S.-based multinationals over the past 
20 years has heightened the awareness of the relatively high U.S. corporate tax rates, includ-
ing its worldwide regime, and corporate concerns over global competitiveness. That more 
inversions are resulting in movements of newly merged incorporations to other major devel-
oped countries like Ireland, and not to tax havens like Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, or the 
Bahamas, has increased tensions over worldwide treaty shopping and political debate over a 
corporate race to the bottom of the corporate tax environment. The merger between Applied 
Materials (U.S.) and Tokyo Electron (Japan) in 2013, in which the two merged and reincorpo-
rated in the Netherlands, is one such complex example. The continuing concern is reflected in 
the words of Senator Charles E. Grassley, ranking member of the U.S. Senate Committee on 
Finance who noted in 2002, “These expropriations aren’t illegal. But they’re sure immoral.”
Summary Points
■
■
Nations structure their tax systems along one of two 
basic approaches: the worldwide approach or the ter-
ritorial approach. Both approaches are attempts to 
determine which firms and which incomes, foreign or 
domestic by incorporation and origin, are subject to the 
taxation of host-country tax authorities.
■
■
Tax treaties normally define whether taxes are to 
be imposed on income earned in one country by the 
nationals of another, and if so, how. Tax treaties are 
bilateral, with the two signatories specifying what rates 
are applicable to which types of income between the 
two countries.
■
■
Transfer pricing is the pricing of goods, services, and 
technology between related companies. High- or low-
transfer prices have an effect on income taxes, fund 
positioning, managerial incentives and evaluation, and 
joint venture partners.
■
■
The U.S. differentiates foreign source income from 
domestic source income. Each is taxed separately, and 
tax deficits/credits in one category may not be used 
against deficits/credits in the other category.
■
■
If a U.S.-based MNE receives income from a foreign 
country that imposes higher corporate income taxes 
than does the United States, total creditable taxes will 
exceed U.S. taxes on that foreign income, resulting in 
excess foreign tax credits.
■
■
MNEs have foreign subsidiaries that act as tax havens 
for corporate funds awaiting reinvestment or repatria-
tion. Tax havens are typically located in countries that 
have a low corporate tax rate, a stable currency, facilities 
to support financial services, and a stable government.
■
■
Many U.S.-based companies have used corporate inver-
sions in an effort to reduce their effective tax rates by 
re-incorporating offshore in lower tax environments. An 
alternative to a corporate inversion is acquiring a firm 
incorporated within one of these low-tax environments, 
and then adopting its incorporation for the new com-
bined company.

441
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
Apple does not use tax gimmicks. Apple does not move 
its intellectual property into offshore tax havens and use 
it to sell products back into the U.S. in order to avoid 
U.S. tax; it does not use revolving loans from foreign 
subsidiaries to fund its domestic operations; it does not 
hold money on a Caribbean island; and it does not have 
a bank account in the Cayman Islands. Apple has sub-
stantial foreign cash because it sells the majority of its 
products outside the U.S.
—Apple CEO Tim Cook, in testimony before 
the U.S. Senate Permanent Subcommittee on 
Investigations, 2013.
Life—or at least your public reputation—is difficult to 
manage when you are possibly the world’s largest and 
most profitable company, and you are constantly criticized 
for not paying enough in taxes. Such is the angst at Apple. 
Apple has engineered one of the more aggressive ­tax-saving 
global tax strategies in global business.
Global Operations
Apple is in many ways organized like any other large 
multinational company. It is headquartered in Cupertino, 
California, and is a U.S. incorporated company—Apple, 
Inc. It is here, as noted in Exhibit A, that essentially all 
of its global research and development is conducted, 
and therefore its intellectual property created. Although 
Apple does use contract manufacturers for most of its 
product construction and assembly (primarily in China), it 
does manufacture all of its A5 series of ­microprocessors—
the self-described engine of Apple products—at its 
Apple’s Global iTax Strategy1
Mini-Case
1Copyright © 2015 Thunderbird School of Global Management. All rights reserved. This case was prepared by Professor Michael H. 
Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only and not to indicate either effective or ineffective management.
Apple R&D
Cupertino, CA
Apple Sales International
(ASI)
Ireland/No tax residence *
Apple Operations Europe
(AOE)
Ireland/No tax residence *
Contract
Manufacturers
(China)
Product
Payment
(e.g., $200)
Apple Retail Belgium
Apple Retail France
Apple Retail Germany
Apple Retail Italy
Apple Retail Netherlands
Apple Retail Spain
Apple Retail Switzerland
Apple Retail U.K.
Product
Approximately 99% of Apple’s R&D is conducted in Cupertino, California. All micro-processors
used in all Apple products globally are manufactured in Austin, Texas. Apple then uses contract
manufacturers, mostly in China, to produce their products, which are then shipped directly to
Apple distributors in the Americas, Europe (ADI), and Singapore.
All of Apple’s global sales outside the U.S.
are booked through ASI in Ireland. Since it
receives much higher prices on product
than it pays for the goods, large proﬁts are
positioned in ASI. It then pays its proﬁts as
dividends to its Irish parent company.
Product
Payment
(e.g., $400)
Dividends
(parent company)
Apple Distribution International
(ADI)
Ireland/Ireland *
* Country of incorporation/tax residence
Exhibit A
 Apple’s International Product Value Stream

442
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
the United States and Apple Sales International (ASI) of 
­Ireland. ASI is responsible for the sale of all Apple prod-
ucts in Europe, the Middle East, Asia, Africa, India, and 
the Pacific.
The key to understanding both the structure and func-
tion of Apple’s tax strategy is the incorporation of its major 
foreign affiliate holding companies—AOI, AOE, ASI, and 
ADI, and Apple Retail Europe—in Ireland. Ireland has a 
low (by global standards) statutory corporate income tax 
rate of 12%. Apple, however, has negotiated a lower rate 
with the Irish government, at just less than 2%, since 2003.3 
This is accomplished, according to Apple, by the way the 
Irish government has chosen to calculate Apple’s taxable 
income.
As illustrated in Exhibit B, Apple Operations Inter-
national (AOI) is the single legal entity which owns and 
controls all of Apple’s activities outside the Americas. 
AOI itself is testimony to the global and digital structure 
of global enterprise management today.
■
■
AOI was incorporated in Ireland in 1980. Apple, 
however, has been unable to locate any documents 
that explain why Ireland was chosen as its place of 
incorporation.
■
■
AOI has not declared a tax residency in Ireland or any 
other country.
■
■
As of 2013, AOI had not paid any corporate income 
taxes to any government anywhere in the world, in the 
previous 5 years.
■
■
AOI has no actual physical presence in Dublin or Ire-
land, and it has no Irish employees.
■
■
AOI has three directors, all of whom work for other 
Apple companies while serving as directors of AOI. 
Two reside in California, one in Ireland.
■
■
AOI’s assets are managed by Braeburn Capital, an 
Apple subsidiary located in Nevada, U.S.A.
■
■
AOI’s actual asset holdings are held in bank accounts 
in New York.
■
■
AOI’s general ledger is managed at Apple’s U.S. 
shared service center in Austin, Texas.
■
■
Apple’s tax director, in testimony before the U.S. 
Senate subcommittee, stated that he believed AOI’s 
functions were managed and controlled in the United 
States.
■
■
From 2009 to 2011, roughly 30% of Apple’s total 
worldwide net income came from AOI.
production facility in Austin, Texas. Manufactured final 
product is then shipped directly to Apple’s distribution 
centers globally.
All of Apple’s sales outside the Americas are booked 
through its Irish subsidiary ASI, Apple Sales International. 
ASI purchases the product from the contract manufactur-
ers, taking title to the goods, and then resells to its inter-
national distribution company, ADI, Apple Distribution 
International. As demonstrated in Exhibit A, ASI then 
enjoys large profitability on the resale. ASI, as is typical 
of much of global commerce today, may take legal title 
to the goods but the goods never physically pass through 
Ireland, being shipped directly from Chinese manufactur-
ers to the distribution centers for in-country sales, like all 
of the retail companies listed for Europe in Exhibit A. ASI 
then pays out all of its profits, in the form of dividends, to 
Apple Operations Europe (AOE), its parent company, also 
in Ireland.
Apple’s tax management is then based on a series of 
structures it has established, beginning with the principle 
of a cost sharing agreement on the development and owner-
ship of intellectual property.
Cost Sharing
Apple has a cost sharing agreement between Apple Inc. and 
ASI, an agreement between the parent company and the 
Irish subsidiary. The two units agree to share in the cost of 
development of Apple’s products, and in turn to share the 
economic rights of any resulting intellectual property. For 
example, in 2011, Apple’s worldwide spending on research 
and development (approximately 95% of which occurred 
in Cupertino, California) totaled $2.4 billion. The two units, 
Apple Inc. and ASI, then split these costs on the basis 
of Apple’s global sales in that year, roughly 40% in the 
Americas (Apple Inc. paid $1.0 billion) and 60% offshore 
(ASI paid $1.4 billion of the expenses).
This sharing of cost and subsequent intellectual prop-
erty ownership is central to Apple’s tax strategy. As a result, 
the profits accruing to ASI based on its ownership of intel-
lectual property are not immediately taxable by U.S. tax 
authorities because of its Irish incorporation. Theoreti-
cally, ASI or AOE should then be paying taxes in Ireland. 
Theoretically.
Apple’s Global Structure
Apple’s global structure is summarized in Exhibit B.2 
Apple’s global sales are divided between Apple Inc. in 
3This is based on data presented by Apple in 2013, most of which focused on the 2008–2011 period.
2Memorandum of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Re: Offshore Profit Shifting and the U.S. Tax Code—Part 2  
(Apple Inc.), U.S. Senate, May 21, 2013.

443
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
Apple Sales International (ASI), like AOI, has no tax 
residency anywhere. Exhibit C indicates that ASI paid just 
$10 million (million with an “m”) in taxes on more than 
$22 billion (billion with a “b”) in pre-tax earnings in 2011. 
That is an effective tax rate of less than 0.05%. For the 
2009–2011 period, ASI had pre-tax earnings of $38 bil-
lion and paid a total of $21 million in taxes. Curiously, 
although ASI is not a tax resident of Ireland, it has filed 
corporate tax returns in Ireland, which is why we have 
these numbers.
Whether businesses like AOI or ASI are really, in any 
functional form, separate from Apple Inc. continues to 
be debated. In 2008, Apple Inc., ASI, and AOE signed an 
amended cost sharing agreement. The signatory for AOE 
was Apple’s Treasurer. The signatory for ASI was Tim 
Cook, Apple’s COO. The signatory for AOE was Apple’s 
AOI is clearly a legal entity of a digital construction, but 
its lack of a tax residence anywhere on earth is obviously 
curious.4
Tax Residency
Under Irish law, Irish tax residency requires that the com-
pany be either managed or controlled in Ireland. Obviously, 
by the details reported above, AOI is not. The United States 
requirements for tax residency require that the business be 
incorporated in the United States, which AOI is not. So, in 
Apple’s opinion, AOI has no tax residency anywhere on 
earth, and the company has therefore never established its 
tax residency. Apple executives, when asked in a U.S. Sen-
ate subcommittee hearing whether AOI was actually man-
aged and controlled from the U.S., answered that “. . . it had 
not determined the answer to that question.”
Apple, Inc.
(United States)
* Country of incorporation/tax residence
Source: Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, May 2013.
Apple Distribution International
(ADI)
Ireland/Ireland
Apple Operations Europe
(AOE)
Ireland/No tax residence
Apple Retail Holding Europe
Ireland/Ireland
Apple Sales International
(ASI)
Ireland/No tax residence
Apple South Asia Pte, Ltd
(Apple Singapore)
Singapore/Singapore
Apple Asia In-Country
Distributors
Apple Retail Belgium
Apple Retail France
Apple Retail Germany
Apple Retail Italy
Apple Retail Netherlands
Apple Retail Spain
Apple Retail Switzerland
Apple Retail U.K.
Apple Operations International
(AOI)
Ireland/No tax residence
Exhibit B
 Apple’s Global Organizational Structure
4Apple reorganized its Irish employees in 2012. Apple’s 2,455 employees were redistributed across five different Irish business units, the 
majority of which were now assigned to ADI. ASI’s employment in Ireland expanded from zero to 250 employees.

444
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
all being disregarded entities, disappear for tax purposes 
because U.S. tax regulations do not recognize payments 
made between units within a single entity. The U.S. tax 
authorities therefore evaluate only AOI, and its income 
is considered active as it buys and resells Apple products 
globally. As such, it is allowed to defer U.S. taxes on its 
profits until that time of repatriation—if ever.6
Apple’s Tax Payments
Apple is likely the largest corporate income tax payer in 
the US, having paid nearly $6 billion in taxes to the US 
Treasury in FY2012. These payments account for $1 in 
every $40 in corporate income tax the US Treasury col-
lected last year. The Company’s FY2012 total US federal 
cash effective tax rate was approximately 30.5%. The 
Company expects to pay over $7 billion in taxes to the 
US Treasury in its current fiscal year. In accordance with 
US law, Apple pays US corporate income taxes on the 
profits earned from its sales in the US and on the invest-
ment income of its Controlled Foreign Corporations 
(“CFCs”), including the investment earnings of its Irish 
subsidiary, Apple Operations International (“AOI”).
—Testimony of Apple Inc. before the 
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, 
U.S. Senate, May 21, 2013.
Apple does indeed pay a lot of taxes. As illustrated by 
Exhibit D, in 2011 alone, according to its 10-K filing, 
Apple had total taxes payable for the year of $8.283 bil-
lion. Yet its effective tax rate in the United States was a 
combined 22.4% Federal plus State, and its effective tax 
CFO. One can only believe negotiations were brief and 
efficient.
According to the United States’ worldwide tax struc-
ture, foreign subsidiaries of U.S. companies have the right 
to defer payment of U.S. taxes on active income (income 
derived from the active conduct of manufacturing and 
sales and services provided). If, however, the income is 
passive—such as interest, royalties, dividends—it is sub-
ject to immediate taxation by U.S. tax authorities under 
Subpart F income rules as applied to controlled foreign 
corporations (CFCs). Therefore, according to statute, the 
income earned by ASI and AOI, which is by all indication 
passive income, should become immediately taxable in the 
U.S. by tax authorities.5 In fact, between 2009 and 2012, 
AOI reportedly received $29.9 billion in income from its 
lower-tier subsidiaries in dividends. These dividends would 
ordinarily be immediately taxable by U.S. tax authorities 
according to Subpart F statutes.
Apple, however, has avoided this tax exposure through 
the use of what is known as check-the-box. In 1996, in an 
attempt to simplify the U.S. tax code, the Treasury Depart-
ment adopted a new practice that allowed companies to 
“check-the-box” on a tax form to describe a foreign cor-
porate entity (like ASI or AOE) for tax purposes as irrel-
evant—a so-called disregarded entity. This simplified the 
tax filings for multinational companies dramatically. This 
disregarded entity status allowed U.S.-based multinationals 
like Apple to set up high-volume profitability subsidiar-
ies in low tax jurisdictions such as Ireland or Luxembourg. 
For Apple, that meant that all of the companies shown in 
Exhibit B below Apple Operations International (AOI), 
Exhibit C
Global Taxes Paid by Apple Sales International (ASI)
ASI (Ireland)
2009
2010
2011
Total
Pre-Tax Earnings
$4 billion
$12 billion
$22 billion
$38 billion
Global Tax
$4 million
$7 million
$10 million
$21 million
Tax Rate
0.10%
0.06%
0.05%
0.06%
Source: Apple Consolidating Financial Statements, APL-PSI-000130-232 (sealed exhibit).
5Theoretically, Apple had two types of income that should have been subject to Subpart F statutes: 1) foreign base company sales 
income (FBCS), the sales income that Apple had assigned to ASI in Ireland for no reason but consolidation and positioning of profits; 
and 2) foreign personal holding company income (FPHC), the passive income earned in Ireland from dividends, royalties, fees, and 
interest.
6After the passage of check-the-box legislation U.S. tax authorities nearly immediately realized their mistake. Tax authorities later 
admitted that the statutory changes were meant for corporations operating within the territorial boundaries of the United States, and 
they had not even evaluated how they might affect international operations and tax liability. Although tax authorities have repeatedly 
tried to get check-the-box repealed, they have been unable to, primarily because of political opposition.

445
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
and implements a reasonable tax on foreign ­earnings 
that allows free movement of capital back to the US. 
Apple believes such comprehensive reform would stim-
ulate economic growth. Apple supports this plan even 
though it would likely result in Apple paying more US 
corporate tax.
—Testimony of Apple Inc. before the 
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, 
U.S. Senate, May 21, 2013.
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 What is the single most important element of Apple’s 
global tax strategy?
2.	 Why do most of Apple’s businesses in Ireland not have 
a country of tax residence?
3.	 Why does Apple Operations International (AOI)—
the Irish subsidiary that captures most of Apple’s 
global profits outside the Americas—not pay taxes to 
Ireland or the United States?
rate on profits earned outside the U.S. was 1.8%. Given 
that the U.S. statutory corporate income tax rate alone is 
35%, Apple’s strategy and structure seems to be working 
to reduce its taxes—globally.
One of the principles underlying worldwide taxation 
and deferral under the U.S. tax system is that company 
operations and profits earned in other countries are pay-
ing taxes in those countries. The deferral provision, how-
ever, was suspended with the creation of Subpart F income 
statutes in 1962 to deter the use of tax havens to position 
offshore profits and permanently defer paying corporate 
income taxes. At this point one must conclude that the 
complexity of global business combined with changes made 
to the U.S. tax code over the past 50 years have undermined 
what was originally intended.
Apple supports comprehensive reform of the US cor-
porate tax system. The Company supports a dramatic 
simplification of the corporate tax system that is revenue 
neutral, eliminates all tax expenditures, lowers tax rates 
Tax Liability
Federal
State
Foreign
Total
Current
$ 3,884
$ 762
$ 769
Deferred
2,998
37
(167)
Net
$ 6,882
$ 799
$ 602
$8,283
Effective Tax Rate
20.1%
2.3%
1.8%
24.2%
Source: Apple 2011 Annual Report (Form 10-K).
Exhibit D
Apple’s Provisions for U.S. Taxes—2011
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Primary Objective. What is the primary objective of 
multinational tax planning?
2.	 Tax Morality. What is meant by the term “tax moral-
ity”? If for example, your company has a subsidiary 
in Russia where some believe tax evasion is a fine art, 
should you comply with Russian tax laws or violate the 
laws as do your local competitors?
3.	 Tax Neutrality. What is tax neutrality? What is the 
difference between domestic neutrality and foreign 
neutrality?
4.	 Worldwide versus Territorial. What is the difference 
between the worldwide and territorial approaches to 
taxation?
5.	 Direct or Indirect. What is the difference between a 
direct tax and an indirect tax?
6.	 Tax Deferral. What is meant by tax deferral in 
the U.S. system of taxation? What is the deferral  
privilege?
7.	 Value-Added Tax. What is a value-added tax, and how 
does it differ from an income tax?
8.	 Withholding Tax. What is a withholding tax and why 
do governments impose them?

446
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
17.	 Income Tax Effect. What is the income tax effect, and 
how may a multinational firm alter transfer prices as 
a result of the income tax effect?
18.	 Correct Pricing. What is Section 482 of the U.S. Inter-
nal Revenue Code and what guidelines does it recom-
mend when setting transfer prices?
19.	 Cross-Crediting. Define cross-crediting and explain 
why it may or may not be consistent with a worldwide 
tax regime.
20.	 Check-the-Box. Explain how the check-the-box regu-
latory change altered the effectiveness of Subpart F 
income regulations.
21.	 Measuring Managerial Performance. What role does 
transfer pricing have within multinational companies 
when measuring management performance? How can 
transfer pricing practices within a firm conflict with 
performance measurement?
22.	 Tax Haven Subsidiary. What is a tax haven? Is it the 
same thing as an international offshore financial cen-
ter? What is the purpose of a multinational creating 
and operating a financial subsidiary in a tax haven?
23.	 Corporate Inversion. What is a corporate inversion, 
and why do many U.S. corporations want to pursue 
it although it is highly criticized by public and private 
parties alike?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Avon’s Foreign-Source Income. Avon is a U.S.-based 
direct seller of a wide array of products. Avon mar-
kets leading beauty, fashion, and home products in 
more than 100 countries. As part of the training in 
its corporate treasury offices, it has its interns build 
a spreadsheet analysis of the following hypotheti-
cal subsidiary earnings/distribution analysis. Use the 
tax analysis ­presented in Exhibit 15.7 for your basic 
structure.
Baseline Values
Case 1
Case 2
a. Foreign corporate income tax rate
28%
45%
b. U.S. corporate income tax rate
35%
35%
c. Foreign dividend withholding tax rate
15%
0%
d. U.S. ownership in foreign firm
100%
100%
e. Dividend payout rate of foreign firm
100%
100%
9.	 Tax Treaty. What is usually included within a tax 
treaty?
10.	 Active versus Passive. What do the terms active and 
passive mean in the context of U.S. taxation of foreign 
source income?
11.	 Tax Types. Taxes are classified based on whether they 
are applied directly to income, called direct taxes, or 
to some other measurable performance characteristic 
of the firm, called indirect taxes. Identify each of the 
following as a “direct tax,” an “indirect tax,” or some-
thing else:
a.	 Corporate income tax paid by a Japanese subsid-
iary on its operating income
b.	 Royalties paid to Saudi Arabia for oil extracted and 
shipped to world markets
c.	 Interest received by a U.S. parent on bank deposits 
held in London
d.	 Interest received by a U.S. parent on a loan to a 
subsidiary in Mexico
e.	 Principal repayment received by U.S. parent from 
Belgium on a loan to a wholly owned subsidiary 
in Belgium
f.	 Excise tax paid on cigarettes manufactured and 
sold within the United States
g.	 Property taxes paid on the corporate headquarters 
building in Seattle
h.	 A direct contribution to the International Commit-
tee of the Red Cross for refugee relief
i.	 Deferred income tax, shown as a deduction on the 
U.S. parent’s consolidated income tax
j.	 Withholding taxes withheld by Germany on 
dividends paid to a United Kingdom parent 
corporation
12.	 Foreign Tax Credit. What is a foreign tax credit? Why 
do countries give credit for taxes paid on foreign 
source income?
13.	 Earnings Stripping. What is earnings stripping, and 
what are some examples of how multinational firms 
pursue it?
14.	 Controlled Foreign Corporation. What is a controlled 
foreign corporation and what is its significance in 
global tax management?
15.	 Transfer Pricing. What is a transfer price and can a 
government regulate it? What difficulties and motives 
does a parent multinational firm face in setting trans-
fer prices?
16.	 Fund Positioning. What is fund positioning?

447
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
revising its financial policies in line with the increasing 
degree of disclosure required by firms if they wish to 
list their shares publicly in or out of Germany. The 
company’s earnings before tax (EBT) is €483,500,000.
Kraftstoff’s primary problem is that the German 
corporate income tax code applies a different income 
tax rate to income depending on whether it is retained 
(45%) or distributed to stockholders (30%).
a.	 If Kraftstoff planned to distribute 50% of its net 
income, what would be its total net income and 
total corporate tax bills?
b.	 If Kraftstoff was attempting to choose between a 
40% and 60% payout rate to stockholders, what 
arguments and values would management use in 
order to convince stockholders which of the two 
payouts is in everyone’s best interest?
4.	 Gamboa’s Tax Averaging. Gamboa, Incorporated, is 
a relatively new U.S.-based retailer of specialty fruits 
and vegetables. The firm is vertically integrated with 
fruit and vegetable-sourcing subsidiaries in Central 
America, and distribution outlets throughout the 
southeastern and northeastern regions of the United 
States. Gamboa’s two Central American subsidiaries 
are in Belize and Costa Rica.
Maria Gamboa, the daughter of the firm’s founder, 
is being groomed to take over the firm’s financial 
management in the near future. Like many firms of 
Gamboa’s size, it has not possessed a very high degree 
of sophistication in financial management simply out 
of time and cost considerations. Maria, however, has 
recently finished her MBA and is now attempting to 
put some specialized knowledge of U.S. taxation prac-
tices to work to save Gamboa money. Her first concern 
is tax averaging for foreign tax liabilities arising from 
the two Central American subsidiaries.
Costa Rican operations are slightly more profit-
able than Belize, which is particularly good since Costa 
Rica is a relatively low-tax country. Costa Rican cor-
porate taxes are a flat 30%, and there are no withhold-
ing taxes imposed on dividends paid by foreign firms 
with operations there. Belize has a higher corporate 
income tax rate, 40%, and imposes a 10% withholding 
tax on all dividends distributed to foreign investors. 
The current U.S. corporate income tax rate is 35%.
Belize
Costa Rica
Earnings before taxes
$1,000,000
$1,500,000
Corporate income tax rate
40%
30%
Dividend withholding tax rate
10%
0%
a.	 What is the total tax payment, foreign and domestic 
combined, for this income?
b.	 What is the effective tax rate paid on this income 
by the U.S.-based parent company?
c.	 What would be the total tax payment and effective 
tax rate if the foreign corporate tax rate was 45% 
and there were no withholding taxes on dividends?
d.	 What would be the total tax payment and effective 
tax rate if the income was earned by a branch of the 
U.S. corporation?
2.	 Pacific Jewel Airlines (Hong Kong). Pacific Jewel 
Airlines is a U.S.-based air freight firm with a wholly 
owned subsidiary in Hong Kong. The subsidiary, Jewel 
Hong Kong, has just completed a long-term planning 
report for the parent company in San Francisco, in 
which it has estimated the following expected earn-
ings and payout rates for the years 2011–2014.
Jewel Hong Kong Income Items (millions US$)
2011
2012
2013
2014
Earnings before 
interest and taxes 
(EBIT)
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
Less interest expenses
(800)
(1,000)
(1,200)
(1,400)
Earnings before taxes 
(EBT)
7,200
9,000
10,800
12,600
The current Hong Kong corporate tax rate on this 
category of income is 16.5%. Hong Kong imposes no 
withholding taxes on dividends remitted to U.S. inves-
tors (per the Hong Kong–United States bilateral tax 
treaty). The U.S. corporate income tax rate is 35%. 
The parent company wants to repatriate 75% of net 
income as dividends annually.
a.	 Calculate the net income available for distribu-
tion by the Hong Kong subsidiary for the years 
2011–2014.
b.	 What is the expected amount of the dividend to be 
remitted to the U.S. parent each year?
c.	 After estimating the theoretical U.S. tax liability on 
the expected dividend (what is often termed gross-up 
in the U.S.), what is the total dividend after tax, includ-
ing all Hong Kong and U.S. taxes, expected each year?
d.	 What is the effective tax rate on this foreign-
sourced income per year?
3.	 Kraftstoff of Germany. Kraftstoff is a German-based 
company that manufactures electronic fuel-injection 
carburetor assemblies for several large automobile 
companies in Germany, including Mercedes, BMW, and 
Opel. The firm, like many firms in Germany today, is 

448
CHAPTER 15    Multinational Tax Management
reposition profit in Hong Kong. It is, however, facing 
two constraints. First, the final sales price in Great 
Britain must be £20,000 or less to remain competi-
tive. Secondly, the British tax authorities—in work-
ing with Torrington Edge’s cost accounting staff—has 
established a maximum transfer price allowed (from 
Hong Kong) of £17,800. What combination of markups 
do you recommend for Torrington Edge to institute? 
What is the impact of this repositioning on consoli-
dated profits on after-tax and total tax payments?
7.	 Chinglish Dirk (C). Not to leave any potential tax 
repositioning opportunities unexplored, Torrington 
Edge wants to combine the components of Problems 
4 and 5 with a redistribution of overhead costs. If over-
head costs could be reallocated between the two units, 
but still total £5,000 per unit, and maintain a minimum 
of £1,750 per unit in Hong Kong, what is the impact of 
this repositioning on consolidated profits after-tax and 
total tax payments?
Internet Exercises
1.	 Global Taxes. Web sites like TaxWorld.org provide 
detailed insights into the conduct of business and the 
associated tax and accounting requirements of doing 
business in a variety of countries.
International Tax 
Resources
www.taxworld.org/OtherSites/
International/international.htm
2.	 International Taxpayer. The United States Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) provides detailed support and 
document requirements for international taxpayers. 
Use the IRS site to find the legal rules and regulations 
and definitions for international residents tax liabilities 
when earning income and profits in the United States.
U.S. IRS 
Taxpayer
www.irs.gov/businesses/small/
international/index.html
3.	 Official Government Tax Authorities. Tax laws are 
constantly changing, and an MNE’s tax planning 
and management processes must therefore include 
a ­continual updating of tax practices by country. Use 
the following government tax sites to address specific 
issues related to those countries:
Hong Kong’s 
ownership change to 
China
www.gov.hk/en/business/
taxes/profittax/
Ireland’s international 
financial services 
center
www.revenue.ie
a.	 If Maria Gamboa assumes a 50% payout rate from 
each subsidiary, what are the additional taxes due 
on foreign-sourced income from Belize and Costa 
Rica individually? How much in additional U.S. 
taxes would be due if Maria averaged the tax cred-
its/liabilities of the two units?
b.	 Keeping the payout rate from the Belize subsidiary 
at 50%, how should Maria change the payout rate 
of the Costa Rican subsidiary in order to most effi-
ciently manage her total foreign tax bill?
c.	 What is the minimum effective tax rate that Maria 
can achieve on her foreign sourced income?
Chinglish Dirk
Use the following company case to answer Problems 5–7.
Chinglish Dirk Company (Hong Kong) exports razor 
blades to its wholly owned parent company, Torrington 
Edge (Great Britain). Hong Kong tax rates are 16% and 
British tax rates are 30%. Chinglish calculates its profit per 
container as follows (all values in British pounds).
Constructing Transfer
(Sales) Price per Unit
Chinglish Dirk
(British pounds)
Torrington Edge
(British pounds)
Direct costs
£10,000
£16,100
Overhead
4,000
1,000
Total costs
£14,000
£17,100
Desired markup
2,100
2,565
Transfer price ­ 
(sales price)
£16,100
£19,665
Income Statement
Sales price
£16,100,000
£19,665,000
Less total costs
(14,000,000)
(17,100,000)
Taxable income
£2,100,000
£2,565,000
Less taxes
(336,000)
(769,500)
Profit, after-tax
£1,764,000
£1,795,500
5.	 Chinglish Dirk (A). Corporate management of Tor-
rington Edge is considering repositioning profits 
within the multinational company. What happens 
to the profits of Chinglish Dirk and Torrington 
Edge, and the consolidated results of both, if the 
markup at Chinglish was increased to 20% and the 
markup at Torrington was reduced to 10%? What 
is the impact of this repositioning on consolidated 
tax payments?
6.	 Chinglish Dirk (B). Encouraged by the results from 
the previous problem’s analysis, corporate man-
agement of Torrington Edge wishes to continue to 

449
Multinational Tax Management    CHAPTER 15 
Ernst and Young
www.ey.com/tax/
Deloitte & Touche
www.deloitte.com/view/en_US/
us/Services/tax/index.htm
KPMG
www.kpmg.com
Price Waterhouse 
Coopers
www.pwc.com/us/en/tax-
services/index.jhtml
Ernst & Young
www.eyi.com
4.	 Tax Practices for International Business. Many of the 
major accounting firms provide online ­information 
and advisory services for international business 
­activities as related to tax and accounting practices. 
Use the following Web sites to find current informa-
tion on tax law changes and practices.

Chapter    16
International Trade 
Finance
What the wise man does in the beginning, the fool does in the end.
—Niccolò Machiavelli.
The purpose of this chapter is to explain how international trade—exports and imports—is 
financed. The content is of direct practical relevance to both domestic firms—that simply 
import and export—and to multinational firms—that trade with related and unrelated entities.
The chapter opens with an explanation of the types of trade relationships that exist and 
a discussion of the trade dilemma: exporters want to be paid before they export and import-
ers do not want to pay until they receive the goods. The next section then describes the key 
elements of an international trade transaction. This is followed by an exploration of the three 
key trade documents—the letter of credit, draft, and bill of lading—and how they are used to 
manage the various risks of international import and export. The fourth section of the chap-
ter describes government export financing programs, followed by a detailed examination of 
alternative trade financing vehicles and instruments. The sixth and final section explores the 
use of forfaiting for the financing of long-term receivables. The Mini-Case at the end of the 
chapter, Crosswell International and Brazil, illustrates how an export requires the integration 
of management, marketing, and finance.
The Trade Relationship
As we saw in Chapter 1, the first significant global activity by a domestic firm is the importing 
and exporting of goods and services. The purpose of this chapter is to analyze the interna-
tional trade phase for a domestic firm, which begins to import goods and services from foreign 
suppliers and to export to foreign buyers. In the case of Ganado, this trade phase began with 
suppliers from Mexico and buyers from Canada.
Learning Objectives
■
■
Learn how international trade alters both the supply chain and general value chain 
of the firm
■
■
Discover the key elements of an import or export business transaction system
■
■
Explore how the three key documents in import/export combine to finance both the 
transaction and to manage its risks
■
■
Describe the variety of government programs to help finance exports
■
■
Examine the major trade financing alternatives
■
■
Evaluate the use of forfaiting for medium- to long-term trade financing
450

451
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16 
Trade financing shares a number of common characteristics with the traditional value chain 
activities conducted by all firms. All companies must search out suppliers for the many goods 
and services required as inputs to their own goods production or service provision processes. 
Ganado’s Purchasing and Procurement Department must determine whether each potential 
supplier is capable of producing the product to required quality specifications and in a timely 
and reliable manner, and whether the supplier will work with Ganado in the ongoing process of 
product and process improvement for continued competitiveness. All must be at an acceptable 
price and payment terms. As illustrated in Exhibit 16.1, this same series of issues applies to poten-
tial customers, as their continued business is equally critical to Ganado’s operations and success.
Understanding the nature of the relationship between the exporter and the importer 
is critical to understanding the methods for import-export financing utilized in industry. 
Exhibit 16.2 provides an overview of the three categories of import/export relationships: 
unaffiliated unknown, unaffiliated known, and affiliated.
■
■
A foreign importer with which Ganado has not previously conducted business would 
be considered unaffiliated unknown. In this case, the two parties would need to enter 
into a detailed sales contract, outlining the specific responsibilities and expectations 
of the business agreement. Ganado would also need to seek out protection against 
the possibility that the importer would not make payment in full in a timely fashion.
■
■
A foreign importer with which Ganado has previously conducted business success-
fully would be considered unaffiliated known. In this case, the two parties may still 
enter into a detailed sales contract, but specific terms and shipments or provisions 
of services may be significantly looser in definition. Depending on the depth of the 
relationship, Ganado may seek some third-party protection against noncompletion 
or conduct the business on an open account basis.
■
■
A foreign importer, which is a subsidiary business unit of Ganado, such as Ganado 
Brazil, would be an affiliated party (sometimes referred to as intrafirm trade). Because 
both businesses are part of the same MNE, the most common practice would be to 
conduct the trade transaction without a contract or protection against nonpayment. 
This is not, however, always the case. In a variety of international business situations 
it may still be in Ganado’s best interest to detail the conditions for the business trans-
action, and to possibly protect against any political or country-based interruption to 
the completion of the trade transaction.
Domestic Buyer
(United States)
Canadian Buyer
(Calgary, Alberta)
Goods and services ﬂow from
supplier to Ganado to buyer
Goods and services ﬂow from
supplier to Ganado to buyer
US$
Mexican pesos
Canadian $
US$
Ganado U.S.
(Los Angeles)
Domestic Supplier
(United States)
Mexican Supplier
(Monterey, Mexico)
Exhibit 16.1
Financing Trade: The Flow of Goods and Funds

452
CHAPTER 16    International Trade Finance
Ganado
A new customer with which
Ganado has no historical
business relationship
Requires:
 A contract
 Protection against
 nonpayment
Requires:
 A contract
 Possibly some protection
 against nonpayment
Requires:
 No contract
 No protection against
 nonpayment
A long-term customer with which
there is an established relationship
of trust and performance
A foreign subsidiary
or business unit of
Ganado
Unaﬃliated
Unknown Party
Unaﬃliated
Known Party
Aﬃliated
Party
Importer is. . .
1.                
2. 
1.          
2. 
1. 
2. 
Exhibit 16.2
Alternative International Trade Relationships
International trade must work around a fundamental dilemma. Imagine an importer and 
an exporter who would like to do business with one another. Because of the distance between 
the two, it is not possible to simultaneously hand over goods with one hand and accept pay-
ment with the other. The importer would prefer the arrangement at the top of Exhibit 16.3, 
while the exporter’s preference is shown at the bottom.
Importer
Exporter
1. Exporter ships the goods.
2. Importer pays after goods received.
Importer Preference
Importer
Exporter
1. Importer pays for goods.
2. Exporter ships the goods after being paid.
Exporter Preference
Exhibit 16.3
The Mechanics of Import and Export

453
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16 
The fundamental dilemma of being reluctant to trust a stranger in a foreign land is resolved 
by using a highly respected bank as intermediary. A greatly simplified view is described in 
Exhibit 16.4. In this simplified view, the importer obtains the bank’s promise to pay on its 
behalf, knowing that the exporter will trust the bank. The bank’s promise to pay is called a letter 
of credit (L/C). The exporter ships the merchandise to the importer’s country. Title to the mer-
chandise is given to the bank on a document called a bill of lading (B/L). The exporter asks the 
bank to pay for the goods, and the bank does so. The document requesting payment is called a 
sight draft. The bank, having paid for the goods, now passes title to the importer, whom the bank 
trusts. At that time or later, depending on their agreement, the importer reimburses the bank.
Financial managers of MNEs must understand these three basic documents, because their 
firms will often trade with unaffiliated parties, and also because the system of documentation 
provides a source of short-term capital that can be drawn upon even when shipments are to 
sister subsidiaries.
Benefits of the System
The three key documents and their interaction will be discussed in detail later in this chapter. 
They constitute a system developed and modified over centuries to protect both importer 
and exporter from the risk of noncompletion and foreign exchange risk, as well as to provide 
a means of financing.
Protection against Risk of Noncompletion
As stated above, once importer and exporter agree on terms, the seller usually prefers to 
maintain legal title to the goods until paid, or at least until assured of payment. The buyer, 
however, will be reluctant to pay before receiving the goods, or at least before receiving title 
to them. Each wants assurance that the other party will complete its portion of the transaction. 
The letter of credit, bill of lading, and sight draft are part of a system carefully constructed to 
determine who bears the financial loss if one of the parties defaults at any time.
Importer
Bank
1. Importer obtains bank’s promise
to pay on importer’s behalf.
2. Bank promises exporter
to pay on behalf of importer.
6. Importer pays the bank.
5. Bank “gives” merchandise
to the importer.
4. Bank pays the exporter.
3. Exporter ships “to the bank”
trusting bank’s promise.
Exporter
Exhibit 16.4
The Bank as the Import/Export Intermediary

454
CHAPTER 16    International Trade Finance
Protection against Foreign Exchange Risk
In international trade, foreign exchange risk arises from transaction exposure. If the transac-
tion requires payment in the exporter’s currency, the importer carries the foreign exchange 
risk. If the transaction calls for payment in the importer’s currency, the exporter has the foreign 
exchange risk.
Transaction exposure can be hedged by the techniques described in Chapter 10, but 
in order to hedge, the exposed party must be certain that payment of a specified amount 
will be made on or near a particular date. The three key documents described in this chap-
ter ensure both amount and time of payment and thus lay the groundwork for effective 
hedging.
The risk of noncompletion and foreign exchange risk are most important when the inter-
national trade is episodic, with no outstanding agreement for recurring shipments and no 
sustained relationship between buyer and seller. When the import/export relationship is of a 
recurring nature, as in the case of manufactured goods shipped weekly or monthly to a final 
assembly or retail outlet in another country, and when the relationship is between countries 
whose currencies are considered strong, the exporter may well bill the importer on open 
account after a normal credit check.
Financing the Trade
Most international trade involves a time lag during which funds are tied up while the merchan-
dise is in transit. Once the risks of noncompletion and of exchange rate changes are disposed 
of, banks are willing to finance goods in transit. A bank can finance goods in transit, as well as 
goods held for sale, based on the key documents, without exposing itself to questions about 
the quality of merchandise or aspects of shipment.
Noncompletion Risks
In order to understand the risks associated with international trade transactions, it is helpful to 
understand the sequence of events in any such transaction. Exhibit 16.5 illustrates, in principle, 
the series of events associated with a single export transaction.
From a financial management perspective, the two primary risks associated with an inter-
national trade transaction are currency risk (discussed previously in Chapter 10) and risk of 
noncompletion. Exhibit 16.5 illustrates the traditional business problem of credit management: 
the exporter quotes a price, finalizes a contract, and ships the goods, losing physical control 
over the goods based on trust of the buyer or the promise of a bank to pay based on documents 
presented. The risk of default on the part of the importer—risk of noncompletion—is present 
as soon as the financing period begins, as depicted in Exhibit 16.5.
In many cases, the initial task of analyzing the creditworthiness of foreign customers is 
similar to procedures for analyzing domestic customers. If Ganado has had no experience with 
a foreign customer but the customer is a large, well-known firm in its home country, Ganado 
may simply ask for a bank credit report on that firm. Ganado may also talk to other firms 
that have had dealings with the foreign customer. If these investigations show the foreign 
customer (and country) to be completely trustworthy, Ganado would likely ship to them on 
open account, with a credit limit, just as they would for a domestic customer. This is the least 
costly method of handling exports because there are no heavy documentation or bank charges. 
However, before a regular trading relationship has been established with a new or unknown 
firm, Ganado must face the possibility of nonpayment for its exports or noncompletion of its 
imports. The risk of nonpayment can be eliminated through the use of a letter of credit issued 
by a creditworthy bank.

455
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16 
Key Documents
The three key documents described in the following pages—the letter of credit, draft, and bill 
of lading—constitute a system developed and modified over centuries to protect both importer 
and exporter from the risk of noncompletion of the trade transaction as well as to provide a 
means of financing. These three key trade documents are part of a carefully constructed system 
to determine who bears the financial loss if one of the parties defaults at any time.
Letter of Credit (L/C)
A letter of credit (L/C) is a document issued by a bank at the request of an importer (the 
applicant/buyer) by which the bank promises to pay an exporter (the beneficiary of the letter) 
upon presentation of documents specified in the L/C. An L/C reduces the risk of noncomple-
tion, because the bank agrees to pay against documents rather than actual merchandise. The 
relationship between the three parties can be seen in Exhibit 16.6.
A beneficiary (exporter) and an applicant (importer) agree on a transaction and the 
importer then applies to its local bank for the issuance of an L/C. The importer’s bank issues 
an L/C and cuts a sales contract based on its assessment of the importer’s creditworthiness, or 
the bank might require a cash deposit or other collateral from the importer in advance. The 
importer’s bank will want to know the type of transaction, the amount of money involved, and 
what documents must accompany the draft that will be drawn against the L/C.
If the importer’s bank is satisfied with the credit standing of the applicant, it will issue an 
L/C guaranteeing to pay for the merchandise if shipped in accordance with the instructions 
and conditions contained in the L/C.
The essence of an L/C is the promise of the issuing bank to pay against specified documents 
that must accompany any draft drawn against the credit. The L/C is not a guarantee of the 
underlying commercial transaction. Indeed, the L/C is a separate transaction from any sales or 
Time and Events
Goods
are 
shipped
Export
contract
signed
Price
quote
request
Financing Period
Documents Are
Presented
Backlog
Negotiations
Documents
are
accepted
Goods
are 
received
Cash 
settlement
of the 
transaction
Exhibit 16.5
The Trade Transaction Time Line and Structure

456
CHAPTER 16    International Trade Finance
other contracts on which it might be based. To constitute a true L/C transaction, the following 
elements must be present with respect to the issuing bank:
1.	 The issuing bank must receive a fee or other valid business consideration for issuing 
the L/C.
2.	 The bank’s L/C must contain a specified expiration date or a definite maturity.
3.	 The bank’s commitment must have a stated maximum amount of money.
4.	 The bank’s obligation to pay must arise only on the presentation of specific documents, 
and the bank must not be called on to determine disputed questions of fact or law.
5.	 The bank’s customer must have an unqualified obligation to reimburse the bank on 
the same condition as the bank has paid.
Commercial letters of credit are also classified based on whether they are revocable and 
confirmed.
■
■
Irrevocable versus Revocable.   An irrevocable L/C obligates the issuing bank to 
honor drafts drawn in compliance with the credit and can be neither canceled nor 
modified without the consent of all parties, including in particular the beneficiary 
(exporter). A revocable L/C can be canceled or amended at any time before pay-
ment; it is intended to serve as a means of arranging payment but not as a guarantee 
of payment.
■
■
Confirmed versus Unconfirmed.   A confirmed L/C is issued by one bank and can 
be confirmed by another bank, in which case the confirming bank can honor drafts 
drawn in compliance with the L/C. An unconfirmed L/C is the obligation only of 
the issuing bank. An exporter is likely to want a foreign bank’s L/C confirmed by 
a domestic bank when the exporter has doubts about the foreign bank’s ability to 
pay. Such doubts can arise when the exporter is unsure of the financial standing of 
the foreign bank, or if political or economic conditions in the foreign country are 
unstable. The essence of an L/C is shown in Exhibit 16.7.
Most commercial letters of credit are documentary, meaning that certain documents must 
be included with drafts drawn under their terms. Required documents usually include a bill 
Issuing Bank
Beneﬁciary
(exporter)
Applicant
(importer)
The relationship between the issuing bank and the
exporter is governed by the terms of the letter of
credit, as issued by that bank.
The relationship between the importer and the issuing
bank is governed by the terms of the application and
agreement for the letter of credit (L/C).
The relationship between the importer and the
exporter is governed by the sales contract.
Exhibit 16.6
Parties to a Letter of Credit (L/C)

457
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16 
of lading (discussed in more detail later in the chapter), a commercial invoice, and any of the 
following: consular invoice, insurance certificate or policy, and packing list.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Letters of Credit. The primary advantage of an L/C is 
that it reduces risk—the exporter can sell against a bank’s promise to pay rather than against 
the promise of a commercial firm. The exporter is also in a more secure position as to the 
availability of foreign exchange to pay for the sale, since banks are more likely to be aware of 
foreign exchange conditions and rules than is the importing firm itself. If the importing country 
should change its foreign exchange rules during the course of a transaction, the government 
is likely to allow already outstanding bank letters of credit to be honored for fear of throwing 
its own domestic banks into international disrepute. Of course, if the L/C is confirmed by a 
bank in the exporter’s country, the exporter avoids any problem of blocked foreign exchange.
An exporter may find that an order backed by an irrevocable L/C will facilitate obtaining 
pre-export financing in the home country. If the exporter’s reputation for delivery is good, a 
local bank may lend funds to process and prepare the merchandise for shipment. Once the 
merchandise is shipped in compliance with the terms and conditions of the L/C, payment for 
the business transaction is made and funds will be generated to repay the pre-export loan.
Another advantage of an L/C to the importer is that the importer need not pay out funds 
until the documents have arrived at a local port or airfield and unless all conditions stated in 
the credit have been fulfilled.
The main disadvantages of L/Cs are the fees charged by the importer’s bank for issuing 
its L/C and the possibility that the L/C reduces the importer’s borrowing line of credit with its 
bank. It may, in fact, be a competitive disadvantage for the exporter to demand automatically 
an L/C from an importer, especially if the importer has a good credit record and there is no 
concern regarding the economic or political conditions of the importer’s country.
In balance, though, the value of the L/C has been well established since the beginning of 
commerce, as detailed in Global Finance in Practice 16.1.
Bank of the East, Ltd.
[Name of Issuing Bank]
Date: September 18, 2012
L/C  Number 123456
Bank of the East, Ltd. hereby issues this irrevocable documentary Letter of Credit to Jones Company
[name of exporter] for US$500,000, payable 90 days after sight by a draft drawn against Bank of the
East, Ltd., in accordance with Letter of  Credit number 123456.
The draft is to be accompanied by the following documents:
1.  Commercial invoice in triplicate
2.  Packing list
3.  Clean on board order bill of lading
4.  Insurance documents, paid for by buyer
At maturity Bank of the East, Ltd. will pay the face amount of the draft to the bearer of that draft.
Authorized Signature
Exhibit 16.7
Essence of a Letter of Credit (L/C)

458
CHAPTER 16    International Trade Finance
Draft
A draft, sometimes called a bill of exchange (B/E), is the instrument normally used in interna-
tional commerce to effect payment. A draft is simply an order written by an exporter (seller) 
instructing an importer (buyer) or its agent to pay a specified amount of money at a specified 
time. Thus, it is the exporter’s formal demand for payment from the importer.
The person or business initiating the draft is known as the maker (also known as the drawer 
or originator). Normally, maker is the exporter who sells and ships the merchandise. The party 
to whom the draft is addressed is the drawee. The drawee is asked to honor the draft, that is, 
to pay the amount requested according to the stated terms. In commercial transactions, the 
drawee is either the buyer, in which case the draft is called a trade draft, or the buyer’s bank, 
in which case the draft is called a bank draft. Bank drafts are usually drawn according to the 
terms of an L/C. A draft may be drawn as a bearer instrument, or it may designate a person to 
whom payment is to be made. This person, known as the payee, may be the drawer itself or it 
may be some other party such as the drawer’s bank.
Negotiable Instruments. If properly drawn, drafts can become negotiable instruments. As 
such, they provide a convenient instrument for financing the international movement of 
the merchandise. To become a negotiable instrument, a draft must conform to the following 
requirements (Uniform Commercial Code, Section 3104(1)):
1.	 It must be in writing and signed by the maker or drawer.
2.	 It must contain an unconditional promise or order to pay a definite sum of money.
3.	 It must be payable on demand or at a fixed or determinable future date.
4.	 It must be payable to order or to bearer.
If a draft is drawn in conformity with the above requirements, a person receiving it with 
proper endorsements becomes a “holder in due course.” This is a privileged legal status that 
enables the holder to receive payment despite any personal disagreements between drawee 
and maker because of controversy over the underlying transaction. If the drawee dishonors 
the draft, payment must be made to any holder in due course by any prior endorser or by 
Merchant banking for international trade largely began in 
a landlocked city, Florence, Italy. In the late 13th and early 
14th century as commerce grew throughout Europe and the 
Mediterranean, banking began to develop in both Venice and 
Florence.
It was a time in which commerce was still in its infancy, 
with the Catholic Church prohibiting many aspects of com-
merce, including the loaning of money in return for interest—
usury. Although usury has come to mean the illegal activity of 
charging excessive rates of interest, the term originally referred 
to charging interest of any kind.
The florin is a small gold coin first minted in Florence in 
1252. Named after the city, the florin flourished as a means of 
transacting trade across Europe in the following century. Mer-
chants conducted their trade on a bench—a banco—which 
gave rise to the term for the safe place in which to keep 
one’s money.
But the coins were heavy, and if a merchant were travel-
ing from one city or country to another to conduct trade, the 
weight was substantial, as was the chance of being robbed. 
So the merchants created the first financial derivative, a draft 
on the banco—a letter of exchange—which could be carried 
from one city to another and was recognized as a credit for 
florins on account at their home banco. Payment was guar-
anteed within three months. Of course, with the creation of 
banks came the first failures—bankruptcies.
From the very beginning, whether it was the loaning of 
money, the validity of a letter of exchange, or even the value 
of a currency, all were instruments or activities that involved 
risk, or risque in the Italian of the time.
Global Finance in Practice 16.1
Florence—The Birthplace of Trade Financing

459
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16 
the maker. This clear definition of the rights of parties who hold a negotiable instrument as 
a holder in due course has contributed significantly to the widespread acceptance of various 
forms of drafts, including personal checks.
Types of Drafts. Drafts are of two types: sight drafts and time drafts. A sight draft is payable 
on presentation to the drawee; the drawee must pay at once or dishonor the draft. A time 
draft, also called a usance draft, allows a delay in payment. It is presented to the drawee, who 
accepts it by writing or stamping a notice of acceptance on its face. Once accepted, the time 
draft becomes a promise to pay by the accepting party (the buyer). When a time draft is drawn 
on and accepted by a bank, it becomes a bankers’ acceptance; when drawn on and accepted 
by a business firm, it becomes a trade acceptance (T/A).
The time period of a draft is referred to as its tenor. To qualify as a negotiable instrument, 
and so be attractive to a holder in due course, a draft must be payable on a fixed or determina-
ble future date. For example, “60 days after sight” is a fixed date, which is established precisely 
at the time the draft is accepted. However, payment “on arrival of goods” is not determinable 
since the date of arrival cannot be known in advance. Indeed, there is no assurance that the 
goods will arrive at all.
Bankers’ Acceptances. When a draft is accepted by a bank, it becomes a bankers’ acceptance. 
As such it is the unconditional promise of that bank to make payment on the draft when it 
matures. In quality, the bankers’ acceptance is practically identical to a marketable bank cer-
tificate of deposit (CD). The holder of a bankers’ acceptance need not wait until maturity to 
liquidate the investment, but may sell the acceptance in the money market, where constant 
trading in such instruments occurs. The amount of the discount depends entirely on the credit 
rating of the bank that signs the acceptance, or another bank that reconfirmed the bankers’ 
acceptance, for a fee. The total cost or all-in cost of using a bankers’ acceptance compared to 
other short-term financing instruments is analyzed later in this chapter.
Bill of Lading (B/L)
The third key document for financing international trade is the bill of lading (B/L). The bill of 
lading is issued to the exporter by a common carrier transporting the merchandise. It serves 
three purposes: as a receipt, a contract, and a document of title.
As a receipt, the bill of lading indicates that the carrier has received the merchandise 
described on the face of the document. The carrier is not responsible for ascertaining that the 
containers hold what is alleged to be their contents, so descriptions of merchandise on bills of 
lading are usually short and simple. If shipping charges are paid in advance, the bill of lading 
will usually be stamped “freight paid” or “freight prepaid.” If merchandise is shipped collect—a 
less common procedure internationally than domestically—the carrier maintains a lien on the 
goods until freight is paid.
As a contract, the bill of lading indicates the obligation of the carrier to provide certain 
transportation in return for certain charges. Common carriers cannot disclaim responsibility 
for their negligence by inserting special clauses in a bill of lading. The bill of lading may specify 
alternative ports in the event that delivery cannot be made to the designated port, or it may 
specify that the goods will be returned to the exporter at the exporter’s expense.
As a document of title, the bill of lading is used to obtain payment or a written promise of 
payment before the merchandise is released to the importer. The bill of lading can also func-
tion as collateral against which funds may be advanced to the exporter by its local bank prior 
to or during shipment and before final payment by the importer.
The bill of lading is typically made payable to the order of the exporter, who thus retains 
title to the goods after they have been handed to the carrier. Title to the merchandise remains 
with the exporter until payment is received, at which time the exporter endorses the bill of 

460
CHAPTER 16    International Trade Finance
lading (which is negotiable) in blank (making it a bearer instrument) or to the party mak-
ing the payment, usually a bank. The most common procedure would be for payment to be 
advanced against a documentary draft accompanied by the endorsed order bill of lading. 
After paying the draft, the exporter’s bank forwards the documents through bank clearing 
channels to the bank of the importer. The importer’s bank, in turn, releases the documents 
to the importer after payment (sight drafts); after acceptance (time drafts addressed to the 
importer and marked D/A); or after payment terms have been agreed upon (drafts drawn on 
the importer’s bank under provisions of an L/C).
Documentation in a Typical Trade Transaction
Although a trade transaction could conceivably be handled in many ways, we shall now turn 
to a hypothetical example that illustrates the interaction of the various documents. Assume 
that Ganado U.S. receives an order from a Canadian buyer. For Ganado, this will be an export 
financed under an L/C requiring a bill of lading, with the exporter collecting via a time draft 
that was accepted by the Canadian buyer’s bank. Such a transaction proceeds as follows, illus-
trated in Exhibit 16.8.
1.	 The Canadian buyer (the Importer in Exhibit 16.8) places an order with Ganado (the 
Exporter in Exhibit 16.8), asking if Ganado is willing to ship under an L/C.
2.	 Ganado agrees to ship under an L/C and specifies relevant information such as prices 
and terms.
3.	 The Canadian buyer applies to its bank, Northland Bank (Bank I in Exhibit 16.8), 
for an L/C to be issued in favor of Ganado for the merchandise it wishes to buy.
4.	 Northland Bank issues the L/C in favor of Ganado and sends it to Ganado’s bank, 
Southland Bank (Bank X in Exhibit 16.8).
5.	 Southland Bank advises Ganado of the opening of an L/C in Ganado’s favor. 
Southland Bank may or may not confirm the L/C to add its own guarantee to the 
document.
6.	 Ganado ships the goods to the Canadian buyer.
7.	 Ganado prepares a time draft and presents it to its bank, Southland Bank. The draft 
is drawn (i.e., addressed to) Northland Bank in accordance with Northland Bank’s 
L/C and accompanied by other documents as required, including the bill of lading. 
Ganado endorses the bill of lading in blank (making it a bearer instrument) so that 
title to the goods goes with the holder of the documents—Southland Bank at this 
point in the transaction.
8.	 Southland Bank presents the draft and documents to Northland Bank for accep-
tance. Northland Bank accepts the draft by stamping and signing it (making it a 
bankers’ acceptance), takes possession of the documents, and promises to pay the 
now-accepted draft at maturity—say, 60 days.
9.	 Northland Bank returns the accepted draft to Southland Bank. Alternatively, South-
land Bank might ask Northland Bank to accept and discount the draft. Should this 
occur, Northland Bank would remit the cash less a discount fee rather than return 
the accepted draft to Southland Bank.
10.	 Southland Bank, having received back the accepted draft, now a bankers’ acceptance, 
may choose between several alternatives. Southland Bank may sell the acceptance 
in the open market at a discount to an investor, typically a corporation or financial 
institution with with excess cash it wants to invest for a short period of time. South-
land Bank may also hold the acceptance in its own portfolio.

461
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16 
11.	 If Southland Bank discounted the acceptance with Northland Bank (mentioned in 
Step 9) or discounted it in the local money market, Southland Bank will transfer the 
proceeds less any fees and discount to Ganado. Another possibility would be for 
Ganado itself to take possession of the acceptance, hold it for 60 days, and present 
it for collection. Normally, however, exporters prefer to receive the discounted cash 
value of the acceptance at once rather than wait for the acceptance to mature and 
receive a slightly greater amount of cash at a later date.
12.	 Northland Bank notifies the Canadian buyer of the arrival of the documents. The 
­Canadian buyer signs a note or makes some other agreed upon plan to pay Northland 
Bank for the merchandise in 60 days, Northland Bank releases the underlying docu-
ments so that the Canadian buyer can obtain physical possession of the shipment at once.
13.	 After 60 days, Northland Bank receives funds from the Canadian buyer to pay the 
maturing acceptance.
14.	 On the same day, the 60th day after acceptance, the holder of the matured acceptance 
presents it for payment and receives its face value. The holder may present it directly 
to Northland Bank, or return it to Southland Bank and have Southland Bank collect 
it through normal banking channels.
Although this is a typical transaction involving an L/C, few international trade transactions 
are probably ever truly typical. Business, and more specifically international business, requires 
7. Exporter presents draft and documents
to its bank, Bank X
11. Bank X
pays exporter
13. Importer
pays its bank
12. Bank I obtains importer’s note
and releases shipment
Exporter
Importer
Bank X
Bank I
1. Importer orders goods
2. Exporter agrees to ﬁll order
3. Importer arranges 
L/C with its bank
6. Exporter ships goods  to importer
8. Bank X presents draft and documents to Bank I
9. Bank I accepts draft, promising to pay in 60 days, and
returns accepted draft to Bank X
4. Bank I sends L/C to Bank X
10. Bank  X sells acceptance
to investor
14. Investor presents
acceptance and is paid by Bank I
5. Bank X
advises
exporter
of L/C
Public
Investor
Exhibit 16.8
Steps in a Typical Trade Transaction

462
CHAPTER 16    International Trade Finance
flexibility and creativity by management at all times. The Mini-Case at the end of this chapter 
presents an application of the mechanics of a real business situation. The result is a classic chal-
lenge to management: When and on what basis should typical procedures be compromised in 
order to accomplish strategic goals?
Government Programs to Help Finance Exports
Governments of most export-oriented industrialized countries have special financial institu-
tions that provide some form of subsidized credit to their own national exporters. These export 
finance institutions offer terms that are better than those generally available from the private 
sector. Thus, domestic taxpayers are subsidizing sales to foreign buyers in order to create 
employment and maintain a technological edge. The most important institutions usually offer 
export credit insurance and an export-import bank for export financing.
Export Credit Insurance
The exporter who insists on cash or an L/C payment for foreign shipments is likely to lose 
orders to competitors from other countries that provide more favorable credit terms. Better 
credit terms are often made possible by means of export credit insurance, which provides 
assurance to the exporter or the exporter’s bank that, should the foreign customer default 
on payment, the insurance company will pay for a major portion of the loss. Because of the 
availability of export credit insurance, commercial banks are willing to provide medium- to 
long-term financing (five to seven years) for exports. Importers prefer that the exporter pur-
chase export credit insurance to pay for nonperformance risk by the importer. In this way, 
the importer does not need to pay to have an L/C issued and does not reduce its credit line.
Competition between nations to increase exports by lengthening the period for which 
credit transactions can be insured may lead to a credit war and to unsound credit decisions. To 
prevent such an unhealthy development, a number of leading trading nations joined together 
in 1934 to create the Berne Union (officially, the Union d’Assureurs des Credits Internation-
aux) for the purpose of establishing a voluntary international understanding on export credit 
terms. The Berne Union recommends maximum credit terms for many items including, for 
example, heavy capital goods (five years), light capital goods (three years), and consumer 
durable goods (one year).
In the United States, export credit insurance is provided by the Foreign Credit Insurance 
Association (FCIA). This is an unincorporated association of private commercial insurance 
companies operating in cooperation with the Export-Import Bank (discussed in the next sec-
tion). The FCIA provides policies protecting U.S. exporters against the risk of nonpayment 
by foreign debtors as a result of commercial and political risks. Losses due to commercial risk 
are those that result from the insolvency or protracted payment default of the buyer. Political 
losses arise from actions of governments beyond the control of buyer or seller.
Export-Import Bank and Export Financing
The Export-Import Bank (Eximbank) is another independent agency of the U.S. government, 
established in 1934 to stimulate and facilitate the foreign trade of the United States. Interest-
ingly, the Eximbank was originally created primarily to facilitate exports to the Soviet Union. 
In 1945, the Eximbank was re-chartered “to aid in financing and to facilitate exports and 
imports and the exchange of commodities between the United States and any foreign country 
or the agencies or nationals thereof.”
The Eximbank facilitates the financing of U.S. exports through various loan guarantee and 
insurance programs. The Eximbank guarantees repayment of medium-term (181 days to five 
years) and long-term (five years to ten years) export loans extended by U.S. banks to foreign 

463
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16 
borrowers. The Eximbank’s medium- and long-term, direct-lending operation is based on partici-
pation with private sources of funds. Essentially, the Eximbank lends dollars to borrowers outside 
the United States for the purchase of U.S. goods and services. Proceeds of such loans are paid 
to U.S. suppliers. The loans themselves are repaid with interest in dollars to the Eximbank. The 
Eximbank requires private participation in these direct loans in order to: (1) ensure that it comple-
ments rather than competes with private sources of export financing; (2) spread its resources more 
broadly; and (3) ensure that private financial institutions will continue to provide export credit.
The Eximbank also guarantees lease transactions, finances the costs involved in the prepa-
ration by U.S. firms of engineering, planning, and feasibility studies for non-U.S. clients on 
large capital projects; and supplies counseling for exporters, banks, or others needing help in 
finding financing for U.S. goods.
Trade Financing Alternatives
In order to finance international trade receivables, firms use the same financing instruments 
that they use for domestic trade receivables, plus a few specialized instruments that are only 
available for financing international trade. Exhibit 16.9 identifies the main short-term financing 
instruments and their costs.
Bankers’ Acceptances
Bankers’ acceptances, described earlier in this chapter, can be used to finance both domestic 
and international trade receivables. Exhibit 16.9 shows that bankers’ acceptances earn a yield 
comparable to other money market instruments, especially marketable bank certificates of 
deposit. However, the all-in cost to a firm of creating and discounting a bankers’ acceptance 
also depends upon the commission charged by the bank that accepts the firm’s draft.
The first owner of the bankers’ acceptance created from an international trade transac-
tion will be the exporter, who receives the accepted draft back after the bank has stamped 
it “accepted.” The exporter may hold the acceptance until maturity and then collect. On an 
acceptance of, say, $100,000 for three months the exporter would receive the face amount less 
the bank’s acceptance commission of 1.5% per annum:
Face amount of the acceptance
$100,000
Less 1.5% per annum commission for three months
-      375 (.015 * 3/12 * $100,000)
Amount received by exporter in three months
$  99,625
Instrument
Cost or Yield for 3-Month Maturity
Bankers’ acceptances*
1.14% yield annualized
Trade acceptances*
1.17% yield annualized
Factoring
Variable rate but much higher cost than bank credit lines
Securitization
Variable rate but competitive with bank credit lines
Bank credit lines
4.25% plus points (fewer points if covered by export credit insurance)
Commercial paper*
1.15% yield annualized
*These instruments compete with 3-month marketable bank time certificates of deposit that yield 1.17%.
Exhibit 16.9
Instruments for Financing Short-Term Domestic and International Trade Receivables

464
CHAPTER 16    International Trade Finance
Alternatively, the exporter may “discount”—that is, sell at a reduced price—the accep­
tance to its bank in order to receive funds at once. The exporter will then receive the face 
amount of the acceptance less both the acceptance fee and the going market rate of discount 
for bankers’ acceptances. If the discount rate were 1.14% per annum as shown in Exhibit 16.9, 
the exporter would receive the following:
Face amount of the acceptance
$100,000
Less 1.5% per annum commission for three months
-       375 (0.015 * 3/12 * $100,000)
Less 1.14% per annum discount rate for three months
-       285 (0.0114 * 3/12 * $100,000)
Amount received by exporter at once
$   99,340
Therefore, the annualized all-in cost of financing this bankers’ acceptance is as follows:
Commission + Discount
Proceeds
* 360
90 = $375 + $285
$99,340
* 360
90 = 0.0266 or 2.66%.
The discounting bank may hold the acceptance in its own portfolio, earning for itself the 
1.14% per annum discount rate, or the acceptance may be resold in the acceptance market to 
portfolio investors. Investors buying bankers’ acceptances provide the funds that finance the 
transaction.
Trade Acceptances
Trade acceptances are similar to bankers’ acceptances except that the accepting entity is a 
commercial firm, like General Motors Acceptance Corporation (GMAC), rather than a bank. 
The cost of a trade acceptance depends on the credit rating of the accepting firm plus the 
commission it charges. Like bankers’ acceptances, trade acceptances are sold at a discount to 
banks and other investors at a rate that is competitive with other money market instruments 
(see Exhibit 16.9).
Factoring
Specialized firms, known as factors, purchase receivables at a discount on either a non-recourse 
or recourse basis. Non-recourse means that the factor assumes the credit, political, and foreign 
exchange risk of the receivables it purchases. Recourse means that the factor can give back 
receivables that are not collectable. Since the factor must bear the cost and risk of assessing 
the creditworthiness of each receivable, the cost of factoring is usually quite high. It is more 
than borrowing at the prime rate plus points.
The all-in cost of factoring non-recourse receivables is similar in structure to acceptances. 
The factor charges a commission to cover the non-recourse risk, typically 1.5%–2.5%, plus 
interest deducted as a discount from the initial proceeds. On the other hand, the firm selling the 
non-recourse receivables avoids the cost of determining the creditworthiness of its customers. 
It also does not have to show debt borrowed to finance these receivables on its balance sheet. 
Furthermore, the firm avoids both foreign exchange and political risk on these non-recourse 
receivables. Global Finance in Practice 16.2 provides an example of the costs.
Securitization
The securitization of export receivables for financing trade is an attractive supplement to 
bankers’ acceptance financing and factoring. A firm can securitize its export receivables by 
selling them to a legal entity established to create marketable securities based on a package of 

465
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16 
individual export receivables. An advantage of this technique is to remove the export receiva-
bles from the exporter’s balance sheet because they have been sold without recourse.
The receivables are normally sold at a discount. The size of the discount depends on four 
factors:
1.	 The historic collection risk of the exporter
2.	 The cost of credit insurance
3.	 The cost of securing the desirable cash flow stream to the investors
4.	 The size of the financing and services fees
Securitization is more cost effective if there is a large value of transactions with a known 
credit history and default probability. A large exporter could establish its own securitization 
entity. While the initial setup cost is high, the entity can be used on an ongoing basis. Alter-
natively, smaller exporters could use a common securitization entity provided by a financial 
institution, thereby saving the expensive setup costs.
Bank Credit Lines
A firm’s bank credit line can typically be used to finance, up to a fixed upper limit, say 80%, 
of accounts receivable. Export receivables can be eligible for inclusion in bank credit line 
financing. However, credit information on foreign customers may be more difficult to collect 
and assess. If a firm covers its export receivables with export credit insurance, it can greatly 
reduce the credit risk of those receivables. This insurance enables the bank credit line to cover 
more export receivables and lower the interest rate for that coverage. Of course, any foreign 
exchange risk must be handled by the transaction exposure techniques described in Chapter 10.
The cost of using a bank credit line is usually the prime rate of interest plus points to reflect 
a particular firm’s credit risk. As usual, 100 points is equal to 1%. In the United States, borrow-
ers are also expected to maintain a compensating deposit balance at the lending institution. In 
Europe and many other places, lending is done on an overdraft basis. An overdraft agreement 
allows a firm to overdraw its bank account up to the limit of its credit line. Interest at prime 
plus points is based only on the amount of overdraft borrowed. In either case, the all-in cost of 
bank borrowing using a credit line is higher than acceptance financing as shown in Exhibit 16.9.
A U.S.-based manufacturer that may have suffered significant 
losses during first the global credit crisis and the following 
global recession is cash-short. Sales, profits, and cash flows 
have fallen. The company is now struggling to service its 
high levels of debt. It does, however, have a number of new 
sales agreements. It is considering factoring one of its big-
gest new sales, a sale for $5 million to a Japanese company. 
The receivable is due in 90 days. After contacting a factoring 
agent, it is quoted the following numbers.
Face amount of receivable
$5,000,000
Non-recourse fee (1.5%)
-75,000
Factoring fee 
(2.5% per month * 3 months)
  -375,000
Net proceeds on sale (received now)
$4,550,000
If the company wishes to factor its receivable it will net $4.55 
million, 91% of the face amount. Although this may at first 
sight appear expensive, the firm would net the proceeds in 
cash up-front, not having to wait 90 days for payment. And 
it would not be responsible for collecting on the receivable. 
If the firm were able to “factor-in” the cost of factoring in the 
initial sale, all the better. Alternatively, it might offer a discount 
for cash paid in the first 10 days after shipment.
Global Finance in Practice 16.2
Factoring in Practice

466
CHAPTER 16    International Trade Finance
Commercial Paper
A firm can issue commercial paper—unsecured promissory notes—to fund its short-term 
financing needs, including both domestic and export receivables. However, it is only the large 
well-known firms with favorable credit ratings that have access to either the domestic or euro 
commercial paper market. As shown in Exhibit 16.9, commercial paper interest rates lie at the 
low end of the yield curve.
Forfaiting: Medium- and Long-Term Financing
Forfaiting is a specialized technique to eliminate the risk of nonpayment by importers in 
instances where the importing firm and/or its government is perceived by the exporter to be 
too risky for open account credit. The name of the technique comes from the French à forfait, 
a term that implies “to forfeit or surrender a right.”
Role of the Forfaiter
The essence of forfaiting is the non-recourse sale by an exporter of bank-guaranteed prom-
issory notes, bills of exchange, or similar documents received from an importer in another 
country. The exporter receives cash at the time of the transaction by selling the notes or bills 
at a discount from their face value to a specialized finance firm called a forfaiter. The forfaiter 
arranges the entire operation prior to the execution of the transaction. Although the export-
ing firm is responsible for the quality of delivered goods, it receives a clear and unconditional 
cash payment at the time of the transaction. All political and commercial risk of nonpayment 
by the importer is carried by the guaranteeing bank. Small exporters, who trust their clients to 
pay, find the forfaiting technique invaluable because it eases cash flow problems.
During the Soviet era, expertise in the technique was centered in German and ­Austrian 
banks, which used forfaiting to finance sales of capital equipment to eastern European, 
“Soviet Bloc,” countries. British, Scandinavian, Italian, Spanish, and French exporters have 
now adopted the technique, but U.S. and Canadian exporters are reported to be slow to use 
forfaiting, possibly because they are suspicious of its simplicity and lack of complex documen-
tation. Nevertheless, some American firms now specialize in the technique, and the Association 
of Forfaiters in the Americas (AFIA) has more than 20 members. Major export destinations 
financed via the forfaiting technique are Asia, Eastern Europe, the Middle East, and Latin 
America.
A Typical Forfaiting Transaction
A typical forfaiting transaction involves five parties, as shown in Exhibit 16.10. The steps in 
the process are as follows:
Step 1: Agreement. Importer and exporter agree on a series of imports to be paid for over a 
period of time, typically three to five years. However, periods as long as 10 years and as short 
as 180 days have been financed using the technique. The normal minimum size for a transac-
tion is $100,000. The importer agrees to make periodic payments, often against progress on 
delivery or completion of a project.
Step 2: Commitment. The forfaiter promises to finance the transaction at a fixed discount 
rate, with payment to be made when the exporter delivers to the forfaiter the appropriate 
promissory notes or other specified paper. The agreed-upon discount rate is based on the cost 
of funds in the euromarket, usually on LIBOR for the average life of the transaction, plus a 
margin over LIBOR to reflect the perceived risk in the deal. This risk premium is influenced 

467
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16 
by the size and tenor of the deal, country risk, and the quality of the guarantor institution. 
On a five-year deal, for example, with 10 semiannual payments, the rate used would be based 
on the 2.25-year LIBOR rate. This discount rate is normally added to the invoice value of 
the transaction so that the cost of financing is ultimately borne by the importer. The forfaiter 
charges an additional commitment fee of from 0.5% per annum to as high as 6.0% per annum 
from the date of its commitment to finance until receipt of the actual discount paper issued in 
accordance with the finance contract. This fee is also normally added to the invoice cost and 
passed on to the importer.
Step 3: Aval or Guarantee. The importer obligates itself to pay for its purchases by issuing 
a series of promissory notes, usually maturing every six or twelve months, against progress 
on delivery or completion of the project. These promissory notes are first delivered to the 
importer’s bank where they are endorsed (that is, guaranteed) by that bank. In Europe, this 
unconditional guarantee is referred to as an aval, which translates into English as “backing.” 
At this point, the importer’s bank becomes the primary obligor in the eyes of all subsequent 
holders of the notes. The bank’s aval or guarantee must be irrevocable, unconditional, divisible, 
and assignable. Because U.S. banks do not issue avals, U.S. transactions are guaranteed by a 
standby letter of credit (L/C), which is functionally similar to an aval but more cumbersome. 
For example, L/Cs can normally be transferred only once.
Step 4: Delivery of Notes. The now-endorsed promissory notes are delivered to the 
exporter.
Step 5: Discounting. The exporter endorses the notes “without recourse” and discounts them 
with the forfaiter, receiving the agreed-upon proceeds. Proceeds are usually received two days 
after the documents are presented. By endorsing the notes “without recourse,” the exporter 
frees itself from any liability for future payment on the notes and thus receives the discounted 
proceeds without having to worry about any further payment difficulties.
Step 6: Investment. The forfaiting bank either holds the notes until full maturity as an invest-
ment or endorses and rediscounts them in the international money market. Such subsequent 
Exporter
(private industrial ﬁrm)
Investor
(institutional or individual)
Importer’s Bank
(usually a private bank in
the importer’s country)
Importer
(private ﬁrm or government
purchaser in emerging market)
Step 1
Step 7
Step 5
Step 3
Step 4
Step 6
Step 2
Forfaiter
(subsidiary of a
European bank)
Exhibit 16.10
Typical Forfaiting Transaction

468
CHAPTER 16    International Trade Finance
sale by the forfaiter is usually without recourse. The major rediscount markets are in ­London 
and Switzerland, plus New York for notes issued in conjunction with Latin American business.
Step 7: Maturity. At maturity, the investor holding the notes presents them for collection to 
the importer or to the importer’s bank. The promise of the importer’s bank is what gives the 
documents their value.
In effect, the forfaiter functions as both a money market firm (e.g., a lender of short-term 
financing) and a specialist in packaging financial deals involving country risk. As a money 
market firm, the forfaiter divides the discounted notes into appropriately sized packages and 
resells them to various investors having different maturity preferences. As a country risk spe-
cialist, the forfaiter assesses the risk that the notes will eventually be paid by the importer 
or the importer’s bank and puts together a deal that satisfies the needs of both exporter and 
importer.
Success of the forfaiting technique springs from the belief that the aval—the guarantee 
of a commercial bank—can be depended on. Although commercial banks are the normal and 
preferred guarantors, guarantees by government banks or government ministries of finance 
are accepted in some cases. On occasion, large commercial enterprises have been accepted as 
debtors without a bank guarantee. An additional aspect of the technique is that the endorsing 
bank’s aval is perceived to be an “off balance sheet” obligation—the debt is presumably not 
considered by others in assessing the financial structure of the commercial banks.
Summary Points
■
■
International trade takes place between three catego-
ries of relationships: unaffiliated unknown parties, unaf-
filiated known parties, and affiliated parties.
■
■
International trade transactions between affiliated parties 
typically do not require contractual arrangements or exter-
nal financing. Trade transactions between unaffiliated par-
ties typically require contracts and some type of external 
financing, such as that available through letters of credit.
■
■
The basic procedure of financing international trade rests 
on the interrelationship between three key documents: 
the letter of credit (L/C), the bill of lading, and the draft.
■
■
In the L/C, the bank substitutes its credit for that of the 
importer and promises to pay if certain documents are sub-
mitted to the bank. The exporter may now rely on the prom-
ise of the bank rather than on the promise of the importer.
■
■
The exporter typically ships with a bill of lading, attaches 
the bill of lading to a draft that orders payment from the 
importer’s bank, and presents these documents, plus any 
of a number of additional documents, through its own 
bank to the importer’s bank.
■
■
If the documents are in order, the importer’s bank either 
pays the draft (a sight draft) or accepts the draft (a time 
draft). In the latter case, the bank promises to pay in the 
future. At this step, the importer’s bank acquires title to 
the merchandise through the bill of lading and releases 
the merchandise to the importer.
■
■
The total costs to an exporter of entering a foreign mar-
ket include the transaction costs of the trade financing, 
the import and export duties and tariffs applied by 
exporting and importing nations, and the costs of for-
eign market penetration.
■
■
Trade financing uses the same financing instruments as 
does domestic receivables financing, plus some special-
ized instruments that are only available for financing 
international trade. A popular instrument for short-
term financing is a bankers’ acceptance.
■
■
Other short-term financing instruments with a domestic 
counterpart are trade acceptances, factoring, securitiza-
tion, bank credit lines (usually covered by export credit 
insurance), and commercial paper.

469
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16
Crosswell International is a U.S.-based manufacturer and 
distributor of health care products, including children’s dia-
pers. Crosswell has been approached by Leonardo Sousa, 
the president of Material Hospitalar, a distributor of health 
care products throughout Brazil. Sousa is interested in 
distributing Crosswell’s major diaper product, Precious 
Diapers, but only if an acceptable arrangement regarding 
pricing and payment terms can be reached.
Exporting to Brazil
Crosswell’s manager for export operations, Geoff Mathieux, 
followed up the preliminary discussions by putting together 
an estimate of export costs and pricing for discussion pur-
poses with Sousa. Crosswell needs to know all of the costs 
and pricing assumptions for the entire supply and value 
chain as it reaches the consumer. Mathieux believes it criti-
cal that any arrangement that Crosswell enters into results 
in a price to consumers in the Brazilian marketplace that 
is both fair to all parties involved and competitive, given 
the market niche Crosswell hopes to penetrate. This first 
cut on pricing Precious Diapers into Brazil is presented in 
Exhibit A.
Crosswell proposes to sell the basic diaper line to the 
Brazilian distributor for $34.00 per case, FAS (free along-
side ship) Miami docks. This means that the seller, Cross-
well, agrees to cover all costs associated with getting the 
diapers to the Miami docks. The costs of loading the dia-
pers onto the ship, of the actual shipping (freight), and of 
the associated documents is $4.32 per case. The running 
subtotal, $38.32 per case, is termed CFR (cost and freight). 
Finally, the insurance expenses related to the potential loss 
of the goods while in transit to final port of destination, 
export insurance, are $0.86 per case. The total CIF (cost, 
insurance, and freight) is $39.18 per case, or 97.95 Brazil-
ian real per case, assuming an exchange rate of 2.50 Bra-
zilian real (R$) per U.S. dollar ($). In summary, the CIF 
cost of R$97.95 is the price charged by the exporter to the 
importer on arrival in Brazil, and is calculated as follows:
 CIF = FAS + freight + export insurance
 = ($34.00 + $4.32 + $0.86) * R$2.50/$
 = R$97.95.
The actual cost to the distributor in getting the diapers 
through the port and customs warehouses must also be 
calculated in terms of what Leonardo Sousa’s costs are in 
reality. The various fees and taxes detailed in Exhibit A 
1Copyright © 1946 Thunderbird School of Global Management. All rights reserved. This case was prepared by Professor Michael H. 
Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only and not to indicate either effective or ineffective management.
raise the fully landed cost of the Precious Diapers to 
R$107.63 per case. The distributor would now bear storage 
and inventory costs totaling R$8.33 per case, which would 
bring the costs to R$115.96. The distributor then adds a 
margin for distribution services of 20% (R$23.19), raising 
the price as sold to the final retailer to R$139.15 per case.
Finally, the retailer (a supermarket or other retailer of 
consumer health care products) would include its expenses, 
taxes, and markup to reach the final shelf price to the cus-
tomer of R$245.48 per case. This final retail price estimate 
now allows both Crosswell and Material Hospitalar to eval-
uate the price competitiveness of the Precious Ultra-Thin 
Diaper in the Brazilian marketplace, and provides a basis 
for further negotiations between the two parties.
The Precious Ultra-Thin Diaper will be shipped via 
container. Each container will hold 968 cases of diapers. 
The costs and prices in Exhibit A are calculated on a per 
case basis, although some costs and fees are assessed by 
container.
Mathieux provides the export price quotation shown in 
Exhibit A, an outline of a potential representation agree-
ment (for Sousa to represent Crosswell’s product lines in the 
Brazilian marketplace), and payment and credit terms to 
Leonardo Sousa. Crosswell’s payment and credit terms are 
that Sousa either pay in full in cash in advance, or remit a 
confirmed irrevocable documentary L/C with a time draft 
specifying a tenor of 60 days.
Crosswell also requests from Sousa financial statements, 
banking references, foreign commercial references, descrip-
tions of regional sales forces, and sales forecasts for the 
Precious Diaper line. These last requests allow Crosswell 
to assess Material Hospitalar’s ability to be a dependable, 
creditworthy, and capable long-term partner and repre-
sentative of the firm in the Brazilian marketplace. The dis-
cussions that follow focus on finding acceptable common 
ground between the two parties and on working to increase 
the competitiveness of the Precious Diaper product line in 
the Brazilian marketplace.
Crosswell’s Proposal
The proposed sale by Crosswell to Material Hospitalar, 
at least in the initial shipment, is for 10 containers of 968 
cases of diapers at $39.18 per case, CIF Brazil, payable in 
U.S. dollars. This is a total invoice amount of $379,262.40. 
Payment terms are that a confirmed L/C will be required 
of Material Hospitalar on a U.S. bank. The payment will 
Crosswell International and Brazil1
Mini-Case

470
CHAPTER 16    International Trade Finance
What Should Crosswell Expect?
Assuming Material Hospitalar acquires the L/C and it is 
confirmed by Crosswell’s bank in the United States, Cross-
well will ship the goods after the initial agreement, say 
15 days, as illustrated in Exhibit B.
be based on a time draft of 60 days, presentation to the 
bank for acceptance with other documents on the date of 
shipment. Both the exporter and the exporter’s bank will 
expect payment from the importer or the importer’s bank 
60 days from this date of shipment.
The Precious Ultra-Thin Diaper will be shipped via container. Each container will hold 968 cases of diapers. The costs 
and prices below are calculated on a per case basis, although some costs and fees are assessed per container.
Exports Costs & Pricing to Brazil
Per Case
Rates & Calculation
FAS price per case, Miami
$34.00
Freight, loading & documentation
4.32
$4,180 per container/968 = $4.32
CFR price per case, Brazilian port (Santos)
$38.32
Export insurance
0.86
2.25% of CIF
CIF to Brazilian port
$39.18
CIF to Brazilian port, in Brazilian real
R$97.95
2.50 Real/US$ * $39.18
Brazilian Importation Costs
Import duties
1.96
2.00% of CIF
Merchant marine renovation fee
2.70
25.00% of freight
Port storage fees
1.27
1.30% of CIF
Port handling fees
0.01
R$12 per container
Additional handling fees
0.26
20.00% of storage & handling
Customs brokerage fees
1.96
2.00% of CIF
Import license fee
0.05
R$50 per container
Local transportation charges
1.47
1.50% of CIF
Total cost to distributor in real
R$107.63
Distributor’s Costs & Pricing
Storage cost
1.47
1.50% of CIF * months
Cost of financing diaper inventory
6.86
7.00% of CIF * months
Distributor’s margin
23.19
20.00% of Price + storage + financing
Price to retailer in real
R$139.15
Brazilian Retailer Costs & Pricing
Industrial product tax (IPT)
20.87
15.00% of price to retailer
Mercantile circulation services tax (MCS)
28.80
18.00% of price + IPT
Retailer costs and markup
56.65
30.00% of price + IPT + MCS
Price to consumer in real
R$245.48
Diaper Prices to Consumers
Diapers per Case
Price per Diaper
Small size
352
R$0.70
Medium size
256
R$0.96
Large size
192
R$1.28
Exhibit A
Export Pricing for the Precious Diaper Line to Brazil

471
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16
Simultaneous with the shipment, when Crosswell has 
lost physical control over the goods, Crosswell will pres-
ent the bill of lading (acquired at the time of shipment) 
with the other needed documents to its bank requesting 
payment. Because the export is under a confirmed L/C, 
assuming all documents are in order, Crosswell’s bank will 
give Crosswell two choices:
1.	 Wait the full time period of the time draft of 60 days 
and receive the entire payment in full ($379,262.40).
2.	 Receive the discounted value of this amount today. 
The discounted amount, assuming U.S. dollar interest 
rate of 6.00% per annum (1.00% per 60 days):
$379,262.40
(1 + 0.01) = $379,262.40
1.01
= $375,507.33.
Because the invoice is denominated in U.S. dollars, 
Crosswell need not worry about currency value changes 
(currency risk). And because its bank has confirmed the 
L/C, it is protected against changes or deteriorations in 
Material Hospitalar’s ability to pay on the future date.
What Should Material Hospitalar Expect?
Material Hospitalar will receive the goods on or before day 
60. It will then move the goods through its distribution sys-
tem to retailers. Depending on the payment terms between 
Material Hospitalar and its buyers (retailers), it could 
either receive cash or terms for payment for the goods. 
Because Material Hospitalar purchased the goods via the 
60-day time draft and an L/C from its Brazilian bank, total 
payment of $379,262.40 is due on day 90 (shipment and 
presentation of documents was on 30 + 60 day time draft) 
to the Brazilian bank. Material Hospitalar, because it is a 
­Brazilian-based company and has agreed to make payment 
in U.S. dollars (foreign currency), carries the currency risk 
of the transaction.
Crosswell/Material Hospitalar’s Concern
The concern the two companies hold, however, is that the total 
price to the consumer in Brazil, R$245.48 per case, or R$0.70/
diaper (small size), is too high. The major competitors in the 
Brazilian market for premium quality diapers, Kenko do 
Brasil (Japan), Johnson and Johnson (U.S.), and Procter and 
Gamble (U.S.), are cheaper (see Exhibit C). The competitors 
Time (day count) and Events
Crosswell’s bank
conﬁrms L/C and
notiﬁes Crosswell
Material Hospitalar
applies to its bank in 
Sao Paulo for an L/C
Crosswell agrees to 
ship under an L/C
0
3
10
15
30
60
90
Period of outstanding
account receivable
(60-day time draft)
Brazilian bank approves
L/C and issues in favor 
of Crosswell; L/C sent to
Crosswell’s bank
Crosswell
ships goods
Crosswell presents 
documents to its bank
for acceptance and
payment of $379,262 
(today is “sight”)
Crosswell’s bank pays
discounted value of 
acceptance of $375,507
Goods arrive at
Brazilian port
Material Hospitalar
makes payment to
its bank of $379,262
Exhibit B
Export Payment Terms on Crosswell’s Export to Brazil

penetration of the Brazilian market? Can you sum-
marize them using Exhibit B?
2.	 How important is Sousa to the value-chain of Cross-
well? What worries might Crosswell have regarding 
Sousa’s ability to fulfill his obligations?
3.	 If Crosswell is to penetrate the market, some way of 
reducing its prices will be required. What do you suggest?
all manufacture in-country, thus avoiding the series of import 
duties and tariffs, which have added significantly to Cross-
well’s landed prices in the Brazilian marketplace.
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 How are pricing, currency of denomination, and financ-
ing interrelated in the value-chain for Crosswell’s 
Price per Diaper by Size
Company (Country)
Brand
Small
Medium
Large
Kenko (Japan)
Monica Plus
0.68
0.85
1.18
Procter & Gamble (USA)
Pampers Uni
0.65
0.80
1.08
Johnson & Johnson (USA)
Sempre Seca Plus
0.65
0.80
1.08
Crosswell (USA)
Precious
0.70
0.96
1.40
Exhibit C
Competitive Diaper Prices in the Brazilian Market (in Brazilian real)
472
CHAPTER 16    International Trade Finance
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Unaffiliated Buyers. Why might different documenta-
tion be used for an export to a non-affiliated foreign 
buyer who is a new customer as compared to an export 
to a non-affiliated foreign buyer to whom the exporter 
has been selling for many years?
2.	 Affiliated Buyers. For what reason might an exporter 
use standard international trade documentation (let-
ter of credit, draft, order bill of lading) on an intrafirm 
export to its parent or sister subsidiary?
3.	 Related Party Trade. What reasons can you give for 
the observation that intrafirm trade is now greater 
than trade between non-affiliated exporters and 
importers?
4.	 Documents. Explain the difference between a letter of 
credit (L/C) and a draft. How are they linked?
5.	 Risks. What is the major difference between “cur-
rency risk” and “risk of noncompletion”? How are 
these risks handled in a typical international trade 
transaction?
6.	 Letter of Credit. Identify each party to a letter of 
credit (L/C) and indicate its responsibility.
7.	 Confirmed Letter of Credit. Why would an exporter 
insist on a confirmed letter of credit?
8.	 Documenting an Export of Hard Drives. List the steps 
involved in the export of computer hard disk drives from 
Penang, Malaysia, to San Jose, California, using an uncon-
firmed letter of credit authorizing payment on sight.
9.	 Documenting an Export of Lumber from Portland to 
Yokohama. List the steps involved in the export of 
lumber from Portland, Oregon, to Yokohama, Japan, 
using a confirmed letter of credit, payment to be made 
in 120 days.
10.	 Governmentally Supplied Credit. Various governments 
have established agencies to insure against nonpay-
ment for exports and/or to provide export credit. This 
shifts credit risk away from private banks and to the 
citizen taxpayers of the country whose government cre-
ated and backs the agency. Why would such an arrange-
ment be of benefit to the citizens of that country?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Nikken Microsystems (A). Assume Nikken Microsys-
tems has sold Internet servers to Telecom España for 
€700,000. Payment is due in three months and will be 
made with a trade acceptance from Telecom España 
Acceptance. The acceptance fee is 1.0% per annum of the 
face amount of the note. This acceptance will be sold at a 
4% per annum discount. What is the annualized percent-
age all-in cost in euros of this method of trade financing?

473
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16 
2.	 Nikken Microsystems (B). Assume that Nikken Micro-
systems prefers to receive U.S. dollars rather than 
euros for the trade transaction described in Problem 
1. It is considering two alternatives: (1) sell the accep-
tance for euros at once and convert the euros imme-
diately to U.S. dollars at the spot rate of exchange of 
$1.00/€ or (2) hold the euro acceptance until maturity 
but at the start sell the expected euro proceeds for-
ward for dollars at the 3-month forward rate of $1.02/€.
a.	 What are the U.S. dollar net proceeds received at 
once from the discounted trade acceptance in alter-
native 1?
b.	 What are the U.S. dollar net proceeds received in 
three months in alternative 2?
c.	 What is the break-even investment rate that would 
equalize the net U.S. dollar proceeds from both 
alternatives?
d.	 Which alternative should Nikken Microsystems 
choose?
3.	 Motoguzzie (A). Motoguzzie exports large-engine 
motorcycles (greater than 700cc) to Australia and 
invoices its customers in U.S. dollars. Sydney Whole-
sale Imports has purchased $3,000,000 of merchandise 
from Motoguzzie, with payment due in six months. 
The payment will be made with a bankers’ acceptance 
issued by Charter Bank of Sydney at a fee of 1.75% 
per annum. Motoguzzie has a weighted average cost of 
capital of 10%. If Motoguzzie holds this acceptance to 
maturity, what is its annualized percentage all-in cost?
4.	 Motoguzzie (B). Assuming the facts in Problem 3, 
Bank of America is now willing to buy Motoguzzie’s 
bankers’ acceptance for a discount of 6% per annum. 
What would be Motoguzzie’s annualized percent-
age all-in cost of financing its $3,000,000 Australian 
receivable?
5.	 Nakatomi Toyota. Nakatomi Toyota buys its cars from 
Toyota Motors (U.S.), and sells them to U.S. custom-
ers. One of its customers is EcoHire, a car rental firm 
that buys cars from Nakatomi Toyota at a wholesale 
price. Final payment is due to Nakatomi Toyota in six 
months. EcoHire has bought $200,000 worth of cars 
from Nakatomi, with a cash down payment of $40,000 
and the balance due in six months without any inter-
est charged as a sales incentive. Nakatomi Toyota will 
have the EcoHire receivable accepted by Alliance 
Acceptance for a 2% fee, and then sell it at a 3% per 
annum discount to Wells Fargo Bank.
a.	 What is the annualized percentage all-in cost to 
Nakatomi Toyota?
b.	 What are Nakatomi’s net cash proceeds, including 
the cash down payment?
6.	 Forfaiting at Umaru Oil (Nigeria). Umaru Oil of Nige-
ria has purchased $1,000,000 of oil drilling equipment 
from Gunslinger Drilling of Houston, Texas. Umaru Oil 
must pay for this purchase over the next five years at a 
rate of $200,000 per year due on March 1 of each year.
Bank of Zurich, a Swiss forfaiter, has agreed to 
buy the five notes of $200,000 each at a discount. The 
discount rate would be approximately 8% per annum 
based on the expected 3-year LIBOR rate plus 200 
basis points, paid by Umaru Oil. Bank of Zurich would 
also charge Umaru Oil an additional commitment fee 
of 2% per annum from the date of its commitment to 
finance until receipt of the actual discounted notes 
issued in accordance with the financing contract. The 
$200,000 promissory notes will come due on March 1 
in successive years.
The promissory notes issued by Umaru Oil will 
be endorsed by their bank, Lagos City Bank, for a 1% 
fee and delivered to Gunslinger Drilling. At this point, 
Gunslinger Drilling will endorse the notes without 
recourse and discount them with the forfaiter, Bank 
of Zurich, receiving the full $200,000 principal amount. 
Bank of Zurich will sell the notes by rediscounting 
them to investors in the international money market 
without recourse. At maturity, the investors holding the 
notes will present them for collection at Lagos City 
Bank. If Lagos City Bank defaults on payment, the 
investors will collect on the notes from Bank of Zurich.
a.	 What is the annualized percentage all-in cost to 
Umaru Oil of financing the first $200,000 note due 
March 1, 2011?
b.	 What might motivate Umaru Oil to use this rela-
tively expensive alternative for financing?
7.	 Sunny Coast Enterprises (A). Sunny Coast Enter-
prises has sold a combination of films and DVDs to 
Hong Kong Media Incorporated for US$100,000, 
with payment due in six months. Sunny Coast Enter-
prises has the following alternatives for financing this 
receivable: (1) Use its bank credit line. Interest would 
be at the prime rate of 5% plus 150 basis points per 
annum. Sunny Coast Enterprises would need to main-
tain a compensating balance of 20% of the loan’s face 
amount. No interest will be paid on the compensating 
balance by the bank. (2) Use its bank credit line but 
purchase export credit insurance for a 1% fee. Because 
of the reduced risk, the bank interest rate would be 
reduced to 5% per annum without any points.
a.	 What are the annualized percentage all-in costs of 
each alternative?
b.	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of each 
alternative?
c.	 Which alternative would you recommend?

474
CHAPTER 16    International Trade Finance
value of the shipment, $720,000 U.S. dollars, will be 
paid 90 days after the Madrid bank accepts a draft 
drawn by Inca Breweries in accordance with the terms 
of the letter of credit.
The current discount rate on 3-month bankers’ 
acceptance is 8% per annum, and Inca Breweries 
estimates its weighted average cost of capital to be 
20% per annum. The commission for selling a bank-
ers’ acceptance in the discount market is 1.2% of the 
face amount.
How much cash will Inca Breweries receive from 
the sale if it holds the acceptance until maturity? 
Do you recommend that Inca Breweries hold the 
acceptance until maturity or discount it at once in the 
U.S. bankers’ acceptance market?
12.	 Swishing Shoe Company. Swishing Shoe Company of 
Durham, North Carolina, has received an order for 
50,000 cartons of athletic shoes from Southampton 
Footware, Ltd., of England, payment to be in British 
pounds sterling. The shoes will be shipped to South-
ampton Footware under the terms of a letter of credit 
issued by a London bank on behalf of Southampton 
Footware. The letter of credit specifies that the face 
value of the shipment, £400,000, will be paid 120 days 
after the London bank accepts a draft drawn by South-
ampton Footware in accordance with the terms of the 
letter of credit.
The current discount rate in London on 120-day 
bankers’ acceptances is 12% per annum, and South-
ampton Footware estimates its weighted average cost 
of capital to be 18% per annum. The commission for 
selling a bankers’ acceptance in the discount market 
is 2.0% of the face amount.
a.	 Would Swishing Shoe Company gain by holding 
the acceptance to maturity, as compared to dis-
counting the bankers’ acceptance at once?
b.	 Does Swishing Shoe Company incur any other risks 
in this transaction?
13.	 Going Abroad. Assume that Great Britain charges an 
import duty of 10% on shoes imported into the United 
Kingdom. Swishing Shoe Company, in Problem 12, 
discovers that it can manufacture shoes in Ireland 
and import them into Britain free of any import duty. 
What factors should Swishing consider in deciding to 
continue to export shoes from North Carolina versus 
manufacture them in Ireland?
8.	 Sunny Coast Enterprises (B). Sunny Coast Enter-
prises has been approached by a factor that offers to 
purchase the Hong Kong Media Imports receivable 
at a 16% per annum discount plus a 2% charge for a 
non-recourse clause.
a.	 What is the annualized percentage all-in cost of this 
factoring alternative?
b.	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of the 
factoring alternative compared to the alternatives 
in Problem 7?
9.	 Whatchamacallit Sports (A). Whatchamacallit Sports 
(Whatchamacallit) is considering bidding to sell 
$100,000 of ski equipment to Phang Family Enter-
prises of Seoul, Korea. Payment would be due in six 
months. Since Whatchamacallit cannot find good 
credit information on Phang, Whatchamacallit wants 
to protect its credit risk. It is considering the following 
financing solution.
Phang’s bank issues a letter of credit on behalf of 
Phang and agrees to accept Whatchamacallit’s draft 
for $100,000 due in six months. The acceptance fee 
would cost Whatchamacallit $500, plus reduce Phang’s 
available credit line by $100,000. The bankers’ accep-
tance note of $100,000 would be sold at a 2% per 
annum discount in the money market. What is the 
annualized percentage all-in cost to Whatchamacallit 
of this bankers’ acceptance financing?
10.	 Whatchamacallit Sports (B). Whatchamacallit could 
also buy export credit insurance from FCIA for a 
1.5% premium. It finances the $100,000 receivable 
from Phang from its credit line at 6% per annum 
interest. No compensating bank balance would be 
required.
a.	 What is Whatchamacallit’s annualized percentage 
all-in cost of financing?
b.	 What are Phang’s costs?
c.	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of this 
alternative compared to the bankers’ acceptance 
financing in Problem 9? Which alternative would 
you recommend?
11.	 Inca Breweries of Peru. Inca Breweries of Lima, Peru, 
has received an order for 10,000 cartons of beer from 
Alicante Importers of Alicante, Spain. The beer will 
be exported to Spain under the terms of a letter of 
credit issued by a Madrid bank on behalf of Alicante 
Importers. The letter of credit specifies that the face 

475
International Trade Finance    CHAPTER 16 
Internet Exercises
1.	 Letter of Credit Services. Commercial banks world-
wide provide a variety of services to aid in the financ-
ing of foreign trade. Contact any of the many major 
multinational banks (a few are listed below) and 
determine what types of letter of credit services and 
other trade financing services they are able to provide.
Bank of America
www.bankamerica.com
Barclays
www.barclays.com
Deutsche Bank
www.deutschebank.com
Union Bank of 
Switzerland
www.unionbank.com
Swiss Bank Corporation
www.swissbank.com
2.	 The Balanced World. The Balanced World Web site 
is the equivalent of a social networking site for those 
interested in discussing a multitude of financial issues 
in greater depth and breadth. There is no limit to 
breadth of topics in finance and financial management 
that are posted and discussed.
The Balanced World
www.thebalancedworld.com

This page intentionally left blank 

477
Part  5 
Foreign 
Investments 
and Investment 
Analysis
Chapter 17 
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
Chapter 18 
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border 
Acquisitions

478
Chapter    17
Foreign Direct Investment 
and Political Risk
In this world, shipmates, Sin that pays its way can travel freely, and without 
passport; whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at all frontiers.
—Herman Melville, Chapter 9, The Sermon, in Moby Dick, 1851.
The strategic decision to undertake foreign direct investment (FDI), and thus become an MNE, 
starts with a self-evaluation. This self-evaluation combines a series of questions including the 
nature of the firm’s competitive advantage, what business form and commensurate risks the 
firm should use and accept upon entry, and what political risks—both in the macro and micro 
context—the firm will be facing. This chapter explores this sequence of self-evaluation, as well 
as methods for both measuring and managing the multitude of risks taken in foreign investment. 
As part of this international exploration, an illustrative case on corporate competition from 
the emerging markets, highlighting how many of tomorrow’s most competitive MNEs may 
be arising from the emerging markets themselves. The chapter concludes with the ­Mini-Case, 
Strategic Portfolio Theory, Black Swans, and [Avoiding] Being the Turkey, a discussion of 
modern investment and portfolio theory in a world of growing and unknown risks.
Learning Objectives
■
■
Demonstrate how key competitive advantages support a strategy to sustain direct 
foreign investment
■
■
Show how the OLI Paradigm provides a theoretical foundation for the globalization 
process
■
■
Explore the motivations and factors that determine where multinationals invest 
abroad
■
■
Compare and contrast the modes of foreign investment
■
■
Illustrate the new forces driving corporate competition in emerging markets
■
■
Evaluate the various factors that may be used to predict when and where political 
risks will arise
■
■
Describe the forms of transfer risk and how multinationals may mitigate these 
blockages
■
■
Learn how to evaluate the cultural and institutional factors often leading to firm-
specific political risk
■
■
Examine the unique complexities of global specific risk

479
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
Sustaining and Transferring Competitive Advantage
In deciding whether to invest abroad, management must first determine whether the firm 
has a sustainable competitive advantage that enables it to compete effectively in the home 
market. The competitive advantage must be firm-specific, transferable, and powerful enough 
to compensate the firm for the potential disadvantages of operating abroad (foreign exchange 
risks, political risks, and increased agency costs).
Based on observations of firms that have successfully invested abroad, we can conclude 
that some of the competitive advantages enjoyed by MNEs are (1) economies of scale and 
scope arising from their large size; (2) managerial and marketing expertise; (3) advanced tech-
nology owing to their heavy emphasis on research; (4) financial strength; (5) differentiated 
products; and sometimes (6) competitiveness of their home markets.
Economies of Scale and Scope
Economies of scale and scope can be developed in production, marketing, finance, research 
and development, transportation, and purchasing. All of these areas have significant competi-
tive advantages of being large, whether size is due to international or domestic operations. 
Production economies can come from the use of large-scale automated plant and equipment 
or from an ability to rationalize production through global specialization.
For example, some automobile manufacturers, such as Ford, rationalize manufacturing 
by producing engines in one country, transmissions in another, and bodies in another and 
assembling still elsewhere, with the location often being dictated by comparative advantage. 
Marketing economies occur when firms are large enough to use the most efficient advertis-
ing media to create global brand identification, as well as to establish global distribution, 
warehousing, and servicing systems. Financial economies derive from access to the full range 
of financial instruments and sources of funds, such as the euroequity and eurobond markets. 
In-house research and development programs are typically restricted to large firms because 
of the minimum-size threshold for establishing a laboratory and scientific staff. Transportation 
economies accrue to firms that can ship in carload or shipload lots. Purchasing economies come 
from quantity discounts and market power.
Managerial and Marketing Expertise
Managerial expertise includes skill in managing large industrial organizations from both a 
human and a technical viewpoint. It also encompasses knowledge of modern analytical tech-
niques and their application in functional areas of business. Managerial expertise can be devel-
oped through prior experience in foreign markets. In most empirical studies, multinational 
firms have been observed to export to a market before establishing a production facility there. 
Likewise, they have prior experience sourcing raw materials and human capital in other for-
eign countries either through imports, licensing, or FDI. In this manner, the MNEs can partially 
overcome the supposed superior local knowledge of host-country firms.
Advanced Technology
Advanced technology includes both scientific and engineering skills. It is not limited to MNEs, 
but firms in the most industrialized countries have had an advantage in terms of access to 
continuing new technology spin-offs from the military and space programs. Empirical studies 
have supported the importance of technology as a characteristic of MNEs.

480
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
Financial Strength
Companies demonstrate financial strength by achieving and maintaining a global cost and 
availability of capital. This is a critical competitive cost variable that enables them to fund FDI 
and other foreign activities. MNEs that are resident in liquid and unsegmented capital markets 
are normally blessed with this attribute. However, MNEs that are resident in small industrial 
or emerging market countries can still follow a proactive strategy of seeking foreign portfolio 
and corporate investors.
Small- and medium-size firms often lack the characteristics that attract foreign (and maybe 
domestic) investors. They are too small or unattractive to achieve a global cost of capital. This 
limits their ability to fund FDI, and their higher marginal cost of capital reduces the number 
of foreign projects that can generate the higher required rate of return.
Differentiated Products
Firms create their own firm-specific advantages by producing and marketing differentiated 
products. Such products originate from research-based innovations or heavy marketing expen-
ditures to gain brand identification. Furthermore, the research and marketing process con-
tinues to produce a steady stream of new differentiated products. It is difficult and costly for 
competitors to copy such products, and they always face a time lag if they try. Having devel-
oped differentiated products for the domestic home market, the firm may decide to market 
them worldwide, a decision consistent with the desire to maximize return on heavy research 
and marketing expenditures.
Competitiveness of the Home Market
A strongly competitive home market can sharpen a firm’s competitive advantage relative to 
firms located in less competitive home markets. This phenomenon is known as the “competi-
tive advantage of nations,” a concept originated by Michael Porter of Harvard, and summa-
rized in Exhibit 17.1.
Factor Conditions
Demand Conditions
Related Industries
Firm Strategy,
Structure and Rivalry
Source: Based on concepts described by Michael Porter in “The Competitive Advantage of Nations,” Harvard 
Business Review, March–April 1990.
A ﬁrm’s competitiveness can be signiﬁcantly strengthened based on its having competed in a highly competitive home market.
Home country competitive advantage must be based on at least one of four critical components.
The nature of local customers—customers that are demanding, diligent, sophisticated, focused on
speciﬁc issues of quality or safety—all build competitiveness.
A ﬁrm that has competed successfully in a local market, which requires an integration of related
suppliers and partner ﬁrms, including government, is advantaged.
Many of the world’s most competitive ﬁrms have learned to adapt to local markets in diﬀerent ways,
altering strategy and structure to ﬁnd the best ﬁt for proﬁtable growth.
The factors of production—land, labor, capital, technology—that are core to the speciﬁc industry might
include speciﬁc labor skill sets or complex technology support.
Exhibit 17.1
 Determinants of National Competitive Advantage: Porter’s Demand

481
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
A firm’s success in competing in a particular industry depends partly on the availability 
of factors of production (land, labor, capital, and technology) appropriate for that industry. 
Countries that are either naturally endowed with the appropriate factors or able to create 
them will probably spawn firms that are both competitive at home and potentially so abroad. 
For example, a well-educated workforce in the home market creates a competitive advantage 
for firms in certain high-tech industries. Firms facing sophisticated and demanding customers 
in the home market are able to hone their marketing, production, and quality control skills. 
Japan is such a market.
Firms in industries that are surrounded by a critical mass of related industries and sup-
pliers will be more competitive because of this supporting cast. For example, electronic firms 
located in centers of excellence, such as in the San Francisco Bay area, are surrounded by 
efficient, creative suppliers who enjoy access to educational institutions at the forefront of 
knowledge.
A competitive home market forces firms to fine-tune their operational and control strate-
gies for their specific industry and country environment. Japanese firms learned how to organ-
ize to implement their famous just-in-time inventory control system. One key was to use 
numerous subcontractors and suppliers that were encouraged to locate near the final assembly 
plants.
In some cases, host-country markets have not been large or competitive, but MNEs located 
there have nevertheless developed global niche markets served by foreign subsidiaries. Global 
competition in oligopolistic industries substitutes for domestic competition. For example, a 
number of MNEs resident in Scandinavia, Switzerland, and the Netherlands fall into this 
category. They include Novo Nordisk (Denmark), Norske Hydro (Norway), Nokia ­(Finland), 
L.M. Ericsson (Sweden), Astra (Sweden), ABB (Sweden/Switzerland), Roche Holding 
­(Switzerland), Royal Dutch Shell (the Netherlands), Unilever (the Netherlands), and Philips 
(the Netherlands).
Emerging market countries have also spawned aspiring global MNEs in niche markets 
even though they lack competitive home-country markets. Some of these are traditional 
exporters in natural resource fields such as oil, agriculture, and minerals, but they are in transi-
tion to becoming MNEs. They typically start with foreign sales subsidiaries, joint ventures, and 
strategic alliances. Examples are Petrobrás (Brazil), YPF (Argentina), and Cemex (Mexico). 
Another category is firms that have been recently privatized in the telecommunications indus-
try. Examples are Telefonos de Mexico and Telebrás (Brazil). Still others started as electronic 
component manufacturers but are making the transition to manufacturing abroad. Examples 
are Samsung Electronics (Korea) and Acer Computer (Taiwan).
The OLI Paradigm and Internationalization
The OLI Paradigm (Buckley and Casson, 1976; Dunning, 1977) is an attempt to create an over-
all framework to explain why MNEs choose FDI rather than serve foreign markets through 
alternative modes such as licensing, joint ventures, strategic alliances, management contracts, 
and exporting.1
The OLI Paradigm states first that a firm must first have some competitive advantage in 
its home market—“O” for ownership advantages—that can be transferred abroad if the firm 
1Peter J. Buckley and Mark Casson, The Future of the Multinational Enterprise, London: McMillan, 1976; and John 
H. Dunning, “Trade Location of Economic Activity and the MNE: A Search for an Eclectic Approach,” in The 
International Allocation of Economic Activity, Bertil Ohlin, Per-Ove Hesselborn, and Per Magnus Wijkman, eds., 
New York: Holmes and Meier, 1977, pp. 395–418.

482
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
is to be successful in foreign direct investment. Second, the firm must be attracted by specific 
characteristics of the foreign market—“L” for location advantages—that will allow it to exploit 
its competitive advantages in that market. Third, the firm will maintain its competitive position 
by attempting to control the entire value chain in its industry—“I” for internationalization 
advantages. This leads it to foreign direct investment rather than licensing or outsourcing.
Ownership Advantages
As described earlier, a firm must have competitive advantages in its home market. These 
must be firm-specific, not easily copied, and in a form that allows them to be transferred 
to foreign subsidiaries. For example, economies of scale and financial strength are not 
necessarily firm-specific because they can be achieved by many other firms. Certain kinds 
of technology can be purchased, licensed, or copied. Even differentiated products can 
lose their advantage to slightly altered versions, given enough marketing effort and the 
right price.
Location Advantages
These factors are typically market imperfections or genuine comparative advantages that 
attract FDI to particular locations. These factors might include a low-cost but productive labor 
force, unique sources of raw materials, a large domestic market, defensive investments to 
counter other competitors, or centers of technological excellence.
Internationalization Advantages
According to the theory, the key ingredient for maintaining a firm-specific competitive 
advantage is possession of proprietary information and control of the human capital that can 
generate new information through expertise in research. Needless to say, once again, large 
research-intensive firms are most likely to fit this description.
Minimizing transactions costs is the key factor in determining the success of an inter-
nationalization strategy. Wholly owned FDI reduces the agency costs that arise from asym-
metric information, lack of trust, and the need to monitor foreign partners, suppliers, and 
financial institutions. Self-financing eliminates the need to observe specific debt covenants 
on foreign subsidiaries that are financed locally or by joint venture partners. If a multi-
national firm has a low global cost and high availability of capital, why share it with joint 
venture partners, distributors, licensees, and local banks, all of which probably have a higher 
cost of capital?
The Financial Strategy
Financial strategies are directly related to the OLI Paradigm in explaining FDI, as shown 
in Exhibit 17.2. Proactive financial strategies can be formulated in advance by the MNE’s 
financial managers. These include strategies necessary to gain an advantage from lower 
global cost and greater availability of capital. Other proactive financial strategies are 
negotiating financial subsidies and/or reduced taxation to increase free cash flows, reduc-
ing financial agency costs through FDI, and reducing operating and transaction exposure 
through FDI.
Reactive financial strategies, as illustrated in Exhibit 17.2, depend on discovering market 
imperfections. For example, the MNE can exploit misaligned exchange rates and stock prices. 
It also needs to react to capital controls that prevent the free movement of funds and react to 
opportunities to minimize worldwide taxation.

483
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
Deciding Where to Invest
The decision about where to invest abroad for the first time is not the same as the decision 
about where to reinvest abroad. This decision is influenced by behavioral factors. A firm learns 
from its first few investments abroad and what it learns influences subsequent investments.
In theory, a firm should identify its competitive advantages. Then it should search world-
wide for market imperfections and comparative advantage until it finds a country where it 
expects to enjoy a competitive advantage large enough to generate a risk-adjusted return 
above the firm’s hurdle rate, the minimum acceptable rate of return on new investments.
In practice, firms have been observed to follow a sequential search pattern as described 
in the behavioral theory of the firm. Human rationality is bounded by one’s ability to gather 
and process all the information that would be needed to make a perfectly rational decision 
based on all the facts. This observation lies behind two behavioral theories of FDI described 
next—the behavioral approach and the international network theory.
The Behavioral Approach to FDI
The behavioral approach to analyzing the FDI decision is typified by the so-called Swedish 
School of economists.2 The Swedish School has rather successfully explained not just the initial 
Internationalization Advantages
Location Advantages
Ownership Advantages
Source: Constructed by authors based on “On the Treatment of Finance-Speciﬁc Factors Within the OLI Paradigm,”
by Lars Oxelheim, Arthur Stonehill, and Trond Randøy, International Business Review 10, 2001, pp. 381–398.
• Exploiting exchange rates
• Exploiting stock prices
• Reacting to capital controls
• Minimizing taxation 
• Minimizing taxation 
Reactive Financial Strategies  
• Competitive sourcing of capital globally
• Strategic cross-listing
• Accounting & disclosure transparency
• Maintaining ﬁnancial relationships
• Maintaining competitive credit rating 
• Competitive sourcing of capital globally
• Maintaining competitive credit rating 
• Negotiating tax & ﬁnancial subsidies 
• Maintaining competitive credit rating 
• Reducing agency costs through FDI
Proactive Financial Strategies  
Exhibit 17.2
 Finance Factors and the OLI Paradigm
2John Johansen, and F. Wiedersheim-Paul, “The Internationalization of the Firm: Four Swedish Case Studies,” ­Journal 
of Management Studies, Vol. 12, No. 3, 1975; and John Johansen and Jan Erik Vahlne, “The ­Internationalization of the 
Firm: A Model of Knowledge Development and Increasing Foreign Market Commitments,” Journal of International 
Business Studies, Vol. 8, No. 1, 1977.

484
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
decision to invest abroad but also later decisions to reinvest elsewhere and to change the struc-
ture of a firm’s international involvement over time. Based on the internationalization process 
of a sample of Swedish MNEs, the economists observed that these firms tended to invest first 
in countries that were not too far distant in psychic terms. Close psychic distance defined coun-
tries with a cultural, legal, and institutional environment similar to Sweden’s, such as Norway, 
Denmark, Finland, Germany, and the United Kingdom. The initial investments were modest 
in size to minimize the risk of an uncertain foreign environment. As the Swedish firms learned 
from their initial investments, they became willing to take greater risks with respect to both 
the psychic distance of the countries and the size of the investments.
MNEs in a Network Perspective
As the Swedish MNEs grew and matured, so did the nature of their international involve-
ment, what is often termed the network perspective. Today, each MNE is perceived as being a 
member of an international network, with nodes based in each of the foreign subsidiaries, as 
well as the parent firm itself. Centralized (hierarchical) control has given way to decentralized 
(heterarchical) control. Foreign subsidiaries compete with each other and with the parent for 
expanded resource commitments, thus influencing the strategy and reinvestment decisions.3
Many of these MNEs have become political coalitions with competing internal and exter-
nal networks. Each subsidiary (and the parent) is embedded in its host country’s network of 
suppliers and customers. It is also a member of a worldwide network based on its industry. 
Finally, it is a member of an organizational network under the nominal control of the parent 
firm. Complicating matters still further is the possibility that the parent itself may have evolved 
into a transnational firm, one that is owned by a coalition of investors located in different 
countries.
Modes of Foreign Investment
The globalization process includes a sequence of decisions regarding where production is to 
occur, who is to own or control intellectual property, and who is to own the actual production 
facilities. Exhibit 17.3 provides a roadmap to explain this FDI sequence.
Exporting versus Production Abroad
There are several advantages to limiting a firm’s activities to exports. Exporting has none of the 
unique risks facing FDI, joint ventures, strategic alliances, and licensing. Political risks are mini-
mal. Agency costs, such as monitoring and evaluating foreign units, are avoided. The amount 
of front-end investment is typically lower than in other modes of foreign involvement. Foreign 
exchange risks remain, however. The fact that a significant share of exports (and imports) is 
executed between MNEs and their foreign subsidiaries and affiliates further reduces the risk 
of exports compared to other modes of involvement.
There are also disadvantages of limiting a firm’s activities to exports. A firm is not able 
to internalize and exploit the results of its research and development as effectively as if it 
invested directly. The firm also risks losing markets to imitators and global competitors that 
might be more cost efficient in production abroad and distribution. As these firms capture for-
eign markets, they might become so strong that they can export into the domestic exporter’s 
own market. Remember that defensive FDI is often motivated by the need to prevent this 
kind of predatory behavior as well as to preempt foreign markets before competitors can get 
started.
3Mats Forsgren, Managing the Internationalization Process: The Swedish Case, London: Routledge, 1989.

485
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
Licensing and Management Contracts
Licensing is a popular method for domestic firms to profit from foreign markets without the 
need to commit sizable funds. Since the foreign producer is typically wholly owned locally, 
political risk is minimized. In recent years, a number of host countries have demanded that 
MNEs sell their services in pieces (“unbundled form”) rather than only through FDI. Such 
countries would like their local firms to purchase managerial expertise and knowledge of 
product and factor markets through management contracts, and purchase technology through 
licensing agreements.
The main disadvantage of licensing is that license fees are likely to be lower than FDI 
profits, although the return on the marginal investment might be higher. Other disadvantages 
include the following:
■
■
Possible loss of quality control
■
■
Establishment of a potential competitor in third-country markets
■
■
Possible improvement of the technology by the local licensee, which then enters the 
firm’s home market
The Firm and Its
Competitive Advantage
Greater
Foreign
Investment
Greater Foreign Presence
Production Abroad
Control Assets
Abroad
Wholly Owned
Subsidiary
Acquisition of a 
Foreign Enterprise
Exploit Existing Competitive
Advantage Abroad
Production at Home:
Exporting
Licensing
Management Contract
Joint Venture
Greenﬁeld
Investment
Change
Competitive Advantage
Source: Adapted from Gunter Dufey and R. Mirus, “Foreign Direct Investment: Theory and Strategic Considerations,” 
unpublished, University of Michigan, 1985. Reprinted with permission from the authors. All rights reserved.
Exhibit 17.3
 The FDI Sequence: Foreign Presence and Investment

486
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
■
■
Possible loss of opportunity to enter the licensee’s market with FDI later
■
■
Risk that technology will be stolen
■
■
High agency costs
MNEs have not typically used licensing of independent firms. On the contrary, most licens-
ing arrangements have been with their own foreign subsidiaries or joint ventures. License fees 
are a way to spread the corporate research and development cost among all operating units 
and a means of repatriating profits in a form more acceptable to some host countries than 
dividends.
Management contracts are similar to licensing insofar as they provide for some cash flow 
from a foreign source without significant foreign investment or exposure. Management con-
tracts probably lessen political risk because repatriation of managers is easy. International 
consulting and engineering firms traditionally conduct their foreign business based on a man-
agement contract.
Whether licensing and management contracts are cost effective compared to FDI 
depends on the price host countries will pay for the unbundled services. If the price were 
high enough, many firms would prefer to take advantage of market imperfections in an 
unbundled way, particularly in view of the lower political, foreign exchange, and business 
risks. Because we observe MNEs continuing to prefer FDI, we must assume that the price 
for selling unbundled services is still too low, as managerial expertise is often depend-
ent on a delicate mix of organizational support factors that cannot be transferred abroad 
efficiently.
Joint Venture versus Wholly Owned Subsidiary
A joint venture (JV) is defined here as shared ownership in a foreign business. A foreign busi-
ness unit that is partially owned by the parent company is typically termed a foreign affiliate. 
A foreign business unit that is 50% or more owned (and therefore controlled) by the par-
ent company is typically designated a foreign subsidiary. A JV would therefore typically be 
described as a foreign affiliate, but not a foreign subsidiary.
A joint venture between an MNE and a host-country partner is a viable strategy if, and 
only if, the MNE finds the right partner. Some of the obvious advantages of having a compat-
ible local partner are as follows:
■
■
The local partner understands the customs, mores, and institutions of the local envi-
ronment. An MNE might need years to acquire such knowledge on its own with a 
100%-owned greenfield subsidiary. (Greenfield investments are started with a clean 
slate, having no prior history of development.)
■
■
The local partner can provide competent management, not just at the top but also at 
the middle levels of management.
■
■
If the host country requires that foreign firms share ownership with local firms or 
investors, 100% foreign ownership is not a realistic alternative to a joint venture.
■
■
The local partner’s contacts and reputation enhance access to the host-country’s 
capital markets.
■
■
The local partner may possess technology that is appropriate for the local environ-
ment or perhaps can be used worldwide.
■
■
The public image of a firm that is partially locally owned may improve its sales 
­possibilities if the purpose of the investment is to serve the local market.

487
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
Despite this impressive list of advantages, joint ventures are not as common as 100%—
owned foreign subsidiaries because MNEs fear interference by the local partner in certain 
critical decision areas. Indeed, what is optimal from the viewpoint of the local venture may be 
suboptimal for the multinational operation as a whole. The most important potential conflicts 
or difficulties are these:
■
■
Political risk is increased rather than reduced if the wrong partner is chosen. The 
local partner must be credible and ethical or the venture is worse off for being a 
joint venture.
■
■
Local and foreign partners may have divergent views about the need for cash divi-
dends, or about the desirability of growth financed from retained earnings versus 
new financing.
■
■
Transfer pricing on products or components bought from or sold to related compa-
nies creates a potential for conflict of interest.
■
■
Control of financing is another problem area. An MNE cannot justify its use of cheap 
or available funds raised in one country to finance joint venture operations in another 
country.
■
■
Ability of a firm to rationalize production on a worldwide basis can be jeopardized 
if such rationalization would act to the disadvantage of local joint venture partners.
■
■
Financial disclosure of local results might be necessary with locally traded shares, 
whereas if the firm is wholly owned from abroad such disclosure is not needed. Dis-
closure gives nondisclosing competitors an advantage in setting strategy.
Valuation of equity shares is difficult. How much should the local partner pay for its share? 
What is the value of contributed technology, or of contributed land in a country where all 
land is state owned? It is highly unlikely that foreign and host-country partners have similar 
opportunity costs of capital, expectations about the required rate of return, or similar percep-
tions of appropriate premiums for business, foreign exchange, and political risks. Insofar as the 
venture is a component of the portfolio of each investor, its contribution to portfolio return 
and variance may be quite different for each.
Strategic Alliances
The term strategic alliance conveys different meanings to different observers. In one form of 
cross-border strategic alliance, two firms exchange a share of ownership with one another. A 
strategic alliance can be a takeover defense if the prime purpose is for a firm to place some of 
its stock in stable and friendly hands. If that is all that occurs, it is just another form of portfolio 
investment.
In a more comprehensive strategic alliance, in addition to exchanging stock, the partners 
establish a separate joint venture to develop and manufacture a product or service. Numerous 
examples of such strategic alliances can be found in the automotive, electronics, telecommu-
nications, and aircraft industries. Such alliances are particularly suited to high-tech industries 
where the cost of research and development is high and timely introduction of improvements 
is important.
A third level of cooperation might include joint marketing and servicing agreements in 
which each partner represents the other in certain markets. Some observers believe such 
arrangements begin to resemble the cartels prevalent in the 1920s and 1930s. Because they 
reduce competition, cartels have been banned by international agreements and by many 
national laws.

488
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
Illustrative Case: Corporate Competition  
from the Emerging Markets
BCG [Boston Consulting Group] argues . . . they have managed to resolve three trade-
offs that are usually associated with corporate growth: of volume against margin; rapid 
expansion against low leverage (debt); and growth against dividends. On average the 
challengers have increased their sales three times faster than their established global 
peers since 2005. Yet they have also reduced their debt-to-equity ratio by three percent-
age points and achieved a higher ratio of dividends to share price in every year but one.
—“Nipping at Their Heels: Firms from the Developing World Are Rapidly Catching Up 
with Their Old-World Competitors,” The Economist, January 22, 2011, p. 80.
Leadership in all companies, public and private, new and old, start-ups and maturing, have all 
heard the same threat in recent years: the emerging market competitors are coming. Despite 
the threat, there have been other forces at work that would prevent their advancing—or 
advancing too fast: the ability to raise sufficient capital at a reasonable cost; the ability to reach 
the larger and more profitable markets; the competition in markets that value name recogni-
tion and brand identity; and global reach. But a number of market prognosticators—the gurus 
and consultants—are now contending that these new competitors are already here.
One such analysis was recently published by BCG, the Boston Consulting Group.4 BCG 
labels these firms the global challengers, companies based in rapidly developing economies 
that are “shaking up” the established economic order. Their list of 100 global companies, most 
of which are from Brazil, Russia, India, China, and Mexico, are all innovative and aggressive, 
but have also proven to be financially fit.
The value created by these firms for their shareholders is very convincing. The total share-
holder return (TSR) for the global challengers between 2005 and 2009 was 22%; the same TSR 
for their global peers, public companies in comparable business lines from the industrialized 
economies, was a mere 5%. These firms have, according to BCG, been able to achieve these 
results by resolving three classic trade-offs confronting emerging players. These strategic trade-
offs turn out to be uniquely financial in character.
The Three Trade-Offs
The three trade-offs could also be characterized as three financial dimensions of competitive-
ness—the market, the financing, and the offered return.
Trade-Off #1: Volume versus Margin. Traditional business thinking assumes that large-scale, 
large-market sales, like that of Walmart, require incredibly low prices, which in turn impose 
low margin returns to the scale competitors. Higher margin products and services are usually 
reserved for specialty market segments, which may be much more expensive to service, but 
are found justifiable by the higher prices and higher margins they offer. BCG argues that the 
global challengers have been able to have both volume and margin, relying on exceptionally 
low direct costs of materials and labor, combined with the latest in technology and execution 
found in the developed country markets.
Trade-Off #2: Rapid Expansion versus Low Leverage. One of the key advantages always 
held by the world’s largest companies is their preferred access to capital. The advantages 
4“Companies on the Move, Rising Stars from Rapidly Developing Economies Are Reshaping Global Industries,” 
Boston Consulting Group, January 2011

489
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
afforded companies in large market economies—capitalist economies—is access to plentiful 
and affordable capital. Companies arising from the emerging markets have often been held 
back in their expansion efforts, not having the capital to exercise their ambitions. Only after 
gaining access to the world’s largest capital markets, providers of both debt and equity, can 
these firms pose a serious threat beyond their immediate country market or region. In the past, 
access meant higher levels of debt and the associated risks and burdens of higher leverage.
But the global challengers have again fought off the trade-off, finding ways to increase 
both equity and debt in proportion, and therefore to grow without taking on a riskier financial 
structure. The obvious solution has been to gain increasing access to affordable equity, often 
in London and New York.
Trade-Off #3: Growth versus Dividends. Financial theory has always emphasized the critical 
distinctions between what opportunities and threats growth firms and value firms offer inves-
tors. Growth firms are typically smaller firms, start-ups, companies with unique business models 
based on new technologies or services. They have enormous upside potential, but need more 
time, more experience, more breadth, and most importantly, more capital. Investors in these 
companies know the risks are high, and as a result, accept those risks in focusing on prospec-
tive returns from capital gains, not dividend distributions. Investors also know that these firms, 
often very small firms, will show large share price movements quickly with commensurate 
business developments. For that, the firm needs to be nimble, quick, and not laden with debt.
Value companies—a polite term for mature or older, larger, well-established global com-
petitors—are of a size in which new business developments, new markets, or new technolo-
gies, are rarely large enough to move share prices significantly and quickly. Investors in these 
companies, according to agency theory, do not “trust management” to take sufficient risks 
to generate returns. Therefore, they prefer the firm to bear some artificial financial burdens 
to assure diligence. Those financial burdens are typically higher levels of debt and growing 
distributions of profit as dividends. Both elements serve as financial disciplines, requiring 
management to maintain watchfulness over costs and cash flows to service debt, and generate 
sufficient profitability over time to supply dividends.
The global challengers have arguably thwarted this trade-off as well, paying dividends at 
growing rates and similar dividend yields to more mature firms with stronger and sustained 
cash flows. This may actually be the easiest of the three to accomplish given their already 
substantial sizes and strong profitability.
Continuing Questions
If these global challengers can defeat these traditional financial trade-offs, can they overcome 
the corporate strategic challenges that so many firms from so many markets flailed against 
before them? As The Economist notes, “All this is impressive, but it seems implausible that 
these trade-offs have been ‘resolved.’?”5
Many emerging market analysts and rapidly developing economy analysts argue that these 
firms not only understand emerging markets, but also they have demonstrated sustained inno-
vation and remained financially healthy. Others argue that these three factors are likely to be 
more simultaneous than causal. It is clear, however, that most of these new global players are 
arising from large underdeveloped and underserved markets—markets that are providing 
large bases for their rapid development.
One strategy being rapidly deployed by many of these firms is the use of strategic part-
nerships, joint ventures, or share swap agreements.6 In each of these forms, the companies are 
5“Nipping at Their Heels: Firms from the Developing World Are Rapidly Catching Up with Their Old-World 
­Competitors,” The Economist, January 22, 2011, p. 80.

490
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
gaining a competitive reach, a global partner, and access to technology and markets without 
major growth on their part. Despite the use of these partnerships, this does not directly address 
the continuing debate as to whether firms can grow as successfully into different businesses 
in different markets—diversified global conglomerates. Although a strategy employed in the 
past, it is one not followed frequently today.
Predicting Political Risk
How can multinational firms anticipate political risks such as government regulations that, 
from the firm’s perspective, are discriminatory or wealth depriving? First, the firm must be 
able to define and classify the political risks it may face.
Defining and Classifying Political Risk
In order for an MNE to identify, measure, and manage its political risks, it needs to define 
and classify these risks. At the macro level, firms attempt to assess a host country’s political 
stability and attitude toward foreign investors. At the micro level, firms analyze whether their 
firm-specific activities are likely to conflict with host-country goals as evidenced by existing 
regulations. The most difficult task, however, is to anticipate changes in host-country goal 
priorities, new regulations to implement reordered priorities, and the likely impact of such 
changes on the firm’s operations.
Exhibit 17.4 further classifies the political risks facing MNEs as being firm-specific, 
country-specific, or global-specific.
6“Big Emerging Market Mergers Create Global Competitors,” Gordon Platt, Global Finance, July/August 2009.
Global-Speciﬁc 
Risks
Country-Speciﬁc 
Risks
Transfer Risk
Cultural and
Institutional Risk
Firm-Speciﬁc 
Risks
Micro-Level Risk
Macro-Level Risk
• Governance risks
• Blocked funds
• Ownership structure
• Human resource norms
• Religious heritage
• Nepotism and corruption
• Intellectual property rights
• Protectionism
• Terrorism and war
• Antiglobalization movement
• Environmental concerns
• Poverty
• Cyber attacks
Exhibit 17.4
 Classification of Political Risks

491
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
■
■
Firm-specific risks, also known as micro risks, are those that affect the MNE at the 
project or corporate level. Governance risk due to goal conflict between an MNE 
and its host government is the main political firm-specific risk.
■
■
Country-specific risks, also known as macro risks, are those that affect the MNE at the 
project or corporate level but originate at the country level. The two main political 
risk categories at the country level are transfer risk and cultural and institutional risks. 
Cultural and institutional risks spring from ownership structure, human resource 
norms, religious heritage, nepotism and corruption, intellectual property rights, and 
protectionism.
■
■
Global-specific risks are those that affect the MNE at the project or corporate level 
but originate at the global level. Examples are terrorism, the antiglobalization move-
ment, environmental concerns, poverty, and cyber attacks.
This method of classification differs sharply from the traditional method that classifies 
risks according to the disciplines of economics, finance, political science, sociology, and law. 
We prefer our classification system because it is easier to relate the identified political risks to 
existing and recommended strategies to manage these risks.
Predicting Firm-Specific Risk (Micro Risk)
From the viewpoint of a multinational firm, assessing the political stability of a host country 
is only the first step in predicting firm-specific risk, since the real objective is to anticipate the 
effect of political changes on activities of a specific firm. Indeed, different foreign firms oper-
ating within the same country may have very different degrees of vulnerability to changes in 
host-country policy or regulations. One does not expect a Kentucky Fried Chicken franchise 
to experience the same risk as a Ford manufacturing plant.
The need for firm-specific analyses of political risk has led to a demand for “tailor-made” 
studies undertaken in-house by professional risk analysts. This demand is heightened by the 
observation that outside professional analysts rarely even agree on the degree of macro-
political risk that exists in any set of countries.
In-house political risk analysts relate the macro risk attributes of specific countries to the 
particular characteristics and vulnerabilities of their client firms. Mineral extractive firms, man-
ufacturing firms, multinational banks, private insurance carriers, and worldwide hotel chains 
are all exposed in fundamentally different ways to politically inspired restrictions. Even with 
the best possible firm-specific analysis, MNEs cannot be sure that the political or economic 
situation will not change. Thus, it is necessary to plan protective steps in advance to minimize 
the risk of damage from unanticipated changes.
Predicting Country-Specific Risk (Macro Risk)
Macro political risk analysis is still an emerging field of study. Political scientists in academia, 
industry, and government study country risk for the benefit of multinational firms, government 
foreign policy decision makers, and defense planners.
Political risk studies usually include an analysis of the historical stability of the country in 
question, evidence of present turmoil or dissatisfaction, indications of economic stability, and 
trends in cultural and religious activities. Data are usually assembled by reading local newspa-
pers, monitoring radio and television broadcasts, reading publications from diplomatic sources, 
tapping the knowledge of outstanding expert consultants, contacting other businesspeople who 
have had recent experience in the host country, and finally conducting on-site visits.
Despite this impressive list of activities, the prediction track record of business firms, 
the diplomatic service, and the military has been spotty at best. When one analyzes trends, 

492
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
whether in politics or economics, the tendency is to predict an extension of the same trends 
into the future. It is a rare forecaster who is able to predict a cataclysmic change in direction. 
Who predicted the overthrow of Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines? Indeed, who predicted 
the collapse of communism in the Soviet Union and the Eastern European satellites? Who 
predicted the fall of President Suharto in Indonesia in 1998? As illustrated by Global Finance 
in Practice 17.1, the 2011 public protests in Egypt serve as one corporate reminder of risk and 
the reaction of markets to perceived vulnerability.
Despite the difficulty of predicting country risk, the MNE must still attempt to do so in 
order to prepare itself for the unknown. A number of institutional services provide country 
risk ratings on a regular basis.
Predicting Global-Specific Risk (Macro Risk)
Predicting global-specific risk is even more difficult than the other two types of political risk. 
Nobody predicted the surprise attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon in the 
United States on September 11, 2001. On the other hand, the aftermath of this attack, that is, 
the war on global terrorism, increased U.S. homeland security, and the destruction of part of the 
The January and February 2011 protests in Egypt took ­billions 
of dollars of value away from Apache Corporation (NYSE: 
APA). The U.S.-based oil exploration and production company 
has significant holdings and operations in Egypt, and the politi-
cal turmoil that engulfed the country in early 2011 caused the 
investment public to start dumping Apache’s shares. Although 
actual oil and gas production was not ­disrupted during this 
period, Apache did evacuate all expatriate workers from 
Egypt. Egypt made up roughly 30% of Apache’s revenue 
in 2011, 26% of total production, and 13% of its estimated 
proved reserves of oil and gas.
Global Finance in Practice 17.1
Apache Takes a Hit from Egyptian Protests
Apache Corporation’s Share Price (NYSE: APA)
$128
$126
$124
$122
$120
$118
$116
$114
3-Jan-11
5-Jan-11
7-Jan-11
9-Jan-11
11-Jan-11
13-Jan-11
15-Jan-11
17-Jan-11
19-Jan-11
21-Jan-11
23-Jan-11
25-Jan-11
27-Jan-11
29-Jan-11
31-Jan-11
2-Feb-11
4-Feb-11
6-Feb-11
With 464.4 million shares outstanding,
Apache’s market value dropped $4.6 billion
in 11 days—10% of the company’s
total value.
$127.56/share on January 17
Price falls to $114.84/share
on January 28

493
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
terrorist network in Afghanistan was predictable. Nevertheless, we have come to expect future 
surprise terrorist attacks. U.S.-based MNEs are particularly exposed not only to ­Al-Qaeda but 
also to other unpredictable interest groups willing to use terror or mob action to promote such 
diverse causes as antiglobalization, environmental protection, and even anarchy. Since there 
is a great need to predict terrorism, we can expect to see a number of new indices, similar to 
country-specific indices, but devoted to ranking different types of terrorist threats, their loca-
tions, and potential targets.
Firm-Specific Political Risk: Governance Risk
The firm-specific political risks that confront MNEs include foreign exchange risks and 
governance risks. The various business and foreign exchange risks were detailed in Chapters 10, 
11, and 12. We focus our discussion here on governance risks.
Governance risk is measured by the MNE’s ability to exercise effective control over 
its operations within a country’s legal and political environment. For an MNE, however, 
governance is a subject similar in structure to consolidated profitability—it must be addressed 
for the individual business unit and subsidiary, as well as for the MNE as a whole.
The most important type of governance risk for the MNE on the subsidiary level arises 
from a goal conflict between bona fide objectives of host governments and the private firms 
operating within their spheres of influence. Governments are normally responsive to a con-
stituency consisting of their citizens. Firms are responsive to a constituency consisting of their 
owners and other stakeholders. The valid needs of these two separate sets of constituents need 
not be the same, but governments set the rules. Consequently, governments impose constraints 
on the activities of private firms as part of their normal administrative function.
Historically, conflicts between objectives of MNEs and host governments have arisen over 
such issues as the firm’s impact on economic development, perceived infringement on national 
sovereignty, foreign control of key industries, sharing or nonsharing of ownership and control 
with local interests, impact on a host country’s balance of payments, influence on the foreign 
exchange value of its currency, control over export markets, use of domestic versus foreign 
executives and workers, and exploitation of national resources. Attitudes about conflicts are 
often colored by views about free enterprise versus state socialism, the degree of nationalism 
or internationalism present, or the place of religious views in determining appropriate eco-
nomic and financial behavior.
The best approach to goal conflict management is to anticipate problems and negotiate 
understandings ahead of time. Different cultures apply different ethics to the question of hon-
oring prior “contracts,” especially when they were negotiated with a previous administration. 
Nevertheless, prenegotiation of all conceivable areas of conflict provides a better basis for a 
successful future for both parties than does overlooking the possibility that divergent objec-
tives will evolve over time. Prenegotiation often includes negotiating investment agreements, 
buying investment insurance and guarantees, and designing risk-reducing operating strategies 
to be used after the foreign investment decision has been made.
Investment Agreements
An investment agreement spells out specific rights and responsibilities of both the foreign firm 
and the host government. The presence of MNEs is as often sought by development-seeking 
host governments, just as a particular foreign location may be sought by an MNE. All parties 
have alternatives and so bargaining is appropriate. An investment agreement should spell out 
policies on financial and managerial issues, including the following:
■
■
The basis on which fund flows, such as dividends, management fees, royalties, patent 
fees, and loan repayments, may be remitted
■
■
The basis for setting transfer prices

494
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
■
■
The right to export to third-country markets
■
■
Obligations to build, or fund, social and economic overhead projects, such as schools, 
hospitals, and retirement systems
■
■
Methods of taxation, including the rate, the type of taxation, and means by which the 
rate base is determined
■
■
Access to host-country capital markets, particularly for long-term borrowing
■
■
Permission for 100% foreign ownership versus required local ownership (joint ven-
ture) participation
■
■
Price controls, if any, applicable to sales in the host-country markets
■
■
Requirements for local sourcing versus import of raw materials and components
■
■
Permission to use expatriate managerial and technical personnel, and to bring them 
and their personal possessions into the country free of exorbitant charges or import 
duties
■
■
Provision for arbitration of disputes
■
■
Provision for planned divestment, should such be required, indicating how the going 
concern will be valued and to whom it will be sold
Investment Insurance and Guarantees: OPIC
MNEs can sometimes transfer political risk to a host-country public agency through an invest-
ment insurance and guarantee program. Many developed countries have such programs to 
protect investments by their nationals in developing countries.
For example, in the United States the investment insurance and guarantee program is 
managed by the government-owned Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC). An 
OPIC’s purpose is to mobilize and facilitate the participation of U.S. private capital and skills 
in the economic and social progress of less-developed friendly countries and areas, thereby 
complementing the developmental assistance of the United States. An OPIC offers insurance 
coverage for four separate types of political risk, which have their own specific definitions for 
insurance purposes:
1.	 Inconvertibility is the risk that the investor will not be able to convert profits, royal-
ties, fees, or other income, as well as the original capital invested, into dollars.
2.	 Expropriation is the risk that the host government takes a specific step that for one 
year prevents the investor or the foreign subsidiary from exercising effective control 
over use of the property.
3.	 War, revolution, insurrection, and civil strife coverage applies primarily to the dam-
age of physical property of the insured, although in some cases inability of a foreign 
subsidiary to repay a loan because of a war may be covered.
4.	 Business income coverage provides compensation for loss of business income result-
ing from events of political violence that directly cause damage to the assets of a 
foreign enterprise.
Operating Strategies after the FDI Decision
Although an investment agreement creates obligations on the part of both foreign investor 
and host government, conditions change and agreements are often revised in the light of 
such changes. The changed conditions may be economic, or they may be the result of political 
changes within the host government. The firm that sticks rigidly to the legal interpretation of 
its original agreement may well find that the host government first applies pressure in areas 

495
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
not covered by the agreement and then possibly reinterprets the agreement to conform to the 
political reality of that country.
Most MNEs, in their own self-interest, follow a policy of adapting to changing host-country 
priorities whenever possible. The essence of such adaptation is anticipating host-country pri-
orities and ensuring that the activities of the firm are of continued value to the host country. 
Such an approach assumes the host government acts rationally in seeking its country’s self-
interest and is based on the idea that the firm should initiate reductions in goal conflict. Future 
bargaining position can be enhanced by careful consideration of policies in production, logis-
tics, marketing, finance, organization, and personnel.
Local Sourcing
Host governments may require foreign firms to purchase raw material and components locally 
as a way to maximize value-added benefits and to increase local employment. From the view-
point of the foreign firm trying to adapt to host-country goals, local sourcing reduces political 
risk, albeit at a trade-off with other factors. Local strikes or other turmoil may shut down the 
operation and such issues as quality control, high local prices, and unreliable delivery sched-
ules become important. Often, through local sourcing, the MNE lowers political risk only by 
increasing its financial and commercial risk.
Facility Location
Production facilities may be located to minimize risk. The natural location of different stages 
of production may be resource-oriented, footloose, or market-oriented. Oil, for instance, is 
drilled in and around the Persian Gulf, Russia, Venezuela, and Indonesia. No choice exists for 
where this activity takes place. Refining is footloose; a refining facility can be moved easily to 
another location or country. Whenever possible, oil companies have built refineries in politi-
cally safe countries, such as Western Europe, or small islands (such as Singapore or Curaçao), 
even though costs might be reduced by refining nearer the oil fields. They have traded reduced 
political risk and financial exposure for higher transportation and refining costs.
Control
Control—of transportation, technology, markets, brands and trademarks—is key to the man-
agement of a multitude of political risks.
Transportation. Control of transportation has been an important means to reduce political 
risk. Oil pipelines that cross national frontiers, oil tankers, ore carriers, refrigerated ships, and 
railroads have all been controlled at times to influence the bargaining power of both nations 
and companies.
Technology. Control of key patents and processes is a viable way to reduce political risk. If a 
host country cannot operate a plant because it does not have technicians capable of running 
the process, or of keeping up with changing technology, abrogation of an investment agree-
ment with a foreign firm is unlikely. Control of technology works best when the foreign firm 
is steadily improving its technology.
Markets. Control of markets is a common strategy to enhance a firm’s bargaining position. As 
effective as the OPEC cartel was in raising the price received for crude oil by its member coun-
tries in the 1970s, marketing was still controlled by the international oil companies. OPEC’s 
need for the oil companies limited the degree to which its members could dictate terms.
Control of export markets for manufactured goods is also a source of leverage in deal-
ings between MNEs and host governments. The MNE would prefer to serve world markets 
from sources of its own choosing, basing the decision on considerations of production cost, 

496
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
transportation, tariff barriers, political risk exposure, and competition. The selling pattern that 
maximizes long-run profits from the viewpoint of the worldwide firm rarely maximizes exports, 
or value added, from the perspective of the host countries. Some will argue that if the same 
plants were owned by local nationals and were not part of a worldwide integrated system, more 
goods would be exported by the host country. The contrary argument is that self-contained 
local firms might never obtain foreign market share because they lack economies of scale on 
the production side and are unable to market in foreign countries.
Brand Name/ Trademark. Control of a brand name or trademark can have an effect almost 
identical to that of controlling technology. It gives the MNE a monopoly on something that 
may or may not have substantive value but quite likely represents value in the eyes of consum-
ers. Ability to market under a world brand name is valuable for local firms and may represent 
an important bargaining chip for maintaining an investment.
Thin Equity Base
Foreign subsidiaries can be financed with a thin equity base and a large proportion of local 
debt. If the debt is borrowed from locally owned banks, host-government actions that weaken 
the financial viability of the firm also endanger local creditors.
Multiple-Source Borrowing
If the firm must finance with foreign source debt, it may borrow from banks in a number of 
countries rather than just from host-country banks. If, for example, debt is owed to banks in 
Tokyo, Frankfurt, London, and New York, nationals in a number of foreign countries have 
a vested interest in keeping the borrowing subsidiary financially strong. If the multinational 
is U.S.-owned, a fallout between the United States and the host government is less likely 
to cause the local government to move against the firm if it also owes funds to these other 
countries.
Country-Specific Risk: Transfer Risk
Country-specific risks affect all firms, domestic and foreign, that are resident in a host country. 
Exhibit 17.5 presents a taxonomy of most of the contemporary political risks that emanate from 
a specific country location. The main country-specific political risks are transfer risk, cultural 
risk, and institutional risk. This section focuses on transfer risk.
Blocked Funds
Transfer risk is the risk of limitations on the MNE’s ability to transfer funds into and out of 
a host country without restrictions. When a government runs short of foreign exchange and 
cannot obtain additional funds through borrowing or attracting new foreign investment, it 
usually limits transfers of foreign exchange out of the country, a restriction known as blocked 
funds. In theory, such limitations do not discriminate against foreign-owned firms because 
they apply to everyone; in practice, though, foreign firms have more at stake because of their 
foreign ownership.
Depending on the size of a foreign exchange shortage, the host government might simply 
require approval of all transfers of funds abroad, thus reserving the right to set a priority on 
the use of scarce foreign exchange. In very severe cases, the government might make its cur-
rency nonconvertible into other currencies, thereby fully blocking transfers of funds abroad. 
In between these positions are policies that restrict the size and timing of dividends, debt 
amortization, royalties, and service fees.

497
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
MNEs can react to the potential for blocked funds at three stages:
1.	 Prior to investing, a firm can analyze the effect of blocked funds on expected return on 
investment, the desired local financial structure, and optimal links with subsidiaries.
2.	 During operations, a firm can attempt to move funds through a variety of reposition-
ing techniques.
3.	 Funds that cannot be moved must be reinvested in the local country in a manner that 
avoids deterioration in their real value because of inflation or exchange depreciation.
Preinvestment Strategy to Anticipate Blocked Funds
Management can consider blocked funds in their capital budgeting analysis. Temporary block-
age of funds normally reduces the expected net present value and internal rate of return on 
a proposed investment. Whether the investment should nevertheless be undertaken depends 
on whether the expected rate of return, even with blocked funds, exceeds the required rate of 
return on investments of the same risk class. Preinvestment analysis also includes the potential 
to minimize the effect of blocked funds by financing with local borrowing instead of parent 
equity, swap agreements, and other techniques to reduce local currency exposure and thus the 
need to repatriate funds. Sourcing and sales links with subsidiaries can be predetermined to 
maximize the potential for moving blocked funds.
Moving Blocked Funds
What can a multinational firm do to transfer funds out of countries having exchange or remit-
tance restrictions? At least six popular strategies are used:
1.	 Providing alternative conduits for repatriating funds
2.	 Transferring pricing goods and services between related units of the MNE
Transfer Risk
Blocked Funds
• Preinvestment strategy to anticipate blocked funds
• Fronting loans
• Creating unrelated exports
• Obtaining special dispensation
• Forced reinvestment
Ownership Structure
• Joint venture
Religious Heritage
• Understand and respect host
   country religious heritage
Nepotism and Corruption
• Disclose bribery policy to both
   employees and clients
• Retain a local legal adviser
Human Resource Norms
• Local management and staﬃng
Intellectual Property
• Legal action in host country courts
• Support worldwide treaty to protect
   intellectual property rights
Protectionism
• Support government actions to
   create regional markets
Cultural and
Institutional Risk
Exhibit 17.5
 Management Strategies for Country-Specific Risks

498
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
3.	 Leading and lagging payments
4.	 Signing fronting loans
5.	 Creating unrelated exports
6.	 Obtaining special dispensation
Fronting Loans. A fronting loan is a parent-to-subsidiary loan channeled through a financial 
intermediary, usually a large international bank. Fronting loans differ from “parallel” or “back-
to-back” loans, discussed in Chapter 12. The latter are offsetting loans between commercial 
businesses arranged outside the banking system. Fronting loans are sometimes referred to as 
link financing.
In a direct intracompany loan, a parent or sister subsidiary loans directly to the borrowing 
subsidiary, and later, the borrowing subsidiary repays the principal and interest. In a fronting 
loan, by contrast, the “lending” parent or subsidiary deposits funds in, say, a London bank, and 
that bank loans the same amount to the borrowing subsidiary in the host country. From the 
London bank’s point of view, the loan is risk-free, because the bank has 100% collateral in 
the form of the parent’s deposit. In effect, the bank “fronts” for the parent—hence the name. 
Interest paid by the borrowing subsidiary to the bank is usually slightly higher than the rate 
paid by the bank to the parent, allowing the bank a margin for expenses and profit.
The bank chosen for the fronting loan is usually in a neutral country, away from both the 
lender’s and the borrower’s legal jurisdiction. Use of fronting loans increases the chances for 
repayment should political turmoil occur between the home and host countries. Government 
authorities are more likely to allow a local subsidiary to repay a loan to a large international 
bank in a neutral country than to allow the same subsidiary to repay a loan directly to its par-
ent. To stop payment to the international bank would hurt the international credit image of 
the country, whereas to stop payment to the parent corporation would have minimal impact 
on that image and might even provide some domestic political advantage.
Creating Unrelated Exports. Another approach to blocked funds, which benefits both the 
subsidiary and host country, is the creation of unrelated exports. Because the main reason for 
stringent exchange controls is usually a host country’s persistent inability to earn hard curren-
cies, anything an MNE can do to create new exports from the host country helps the situation 
and provides a potential means to transfer funds out. Some new exports can often be created 
from present productive capacity with little or no additional investment, especially if they are 
in product lines related to existing operations. Other new exports may require reinvestment 
or new funds, although if the funds reinvested consist of those already blocked, little is lost in 
the way of opportunity costs.
Special Dispensation. If all else fails and the multinational firm is investing in an industry 
that is important to the economic development of the host country, the firm may bargain for 
special dispensation to repatriate some portion of the funds that otherwise would be blocked. 
Firms in “desirable” industries such as telecommunications, semiconductor manufacturing, 
instrumentation, pharmaceuticals, or other research and high-tech industries may receive pref-
erence over firms in mature industries. The amount of preference received often depends on 
the relative bargaining strength of the two parties.
Self-Fulfilling Prophecies. In seeking “escape routes” for blocked funds—or for that mat-
ter in trying to position funds through any of the techniques discussed in this chapter—the 
MNE may increase political risk and cause a change from partial blockage to full blockage. 
The possibility of such a self-fulfilling cycle exists any time a firm takes action that, no matter 
how legal, thwarts the underlying intent of politically motivated controls. In the statehouses 

499
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
of the world, as in the editorial offices of the local press and TV, MNEs and their subsidiaries 
are always potential scapegoats.
Forced Reinvestment. If funds are indeed blocked from transfer into foreign exchange, they 
are by definition “reinvested.” Under such a situation, the firm must find local opportunities 
that will maximize the rate of return for a given acceptable level of risk.
If blockage is expected to be temporary, the most obvious alternative is to invest in local 
money market instruments. Unfortunately, in many countries, such instruments are not avail-
able in sufficient quantity or with adequate liquidity. In some cases, government Treasury 
bills, bank deposits, and other short-term instruments have yields that are kept artificially low 
relative to local rates of inflation or probable changes in exchange rates. Thus, the firm often 
loses real value during the period of blockage.
If short-term portfolio investments, such as bonds, bank time deposits, or direct loans to 
other companies, are not possible, investment in additional production facilities may be the 
only alternative. Often, this investment is what the host country is seeking by its exchange 
controls, even if exchange controls is counterproductive to additional foreign investment. 
Examples of forced direct reinvestment can be cited for Peru, where an airline invested in 
hotels and in maintenance facilities for other airlines; for Turkey, where a fish canning company 
constructed a plant to manufacture cans needed for packing the catch.
If investment opportunities in additional production facilities are not available, funds may 
simply be used to acquire other assets expected to increase in value with local inflation. Typical 
purchases might be land, office buildings, or commodities that are exported to global markets. 
Even inventory stockpiling might be a reasonable investment, given the low opportunity cost 
of the blocked funds.
Country-Specific Risk: Cultural and Institutional Risk
When investing in some of the emerging markets, MNEs that are resident in the most indus-
trialized countries face serious risks because of cultural and institutional differences. Many 
such differences include the following:
■
■
Differences in allowable ownership structures
■
■
Differences in human resource norms
■
■
Differences in religious heritage
■
■
Nepotism and corruption in the host country
■
■
Protection of intellectual property rights
■
■
Protectionism
■
■
Legal liabilities
Ownership Structure
Historically, many countries have required that MNEs share ownership of their foreign subsidi-
aries with local firms or citizens. Thus, joint ventures were the only way an MNE could operate 
in some host countries. Prominent countries that used to require majority local ownership were 
Japan, Mexico, China, India, and Korea. This requirement has been eliminated or modified in 
more recent years by these countries and most others. However, firms in certain industries are 
still either excluded from ownership completely or must accept being a minority owner. These 
industries are typically related to national defense, agriculture, banking, or other sectors that 
are deemed critical for the host nation.

500
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
Human Resource Norms
MNEs are often required by host countries to employ a certain proportion of host-country 
citizens rather than staffing mainly with foreign expatriates. It is often very difficult to fire 
local employees due to host-country labor laws and union contracts. This lack of flexibility 
to downsize in response to business cycles affects both MNEs and their local competitors. It 
also qualifies as a country-specific risk. Cultural differences can also inhibit an MNE’s staffing 
policies. For example, it is somewhat difficult for a woman manager to be accepted by local 
employees and managers in selected Middle Eastern countries.
Religious Heritage
MNEs in some cases may encounter host country environments in which the political attitudes, 
and therefore business attitudes, of the state are intertwined with religious beliefs that conflict 
with MNE business practices. Despite religious differences, however, MNEs have operated 
successfully in emerging markets, especially in extractive and natural resource industries, such 
as oil, natural gas, minerals, and forest products. The main MNE strategy is to understand and 
respect the host country’s religious traditions.
Nepotism and Corruption
MNEs must deal with endemic nepotism and corruption in a number of important foreign 
investment locations. Indonesia was famous for nepotism and corruption under the now-
deposed Suharto government. Nigeria, Kenya, Uganda, and a number of other African coun-
tries have a history of nepotism and corruption after they threw out their colonial governments 
after World War II. China and Russia have recently launched well-publicized crackdowns on 
those evils.
Bribery is not limited to emerging markets. It is also a problem in even the most industri-
alized countries, including the United States and Japan. In fact, the United States has an anti-
bribery law that would imprison any U.S. business executive found guilty of bribing a foreign 
government official. This law was passed in reaction to a U.S. aircraft manufacturer’s attempt 
to bribe a senior Japanese government official.
MNEs are caught in a dilemma. Should they employ bribery if their local competitors 
use this strategy? The nearly universal response is, absolutely not. Most MNEs have a set 
of principles and practices that they follow in the execution of their business globally. These 
principles and ethics are universal, and not situation specific. Regardless of what competitors 
may or may not do, the individual MNE must follow its own set of principles—even if it means 
losing the business.
Intellectual Property Rights
Rogue businesses in some host countries have historically infringed on the intellectual prop-
erty rights of both MNEs and individuals. Intellectual property rights grant the exclusive use 
of patented technology and copyrighted creative materials. Examples of patented technology 
are unique manufactured products, processing techniques, and prescription pharmaceutical 
drugs. Examples of copyrighted creative materials are software programs, educational materi-
als (textbooks), and entertainment products (e.g., music, film, art).
The agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) to pro-
tect intellectual property rights has been ratified by most major countries. It remains to be 
seen whether host governments are strong enough to enforce their official efforts to stamp 
out intellectual piracy. Complicating this task is the thin line that exists between the real item 
being protected and generic versions of the same item.

501
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
Protectionism
Protectionism is defined as the attempt by a national government to protect certain of its des-
ignated industries from foreign competition through such methods as tariffs or other import 
restrictions. Protected industries are usually related to defense, agriculture, and “infant” 
industries.
Defense. Even though the U.S. is a vocal proponent of open markets, a foreign firm propos-
ing to buy a U.S. critical defense supplier would not be welcome. The same attitude exists in 
many other countries, such as France, which has always wished to maintain an independent 
defense capability.
Agriculture. Agriculture is another sensitive industry. No MNE would be foolish enough 
as to attempt to buy agricultural properties, such as rice operations, in Japan. Japan has 
worked diligently to maintain an independent ability to feed its own population. Agricul-
ture is the typical “Mother Earth” industry that most countries want to protect for their 
own citizens.
Infant Industries. The traditional protectionist argument is that newly emerging “infant” 
industries need protection from foreign competition until they are firmly established. The 
infant industry argument is usually directed at limiting imports but not necessarily MNEs. 
In fact, most host countries encourage MNEs to establish operations in new industries that 
do not presently exist in the host country. Sometimes the host country offers foreign MNEs 
“infant industry” status for a limited number of years. This status could lead to tax subsidies, 
construction of infrastructure, employee training, and other aids to help the MNE get started. 
Host countries are especially interested in attracting MNEs that promise to export, either to 
their own foreign subsidiaries elsewhere or to unrelated parties.
Tariff and Non-Tariff Barriers. The traditional methods for countries to implement protec-
tionist barriers were through tariff and non-tariff regulations. A multitude of international 
negotiations and treaties have greatly reduced the general level of tariffs over the past decades. 
However, many non-tariff barriers remain. These non-tariff barriers restrict imports by some-
thing other than a financial cost and are often difficult to identify because they are promul-
gated as health, safety, or sanitation requirements.
Strategies to Manage Protectionism. MNEs have only a very limited ability to overcome 
host country protectionism. However, MNEs do enthusiastically support efforts to reduce 
protectionism by joining in regional markets. The best examples of regional markets are the 
European Union (EU), the North American Free Trade Association (NAFTA), and the Latin 
American Free Trade Association (MERCOSUR). Among the objectives of regional markets 
are elimination of internal trade barriers, such as tariffs and non-tariff barriers, as well as the 
free movement of citizens for employment purposes.
Legal Liabilities
Despite good intentions, MNEs are often confronted with unexpected legal liabilities. Global 
Finance in Practice 17.2 illustrates why Hospira, a U.S.-based pharmaceutical manufacturer, 
decided to cancel an FDI project in Italy as a result of potential legal and associated financial 
liabilities.

502
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
Global-Specific Risk
Global-specific risks faced by MNEs have come to the forefront in recent years. Exhibit 17.6 
summarizes some of these risks, and strategies that can be used to manage them. The most 
visible recent risk was, of course, the attack by terrorists on the twin towers of the World Trade 
Center in New York on September 11, 2001. Many MNEs had major operations in the World 
Trade Center and suffered heavy casualties among their employees. In addition to terrorism, 
other global-specific risks include the antiglobalization movement, environmental concerns, 
poverty in emerging markets, and cyber attacks on computer information systems.
Foreign direct investment can be a very tricky thing. Just 
ask Hospira, a U.S.-based pharmaceutical manufacturer. 
Hospira, of Lake Forest, Illinois (U.S.), stopped manufacturing 
of ­Pentothal (sodium thiopental) in North Carolina in the United 
States in mid-2009. It intended to shift all production to Italy.
But Hospira quickly found that the Italian government 
required assurance that any product produced in Italy would 
not be used in capital punishment procedures in the United 
States. Hospira, however, after extensive discussions with its 
wholesalers and distributors could not be certain that product, 
once entering into the sales and distribution system in the 
U.S., could not be diverted to departments of corrections for 
us in capital punishment.
Hospira concluded that it could not afford the risk that 
Italian authorities would hold it liable for the product if it was 
so diverted, and therefore decided to exit the market.
The news was met with dismay by the medical indus-
try. Pentothal, at one time a widely used anesthetic, is today 
only used in a variety of special cases. The drug is preferred 
in specific cases because it does not cause blood pressure 
to drop severely, including the care of the elderly, patients 
with heart disease, or expecting mothers requiring emerging 
C-sections in which the possibility of low blood pressure is 
threatening. Second-best solutions would now have to be 
good enough.
Global Finance in Practice 17.2
Drugs, Public Policy, and the Death Penalty
Terrorism and War
• Support government eﬀorts to ﬁght
   terrorism and war
• Crisis planning
• Cross-border supply chain integration
Environmental Concerns
• Show sensitivity to environmental concerns
• Support government eﬀorts to maintain a
   level playing ﬁeld for pollution controls
Antiglobalization
• Support government eﬀorts to
   reduce trade barriers
• Recognize that MNEs are the targets
Cyber Attacks
• No eﬀective strategy except Internet
   security eﬀorts
• Support government anti-cyber
   attack eﬀorts
Poverty
• Provide stable, relatively well-paying jobs
• Establish the strictest of occupational
   safety standards
MNE movement toward multiple primary objectives:
Proﬁtability, Sustainable Development, Corporate Social Responsibility
Exhibit 17.6
 Management Strategies for Global-Specific Risks

503
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
Terrorism and War
Although the World Trade Center attack and its aftermath, the war in Afghanistan, have 
affected nearly everyone worldwide, many other acts of terrorism have been committed in 
recent years. More terrorist acts are expected to occur in the future. Particularly exposed are 
the foreign subsidiaries of MNEs and their employees. As mentioned earlier, foreign subsidi-
aries are especially exposed to war, ethnic strife, and terrorism because they are symbols of 
their respective parent countries.
Crisis Planning. No MNE has the tools to avert terrorism. Hedging, diversification, insurance, 
and the like are not suited to the task. Therefore, MNEs must depend on governments to fight 
terrorism and protect their foreign subsidiaries (and now even the parent firm). In return, 
governments expect financial, material, and verbal support from MNEs to support antiterrorist 
legislation and proactive initiatives to destroy terrorist cells wherever they exist.
MNEs can be subject to damage by being in harm’s way. Nearly every year one or more 
host countries experience some form of ethnic strife, outright war with other countries, or ter-
rorism. It seems that foreign MNEs are often singled out as symbols of “oppression” because 
they represent their parent country, especially if it is the United States.
Cross-Border Supply Chain Integration. The drive to increase efficiency in manufacturing 
has driven many MNEs to adopt just-in-time (JIT) near-zero inventory systems. Focusing on 
so-called inventory velocity, the speed at which inventory moves through a manufacturing 
process, arriving only as needed and not before, has allowed these MNEs to generate increas-
ing profits and cash flows with less capital being bottled-up in the production cycle itself. This 
finely tuned supply chain system, however, is subject to significant political risk if the supply 
chain itself extends across borders.
Supply Chain Interruptions. Consider the cases of Dell Computer, Ford Motor Company, 
Apple Computer, Herman Miller, and The Limited in the days following the terrorist attacks 
of September 11, 2001. An immediate result of the attacks was the grounding of all aircraft 
into or out of the United States. Similarly, the land (Mexico and Canada) and sea borders of 
the United States were also shut down and not reopened for several days in some specific 
sites. Ford Motor Company shut down five of its manufacturing plants in the days following 
September 11 because of inadequate inventories of critical automotive inputs supplied from 
Canada.
Dell Computer, with one of the most highly acclaimed and admired virtually integrated 
supply chains, depends on computer parts and subassembly suppliers and manufacturers in 
both Mexico and Canada to fulfill its everyday assembly and sales needs. In recent years, Dell 
carried less than three days sales (total inventory—by cost of goods sold). Suppliers are inte-
grated electronically with Dell’s order fulfillment system, and deliver required components 
and subassemblies as sales demands require. But with the closure of borders and grounding of 
air freight, the company was literally brought to a near standstill because of its supply chain’s 
reliance on the ability to treat business units and suppliers in different countries as if they were 
all part of a single seamless political unit.
As a result of these newly learned lessons, many MNEs are now evaluating the degree 
of exposure their own supply chains possess in regard to cross-border stoppages or other 
cross-border political events. These companies are not, however, about to abandon JIT. It is 
estimated that many U.S. companies alone have saved more than $1 billion a year in inven-
tory carrying costs by using JIT methods over the past decade. This substantial benefit is now 
being weighed against the costs and risks associated with the post-September 11 supply chain 

504
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
interruptions. To avoid suffering a similar fate in the future, manufacturers, retailers, and sup-
pliers are now employing a range of tactics:
■
■
Inventory Management.   Manufacturers and assemblers are now considering car-
rying more buffer inventory in order to hedge against supply and production-line 
disruptions. Retailers, meanwhile, should think about the timing and frequency of 
their replenishment. Rather than stocking up across the board, companies are focus-
ing on the most critical parts to the product or service, and those components, which 
are uniquely available from international sources.
■
■
Sourcing.   Manufacturers are now being more selective about where the critical 
inputs to their products come from. Although sourcing strategies will have to vary by 
location (those involving Mexico for example will differ dramatically from Canada), 
firms are attempting to work more closely with existing suppliers to minimize cross-
border exposures and reduce the potential costs with future stoppages.
■
■
Transportation.   Retailers and manufacturers alike are reassessing their cross-
border shipping arrangements. Although the mode of transportation employed is 
a function of value, volume, and weight, many firms are now reassessing whether 
higher costs for faster shipment balance out the more tenuous delivery under airline 
­stoppages from labor, terrorist, or even bankruptcy disruptions in the future.
Antiglobalization Movement
During the past decade, there has been a growing negative reaction by some groups to 
reduced trade barriers and efforts to create regional markets, particularly to NAFTA and 
the European Union. NAFTA has been vigorously opposed by those sectors of the labor 
movement that could lose jobs to Mexico. Opposition within the European Union centers on 
loss of cultural identity, dilution of individual national control as new members are admitted, 
over-centralization of power in a large bureaucracy in Brussels, and the loss of independent 
monetary policies including the definition of their own individual currencies.
The antiglobalization movement has become more visible following riots in Seattle during 
the 2001 annual meeting of the World Trade Organization. However, antiglobalization forces 
were not solely responsible for these riots, or for subsequent riots in Quebec and Prague in 
2001. Other disaffected groups, such as environmentalists and even anarchists, joined in to 
make their causes more visible. MNEs do not have the tools to combat antiglobalism. Indeed 
they are blamed for fostering the problem in the first place. Once again, MNEs must rely on 
governments and crisis planning to manage these risks.
Environmental Concerns
MNEs have been accused of “exporting” their environmental problems to other countries. The 
accusation is that MNEs, frustrated by pollution controls in their home country, have relocated 
these activities to countries with weaker pollution controls. Another accusation is that MNEs 
contribute to the problem of global warming. However, that accusation applies to all firms in 
all countries. It is based on the manufacturing methods employed by specific industries and 
on consumers’ desire for certain products, such as large automobiles and sport utility vehicles 
that are not fuel efficient.
Once again, solving environmental problems is dependent on governments passing leg-
islation and implementing pollution control standards. In 2001, a treaty attempting to reduce 
global warming was ratified by most nations, with the notable exception of the United States. 
However, the United States has promised to combat global warming using its own strate-
gies. The United States objected to provisions in the worldwide treaty that allowed emerging 

505
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
nations to follow less restrictive standards, while the economic burden would fall on the most 
industrialized countries, particularly the United States.
Poverty
MNEs have located foreign subsidiaries in countries plagued by extremely uneven income 
distribution. At one end of the spectrum is an elite class of well-educated, well-connected, 
and productive persons. At the other end is a very large class of persons living at or below 
the poverty level. They lack education, social and economic infrastructure, and political 
power.
MNEs might be contributing to this disparity by employing the elite class to manage their 
operations. On the other hand, MNEs are creating relatively stable and well-paying jobs for 
those who would be otherwise unemployed and living below the poverty level. Despite being 
accused of supporting “sweat shop” conditions, MNEs usually compare favorably to their local 
competitors.
Cyber Attacks
The rapid growth of the Internet has fostered a whole new category of digital terrorists that 
aspire to disrupt institutions and organizations of all kinds. Although a domestic problem 
initially, cyber attacks have been international in their source and structure now for over a 
decade. MNEs can face costly cyber attacks by disaffected persons with a grudge because of 
their visibility and the complexity of their internal information systems, as Sony learned in 
December 2014.
At this time, we know of no uniquely international strategies that MNEs can use to 
combat cyber attacks. MNEs are using the same strategies to manage foreign cyber attacks 
as they use for domestic attacks. Once again, they must rely on governments to control cyber 
attacks.
Summary Points
■
■
In order to invest abroad a firm must have a sustainable 
competitive advantage in the home market. This must 
be strong enough and transferable enough to overcome 
the disadvantages of operating abroad.
■
■
Competitive advantages stem from economies of scale 
and scope arising from large size; managerial and mar-
keting expertise; superior technology; financial strength; 
differentiated products; and competitiveness of the 
home market.
■
■
The OLI Paradigm is an attempt to create an overall 
framework to explain why MNEs choose FDI rather 
than serve foreign markets through alternative modes, 
such as licensing, joint ventures, strategic alliances, man-
agement contracts, and exporting.
■
■
Political risks can be defined on three levels: firm-­
specific, country-specific, or global-specific.
■
■
The main country-specific risks are transfer risk, known as 
blocked funds, and certain cultural and institutional risks.
■
■
Cultural and institutional risks emanate from host-
country policies with respect to ownership structure, 
human resource norms, religious heritage, nepotism and 
corruption, intellectual property rights, protectionism, 
and legal liabilities.
■
■
Managing cultural and institutional risks requires the 
MNE to understand the differences, take legal actions 
in host-country courts, support worldwide treaties to 
protect intellectual property rights, and support govern-
ment efforts to create regional markets.
■
■
MNEs should adopt a crisis plan to protect its employ-
ees and property against global-specific risks. However, 
the main reliance remains on governments to protect 
its citizens and firms from these global-specific threats.

506
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
Put another way, investors are more volatile than invest-
ments. Economic reality governs the returns earned by 
our businesses, and Black Swans are unlikely. But emo-
tions and perceptions—the swings of hope, greed, and 
fear among the participants in our financial system—
govern the returns earned in our markets. Emotional fac-
tors magnify or minimize this central core of economic 
reality, and Black Swans can appear at any time.
—John C. Bogle, founder of The Vanguard Group8
Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT), like all theories, has been 
subject to much criticism. Most of that criticism is focused 
either on the failings of the theory’s fundamental assump-
tions, or in the way the theory and its assumptions have 
been applied. Ultimately, it has been accused of failing to 
predict the major financial crises of our time, like Black 
Monday in 1987, the credit crisis in the U.S. in 2008, or the 
current financial crisis over sovereign debt in Europe.
Criticisms of Modern Portfolio Theory
Modern portfolio theory was the creation of Harry 
Markowitz in which he applied principles of linear pro-
gramming to the creation of asset portfolios.9 Markowitz 
demonstrated that an investor could reduce the standard 
deviation of portfolio returns by combining assets that 
were less than perfectly correlated in their returns. The 
theory assumes that all investors have access to the same 
information at the same point in time. It assumes all inves-
tors are rational and risk averse, and will take on additional 
risk only if compensated by higher expected returns. It 
assumes all investors are similarly rational, although dif-
ferent investors will have different trade-offs between risk 
and return based on their own risk aversion characteristics. 
The usual measure of risk used in portfolio theory is the 
standard deviation of returns, assuming a normal distribu-
tion of returns over time.
As one would expect, the criticisms of portfolio theory 
are pointed at each and every assumption behind the 
theory. For example, the field of behavioral economics 
argues that investors are not necessarily rational—that in 
some cases, gamblers buy risk. All investors do not have 
access to the same information, that insider trading per-
sists, that some investors are biased, that some investors 
regularly beat the market through market timing. Even the 
mathematics comes under attack, as to whether standard 
deviations are the appropriate measure of risk to minimize, 
or whether the standard normal distribution is appropriate.
Many of the major stock market collapses in recent his-
tory, like that of Black Monday’s crash on October 19, 1987, 
when the Dow fell 23%, were “missed” by the purveyors 
of portfolio strategy. Statistical studies of markets and their 
returns over time often show returns that are not normally 
distributed, but are subject to greater deviation from the 
mean than traditional normal distributions—evidence of 
so-called fat tails. Much of the work of Benoit Mandelbrot, 
the father of fractal geometry, revolved around the possi-
bility that financial markets exhibited fat tail distributions. 
Mandelbrot’s analysis in fact showed that the Black Mon-
day event was a 20-sigma event, one which, according to 
normal distributions (bell curve or Gaussian model), was so 
improbable as not likely to ever occur.10 And if something 
has not happened in the past, portfolio theory assumes it 
cannot happen in the future. Yet it did.
The argument and criticism that has been deployed with 
the greatest traction seems to be that portfolio theory is 
typically executed using historical data—the numbers from 
the past—assuming a distribution that the data does not fit.
Any attempts to refine the tools of modern portfolio 
theory by relaxing the bell curve assumptions, or by 
“fudging” and adding the occasional “jumps” will not be 
sufficient. We live in a world primarily driven by random 
jumps, and tools designed for random walks address the 
wrong problem. It would be like tinkering with models 
of gases in an attempt to characterise them as solids and 
call them “a good approximation”11
Strategic Portfolio Theory, Black Swans, and [Avoiding] Being the Turkey7
Mini-Case
7Copyright © 2012 Thunderbird School of Global Management. All rights reserved. This case was prepared by Professor 
Michael H. Moffett for the purpose of classroom discussion only and not to indicate either effective or ineffective management.
8“Black Monday and Black Swans,” remarks by John C. Bogle, Founder and Former Chief Executive, The Vanguard Group, before the 
Risk Management Association, Boca Raton, Florida, October 11, 2007, p.6.
9H.M. Markowitz, “Portfolio Selection,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 7, March 1952, pp. 77–91.
10 For a more detailed discussion see Richard L. Hudson and Benoit B. Mandelbrot, The (Mis)Behavior of Markets: A Fractal View of 
Risk, Ruin, and Reward, Basic Books, 2004.
11 Benoit Mandelbrot and Nassim Taleb, “A focus on the exceptions that prove the rule,” The Financial Times, March 23, 2006.

507
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
Black Swan Theory
Nassim Nicholas Taleb published a book in 2001 entitled 
Fooled by Randomness in which he introduced the analogy 
of the black swan.12 The argument is quite simple: prior to 
the discovery of Australia and the existence of black swans, 
all swans were thought to be white. Black swans did not 
exist because no one had ever seen one. But that did not 
mean they did not exist. Taleb then applied this premise to 
financial markets, arguing that simply because a specific 
event had never occurred did not mean it couldn’t.
Taleb argued that a black swan event is characterized 
by three fundamentals, in order, Rarity, Extremeness, and 
Retrospective Predictability:
1.	 Rarity: The event is a shock or surprise to the observer.
2.	 Extremeness: The event has a major impact.
3.	 Retrospective Predictability: After the event has 
occurred, the event is rationalized by hindsight, and 
found to have been predictable.
Although the third argument is a characteristic of human 
intellectual nature, it is the first element that is fundamental 
to the debate. If an event has not been recorded, does that 
mean it cannot occur? Portfolio theory is a mathematical 
analysis of provided inputs. Its outcomes are no better than 
its inputs. The theory itself does not predict price movements. 
It simply allows the identification of portfolios in which the 
risk is at a minimum for an expected level of return.
Taleb does not argue that he has some secret ability 
to predict the future when historical data cannot. Rather, 
he argues that investors should structure their portfo-
lios, their investments, to protect against the extremes, 
the improbable events rather than the probable ones. 
He argues for what many call “investment humility,” to 
acknowledge that the world we live in is not always the 
one we think we live in, and to understand how much we 
will never understand.
What Drives the Improbable?
So what causes the “random jumps” noted by Mandelbrot 
and Taleb? A number of investment theorists, including John 
Maynard Keynes and John Bogle, have argued over the past 
century that equity returns are driven by two fundamental 
forces, enterprise (economic or business returns over time) 
and speculation (the psychology or emotions of the individu-
als in the market). First Keynes and then Bogle eventually 
concluded that speculation would win out over enterprise, 
very much akin to arguing that hope will win out over logic. 
This is what Bogle means in the opening quotation when he 
states that “investors are more volatile than investments.”
All agree that the behavior of the speculators (in the words 
of Keynes) or the jumps of market returns (in the words of 
Mandelbrot) are largely unpredictable. And all that one can 
do is try and protect against the unpredictable by building 
more robust systems and portfolios than can hopefully with-
stand the improbable. But most also agree that the “jumps” 
are exceedingly rare, and depending upon the holding period, 
the market may return to more fundamental values, if given 
the time. But the event does indeed have a lasting impact.
Portfolio theory remains a valuable tool. It allows inves-
tors to gain approximate values over the risk and expected 
returns they are likely to see in their total positions. But it 
is fraught with failings, although it is not at all clear what 
would be better. Even some of history’s greatest market 
timers have noted that they have followed modern port-
folio theory, but have used subjective inputs on what is to 
be expected in the future. Even Harry Markowitz—on the 
last page of the same article that started it all, Portfolio 
­Selection—noted that “. . . in the selection of securities 
we must have procedures for finding reasonable ri and 
sij. These procedures, I believe, should combine statistical 
techniques and the judgment of practical men.”
But the judgement of practical men is—well—difficult 
to validate. We need predictions of what may come, even if 
it is generally based on the past. Kenneth Arrow, a famed 
economist and Nobel Prize winner relayed the following 
story of how during the World War II a group of statisti-
cians were tasked with forecasting weather patterns.
The statisticians subjected these forecasts to verification and 
found they differed in no way from chance. The forecasters 
themselves were convinced and requested that the forecasts 
be discontinued. The reply read approximately like this: “The 
Commanding General is well aware that the forecasts are no 
good. However, he needs them for planning purposes.”13
Taleb, in a recent edition of Black Swan Theory, notes 
that the event is a surprise to the specific observer, and 
that what is a surprise to the turkey is not a surprise to the 
butcher. The challenge is “to avoid being the turkey.”
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 What are the primary assumptions behind modern 
portfolio theory?
2.	 What do many of MPT’s critics believe are the funda-
mental problems with the theory?
3.	 How would you suggest MPT be used in investing 
your own money?
13 “I Know a Hawk from a Handsaw,” Emminent Economists: Their Life Philosophies, edited by Michael Szenberg, Cambridge  
University Press, 1992, p. 47.
12 Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Fooled by Randomness: The Hidden Role of Chance in Life and in the Markets, Random House, 2001. 
He later extended his premise to many other fields beyond finance in The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable, 
­Random House, 2007.

508
CHAPTER 17    Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
9.	 Exporting versus Producing Abroad. What are the 
advantages and disadvantages of limiting a firm’s 
activities to exporting compared to producing 
abroad?
10.	 Licensing and Management Contracts versus Pro-
ducing Abroad. What are the advantages and dis-
advantages of licensing and management contracts 
compared to producing abroad?
11.	 Joint Venture versus Wholly Owned Production 
­Subsidiary. What are the advantages and disadvan-
tages of forming a joint venture to serve a foreign 
market compared to serving that market with a wholly 
owned production subsidiary?
12.	 Greenfield Investment versus Acquisition. What are 
the advantages and disadvantages of serving a foreign 
market through a greenfield foreign direct investment 
compared to an acquisition of a local firm in the target 
market?
13.	 Cross-Border Strategic Alliance. The term “cross-­
border strategic alliance” conveys different meanings 
to different observers. What are the meanings?
14.	 Governance Risk. Answer the following questions:
a.	 What is meant by the term “governance risk?”
b.	 What is the most important type of governance 
risk?
15.	 Investment Agreement. An investment agreement 
spells out specific rights and responsibilities of both 
the foreign firm and the host government. What are 
the main financial policies that should be included in 
an investment agreement?
16.	 Investment Insurance and Guarantees: OPIC. Answer 
the following questions:
a.	 What is OPIC?
b.	 What types of political risks can OPIC insure 
against?
17.	 Operating Strategies after the FDI Decision. The 
following operating strategies, among others, are 
expected to reduce damage from political risk. Explain 
each and how it reduces damage.
a.	 Local sourcing
b.	 Facility location
c.	 Control of technology
d.	 Thin equity base
e.	 Multiple-source borrowing
18.	 Country-Specific Risk. Define the following terms:
a.	 Transfer risk
b.	 Blocked funds
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Evolving into Multinationalism. As a firm evolves from 
purely domestic into a true multinational enterprise, 
it must consider (1) its competitive advantages, (2) its 
production location, (3) the type of control it wants to 
have over any foreign operations, and (4) how much 
monetary capital to invest abroad. Explain how each 
of these considerations is important to the ­success of 
foreign operations.
2.	 Market Imperfections. MNEs strive to take advan-
tage of market imperfections in national markets for 
products, factors of production, and financial assets. 
Large international firms are better able to exploit 
such imperfections. What are their main competitive 
advantages?
3.	 Competitive Advantage. In deciding whether to invest 
abroad, management must first determine whether 
the firm has a sustainable competitive advantage that 
enables it to compete effectively in the home market. 
What are the necessary characteristics of this competi-
tive advantage?
4.	 Economies of Scale and Scope. Explain briefly how 
economies of scale and scope can be developed in 
production, marketing, finance, research and develop-
ment, transportation, and purchasing.
5.	 Competitiveness of the Home Market. A strongly 
competitive home market can sharpen a firm’s com-
petitive advantage relative to firms located in less 
competitive markets. Explain what is meant by the 
“competitive advantage of nations.”
6.	 OLI Paradigm. The OLI Paradigm is an attempt to 
create an overall framework to explain why MNEs 
choose FDI rather than serve foreign markets through 
alternative modes. Explain what is meant by the “O,” 
the “L,” and the “I” of the paradigm.
7.	 Financial Links to OLI. Financial strategies are 
directly related to the OLI Paradigm.
a.	 Explain how proactive financial strategies are 
related to OLI.
b.	 Explain how reactive financial strategies are 
related to OLI.
8.	 Where to Invest. The decision about where to invest 
abroad is influenced by behavioral factors.
a.	 Explain the behavioral approach to FDI.
b.	 Explain the international network theory explana-
tion of FDI.

509
Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk    CHAPTER 17 
Corruption Index
www.transparency 
.org/policy_research/
surveys_indices/cpi
Bribe Payers Index
www.transparency 
.org/policy_research/
surveys_indices/bpi
2.	 Sovereign Credit Ratings Criteria. The evaluation 
of credit risk and all other relevant risks associated 
with the multitude of borrowers on world debt mar-
kets requires a structured approach to international 
risk assessment. Use Standard and Poor’s criteria, 
described in depth on their Web page, to differentiate 
the various risks (local currency risk, default risk, cur-
rency risk, transfer risk, etc.) contained in major sov-
ereign ratings worldwide. (You may need to complete 
a free login for this site.)
Standard and 
Poor’s
www.standardandpoors.com/
ratings/sovereigns/ratings-list/en/
3.	 Milken Capital Access Index. The Milken Institute’s 
Capital Access Index (CAI) is one of the most recent 
informational indices that aids in the evaluation of 
how accessible world capital markets are to MNEs 
and governments of many emerging market countries. 
According to the CAI, which countries have seen the 
largest deterioration in their access to capital in the 
last two years?
Milken Institute
www.milken-inst.org
4.	 Overseas Private Investment Corporation. The Over-
seas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) provides 
long-term political risk insurance and limited recourse 
project financing aid to U.S.-based firms investing 
abroad. Using the organization’s Web page, answer 
the following questions:
a.	 Exactly what types of risk will OPIC insure against?
b.	 What financial limits and restrictions are there on 
this insurance protection?
c.	 How should a project be structured to aid in its 
approval for OPIC coverage?
Overseas Private 
Investment Corp.
www.opic.gov
5.	 Political Risk and Emerging Markets. Check the 
World Bank’s political risk insurance blog for current 
issues and topics in emerging markets.
Political Insurance Blog
blogs.worldbank.org/
miga/category/tags/
political-risk-insurance
19.	 Blocked Funds. Explain the strategies used by an 
MNE to counter blocked funds.
20.	 Cultural and Institutional Risks. Identify and explain 
the main types of cultural and institutional risks, 
except protectionism.
21.	 Strategies to Manage Cultural and Institutional Risks. 
Explain the strategies that an MNE can use to man-
age each of the cultural and institutional risks that you 
identified in Question 20, except protectionism.
22.	 Protectionism Defined. Respond to the following:
a.	 Define protectionism and identify the industries 
that are typically protected.
b.	 Explain the “infant industry” argument for 
protectionism.
23.	 Managing Protectionism. Answer the following 
questions:
a.	 What are the traditional methods for countries to 
implement protectionism?
b.	 What are some typical non-tariff barriers to trade?
c.	 How can MNEs overcome host country 
protectionism?
24.	 Global-Specific Risks. What are the main types of 
political risks that are global in origin?
25.	 Managing Global-Specific Risks. What are the main 
strategies used by MNEs to manage the global-specific 
risks you have identified in Question 24?
26.	 U.S. Antibribery Law. The United States has a law 
prohibiting U.S. firms from bribing foreign officials 
and business persons, even in countries where brib-
ery is a normal practice. Some U.S. firms claim this 
places the United States at a disadvantage compared 
to host-country firms and other foreign firms that are 
not hampered by such a law. Discuss the ethics and 
practicality of the U.S. antibribery law.
Internet Exercises
1.	 Global Corruption Report. Transparency Interna-
tional (TI) is considered by many to be the lead-
ing nongovernmental anticorruption organization 
in the world today. Recently, it has introduced its 
own annual survey analyzing current developments, 
identifying ongoing challenges, and offering poten-
tial solutions to individuals and organizations. One 
dimension of this analysis is the Bribe Payers Index. 
Visit TI’s Web site to view the latest edition of the 
Bribe ­Payers Index.

510
Chapter    18
Multinational Capital 
Budgeting and Cross-Border 
Acquisitions
When it comes to finances, remember that there are no withholding taxes 
on the wages of sin.
—Mae West (1892–1980), Mae West on Sex, Health and ESP, 1975.
This chapter describes in detail the issues and principles related to the investment in real 
productive assets in foreign countries, generally referred to as multinational capital budgeting. 
The chapter first describes the complexities of budgeting for a foreign project. ­Second, we 
describe the insights gained by valuing a project from both the project’s viewpoint and the 
parent’s viewpoint using an illustrative case involving an investment by Cemex of Mexico 
in Indonesia. This illustrative case also explores real option analysis. Next, the use of project 
financing today is discussed, and the final section describes the stages involved in affecting 
cross-border acquisitions. The chapter concludes with the Mini-Case, Elan and ­Royalty 
Pharma, about a hostile takeover (acquisition) attempt that played out in the summer 
of 2013.
Although the original decision to undertake an investment in a particular foreign coun-
try may be determined by a mix of strategic, behavioral, and economic factors, the specific 
project should be justified—as should all reinvestment decisions—by traditional finan-
cial analysis. For example, a production efficiency opportunity may exist for a U.S. firm to 
invest abroad, but the type of plant, mix of labor and capital, kinds of equipment, method 
Learning Objectives
■
■
Extend the domestic capital budgeting analysis to evaluate a greenfield foreign 
project
■
■
Distinguish between the project viewpoint and the parent viewpoint of a potential 
foreign investment
■
■
Adjust the capital budgeting analysis of a foreign project for risk
■
■
Examine the use of project finance to fund and evaluate large global projects
■
■
Introduce the principles of cross-border mergers and acquisitions

511
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
of financing, and other project variables must be analyzed with traditional discounted cash 
flow analysis. The firm must also consider the impact of the proposed foreign project on con-
solidated earnings, cash flows from subsidiaries in other countries, and on the market value 
of the parent firm.
Multinational capital budgeting for a foreign project uses the same theoretical framework 
as domestic capital budgeting—with a few very important differences. The basic steps are as 
follows:
■
■
Identify the initial capital invested or put at risk.
■
■
Estimate cash flows to be derived from the project over time, including an estimate 
of the terminal or salvage value of the investment.
■
■
Identify the appropriate discount rate for determining the present value of the 
expected cash flows.
■
■
Use traditional capital budgeting methods, such as net present value (NPV) and 
internal rate of return (IRR), to assess and rank potential projects.
Complexities of Budgeting for a Foreign Project
Capital budgeting for a foreign project is considerably more complex than the domestic case. 
Two broad categories of factor contribute to this greater complexity, cash flows and manage-
rial expectations.
Cash Flows
■
■
Parent cash flows must be distinguished from project cash flows. Each of these two 
types of flows contributes to a different view of value.
■
■
Parent cash flows often depend on the form of financing. Thus, we cannot clearly 
separate cash flows from financing decisions, as we can in domestic capital budgeting.
■
■
Additional cash flows generated by a new investment in one foreign subsidiary may 
be in part or in whole taken away from another subsidiary, with the net result that the 
project is favorable from a single subsidiary’s point of view but contributes nothing 
to worldwide cash flows.
■
■
The parent must explicitly recognize remittance of funds because of differing tax sys-
tems, legal and political constraints on the movement of funds, local business norms, 
and differences in the way financial markets and institutions function.
■
■
An array of nonfinancial payments can generate cash flows from subsidiaries to the 
parent, including payment of license fees and payments for imports from the parent.
Management Expectations
■
■
Managers must anticipate differing rates of national inflation because of their poten-
tial to cause changes in competitive position, and thus changes in cash flows over a 
period of time.
■
■
Managers must keep the possibility of unanticipated foreign exchange rate changes 
in mind because of possible direct effects on the value of local cash flows, as well as 
indirect effects on the competitive position of the foreign subsidiary.
■
■
Use of segmented national capital markets may create an opportunity for financial 
gains or may lead to additional financial costs.

512
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
■
■
Use of host-government subsidized loans complicates both capital structure and the 
parent’s ability to determine an appropriate weighted average cost of capital for 
discounting purposes.
■
■
Managers must evaluate political risk because political events can drastically reduce 
the value or availability of expected cash flows.
■
■
Terminal value is more difficult to estimate because potential purchasers from the 
host, parent, or third countries, or from the private or public sector, may have widely 
divergent perspectives on the value to them of acquiring the project.
Since the same theoretical capital budgeting framework is used to choose among com-
peting foreign and domestic projects, it is critical that we have a common standard. Thus, all 
foreign complexities must be quantified as modifications to either expected cash flow or the 
rate of discount. Although in practice many firms make such modifications arbitrarily, readily 
available information, theoretical deduction, or just plain common sense can be used to make 
less arbitrary and more reasonable choices.
Project versus Parent Valuation
Consider a foreign direct investment like that illustrated in Exhibit 18.1. A U.S. multina-
tional invests capital in a foreign project in a foreign country, the results of which—if they 
occur—are generated over time. Similar to any investment, domestically or internationally, 
the return on the investment is based on the outcomes to the parent company. Given that 
the initial investment is in the parent’s own or home currency, the U.S. dollar as shown here, 
then those returns over time need to be denominated in that same currency for evaluation 
purposes.
A strong theoretical argument exists in favor of analyzing any foreign project from the 
viewpoint of the parent. Cash flows to the parent are ultimately the basis for dividends to 
stockholders, reinvestment elsewhere in the world, repayment of corporate-wide debt, and 
other purposes that affect the firm’s many interest groups. However, since most of a project’s 
Long-Term Foreign
Direct Investment (multi-year period)
Home / U.S. Dollar Market
Foreign Currency & Commercial Market
CF1
$
CF2
$
CF3
$
CF1
Cash ﬂow remittances over time
at spot rates in marketplace
S1
S2
S3
CF2
CF3
Construct and operate cement
manufacturing facility in Indonesia
Potential for
blocked funds
Parent Viewpoint Capital Budget
(U.S. dollars)
Project Viewpoint Capital Budget
(local currency)
Invest in Foreign Market
at spot rate for initial investment
Foreign Capital Investment
In foreign currency
Multinational Parent
Invests U.S. dollar capital
Exhibit 18.1
 Multinational Capital Budgeting: Project and Parent Viewpoints

513
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
cash flows to its parent or sister subsidiaries are financial cash flows rather than operating 
cash flows, the parent viewpoint violates a cardinal concept of capital budgeting, namely, that 
financial cash flows should not be mixed with operating cash flows. Often the difference is not 
important because the two are almost identical, but in some instances a sharp divergence in 
these cash flows will exist. For example, funds that are permanently blocked from repatriation, 
or “forcibly reinvested,” are not available for dividends to the stockholders or for repayment 
of parent debt. Therefore, shareholders will not perceive the blocked earnings as contributing 
to the value of the firm, and creditors will not count on them in calculating interest coverage 
ratios and other metrics of debt service capability.
Evaluation of a project from the local viewpoint—the project viewpoint—serves a number 
of useful purposes as well. In evaluating a foreign project’s performance relative to the poten-
tial of a competing project in the same host country, we must pay attention to the project’s 
local return. Almost any project should at least be able to earn a cash return equal to the yield 
available on host government bonds with a maturity equal to the project’s economic life, if a 
free market exists for such bonds. Host-government bonds ordinarily reflect the local risk-free 
rate of return, including a premium equal to the expected rate of inflation. If a project cannot 
earn more than such a bond yield, the parent firm should buy host government bonds rather 
than invest in a riskier project.
Multinational firms should invest only if they can earn a risk-adjusted return greater than 
locally based competitors can earn on the same project. If they are unable to earn superior 
returns on foreign projects, their stockholders would be better off buying shares in local firms, 
where possible, and letting those companies carry out the local projects. Apart from these 
theoretical arguments, surveys over the past 40 years show that in practice MNEs continue to 
evaluate foreign investments from both the parent and project viewpoint.
The attention paid to project returns in various surveys may reflect emphasis on maximiz-
ing reported earnings per share as a corporate financial goal of publicly traded companies. It 
is not clear that privately held firms place the same emphasis on consolidated results, given 
that few public investors ever see their financial results. Consolidation practices, including 
translation as described in Chapter 11, remeasure foreign project cash flows, earnings, and 
assets as if they are “returned” to the parent company. And as long as foreign earnings are not 
blocked, they can be consolidated with the earnings of both the remaining subsidiaries and 
the parent.1 Even in the case of temporarily blocked funds, some of the most mature MNEs 
do not necessarily eliminate a project from financial consideration. They take a very long-run 
view of world business opportunities.
If reinvestment opportunities in the country where funds are blocked are at least equal 
to the parent firm’s required rate of return (after adjusting for anticipated exchange rate 
changes), temporary blockage of transfer may have little practical effect on the capital budg-
eting outcome, because future project cash flows will be increased by the returns on forced 
reinvestment. Since large multinationals hold a portfolio of domestic and foreign projects, 
corporate liquidity is not impaired if a few projects have blocked funds; alternate sources of 
funds are available to meet all planned uses of funds. Furthermore, a long-run historical per-
spective on blocked funds does indeed lend support to the belief that funds are almost never 
permanently blocked. However, waiting for the release of such funds can be frustrating, and 
sometimes the blocked funds lose value while blocked because of inflation or unexpected 
exchange rate deterioration, even though they have been reinvested in the host country to 
protect at least part of their value in real terms.
1 U.S. firms must consolidate foreign subsidiaries that are over 50% owned. If a firm is owned between 20% and 
49% by a parent, it is called an affiliate. Affiliates are consolidated with the parent owner on a pro rata basis. 
­Subsidiaries less than 20% owned are normally carried as unconsolidated investments.

514
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
In conclusion, most firms appear to evaluate foreign projects from both parent and project 
viewpoints. The parent’s viewpoint gives results closer to the traditional meaning of net present 
value in capital budgeting theoretically, but as we will demonstrate, possibly not in practice. 
Project valuation provides a closer approximation of the effect on consolidated earnings per 
share, which all surveys indicate is of major concern to practicing managers. To illustrate the 
foreign complexities of multinational capital budgeting, we analyze a hypothetical market-
seeking foreign direct investment by Cemex in Indonesia.
Illustrative Case: Cemex Enters Indonesia2
Cementos Mexicanos, Cemex, is considering the construction of a cement manufacturing facil-
ity on the Indonesian island of Sumatra. The project, Semen Indonesia (the Indonesian word 
for “cement” is semen), would be a wholly owned greenfield investment with a total installed 
capacity of 20 million metric tonnes per year (mmt/y). Although that is large by Asian produc-
tion standards, Cemex believes that its latest cement manufacturing technology would be most 
efficiently utilized with a production facility of this scale.
Cemex has three driving reasons for the project: (1) the firm wishes to initiate a productive 
presence of its own in Southeast Asia, a relatively new market for Cemex; (2) the long-term 
prospects for Asian infrastructure development and growth appear very good over the longer 
term; and (3) there are positive prospects for Indonesia to act as a produce-for-export site as 
a result of the depreciation of the Indonesian rupiah (IDR or Rp) in recent years.
Cemex, the world’s third-largest cement manufacturer, is an MNE headquartered in an 
emerging market but competing in a global arena. The firm competes in the global marketplace 
for both market share and capital. The international cement market, like markets in other 
commodities such as oil, is a dollar-based market. For this reason, and for comparisons against 
its major competitors in both Germany and Switzerland, Cemex considers the U.S. dollar its 
functional currency.
Cemex’s shares are listed in both Mexico City and New York (OTC: CMXSY). The firm 
has successfully raised capital—both debt and equity—outside Mexico in U.S. dollars. Its inves-
tor base is increasingly global, with the U.S. share turnover rising rapidly as a percentage of 
total trading. As a result, its cost and availability of capital are internationalized and dominated 
by U.S. dollar investors. Ultimately, the Semen Indonesia project will be evaluated—in both 
cash flows and capital cost—in U.S. dollars.
Overview
The first step in analyzing Cemex’s potential investment in Indonesia is to construct a set 
of pro forma financial statements for Semen Indonesia, all in Indonesian rupiah (IDR). The 
next step is to create two capital budgets, the project viewpoint and parent viewpoint. Semen 
Indonesia will take only one year to build the plant, with actual operations commencing in 
year 1. The Indonesian government has only recently deregulated the heavier industries to 
allow foreign ownership.
All of the following analysis is conducted assuming that purchasing power parity (PPP) 
holds for the rupiah to dollar exchange rate for the life of the Indonesian project. This is a 
standard financial assumption made by Cemex for its foreign investments. Thus, if we assume 
an initial spot rate of Rp10,000/$, and Indonesian and U.S. inflation rates of 30% and 3% per 
annum, respectively, for the life of the project, forecasted spot exchange rates follow the usual 
2 Cemex is a real company. However, the greenfield investment described here is hypothetical.

515
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
PPP calculation. For example, the forecasted exchange rate for year 1 of the project would be 
as follows:
Spot rate (year 1) = Rp10,000/US$ * 1 + .30
1 + .03 = Rp12,621/US$
The financial statements shown in Exhibits 18.2 through 18.5 are based on these assumptions.
Capital Investment. Although the cost of building new cement manufacturing capacity any-
where in the industrial countries is now estimated at roughly $150/tonne of installed capac-
ity, Cemex believed that it could build a state-of-the-art production and shipment facility in 
Sumatra at roughly $110/tonne (see Exhibit 18.2). Assuming a 20 million metric ton per year 
(mmt/y) capacity, and a year 0 average exchange rate of Rp10,000/$, this cost will constitute an 
investment of Rp22 trillion ($2.2 billion). This figure includes an investment of Rp17.6 trillion 
in plant and equipment, giving rise to an annual depreciation charge of Rp1.76 trillion if we 
assume a 10-year straight-line depreciation schedule. The relatively short depreciation sched-
ule is one of the policies of the Indonesian tax authorities meant to attract foreign investment.
Financing. This massive investment would be financed with 50% equity, all from Cemex, and 
50% debt—75% from Cemex and 25% from a bank consortium arranged by the Indonesian 
government. Cemex’s own U.S. dollar-based weighted average cost of capital (WACC) was 
currently estimated at 11.98%. The WACC for the project itself on a local Indonesian level in 
rupiah terms was estimated at 33.257%. The details of this calculation are discussed later in 
this chapter.
The cost of the U.S. dollar-denominated loan is stated in rupiah terms assuming purchas-
ing power parity and U.S. dollar and Indonesian inflation rates of 3% and 30% per annum, 
respectively, throughout the subject period. The explicit debt structures, including repayment 
schedules, are presented in Exhibit 18.3. The loan arranged by the Indonesian government, 
part of the government’s economic development incentive program, is an eight-year loan, in 
rupiah, at 35% annual interest, fully amortizing. The interest payments are fully deductible 
against corporate tax liabilities.
The majority of the debt, however, is being provided by the parent company, Cemex. After 
raising the capital from its financing subsidiary, Cemex will re-lend the capital to Semen Indo-
nesia. The loan is denominated in U.S. dollars, five years maturity, with an annual interest rate 
of 10%. Because the debt will have to be repaid from the rupiah earnings of the Indonesian 
enterprise, the pro forma financial statements are constructed so that the expected costs of 
servicing the dollar debt are included in the firm’s pro forma income statement. The dollar 
loan, if the rupiah follows the purchasing power parity forecast, will have an effective interest 
expense in rupiah terms of 38.835% before taxes. We find this rate by determining the internal 
rate of return of repaying the dollar loan in full in rupiah (see Exhibit 18.3).
The loan by Cemex to the Indonesian subsidiary is denominated in U.S. dollars. Therefore, 
the loan will have to be repaid in U.S. dollars, not rupiah. At the time of the loan agreement, the 
spot exchange rate is Rp10,000/$. This is the assumption used in calculating the “scheduled” 
repaying of principal and interest in rupiah. The rupiah, however, is expected to depreciate 
in line with purchasing power parity. As it is repaid, the “actual” exchange rate will therefore 
give rise to a foreign exchange loss as it takes more and more rupiah to acquire U.S. dollars 
for debt service, both principal and interest. The foreign exchange losses on this debt service 
will be recognized on the Indonesian income statement.
Revenues. Given the current existing cement manufacturing in Indonesia, and its currently 
depressed state as a result of the Asian crisis, all sales are based on export. The 20 mmt/y 

516
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
 Investment and Financing of the Semen Indonesia Project (in 000s)
Exhibit 18.2
Invesment
Financing
Average exchange rate, Rp/$
10,000
Equity
11,000,000,000
Cost of installed capacity ($/tonne)
$110
Debt:
11,000,000,000
Installed capacity
20,000
  Rupiah debt
2,750,000,000
Investment in US$
$2,200,000
  US$ debt in rupiah
  8,250,000,000
Investment in rupiah
22,000,000,000
Total
22,000,000,000
Percentage of investment in plant & equip
80%
Plant and equipment (000s Rp)
17,600,000,000
Note: US$ debt principal
$825,000
Depreciation of capital equipment (years)
10.00
Annual depreciation (millions)
(1,760,000)
Costs of Capital: Cemex (Mexico)
Risk-free rate
6.000%
Cemex beta
1.50
Credit premium
2.000%
Equity risk premium
7.000%
Cost of debt
8.000%
Cost of equity
16.500%
Corporate income tax rate
35.000%
Percent equity
60.0%
Cost of debt after-tax
5.200%
WACC
11.980%
Percent debt
40.0%
Cost of Capital: Semen Indonesia (Indonesia)
Risk-free rate
33.000%
Semen Indonesia beta
1.000
Credit premium
2.000%
Equity risk premium
6.000%
Cost of rupiah debt
35.000%
Cost of equity
40.000%
Indonesia corporate income tax rate
30.000%
Percent equity
50.0%
Cost of US$ debt, after-tax
5.200%
WACC
33.257%
Cost of US$ debt (rupiah equivalent)
38.835%
Cost of US$ debt, after-tax (rupiah eq)
27.184%
Percent debt
50.0%
The cost of the US$ loan is stated in rupiah terms assuming purchasing power parity and U.S. dollar and Indionesian inflation rates of 3% and  
30% per annum, respectively, throughout the subject period.
Semen Indonesia (Rp)
Amount
Financing 
Proportion
Cost
After-tax Cost
Component 
Cost
Rupiah loan
2,750,000,000
12.5%
35.000%
24.500%
3.063%
Cemex loan
8,250,000,000
37.5%
38.835%
27.184%
10.194%
Total debt
11,000,000,000
50.0%
Equity
11,000,000,000
50.0%
40.000%
40.000%
20.000%
Total financing
22,000,000,000
100.0%
WACC
33.257%
facility is expected to operate at only 40% capacity (producing 8 million metric tonnes). 
Cement produced will be sold in the export market at $58/tonne (delivered). Note also that, 
at least for the conservative baseline analysis, we assume no increase in the price received 
over time.

517
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
 Semen Indonesia’s Debt Service Schedules and Foreign Exchange Gains/Losses
Exhibit 18.3
Spot rate (Rp/$)
10,000
12,621
15,930
20,106
25,376
32,028
Project Year
0
1
2
3
4
5
Indonesian loan @ 35% for 8 years (millions of rupiah)
Loan principal
2,750,000
Interest payment
(962,500)
(928,921)
(883,590)
(822,393)
(739,777)
Principal payment
(95,939)
(129,518)
(174,849)
(236,046)
(318,662)
Total payment
(1,058,439)
(1,058,439)
(1,058,439)
(1,058,439)
(1,058,439)
Cemex loan @ 10% for 5 years (millions of U.S. dollars)
Loan principal
825
Interest payment
($82.50)
($68.99)
($54.12)
($37.77)
($19.78)
Principal payment
($135.13)
($148.65)
($163.51)
($179.86)
($197.85)
Total payment
($217.63)
($217.63)
($217.63)
($217.63)
($217.63)
Cemex loan converted to Rp at scheduled and current spot rates (millions of Rp):
Scheduled at Rp10,000/$:
Interest payment
(825,000)
(689,867)
(541,221)
(377,710)
(197,848)
Principal payment
(1,351,329)
(1,486,462)
(1,635,108)
(1,798,619)
(1,978,481)
Total payment
(2,176,329)
(2,176,329)
(2,176,329)
(2,176,329)
(2,176,329)
Actual (at current spot rate):
Interest payment
(1,041,262)
(1,098,949)
(1,088,160)
(958,480)
(633,669)
Principal payment
(1,705,561)
(2,367,915)
(3,287,494)
(4,564,190)
(6,336,691)
Total payment
(2,746,823)
(3,466,864)
(4,375,654)
(5,522,670)
(6,970,360)
Cash flows in Rp on Cemex loan (millions of Rp):
Total actual cash flows
8,250,000
(2,746,823)
(3,466,864)
(4,375,654)
(5,522,670)
(6,970,360)
IRR of cash flows
38.835%
Foreign exchange gains (losses) on Cemex loan (millions of Rp):
Foreign exchange gains 
(losses) on interest
(216,262)
(409,082)
(546,940)
(580,770)
(435,821)
Foreign exchange gains 
(losses) on principal
(354,232)
(881,453)
(1,652,385)
(2,765,571)
(4,358,210)
Total foreign exchange losses 
on debt
(570,494)
(1,290,535)
(2,199,325)
(3,346,341)
(4,794,031)
The loan by Cemex to the Indonesian subsidiary is denominated in U.S. dollars. Therefore, the loan will have to be repaid in U.S. dollars, not rupiah. At the time 
of the loan agreement, the spot exchange rate is Rp10,000/$. This is the assumption used in calculating the “scheduled” repaying of principal and interest 
in rupiah. The rupiah, however, is expected to depreciate in line with purchasing power parity. As it is repaid, the “actual” exchange rate will therefore give 
rise to a foreign exchange loss as it takes more and more rupiah to acquire U.S. dollars for debt service, both principal and interest. The foreign exchange 
losses on this debt service will be recognized on the Indonesian income statement.
Costs. The cash costs of cement manufacturing (labor, materials, power, etc.) are estimated at 
Rp115,000 per tonne for year 1, rising at about the rate of inflation, 30% per year. Additional 
production costs of Rp20,000 per tonne for year 1 are also assumed to rise at the rate of infla-
tion. As a result of all production being exported, loading costs of $2.00/tonne and shipping of 
$10.00/tonne must also be included. Note that these costs are originally stated in U.S. dollars, 

518
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
and for the purposes of Semen Indonesia’s income statement, they must be converted to 
rupiah terms. This is the case because both shiploading and shipping costs are international 
services governed by contracts denominated in dollars. As a result, they are expected to rise 
over time only at the U.S. dollar rate of inflation (3%).
Semen Indonesia’s pro forma income statement is illustrated in Exhibit 18.4. This is the 
typical financial statement measurement of the profitability of any business, whether domestic 
or international. The baseline analysis assumes a capacity utilization rate of only 40% (year 1),  
Exhibit 18.4
Semen Indonesia’s Pro Forma Income Statement (millions of rupiah)
Exchange rate (Rp/US$)
10,000
12,621
15,930
20,106
25,376
32,028
Project Year
0
1
2
3
4
5
Sales volume
8.00
10.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
Sales price (US$)
58.00
58.00
58.00
58.00
58.00
Sales price (Rp)
732,039
923,933
1,166,128
1,471,813
1,857,627
Total revenue
5,856,311
9,239,325
13,993,541
17,661,751
22,291,530
Less cash costs
(920,000)
(1,495,000)
(2,332,200)
(3,031,860)
(3,941,418)
Less other production costs
(160,000)
(260,000)
(405,600)
(527,280)
(685,464)
Less loading costs
(201,942)
(328,155)
(511,922)
(665,499)
(865,149)
Less shipping costs
(1,009,709)
(1,640,777)
(2,559,612)
(3,327,495)
(4,325,744)
Total production costs
(2,291,650)
(3,723,932)
(5,809,334)
(7,552,134)
(9,817,774)
Gross profit
3,564,660
5,515,393
8,184,207
10,109,617
12,473,756
  Gross margin
60.9%
59.7%
58.5%
57.2%
56.0%
Less license fees
(117,126)
(184,787)
(279,871)
(353,235)
(445,831)
Less general & administrative
(468,505)
(831,539)
(1,399,354)
(1,942,793)
(2,674,984)
EBITDA
2,979,029
4,499,067
6,504,982
7,813,589
9,352,941
Less depreciation & amortization
(1,760,000)
(1,760,000)
(1,760,000)
(1,760,000)
(1,760,000)
EBIT
1,219,029
2,739,067
4,744,982
6,053,589
7,592,941
Less interest on Cemex debt
(825,000)
(689,867)
(541,221)
(377,710)
(197,848)
Foreign exchange losses on debt
(570,494)
(1,290,535)
(2,199,325)
(3,346,341)
(4,794,031)
Less interest on local debt
(962,500)
(928,921)
(883,590)
(822,393)
(739,777)
EBT
(1,138,965)
(170,256)
1,120,846
1,507,145
1,861,285
Less income taxes (30%)
—
—
—
(395,631)
(558,386)
Net income
(1,138,965)
(170,256)
1,120,846
1,111,514
1,302,900
  Net income (millions of US$)
(90)
(11)
56
44
41
  Return on sales
-19.4%
-1.8%
8.0%
6.3%
5.8%
Dividends distributed
—
—
560,423
555,757
651,450
Retained
(1,138,965)
(170,256)
560,423
555,757
651,450
EBITDA = earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization. EBIT = earnings before interest and taxes; EBT = earnings before taxes.
Tax credits resulting from current period losses are carried forward toward next year’s tax liabilities. Dividends are not distributed in the first year of operations 
as a result of losses, and are distributed at a 50% rate in years 2000–2003.
All calculations are exact, but may appear not to add due to reported decimal places. The tax payment for year 3 is zero, and year 4 is less than 30%, as a 
result of tax loss carry-forwards from previous years.

519
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
50% (year 2), and 60% in the following years. Management believes this is necessary since 
existing in-country cement manufacturers are averaging only 40% of capacity at this time.
Tax credits resulting from current period losses are carried forward toward next year’s tax 
liabilities. Dividends are not distributed in the first year of operations as a result of losses, and 
are distributed at a 50% rate in years 2–5.
Additional expenses in the pro forma financial analysis include license fees paid by the 
subsidiary to the parent company of 2.0% of sales, and general and administrative expenses 
for Indonesian operations of 8.0% per year (and growing an additional 1% per year). Foreign 
exchange gains and losses are those related to the servicing of the U.S. dollar-denominated 
debt provided by the parent and are drawn from the bottom of Exhibit 18.3. In summary, the 
subsidiary operation is expected to begin turning an accounting profit in its fourth year of 
operations, with profits rising as capacity utilization increases over time.
The loan by Cemex to the Indonesian subsidiary is denominated in U.S. dollars. Therefore, 
the loan will have to be repaid in U.S. dollars, not rupiah. At the time of the loan agreement, the 
spot exchange rate is Rp10,000/$. This is the assumption used in calculating the “scheduled” 
repaying of principal and interest in rupiah. The rupiah, however, is expected to depreciate 
in line with purchasing power parity. As it is repaid, the “actual” exchange rate will therefore 
give rise to a foreign exchange loss as it takes more and more rupiah to acquire U.S. dollars 
for debt service, both principal and interest. The foreign exchange losses on this debt service 
will be recognized on the Indonesian income statement.
Tax credits resulting from current period losses are carried forward toward next year’s tax 
liabilities. Dividends are not distributed in the first year of operations as a result of losses, and 
are distributed at a 50% rate in years 2000–2003. All calculations are exact, but may appear 
not to add due to reported decimal places. The tax payment for year 3 is zero, and year 4 is less 
than 30%, as a result of tax loss carry-forwards from previous years.
Project Viewpoint Capital Budget
The capital budget for the Semen Indonesia project from a project viewpoint is shown in 
Exhibit 18.5. We find the net cash flow, free cash flow as it is often labeled, by summing 
EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization), recalculated taxes, 
changes in net working capital (the sum of the net additions to receivables, inventories, and 
payables necessary to support sales growth), and capital investment.
Note that EBIT, not EBT, is used in the capital budget, which contains both depreciation 
and interest expense. Depreciation and amortization are noncash expenses of the firm and 
therefore contribute positive cash flow. Because the capital budget creates cash flows that will 
be discounted to present value with a discount rate, and the discount rate includes the cost of 
debt—interest—we do not wish to subtract interest twice. Therefore, taxes are recalculated on 
the basis of EBIT.3 The firm’s cost of capital used in discounting also includes the deductibility 
of debt interest in its calculation.
The initial investment of Rp22 trillion is the total capital invested to support these earn-
ings. Although receivables average 50 to 55 days sales outstanding (DSO) and inventories 
average 65 to 70 DSO, payables and trade credit are also relatively long at 114 DSO in the 
Indonesian cement industry. Semen Indonesia expects to add approximately 15 net DSO to 
its investment with sales growth. The remaining elements to complete the project viewpoint’s 
capital budget are the terminal value (discussed below) and the discount rate of 33.257% (the 
firm’s weighted average cost of capital).
3 This highlights the distinction between an income statement and a capital budget. The project’s income statement 
shows losses the first two years of operations as a result of interest expenses and forecast foreign exchange losses, so 
it is not expected to pay taxes. But the capital budget, constructed on the basis of EBIT, before these financing and 
foreign exchange expenses, calculates a positive tax payment.

520
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
Exhibit 18.5
Semen Indonesia Capital Budget: Project Viewpoint (millions of rupiah)
Exchange rate (Rp/US$)
10,000
12,621
15,930
20,106
25,376
32,028
Project Year
0
1
2
3
4
5
EBIT
1,219,029
2,739,067
4,744,982
6,053,589
7,592,941
Less recalculated taxes @ 30%
(365,709)
(821,720)
(1,423,495)
(1,816,077)
(2,277,882)
Add back depreciation
1,760,000
1,760,000
1,760,000
1,760,000
1,760,000
Net operating cash flow
2,613,320
3,677,347
5,081,487
5,997,512
7,075,059
Less changes to NWC
(240,670)
(139,028)
(195,379)
(150,748)
(190,265)
Initial investment
(22,000,000)
Terminal value
21,274,102
Free cash flow (FCF)
(22,000,000)
2,372,650
3,538,319
4,886,109
5,846,764
28,158,896
NPV @ 33.257%
(7,606,313)
IRR
19.1%
NWC = net working capital. NPV = net present value. Discount rate is Semen Indonesia’s WACC of 33.257%. IRR = internal rate of return, the rate 
of discount yielding an NPV of exactly zero. Values in exhibit are exact and are rounded to the nearest million.
Terminal Value. The terminal value (TV) of the project represents the continuing value of the 
cement manufacturing facility in the years after year 5, the last year of the detailed pro forma 
financial analysis shown in Exhibit 18.5. This value, like all asset values according to financial 
theory, is the present value of all future free cash flows that the asset is expected to yield. We 
calculate the TV as the present value of a perpetual net operating cash flow (NOCF) generated 
in the fifth year by Semen Indonesia, the growth rate assumed for that net operating cash flow 
(g), and the firm’s weighted average cost of capital (kWACC):
Terminal value = NOCF5 (1 + g)
kWACC - g
= 7,075,059 (1 + 0)
.33257 - 0
= Rp21,274,102
or Rp21,274,102 trillion. The assumption that g = 0, that is, that net operating cash flows will 
not grow past year 5 is probably not true, but it is a prudent assumption for Cemex to make 
when estimating future cash flows. (If Semen Indonesia’s business was to continue to grow in-
line with the Indonesian economy, g may well be 1% or 2%.) The results of the capital budget 
from the project viewpoint indicate a negative net present value (NPV) and an internal rate of 
return (IRR) of only 19.1% compared to the 33.257% cost of capital. These are the returns the 
project would yield to a local or Indonesian investor in Indonesian rupiah. The project, from 
this viewpoint, is not acceptable.
Repatriating Cash Flows to Cemex
Exhibit 18.6 now collects all incremental earnings to Cemex from the prospective investment 
project in Indonesia. As described in the section, Project versus Parent Valuation, a foreign 
investor’s assessment of a project’s returns depends on the actual cash flows that are returned 
to it in its own currency via actual potential cash flow channels. For Cemex, this means that 
the investment must be analyzed in terms of the actual likely U.S. dollar cash inflows and 

521
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
Semen Indonesia’s Remittance of Income to Parent Company (millions of rupiah and US$)
Exhibit 18.6
Exchange rate (Rp/$)
10,000
12,621
15,930
20,106
25,376
32,028
Project Year
0
1
2
3
4
5
Dividend Remittance
Dividends paid (Rp)
—
—
560,423
555,757
651,450
Less Indonesian withholding taxes
—
—
(84,063)
(83,364)
(97,717)
Net dividend remitted (Rp)
—
—
476,360
472,393
553,732
Net dividend remitted ($)
—
—
23.69
18.62
17.29
License Fees Remittance
License fees remitted (Rp)
117,126
184,787
279,871
353,235
445,831
Less Indonesian withholding taxes
(5,856)
(9,239)
(13,994)
(17,662)
(22,292)
Net license fees remitted (Rp)
111,270
175,547
265,877
335,573
423,539
Net license fees remitted ($)
8.82
11.02
13.22
13.22
13.22
Debt Service Remittance
Promised interest paid ($)
82.50
68.99
54.12
37.77
19.78
Less Indonesian withholding tax @ 10%
(8.25)
(6.90)
(5.41)
(3.78)
(1.98)
Net interest remitted ($)
74.25
62.09
48.71
33.99
17.81
Principal payments remitted ($)
135.13
148.65
163.51
179.86
197.85
Total principal and interest remitted
$209.38
$210.73
$212.22
$213.86
$215.65
Capital Budget: Parent Viewpoint (millions of U.S. dollars)
Dividends
$0.0
$0.0
$23.7
$18.6
$17.3
License fees
8.8
11.0
13.2
13.2
13.2
Debt service
209.4
210.7
212.2
213.9
215.7
Total earnings
$218.2
$221.8
$249.1
$245.7
$246.2
Initial investment
(1,925.0)
Terminal value
1,369.1
Net cash flows
($1,925.0)
$218.2
$221.8
$249.1
$245.7
$1,615.3
NPV @ 17.98%
17.98%
(595.6)
IRR
7.21%
NPV calculated using a company-determined discount rate of WACC+ foreign investment premium, or 11.98% + 6.00% = 17.98%.
outflows associated with the investment over the life of the project, after-tax, discounted at its 
appropriate cost of capital.
The parent viewpoint capital budget is constructed in two steps:
1.	 First, we isolate the individual cash flows, cash flows by channel, adjusted for any 
withholding taxes imposed by the Indonesian government and converted to U.S. 
dollars. (Statutory withholding taxes on international transfers are set by bilateral 
tax treaties, but individual firms may negotiate lower rates with governmental tax 

522
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
authorities. In the case of Semen Indonesia, dividends will be charged a 15% with-
holding tax, 10% on interest payments, and 5% license fees.) Mexico does not tax 
repatriated earnings since they have already been taxed in Indonesia. (The U.S. does 
levy a contingent tax on repatriated earnings of foreign source income, as discussed 
in Chapter 16.)
2.	 The second step, the actual parent viewpoint capital budget, combines these U.S. dollar 
after-tax cash flows with the initial investment to determine the net present value of 
the proposed Semen Indonesia subsidiary in the eyes (and pocketbook) of Cemex. 
This is illustrated in Exhibit 18.6, which shows all incremental earnings to Cemex 
from the prospective investment project. A specific peculiarity of this parent view-
point capital budget is that only the capital invested into the project by Cemex itself, 
$1,925 million, is included in the initial investment (the $1,100 million in equity and 
the $825 million loan). The Indonesian debt of Rp2.75 billion ($275 million) is not 
included in the Cemex parent viewpoint capital budget.
Parent Viewpoint Capital Budget
Finally, all cash flow estimates are now constructed to form the parent viewpoint’s capital 
budget, detailed in the bottom of Exhibit 18.6. The cash flows generated by Semen Indonesia 
from its Indonesian operations, dividends, license fees, debt service, and terminal value are 
now valued in U.S. dollar terms after-tax.
In order to evaluate the project’s cash flows that are returned to the parent company, 
Cemex must discount these at the corporate cost of capital. Remembering that Cemex consid-
ers its functional currency to be the U.S. dollar, it calculates its cost of capital in U.S. dollars. As 
described in Chapter 13, the customary weighted average cost of capital formula is as follows:
kWACC = ke E
V + kd (1 - t)D
V,
where ke is the risk-adjusted cost of equity, kd is the before-tax cost of debt, t is the marginal 
tax rate, E is the market value of the firm’s equity, D is the market value of the firm’s debt, 
and V is the total market value of the firm’s securities (E + D).
ke = krf + (km - krf)bCemex = 6.00% + (13.00% - 6.00%)1.5 = 16.50%
Cemex’s cost of equity is calculated using the capital asset pricing model (CAPM):
This assumes the risk-adjusted cost of equity (ke) is based on the risk-free rate of interest 
(krf), as measured by the U.S. Treasury intermediate bond yield of 6.00%, the expected rate 
of return in U.S. equity markets (km) is 13.00%, and the measure of Cemex’s individual risk 
relative to the market (bCemex) is 1.5. The result is a cost of equity—required rate of return on 
equity investment in Cemex—of 16.50%.
The investment will be funded internally by the parent company, roughly in the same debt/
equity proportions as the consolidated firm, 40% debt (D/V) and 60% equity (E/V). The cur-
rent cost of debt for Cemex is 8.00%, and the effective tax rate is 35%. The cost of equity, when 
combined with the other components, results in a weighted average cost of capital for Cemex of
kWACC = ke E
V + kd (1 - t) D
V = (16.50%)(.60) + (8.00%)(1 - .35)(.40) = 11.98%

523
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
Cemex customarily uses this weighted average cost of capital of 11.98% to discount pro-
spective investment cash flows for project ranking purposes. The Indonesian investment poses 
a variety of risks, however, which the typical domestic investment does not.
If Cemex were undertaking an investment of the same relative degree of risk as the 
firm itself, a simple discount rate of 11.980% might be adequate. Cemex, however, gener-
ally requires new investments to yield an additional 3% over the cost of capital for domestic 
investments, and 6% more for international projects (these are company-required spreads, 
and will differ dramatically across companies). The discount rate for Semen Indonesia’s cash 
flows repatriated to Cemex will therefore be discounted at 11.98% + 6.00%, or 17.98%. The 
project’s baseline analysis indicates a negative NPV with an IRR of 7.21%, which means that 
it is an unacceptable investment from the parent’s viewpoint.
Most corporations require that new investments more than cover the cost of the capital 
employed in their undertaking. It is therefore not unusual for the firm to require a hurdle rate 
of 3% to 6% above its cost of capital in order to identify potential investments that will liter-
ally add value to stockholder wealth. An NPV of zero means the investment is “acceptable,” 
but NPV values that exceed zero are literally the present value of wealth that is expected to 
be added to the value of the firm and its shareholders. For foreign projects, as discussed previ-
ously, we must adjust for agency costs and foreign exchange risks and costs.
Sensitivity Analysis: Project Viewpoint
So far, the project investigation team has used a set of “most likely” assumptions to forecast 
rates of return. It is now time to subject the most likely outcome to sensitivity analyses. The 
same probabilistic techniques are available to test the sensitivity of results to political and 
foreign exchange risks as are used to test sensitivity to business and financial risks. Many deci-
sion makers feel more uncomfortable about the necessity to guess probabilities for unfamiliar 
political and foreign exchange events than they do about guessing their own more familiar 
business or financial risks. Therefore, it is more common to test sensitivity to political and for-
eign exchange risk by simulating what would happen to net present value and earnings under 
a variety of “what if” scenarios.
Political Risk. What if Indonesia imposes controls on the payment of dividends or license fees 
to Cemex? The impact of blocked funds on the rate of return from Cemex’s perspective would 
depend on when the blockage occurs, what reinvestment opportunities exist for the blocked 
funds in Indonesia, and when the blocked funds would eventually be released to Cemex. 
We could simulate various scenarios for blocked funds and rerun the cash flow analysis in 
Exhibit 18.6 to estimate the effect on Cemex’s rate of return.
What if Indonesia should expropriate Semen Indonesia? The effect of expropriation would 
depend on the following factors:
1.	 When the expropriation occurs, in terms of number of years after the business began 
operation
2.	 How much compensation the Indonesian government will pay, and how long after 
expropriation the payment will be made
3.	 How much debt is still outstanding to Indonesian lenders, and whether the parent, 
Cemex, will have to pay this debt because of its parental guarantee
4.	 The tax consequences of the expropriation
5.	 Whether the future cash flows are foregone

524
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
Many expropriations eventually result in some form of compensation to the former own-
ers. This compensation can come from a negotiated settlement with the host government or 
from payment of political risk insurance by the parent government. Negotiating a settlement 
takes time, and the eventual compensation is sometimes paid in installments over a further 
period of time. Thus, the present value of the compensation is often much lower than its nomi-
nal value. Furthermore, most settlements are based on book value of the firm at the time of 
expropriation rather than the firm’s market value.
The tax consequences of expropriation would depend on the timing and amount of capi-
tal loss recognized by Mexico. This loss would usually be based on the uncompensated book 
value of the Indonesian investment. The problem is that there is often some doubt as to when 
a write-off is appropriate for tax purposes, particularly if negotiations for a settlement drag 
on. In some ways, a nice clear expropriation without hope of compensation, such as occurred 
in Cuba in the early 1960s, is preferred to a slow “bleeding death” in protracted negotiations. 
The former leads to an earlier use of the tax shield and a one-shot write-off against earnings, 
whereas the latter tends to depress earnings for years, as legal and other costs continue and 
no tax shelter is achieved.
Foreign Exchange Risk. The project investigation team assumed that the Indonesian rupiah 
would depreciate versus the U.S. dollar at the purchasing power parity “rate” (approximately 
20.767% per year in the baseline analysis).
What if the rate of rupiah depreciation were greater? Although this event would make 
the assumed cash flows to Cemex worth less in dollars, operating exposure analysis would 
be necessary to determine whether the cheaper rupiah made Semen Indonesia more com-
petitive. For example, since Semen Indonesia’s exports to Taiwan are denominated in U.S. 
dollars, a weakening of the rupiah versus the dollar could result in greater rupiah earn-
ings from those export sales. This serves to somewhat offset the imported components that 
Semen Indonesia purchases from the parent company that are also denominated in U.S. 
dollars. Semen Indonesia is representative of firms today that have both cash inflows and 
outflows denominated in foreign currencies, providing a partial natural hedge against cur-
rency movements.
What if the rupiah should appreciate against the dollar? The same kind of economic expo-
sure analysis is needed. In this particular case, we might guess that the effect would be positive 
on both local sales in Indonesia and the value in dollars of dividends and license fees paid to 
Cemex by Semen Indonesia. Note, however, that an appreciation of the rupiah might lead to 
more competition within Indonesia from firms in other countries with now lower cost struc-
tures, lessening Semen Indonesia’s sales.
Sometimes foreign exchange risk and political risks were inseparable, as was the case of 
Venezuela in 2015 as examined in Global Finance in Practice 18.1.
Other Sensitivity Variables. The project rate of return to Cemex would also be sensitive to a 
change in the assumed terminal value, the capacity utilization rate, the size of the license fee 
paid by Semen Indonesia, the size of the initial project cost, the amount of working capital 
financed locally, and the tax rates in Indonesia and Mexico. Since some of these variables are 
within control of Cemex, it is still possible that the Semen Indonesia project could be improved 
in its value to the firm and become acceptable.
Sensitivity Analysis: Parent Viewpoint Measurement
When a foreign project is analyzed from the parent’s point of view, the additional risk that 
stems from its “foreign” location can be measured in two ways, adjusting the discount rates or 
adjusting the cash flows.

525
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
Adjusting Discount Rates. The first method is to treat all foreign risk as a single problem, 
by adjusting the discount rate applicable to foreign projects relative to the rate used for 
domestic projects to reflect the greater foreign exchange risk, political risk, agency costs, 
asymmetric information, and other uncertainties perceived in foreign operations. However, 
adjusting the discount rate applied to a foreign project’s cash flow to reflect these uncer-
tainties does not penalize net present value in proportion either to the actual amount at 
risk or to possible variations in the nature of that risk over time. Combining all risks into a 
single discount rate may thus cause us to discard much information about the uncertainties 
of the future.
In the case of foreign exchange risk, changes in exchange rates have a potential effect 
on future cash flows because of operating exposure. The direction of the effect, however, can 
either decrease or increase net cash inflows, depending on where the products are sold and 
where inputs are sourced. To increase the discount rate applicable to a foreign project on 
the assumption that the foreign currency might depreciate more than expected, is to ignore 
the possible favorable effect of a foreign currency depreciation on the project’s competitive 
position. Increased sales volume might more than offset a lower value of the local currency. 
Such an increase in the discount rate also ignores the possibility that the foreign currency may 
appreciate (two-sided risk).
Adjusting Cash Flows. In the second method, we incorporate foreign risks in adjustments 
to forecasted cash flows of the project. The discount rate for the foreign project is risk-
adjusted only for overall business and financial risk, in the same manner as for domes-
tic projects. Simulation-based assessment utilizes scenario development to estimate cash 
flows to the parent arising from the project over time under different alternative economic 
futures.
Certainty regarding the quantity and timing of cash flows in a prospective foreign 
investment is, to quote Shakespeare, “the stuff that dreams are made of.” Due to the 
The Venezuelan government’s restrictions on access to hard 
currency have now lasted more than 12 years, and foreign 
corporate interests have had enough. Throughout 2014 and 
into 2015 many international investors in Venezuela struggled 
to run and value their businesses.
Air Canada suspended all flights to Venezuela in March 
2014, citing concern over its ability to assure passenger safety in 
light of ongoing civil protest in the country. Air Canada was also 
due millions of dollars in back payments for services rendered. 
International airlines in total claimed that they were owed more 
than $2 billion in backpayments. Other companies like Avon and 
Merck wrote down their investments in Venezuela as a result of 
the continuing fall in the market value of the ­Venezuelan bolivar. 
Manufacturing companies like GM continued to struggle to even 
operate, as restricted access to hard currency prevented them 
from purchasing critical inputs and components for their prod-
ucts. Factories stopped, layoffs followed.
In February 2015 the Venezuelan government announced 
once again a “new” currency exchange system. The new sys-
tem was little different, however, from the old three-tiered 
system in effect. There is the official exchange rate of roughly 
6.3 bolivars to the U.S. dollar. But outside of food and medi-
cal purchases, few companies had access to this rate. The 
second- or middle-tier rate, called SICAD 1, a rate that was 
offered to select companies, was 12 bolivars. The third-tier 
rate, SICAD 2, theoretically open to all who needed it, was 
hovering around 52. A fourth, the black market rate, was trad-
ing at 190 bolivars per dollar.
Regardless of the next exchange rate system or next 
devaluation, multinational firms from all over the world contin-
ued to write down their Venezuelan investments. This included 
Coca Cola (U.S.), Telefonica (Spain) and drugmaker Bayer 
(Germany). So what was the value of investing or doing busi-
ness in Venezuela tomorrow?
Global Finance in Practice 18.1
Venezuelan Currency and Capital Controls Force Devaluation of Business

526
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
complexity of economic forces at work in major investment projects, it is paramount that 
the analyst understand the subjectivity of the forecast cash flows. Humility in analysis is a 
valuable trait.
Shortcomings of Each. In many cases, however, neither adjusting the discount rate nor adjust-
ing cash flows is optimal. For example, political uncertainties are a threat to the entire invest-
ment, not just the annual cash flows. Potential loss depends partly on the terminal value of the 
unrecovered parent investment, which will vary depending on how the project was financed, 
whether political risk insurance was obtained, and what investment horizon is contemplated. 
Furthermore, if the political climate were expected to be unfavorable in the near future, any 
investment would probably be unacceptable. Political uncertainty usually relates to possible 
adverse events that might occur in the more distant future, but that cannot be foreseen at the 
present. Adjusting the discount rate for political risk thus penalizes early cash flows too heavily 
while not penalizing distant cash flows enough.
Repercussions to the Investor. Apart from anticipated political and foreign exchange risks, 
MNEs sometimes worry that taking on foreign projects may increase the firm’s overall cost 
of capital because of investors’ perceptions of foreign risk. This worry seemed reasonable if a 
firm had significant investments in Iraq, Iran, Russia, Serbia, or Afghanistan in recent years. 
However, the argument loses persuasiveness when applied to diversified foreign investments 
with a heavy balance in the industrial countries of Canada, Western Europe, Australia, Latin 
America, and Asia where, in fact, the bulk of FDI is located. These countries have a reputa-
tion for treating foreign investments by consistent standards, and empirical evidence confirms 
that a foreign presence in these countries may not increase the cost of capital. In fact, some 
studies indicate that required returns on foreign projects may even be lower than those for 
domestic projects.
MNE Practices. Surveys of MNEs over the past 35 years have shown that about half of them 
adjust the discount rate and half adjust the cash flows. One recent survey indicated a rising use 
of adjusting discount rates over adjusting cash flows. However, the survey also indicated an 
increasing use of multifactor methods—discount rate adjustment, cash flow adjustment, real 
options analysis, and qualitative criteria—in evaluating foreign investments.4
Portfolio Risk Measurement
The field of finance has distinguished two different definitions of risk: (1) the risk of the 
individual security (standard deviation of expected return) and (2) the risk of the individual 
security as a component of a portfolio (beta). A foreign investment undertaken in order to 
enter a local or regional market—market seeking—will have returns that are more or less 
correlated with those of the local market. A portfolio-based assessment of the investment’s 
prospects would then seem appropriate. A foreign investment motivated by resource-seeking 
or production-seeking objectives may yield returns related to the products or services and mar-
kets of the parent company or units located somewhere else in the world and have little to do 
with local markets. Cemex’s proposed investment in Semen Indonesia is both market-seeking 
and production-seeking (for export). The decision about which approach is to be used in evalu-
ating prospective foreign investments may be the single most important analytical decision 
that the MNE makes. An investment’s acceptability may change dramatically across criteria.
4 Tom Keck, Eric Levengood, and Al Longield, “Using Discounted Cash Flow Analysis in an International 
­Setting: A Survey of Issues in Modeling the Cost of Capital,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Vol. 11, No. 3, 
Fall 1998, pp. 82–99.

527
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
For comparisons within the local host country, we should overlook a project’s actual 
financing or parent-influenced debt capacity, since these would probably be different for local 
investors than they are for a multinational owner. In addition, the risks of the project to local 
investors might differ from those perceived by a foreign multinational owner because of the 
opportunities an MNE has to take advantage of market imperfections. Moreover, the local 
project may be only one out of an internationally diversified portfolio of projects for the 
multinational owner; if undertaken by local investors it might have to stand alone without 
international diversification. Since diversification reduces risk, the MNE can require a lower 
rate of return than is required by local investors.
Thus, the discount rate used locally must be a hypothetical rate based on a judgment as 
to what independent local investors would probably demand were they to own the business. 
Consequently, application of the local discount rate to local cash flows provides only a rough 
measure of the value of the project as a stand-alone local venture, rather than an absolute 
valuation.
Real Option Analysis
The discounted cash flow (DCF) approach used in the valuation of Semen Indonesia—and 
capital budgeting and valuation in general—has long had its critics. Investments that have long 
lives, cash flow returns in later years, or higher levels of risk than those typical of the firm’s 
current business activities are often rejected by traditional DCF financial analysis. More impor-
tantly, when MNEs evaluate competitive projects, traditional discounted cash flow analysis is 
typically unable to capture the strategic options that an individual investment option may offer. 
This has led to the development of real option analysis. Real option analysis is the application 
of option theory to capital budgeting decisions.
Real options present a different way of thinking about investment values. At its core, 
it is a cross between decision-tree analysis and pure option-based valuation. It is par-
ticularly useful when analyzing investment projects that will follow very different value 
paths at decision points in time where management decisions are made regarding project 
pursuit. This wide range of potential outcomes is at the heart of real option theory. These 
wide ranges of value are volatilities, the basic element of option pricing theory described 
previously.
Real option valuation also allows us to analyze a number of managerial decisions, which 
in practice characterize many major capital investment projects:
■
■
The option to defer
■
■
The option to abandon
■
■
The option to alter capacity
■
■
The option to start up or shut down (switching)
Real option analysis treats cash flows in terms of future value in a positive sense, 
whereas DCF treats future cash flows negatively (on a discounted basis). Real option 
analysis is a particularly powerful device when addressing potential investment projects 
with extremely long life spans or investments that do not commence until future dates. 
Real option analysis acknowledges the way information is gathered over time to sup-
port ­decision-making. Management learns from both active (searching it out) and passive 
(observing market conditions) knowledge-gathering and then uses this knowledge to make 
better decisions.

528
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
Project Financing
One of the more unique structures used in international finance is project finance, which refers 
to the arrangement of financing for long-term capital projects, large in scale, long in life, and 
generally high in risk. This is a very general definition, however, because there are many dif-
ferent forms and structures that fall under this generic heading.
Project finance is not new. Examples of project finance go back centuries, and include 
many famous early international businesses such as the Dutch East India Company and the 
British East India Company. These entrepreneurial importers financed their trade ventures 
to Asia on a voyage-by-voyage basis, with each voyage’s financing being like venture capital-
investors would be repaid when the shipper returned and the fruits of the Asian marketplace 
were sold at the docks to Mediterranean and European merchants. If all went well, the indi-
vidual shareholders of the voyage were paid in full.
Project finance is used widely today in the development of large-scale infrastructure 
projects in China, India, and many other emerging markets. Although each individual project 
has unique characteristics, most are highly leveraged transactions, with debt making up more 
than 60% of the total financing. Equity is a small component of project financing for two 
reasons: first, the simple scale of the investment project often precludes a single investor or 
even a collection of private investors from being able to fund it; second, many of these projects 
involve subjects traditionally funded by governments—such as electrical power generation, 
dam building, highway construction, energy exploration, production, and distribution.
This level of debt, however, places an enormous burden on cash flow for debt service. 
Therefore, project financing usually requires a number of additional levels of risk reduction. 
The lenders involved in these investments must feel secure that they will be repaid; bankers 
are not by nature entrepreneurs, and do not enjoy entrepreneurial returns from project finance. 
Project finance has a number of basic properties that are critical to its success.
Separability of the Project from Its Investors
The project is established as an individual legal entity, separate from the legal and financial 
responsibilities of its individual investors. This not only serves to protect the assets of equity 
investors, but also it provides a controlled platform upon which creditors can evaluate the risks 
associated with the singular project, the ability of the project’s cash flows to service debt, and 
to rest assured that the debt service payments will be automatically allocated by and from the 
project itself (and not from a decision by management within an MNE).
Long-Lived and Capital-Intensive Singular Projects
Not only must the individual project be separable and large in proportion to the financial 
resources of its owners, but also its business line must be singular in its construction, opera-
tion, and size (capacity). The size is set at inception, and is seldom, if ever, changed over the 
project’s life.
Cash Flow Predictability from Third Party Commitments
An oil field or electric power plant produces a homogeneous commodity product that can 
produce predictable cash flows if third party commitments to take and pay can be established. 
In addition to revenue predictability, nonfinancial costs of production need to be controlled 
over time, usually through long-term supplier contracts with price adjustment clauses based on 
inflation. The predictability of net cash inflows to long-term contracts eliminates much of the 
individual project’s business risk, allowing the financial structure to be heavily debt-financed 
and still be safe from financial distress.

529
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
The predictability of the project’s revenue stream is essential in securing project financing. 
Typical contract provisions that are intended to assure adequate cash flow normally include the 
following clauses: quantity and quality of the project’s output; a pricing formula that enhances 
the predictability of adequate margin to cover operating costs and debt service payments; a 
clear statement of the circumstances that permit significant changes in the contract, such as 
force majeure or adverse business conditions.
Finite Projects with Finite Lives
Even with a longer-term investment, it is critical that the project have a definite ending point 
at which all debt and equity has been repaid. Because the project is a stand-alone investment 
in which its cash flows go directly to the servicing of its capital structure and not to reinvest-
ment for growth or other investment alternatives, investors of all kinds need assurances that 
the project’s returns will be attained in a finite period. There is no capital appreciation, only 
cash flow.
Examples of project finance include some of the largest individual investments undertaken 
in the past three decades, such as British Petroleum’s financing of its interest in the North 
Sea, and the Trans-Alaska Pipeline. The Trans-Alaska Pipeline was a joint venture between 
Standard Oil of Ohio, Atlantic Richfield, Exxon, British Petroleum, Mobil Oil, Philips Petro-
leum, Union Oil, and Amerada Hess. Each of these projects was at or above $1 billion, and 
represented capital expenditures that no single firm would or could attempt to finance. Yet, 
through a joint venture arrangement, the higher than normal risk absorbed by the capital 
employed could be managed.
Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions
The drivers of M&A activity, summarized in Exhibit 18.7, are both macro in scope—the global 
competitive environment—and micro in scope—the variety of industry and firm-level forces 
and actions driving individual firm value. The primary forces of change in the global com-
petitive environment—technological change, regulatory change, and capital market change—­
create new business opportunities for MNEs, which they pursue aggressively.
But the global competitive environment is really just the playing field, the ground upon 
which the individual players compete. MNEs undertake cross-border mergers and acquisitions 
for a variety of reasons. As shown in Exhibit 18.7, the drivers are strategic responses by MNEs 
to defend and enhance their global competitiveness.
As opposed to greenfield investment, a cross-border acquisition has a number of signifi-
cant advantages. First and foremost, it is quicker. Greenfield investment frequently requires 
extended periods of physical construction and organizational development. By acquiring 
an existing firm, the MNE shortens the time required to gain a presence and facilitate 
competitive entry into the market. Second, acquisition may be a cost-effective way of gain-
ing competitive advantages, such as technology, brand names valued in the target market, 
and logistical and distribution advantages, while simultaneously eliminating a local com-
petitor. Third, specific to cross-border acquisitions, international economic, political, and 
foreign exchange conditions may result in market imperfections, allowing target firms to be 
undervalued.
Cross-border acquisitions are not, however, without their pitfalls. As with all acquisitions—
domestic or cross-border—there are problems of paying too much or suffering excessive 
financing costs. Melding corporate cultures can be traumatic. Managing the post-acquisition 
process is frequently characterized by downsizing to gain economies of scale and scope in over-
head functions. This results in nonproductive impacts on the firm as individuals attempt to save 

530
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
their own jobs. Internationally, additional difficulties arise from host governments intervening 
in pricing, financing, employment guarantees, market segmentation, and general nationalism 
and favoritism. In fact, the ability to successfully complete cross-border acquisitions may itself 
be a test of competency of the MNE when entering emerging markets.
The Cross-Border Acquisition Process
Although the field of finance has sometimes viewed acquisition as mainly an issue of valua-
tion, it is a much more complex and rich process than simply determining what price to pay. 
As depicted in Exhibit 18.8, the process begins with the strategic drivers discussed in the 
previous section.
The process of acquiring an enterprise anywhere in the world has three common ­elements: 
(1) identification and valuation of the target, (2) execution of the acquisition offer and 
­purchase—the tender, and (3) management of the post-acquisition transition.
Stage 1: Identification and Valuation. Identification of potential acquisition targets requires 
a well-defined corporate strategy and focus.
The identification of the target market typically precedes the identification of the target 
firm. Entering a highly developed market offers the widest choice of publicly traded firms 
with relatively well-defined markets and publicly disclosed financial and operational data. 
In this case, the tender offer is made publicly, although target company management may 
openly recommend that its shareholders reject the offer. If enough shareholders take the 
offer, the acquiring company may gain sufficient ownership influence or control to change 
management. During this rather confrontational process, it is up to the board of the target 
company to continue to take actions consistent with protecting the rights of sharehold-
ers. The board may need to provide rather strong oversight of management during this 
process to ensure that the acts of management are consistent with protecting and building 
­shareholder value.
Once identification has been completed, the process of valuing the target begins. 
A ­variety of valuation techniques are widely used in global business today, each with its own 
Changes in the Global Business Environment 
Create business opportunities for select ﬁrms to both enhance
and defend their competitive positions in global markets 
•  Gaining access to strategic proprietary assets 
•  Gaining market power and dominance 
•  Achieving synergies in local/global operations and across diﬀerent industries 
•  Becoming larger, and then reaping the beneﬁts of size in competition and negotiation 
•  Diversifying and spreading their risks wider 
•  Exploiting ﬁnancial opportunities they may possess and others desire 
•  Changes in technology
•  Changes in regulation
•  Changes in capital markets
Exhibit 18.7
Driving Forces Behind Cross-Border Acquisition

531
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
Strategy and Management
Financial Analysis and Strategy
Stage 2
Stage 1
Stage 3
Identiﬁcation and
valuation of the target
Completion of the
ownership change
transaction (the tender)
Management of the
post-acquisition transition;
integration of business
and culture
Valuation and
negotiation
Financial settlement
and compensation
Rationalization of operations;
integration of ﬁnanical goals;
achieving synergies
Exhibit 18.8
 The Cross-Border Acquisition Process
merits. In addition to the fundamental methodologies of discounted cash flow (DCF) and 
multiples (earnings and cash flows), there are also industry-specific measures that focus on 
the most significant elements of value in business lines. The completion of various alterna-
tive valuations for the target firm aids not only in gaining a more complete picture of what 
price must be paid to complete the transaction, but also in determining whether the price 
is attractive.
Stage 2: Execution of the Acquisition. Once an acquisition target has been identified 
and valued, the process of gaining approval from management and ownership of the ­target, 
­getting approvals from government regulatory bodies, and finally determining method of 
­compensation—the complete execution of the acquisition strategy—can be time-consuming 
and complex.
Gaining the approval of the target company has been the highlight of some of the most 
famous acquisitions in business history. The critical distinction here is whether the acquisition 
is supported or not by the target company’s management.
Although there is probably no “typical transaction,” many acquisitions flow relatively 
smoothly through a friendly process. The acquiring firm will approach the management of 
the target company and attempt to convince them of the business logic of the acquisition. 
(Gaining their support is sometimes difficult, but assuring target company management 
that it will not be replaced is often quite convincing!) If the target’s management is sup-
portive, management may then recommend to stockholders that they accept the offer of 
the acquiring company. One problem that occasionally surfaces at this stage is that influ-
ential shareholders may object to the offer, either in principle or based on price, and may 
therefore feel that management is not taking appropriate steps to protect and build their 
shareholder value.
The process takes on a very different dynamic when the acquisition is not supported by 
the target company management—the so-called hostile takeover. The acquiring company may 
choose to pursue the acquisition without the target’s support, and instead go directly to the 
target shareholders. In this case, the tender offer is made publicly, although target company 

532
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
management may openly recommend that its shareholders reject the offer. If enough share-
holders take the offer, the acquiring company may gain sufficient ownership influence or 
control to change management. During this rather confrontational process, it is up to the board 
of the target company to continue to take actions consistent with protecting the rights of share-
holders. As in Stage 1, the board may need to provide rather strong oversight of management 
during this process to ensure that the acts of management are consistent with protecting and 
building shareholder value.
Regulatory approval alone may prove to be a major hurdle in the execution of the deal. 
An acquisition may be subject to significant regulatory approval if it involves a company in 
an industry considered fundamental to national security or if there is concern over major 
concentration and anticompetitive results from consolidation.
The proposed acquisition of Honeywell International (itself the result of a merger of 
Honeywell U.S. and Allied-Signal U.S.) by General Electric (U.S.) in 2001 was something 
of a watershed event in the field of regulatory approval. General Electric’s acquisition of 
Honeywell had been approved by management, ownership, and U.S. regulatory bodies 
when it then sought approval within the European Union. Jack Welch, the charismatic 
chief executive officer and president of GE did not anticipate the degree of opposition 
that the merger would face from EU authorities. After a continuing series of demands 
by the EU that specific businesses within the combined companies be sold off to reduce 
anticompetitive effects, Welch withdrew the request for acquisition approval, arguing that 
the liquidations would destroy most of the value-enhancing benefits of the acquisition. The 
acquisition was canceled. This case may have far-reaching effects on cross-border M&A 
for years to come, as the power of regulatory authorities within strong economic zones 
like the EU to block the combination of two MNEs may foretell a change in regulatory 
strength and breadth.
The last act within this second stage of cross-border acquisition, compensation settlement, 
is the payment to shareholders of the target company. Shareholders of the target company 
are typically paid either in shares of the acquiring company or in cash. If a share exchange 
occurs, the exchange is generally defined by some ratio of acquiring company shares to target 
company shares (say, two shares of acquirer in exchange for three shares of target), and the 
stockholder is typically not taxed—the shares of ownership are simply replaced by other shares 
in a nontaxable transaction.
If cash is paid to the target company shareholder, it is the same as if the shareholder sold 
the shares on the open market, resulting in a capital gain or loss (a gain, it is hoped, in the 
case of an acquisition) with tax liabilities. Because of the tax ramifications, shareholders are 
typically more receptive to share exchanges so that they may choose whether and when tax 
liabilities will arise.
A variety of factors go into the determination of the type of settlement. The availability 
of cash, the size of the acquisition, the friendliness of the takeover, and the relative valuations 
of both acquiring firm and target firm affect the decision. One of the most destructive forces 
that sometimes arises at this stage is regulatory delay and its impact on the share prices of the 
two firms. If regulatory body approval drags out over time, the possibility of a drop in share 
price increases and can change the attractiveness of the share swap.
Stage 3: Post-Acquisition Management. Although the headlines and flash of investment 
banking activities are typically focused on the valuation and bidding process in an acquisi-
tion transaction, post-transaction management is probably the most critical of the three 
stages in determining an acquisition’s success or failure. An acquiring firm can pay too 
little or too much, but if the post transaction is not managed effectively, the entire return 

533
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
on the investment is squandered. Post-acquisition management is the stage in which the 
motivations for the transaction must be realized—motivations such as more effective man-
agement, synergies arising from the new combination, or the injection of capital at a cost 
and availability previously out of the reach of the acquisition target, must be effectively 
implemented after the transaction. The biggest problem, however, is nearly always melding 
corporate cultures.
The clash of corporate cultures and personalities pose both the biggest risk and the biggest 
potential gain from cross-border mergers and acquisitions. Although not readily measurable 
as are price/earnings ratios or share price premiums, in the end, the value is either gained or 
lost in the hearts and minds of the stakeholders.
Currency Risks in Cross-Border Acquisitions
The pursuit and execution of a cross-border acquisition poses a number of challenging foreign 
currency risks and exposures for an MNE. As illustrated by Exhibit 18.9, the nature of the 
currency exposure related to any specific cross-border acquisition evolves as the bidding and 
negotiating process itself evolves across the bidding, financing, transaction (settlement), and 
Operational Stage 
What are the operational cash
ﬂows?  
What are the currency exposures
associated with cash ﬂows?  
Transaction Stage 
What will be the precise timing and execution? 
Financing Stage 
How will it be
ﬁnanced?  
What is the form of
payment?  
Bidding Stage 
Will it happen? 
When will it happen? 
Uncertainty
High 
Low 
What is the ﬁnal price? 
Moderate 
Exhibit 18.9
 Currency Risks in Cross-Border Acquisitions

534
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
operating stages. The assorted risks, both in the timing and information related to the various 
stages of a cross-border acquisition, make the management of the currency exposures difficult. 
As illustrated in Exhibit 18.9, the uncertainty related to the multitude of stages declines over 
time as stages are completed and contracts and agreements reached.
The initial bid, if denominated in a foreign currency, creates a contingent foreign ­currency 
exposure for the bidder. This contingent exposure grows in certainty of occurrence over time 
as negotiations continue, regulatory requests and approvals are gained, and competitive 
bidders emerge. Although a variety of hedging strategies might be employed, the use of a 
purchased currency call option is the simplest. The option’s notional principal would be for 
the estimated purchase price, but the maturity, for the sake of conservatism, might possibly 
be significantly longer than probably needed to allow for extended bidding, regulatory, and 
negotiation delays.
Once the bidder has successfully won the acquisition, the exposure evolves from a contin-
gent exposure to a transaction exposure. Although a variety of uncertainties remain as to the 
exact timing of the transaction settlement, the certainty over the occurrence of the currency 
exposure is largely eliminated. Some combination of forward contracts and purchased currency 
options may then be used to manage the currency risks associated with the completion of the 
cross-border acquisition.
Once consummated, the currency risks and exposures of the cross-border acquisition, now 
a property and foreign subsidiary of the MNE, changes from being a transaction-based cash 
flow exposure to the MNE to part of its multinational structure and therefore part of its oper-
ating exposure from that time forward. Time, as is always the case involving currency exposure 
management in multinational business, is the greatest challenge to the MNE, as illustrated by 
Global Finance in Practice 18.2.
Statoil’s acquisition of Svenska Esso (Exxon’s wholly owned 
subsidiary operating in Sweden) in 1986 was one of the more 
uniquely challenging cross-border acquisitions ever com-
pleted. First, Statoil was the national oil company of Norway, 
and therefore a government-owned and operated business 
bidding for a private company in another country. Second, 
if completed, the acquisition’s financing as ­proposed would 
increase the financial obligations of Svenska Esso (debt ­levels 
and therefore debt service), reducing the company’s tax liabili-
ties to Sweden for many years to come. The proposed cross-
border transaction was characterized as a value transfer from 
the Swedish government to the Norwegian government.
As a result of the extended period of bidding, negotiation, 
and regulatory approvals, the currency risk of the transaction 
was both large and extensive. Statoil, being a Norwegian oil 
company, was a Norwegian kroner (NOK)-based company 
with the U.S. dollar as its functional currency as a result of 
the global oil industry being dollar-denominated. Svenska 
Esso, although Swedish by incorporation, was the wholly 
owned subsidiary of a U.S.-based MNE, Exxon, and the 
final bid and cash settlement on the sale was therefore U.S. 
dollar-denominated.
On March 26, 1985, Statoil and Exxon agreed upon the 
sale of Svenska Esso for $260 million, or NOK2.47 billion at 
the current exchange rate of NOK9.50/$. (This was by all 
modern standards the weakest the Norwegian krone had 
ever been against the dollar, and many currency analysts 
believed the dollar to be significantly overvalued at the time.) 
The sale could not be consummated without the approval of 
the ­Swedish government. That approval process—eventually 
requiring the approval of Swedish Prime Minister Olaf Palme—
took nine months. Because Statoil considered the U.S. ­dollar 
as its true operating currency, it chose not to hedge the 
­purchase price currency exposure. At the time of settlement 
the krone had appreciated to NOK7.65/$,final acquisition cost 
in Norwegian kroner of NOK1.989 billion. Statoil saved nearly 
20% on the purchase price, NOK0.481 billion, as a result of 
not hedging.
Global Finance in Practice 18.2
Statoil of Norway’s Acquisition of Esso of Sweden

535
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
Summary Points
■
■
Parent cash flows must be distinguished from project 
cash flows. Each of these two types of flows contributes 
to a different view of value.
■
■
Parent cash flows often depend on the form of financ-
ing. Thus, cash flows cannot be clearly separated from 
financing decisions, as is done in domestic capital 
budgeting.
■
■
Remittance of funds to the parent must be explicitly 
recognized because of differing tax systems, legal and 
political constraints on the movement of funds, local 
business norms, and differences in how financial mar-
kets and institutions function.
■
■
When a foreign project is analyzed from the project’s 
point of view, risk analysis focuses on the use of sen-
sitivities, as well as consideration of foreign exchange 
and political risks associated with the project’s execu-
tion over time.
■
■
When a foreign project is analyzed from the parent’s 
point of view, the additional risk that stems from its 
“foreign” location can be measured in at least two 
ways, adjusting the discount rates or adjusting the cash 
flows.
■
■
Real option analysis is a different way of thinking about 
investment values. At its core, it is a cross between 
decision-tree analysis and pure option-based valuation. 
It allows us to evaluate the option to defer, the option 
to abandon, the option to alter size or capacity, and the 
option to start up or shut down a project.
■
■
Project finance is used widely today in the development 
of large-scale infrastructure projects in many emerging 
markets. Although each individual project has unique 
characteristics, most are highly leveraged transac-
tions, with debt making up more than 60% of the total 
financing.
■
■
The process of acquiring an enterprise anywhere in 
the world has three common elements: (1) identifica-
tion and valuation of the target; (2) completion of the 
ownership change transaction (the tender); and (3) the 
management of the post-acquisition transition.
■
■
Cross-border mergers, acquisitions, and strategic alli-
ances, all face similar challenges: They must value the 
target enterprise on the basis of its projected perfor-
mance in its market. This process of enterprise valuation 
combines elements of strategy, management, and finance.
We lived a long time with Elan (ELN). We always appre-
ciated its science and scientists, and, at times, we hated its 
former management, or whoever caused it to turn from 
ascending towards becoming a citadel of sciences, espe-
cially neurosciences, into an almost bankrupt firm with 
less everything valuable in it than what was necessary for 
its survival. What saved it at the time was the emergence 
of Tysabri, for multiple sclerosis, which we knew it was 
second to none in treatment of relapsing remitting mul-
tiple sclerosis. We were certain that this drug, like Aaron’s 
cane, would swallow up all magicians’ staffs.
—“Biogen Idec Pays Elan $3.25 Billion for Tysabri: 
Do We Leave, Or Stay?,” Seeking Alpha,  
February 6, 2013.
Elan’s shareholders (Elan Corporation, NYSE: ELN) were 
faced with a difficult choice. Elan’s management had made 
four proposals to shareholders in an attempt to defend 
itself against a hostile takeover from Royalty Pharma 
(U.S.), a privately held company. If shareholders voted in 
favor of any of the four initiatives, it would kill Royalty 
Pharma’s offer. That would allow Elan to stay independent 
and remain under the control of a management team that 
had not sparked confidence in recent years. All votes had 
to be filed by midnight June 16, 2013.
The Players
Elan Corporation was a global biopharmaceutical com-
pany headquartered in Dublin, Ireland. Elan focused on 
Elan and Royalty Pharma5
Mini-Case 
5Copyright © 2014 Thunderbird School of Global Management. All rights reserved. This case was prepared by Professor Michael H. Moffett 
for the purpose of classroom discussion only.

536
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
Royalty Pharma responded publicly with a letter to 
Elan’s stockholders questioning whether Elan’s leadership 
was really acting in the best interests of the shareholders. 
It then increased its tender offer to $12.50/share plus a 
­Contingent Value Right (CVR). The CVR was a conditional 
element where all shareholders would receive an addi-
tional amount per share in the future—up to an additional 
$2.50 per share—if Tysabri’s future sales reached specific 
­milestone targets. Royalty Pharma’s CVR offer required 
Tysabri sales to hit $2.6 billion by 2015 and $3.1 billion 
by 2017. Royalty Pharma also made it very clear that if 
­shareholders were to approve any of the Elan’s four man-
agement proposals, the acquisition offer would lapse.
The Value Debate
Elan, as of May 2013, consisted of $1.787 billion in cash, 
the Tysabri royalty stream, a few remaining prospective 
pipeline products, and between $100 and $200 million in 
annual expenses associated with its business. Elan’s leader-
ship wanted to use its cash and its annual royalty earnings 
to build a new business. Royalty Pharma just wanted to 
buy Elan, take the cash and royalty stream assets, and shut 
Elan down.
The valuation debate on Elan revolved around the 
value of the Tysabri royalty stream. That meant predicting 
what actual sales were likely to be in the coming decade. 
Exhibit A presents Royalty Pharma’s synopsis of the sales 
debate, noting that Elan’s claims on value have been selec-
tively high, while Royal Pharma has based its latest offer 
on the Street Consensus numbers.
Predicting royalty earnings on biotechnology prod-
ucts is not all that different than predicting the sales of 
any product. Pricing, competition, regulation, government 
policy, changing demographics and conditions—all could 
change future global sales. That said, there were several 
more distinct factors of concern.
First, Tysabri was scheduled to go off-patent in 2020 
(original patent filing was in 2000). The Street Consensus 
forecast, the one advocated by Royalty Pharma, predicted 
Tysabri global sales to peak in that year at $2.74 billion. 
Sales would slide, but continue, in the following years. 
Second, competitive products were already entering the 
market. In the spring, Biogen had finally received FDA 
approval on an oral treatment for relapsing-remitting forms 
of multiple sclerosis. It was only one of several new treat-
ments coming to the market. Royalty Pharma had pointed 
to declining new patient adds over the past two quarters as 
evidence that aggressive future sales forecasts for Tysabri 
may be unrealistic—already.
For these and other reasons Royalty Pharma had argued 
that a conservative sales forecast was critically important 
for investors to use when deciding whether or not to go with 
the discovery, development and marketing of therapeutic 
products in neurology including Alzheimer’s disease and 
Parkinson’s disease and autoimmune diseases such as mul-
tiple sclerosis and Crohn’s disease. But over time the com-
pany had spun-out, sold-off, or closed most of its business 
activities. By the spring of 2013, Elan was a company of 
only two assets: a large pile of cash and a perpetual royalty 
stream on a leading therapeutic for multiple sclerosis called 
Tysabri, which it had co-developed with Biogen.
The solution to Elan’s problem was the sale of its inter-
est in Tysabri to its partner Biogen. In February 2013 Elan 
sold its 50% rights in Tysabri to Biogen in return for $3.29 
billion in cash and a perpetual royalty stream on Tysabri. 
Whereas previously Elan earned returns on only its 50% 
share of Tysabri, the royalty agreement was based on 100% 
of the asset. The royalty was a step-up rate structure on 
worldwide sales of 12% in year 1, 18% all subsequent years, 
plus 25% on all global sales above $2 billion.
The ink had barely dried on Elan’s sale agreement in 
February 2013 when it was approached by a private U.S. 
firm, Royalty Pharma, about the possible purchase of Elan 
for $11 per share. Elan acknowledged the proposal publicly, 
and stated it would consider the proposal along with other 
strategic options.
Royalty Pharma (RP) is a privately held company 
(owned by private equity interests) that acquires royalty 
interests in marketed or late-stage pharmaceutical products. 
Its business allows the owners of these intellectual products 
to monetize their interests in order to pursue additional busi-
ness development opportunities. RP accepts the risk that the 
price they paid for the asset interest will actually accrue over 
time. RP owns royalty rights; it does not operate or market.
In March 2013, possibly tired of waiting, RP issued a 
statement directly to Elan shareholders to encourage them 
to vote for the proposed acquisition of Elan for $11 per 
share. At that time, Elan issued a response to RP’s state-
ment that characterized the Royalty Pharma proposal as 
“conditional and opportunistic.”
Elan’s Defense
Elan’s leadership was now under considerable pressure 
by shareholders to explain why shareholders should not 
­tender their shares to Royalty Pharma. In May, Elan began 
to detail a collection of initiatives to redefine the company. 
Going forward, Elan described a series of four complex 
strategic initiatives that it would pursue to grow and 
diversify the firm beyond its current two-asset portfolio. 
Because the company was currently in the offer period of 
a ­proposed acquisition, Irish securities laws required that 
all four of Elan’s proposals be approved by shareholders. 
But from the beginning that appeared difficult given public 
perception that the initiatives were purely defensive.

537
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18
1.63 
1.75 
1.80 
1.81 
1.77 
1.73 
1.66 
1.64 
1.61 
1.61 
1.60 
1.60 
1.60 
1.63 
1.88 
2.08 
2.27 
2.42 
2.53 
2.59 
2.64 
2.74 
2.74 
2.65 
2.61 
2.61 
1.63 
1.79 
2.11 
2.32 
2.50 
2.62 
2.75 
2.89 
3.03 
3.18 
3.34 
3.51 
3.69 
1.63 
1.90 
2.22 
2.67 
3.00 
3.15 
3.31 
3.48 
3.65 
3.83 
4.02 
4.23 
4.44 
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Elan’s Street
Upside
Street Low
Street Consensus
Elan’s Street
Consensus
Billions of US$
Source: “Royalty Pharma’s Response to Elan’s Tysabri Valuation,” Royalty Pharma, May 31, 2013, p. 4. 
Exhibit A
 Forecasts of Tysabri’s Worldwide Sales
management or Royalty Pharma’s offer. Royalty Pharma’s 
valuation, presented in Exhibit B, used this sales forecast 
for its baseline analysis. Royalty Pharma’s valuation of 
Elan was based on the following critical assumptions:
■
■
Tysabri’s worldwide sales, the top-line of the valuation, 
were based on the Street Consensus.
■
■
Elan’s operating expenses would remain relatively flat, 
rising at 1% to 2% per year, from $75 million in 2013.
■
■
Elan’s net operating losses and Irish incorporation 
would reduce effective taxes to 1% per year through 
2017, rising to Ireland’s still relatively low corporate 
tax rate of 12.5% per year afterward.
■
■
The discount rate would be 7.5% per year up until 
going off-patent in 2017, and rising to 10% after that.
■
■
Perpetuity value (terminal value) would be based on 
year 2024’s income, discounted at 12%, and assum-
ing an annual growth rate of either -2% or -4% as 
Tysabri’s sales slide into the future.
■
■
There were 518 million shares outstanding as of 
May 29, 2013, according to Elan’s most recent 
communications.
■
■
Elan’s cash total was $1.787 billion, according to Elan’s 
most recent communications.
The result was a base valuation of $10.49 or $10.17 per 
share, depending on the terminal value decline assump-
tion. As typical of most valuations, the top-line total sales 
was the single largest driver for all future projected cash 
flows. The shares outstanding assumption, 518 million 
shares, reflected the results of a large share repurchase 
program that Elan had pursued right up to mid-May of 
2013. Note that Royalty Pharma expressly decomposed 
its total valuation into three pieces: (1) the under patent 
period, (2) the post-patent period, and (3) the perpetuity 
value. In Royalty Pharma’s opinion, the post-patent period 
represented a significantly higher risk period for actual 
Tysabri sales.
Market Valuation
Despite the debate over Elan’s value, as a publicly traded 
company, the market made its opinion known every single 
trading day. On the day prior to receiving the first indica-
tion of interest from Royalty Pharma, Elan was trading at 
$11 per share. (In the days that follow, the market is factor-
ing in what it thinks the effective offer price is from a suitor 
like Royalty Pharma and the probability of the acquisition 
occurring.) Elan’s share price history for 2013 is shown in 
Exhibit C.

538
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
Valuing Elan: Prospective Royalties on Tysabri Plus Cash
Exhibit B
Actual
Millions of US$
Rates
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Worldwide Sales
1,631
1,884
2,082
2,266
2,418
2,530
2,591
2,643
2,742
2,744
2,653
2,609
2,611
year-over-year 
growth
15.5%
10.5%
8.8%
6.7%
4.6%
2.4%
2.0%
3.7%
0.1%
-3.3%
-1.7%
0.1%
Royalties to Elan:
$0 to $2 billion in 
sales
18%
151
360
360
360
360
360
360
360
360
360
360
360
Greater than $2 
billion
25%
21
67
105
133
148
161
186
186
163
152
153
Total Royalties
151
381
427
465
493
508
521
546
546
523
512
513
Expenses
(75)
(77)
(78)
(80)
(81)
(83)
(84)
(86)
(88)
(90)
(91)
(93)
Pre-tax Income
76
304
349
385
412
425
437
460
458
433
421
420
Less Taxes
1%
12.5%
(1)
(3)
(3)
(4)
(4)
(53)
(55)
(57)
(57)
(54)
(53)
(52)
Net Income
75
300
345
381
407
372
382
402
401
379
369
367
WACC
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
10.0%
10.0%
10.0%
10.0%
10.0%
Discount Factor
1.0000
0.9302
0.8653
0.8050
0.7488
0.6966
0.6480
0.5132
0.4665
0.4241
0.3855
0.3505
PV of Net Income
75
280
299
306
305
259
248
206
187
161
142
129
Perpetuity Value
−2%
2,999
Discount Factor
0.3505
PV of Perpetuity
1,051
NPV (cumulative 
PV)
$3,647
Shares Outstanding 
(millions)
518
Value per Share
$7.04
Cash
1,787
Cash Value per 
Share
$3.45
Elan, Total Value per 
Share
$10.49
(2%) Perpetuity Growth Rate
Total
Per Share
% of Total
(4%) Perpetuity Growth Rate
Total
Per Share
% of Total
Discounted value 2013–2020
$1,977
$3.82
54.2%
Discounted value 
2013–2020
$1,977
$3.82
56.8%
Discounted value 2021–2024
$619
$1.19
17.0%
Discounted value 
2021–2024
$619
$1.19
17.8%
Perpetuity value beyond 
2024
−2%
$1,051
$2.03
28.8%
Perpetuity value beyond 
2024
−4%
$883
$1.70
25.4%
Total Tysabri Value
$3,647
$7.04
100.0%
  Total Tysabri Value
$3,479
$6.72
100.0%
Cash
$1,787
$3.45
  Cash
$1,787
$3.45
Total Elan Value
$5,434
$10.49
Total Elan Value
$5,266
$10.17
Notes: Valuation based on that presented in “Royalty Pharma’s Response to Elan’s Tysabri Valuation,” May 29, 2013, p. 12. Royalties paid for the first 12 
months, approximately 2013 in length, are at 12%. Perpetuity value (terminal value) assumes net revenues “grow” at −2% per annum indefinitely and are 
discounted at 10%. Assumes same 518 million shares outstanding as Elan stated on May 29, 2013. Elan’s tax loss carry-forwards reduce the effective tax 
rate to 1% through 2017; beginning in 2018 the royalty stream is subject to Irish taxation at 12.5%. Royalty Pharma believes that the WACC should rise 
from 7.50% to 10.0% beginning in 2020 when Tysabri goes off-patent.

539
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
Elan’s management had made their case to shareholders. 
The collection of initiatives that Elan’s leadership wished 
to pursue had to be approved, however, by shareholders. 
The Extraordinary General Meeting (EGM) of sharehold-
ers would be held on Monday, June 17th. At that meeting 
the results of the shareholder vote (all votes were due by 
the previous Friday) would be announced.
In the days leading up to the EGM, the battle had 
become very public, and in the words of one journal-
ist, “quite chippy.” In a Financial Times editorial, one 
former Elan board member, Jack Schuler, wrote “I have 
no confidence that Kelly Martin [Elan’s CEO] or the 
other Elan board members will act in the interests of 
shareholders. I hope the Elan shareholders realise that 
their only option is to sell the company to the highest 
bidder.” Elan’s current non-executive chairman then 
responded: “I note that Elan’s share price has trebled 
$14.0
$13.5
$11.5
$12.0
$13.0
$12.5
$11.0
$10.5
$10.0
$9.5
$9.0
1/2/2013
1/9/2013
1/16/2013
1/23/2013
1/30/2013
2/6/2013
2/13/2013
2/20/2013
2/27/2013
3/6/2013
3/13/2013
3/20/2013
3/27/2013
4/3/2013
4/10/2013
4/17/2013
4/24/2013
5/1/2013
5/8/2013
5/15/2013
5/22/2013
5/29/2013
6/5/2013
6/12/2013
Royalty Pharma raises
oﬀer to $12.50 + CVR
Royalty Pharma makes oﬀer
to acquire Elan for $11 per share
Elan sells Tysabri
rights to Biogen
Exhibit C
 Elan’s Share Price (January 1–June 16, 2013)
since Mr. Schuler’s departure. The board and manage-
ment team remain wholly focused on continued value 
creation and will continue to act in the best interests of 
our shareholders.”
Shareholders had to decide—quickly.
Mini-Case Questions
1.	 Using the sales forecasts for Tysabri presented in 
Exhibit A, and using the discounted cash flow model 
presented in Exhibit B, what do you think Elan is 
worth?
2.	 What other considerations do you think should be 
included in the valuation of Elan?
3.	 What would be your recommendation to ­shareholders—
to approve management’s proposals killing RP’s 
offer—or say “no” to the proposals, probably prompt-
ing the acceptance of RP’s offer?
Questions
These questions are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Capital Budgeting Theoretical Framework. Capital 
budgeting for a foreign project uses the same theoreti-
cal framework as domestic capital budgeting. What are 
the basic steps in domestic capital budgeting?
2.	 Foreign Complexities. Capital budgeting for a for-
eign project is considerably more complex than 
the ­domestic case. What are the factors that add 
complexity?
3.	 Project versus Parent Valuation. Why should a foreign 
project be evaluated both from a project and parent 
viewpoint?

540
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
4.	 Viewpoint and NPV. Which viewpoint, project or 
­parent, gives results closer to the traditional meaning 
of net present value in capital budgeting?
5.	 Viewpoint and Consolidated Earnings. Which view-
point gives results closer to the effect on consolidated 
earnings per share?
6.	 Operating and Financing Cash Flows. Capital proj-
ects provide both operating cash flows and financial 
cash flows. Why are operating cash flows preferred 
for domestic capital budgeting but financial cash 
flows given major consideration in international 
projects?
7.	 Risk-Adjusted Return. Should the anticipated inter-
nal rate of return (IRR) for a proposed foreign proj-
ect be compared to (a) alternative home country 
­proposals, (b) returns earned by local companies in 
the same industry and/or risk class, or (c) both? Justify 
your answer.
8.	 Blocked Cash Flows. In the evaluation of a potential 
foreign investment, how should a multinational firm 
evaluate cash flows in the host foreign country that 
are blocked from being repatriated to the firm’s home 
country?
9.	 Host Country Inflation. How should an MNE factor 
host country inflation into its evaluation of an invest-
ment proposal?
10.	 Cost of Equity. A foreign subsidiary does not have an 
independent cost of capital. However, in order to esti-
mate the discount rate for a comparable host-country 
firm, the analyst should try to calculate a hypothetical 
cost of capital. How is this done?
11.	 Viewpoint Cash Flows. What are the differences in the 
cash flows used in a project point of view analysis and 
a parent point of view analysis?
12.	 Foreign Exchange Risk and Capital Budgeting. How 
is foreign exchange risk sensitivity factored into the 
capital budgeting analysis of a foreign project?
13.	 Expropriation Risk. How is expropriation risk ­factored 
into the capital budgeting analysis of a ­foreign project?
14.	 Real Option Analysis. What is real option analysis? 
How is it a better method of making investment deci-
sions than traditional capital budgeting analysis?
15.	 M&A Business Drivers. What are the primary driv-
ing forces that motivate cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions?
16.	 Three Stages of Cross-Border Acquisitions. What 
are the three stages of a cross-border acquisition? 
What are the core financial elements integral to each 
stage?
17.	 Currency Risks in Cross-Border Acquisitions. What 
are the currency risks that arise in the process of 
­making a cross-border acquisition?
18.	 Contingent Currency Exposure. What are the larg-
est contingent currency exposures that arise in the 
process of pursuing and executing a cross-border 
acquisition?
Problems
These problems are available in MyFinanceLab.
1.	 Carambola de Honduras. Slinger Wayne, a U.S.-based 
private equity firm, is trying to determine what it 
should pay for a tool manufacturing firm in Hondu-
ras named Carambola. Slinger Wayne estimates that 
Carambola will generate a free cash flow of 13 million 
Honduran lempiras (Lp) next year (2012), and that 
this free cash flow will continue to grow at a constant 
rate of 8.0% per annum indefinitely.
A private equity firm like Slinger Wayne, how-
ever, is not interested in owning a company for long, 
and plans to sell Carambola at the end of three years 
for approximately 10 times Carambola’s free cash 
flow in that year. The current spot exchange rate is 
Lp14.80/$, but the Honduran inflation rate is expected 
to remain at a relatively high rate of 16.0% per annum 
compared to the U.S. dollar inflation rate of only 2.0% 
per annum. Slinger Wayne expects to earn at least a 
20% annual rate of return on international invest-
ments like Carambola.
a.	 What is Carambola worth if the Honduran lempira 
were to remain fixed over the three year invest-
ment period?
b.	 What is Carambola worth if the Honduran lempira 
were to change in value over time according to pur-
chasing power parity?
2.	 Finisterra, S.A. Finisterra, S.A., located in the state of 
Baja California, Mexico, manufactures frozen Mexi-
can food that is popular in the states of California and 
Arizona (U.S.). In order to be closer to its U.S. market, 
Finisterra is considering moving some of its manufac-
turing operations to southern California. Operations 
in California would begin in year 1 and have the fol-
lowing attributes:

541
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
Assumptions
Value
Sales price per unit, year 1 (US$)
$5.00
Sales price increase, per year
3.00%
Initial sales volume, year 1, units
1,000,000
Sales volume increase, per year
10.00%
Production costs per unit, year 1
$4.00
Production cost per unit increase, per year
4.00%
General and administrative expenses 
per year
$100,000
Depreciation expenses per year
$ 80,000
Finisterra’s WACC (pesos)
16.00%
Terminal value discount rate
20.00%
The operations in California will pay 80% of its account-
ing profit to Finisterra as an annual cash dividend. 
­Mexican taxes are calculated on grossed up dividends 
from foreign countries, with a credit for host-country 
taxes already paid. What is the maximum U.S. dollar 
price Finisterra should offer in year 1 for the investment?
3.	 Grenouille Properties. Grenouille Properties (U.S.) 
expects to receive cash dividends from a French joint 
venture over the coming three years. The first divi-
dend, to be paid December 31, 2011, is expected to 
be €720,000. The dividend is then expected to grow 
10.0% per year over the following two years. The cur-
rent exchange rate (December 30, 2010) is $1.3603/€. 
Grenouille’s weighted average cost of capital is 12%.
a.	 What is the present value of the expected euro divi-
dend stream if the euro is expected to appreciate 
4.00% per annum against the dollar?
b.	 What is the present value of the expected dividend 
stream if the euro were to depreciate 3.00% per 
annum against the dollar?
4.	 Natural Mosaic. Natural Mosaic Company (U.S.) is 
considering investing Rs50,000,000 in India to create 
a wholly owned tile manufacturing plant to export to 
the European market. After five years, the subsidiary 
would be sold to Indian investors for Rs100,000,000. 
A pro forma income statement for the Indian opera-
tion predicts the generation of Rs7,000,000 of annual 
cash flow, is listed in the following table.
Sales revenue
30,000,000
Less cash operating expenses
(17,000,000)
Gross income
13,000,000
Less depreciation expenses
(1,000,000)
Earnings before interest and taxes
12,000,000
Less Indian taxes at 50%
(6,000,000)
Net income
6,000,000
Add back depreciation
1,000,000
Annual cash flow
7,000,000
The initial investment will be made on December 
31, 2011, and cash flows will occur on December 31st 
of each succeeding year. Annual cash dividends to 
Philadelphia Composite from India will equal 75% of 
accounting income.
The U.S. corporate tax rate is 40% and the Indian 
corporate tax rate is 50%. Because the Indian tax rate 
is greater than the U.S. tax rate, annual dividends paid 
to Natural Mosaic will not be subject to additional 
taxes in the United States. There are no capital gains 
taxes on the final sale. Natural Mosaic uses a weighted 
average cost of capital of 14% on domestic invest-
ments, but will add six percentage points for the Indian 
investment because of perceived greater risk. Natural 
Mosaic forecasts the rupee/dollar exchange rate for 
December 31st on the next six years are listed below.
R$/$
R$/$
2011
50
2014
62
2012
54
2015
66
2013
58
2016
70
What is the net present value and internal rate of 
return on this investment?
5.	 Doohicky Devices. Doohickey Devices, Inc., manu-
factures design components for personal computers. 
Until the present, manufacturing has been subcon-
tracted to other companies, but for reasons of quality 
control Doohicky has decided to manufacture itself in 
Asia. Analysis has narrowed the choice to two possi-
bilities, Penang, Malaysia, and Manila, the Philippines. 
At the moment only the summary of expected, after-
tax, cash flows displayed at the bottom of this page is 
available. Although most operating outflows would be 
in Malaysian ringgit or Philippine pesos, some addi-
tional U.S. dollar cash outflows would be necessary, as 
shown in the table at the top of the next page.
The Malaysia ringgit currently trades at RM3.80/$ 
and the Philippine peso trades at Ps50.00/$. Doohicky 
expects the Malaysian ringgit to appreciate 2.0% 
per year against the dollar, and the Philippine peso 
to depreciate 5.0% per year against the dollar. If the 
weighted average cost of capital for Doohicky Devices 
is 14.0%, which project looks most promising?

542
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
Problem 5.
Doohicky in Penang (after-tax)
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Net ringgit cash flows
(26,000)
8,000
6,800
7,400
9,200
10,000
Dollar cash outflows
—
(100)
(120)
(150)
(150)
—
Doohicky in Manila (after-tax)
Net peso cash flows
(560,000)
190,000
180,000
200,000
210,000
200,000
Dollar cash outflows
—
(100)
(200)
(300)
(400)
—
6.	 Wenceslas Refining Company. Privately owned 
­Wenceslas Refining Company is considering investing 
in the Czech Republic so as to have a refinery source 
closer to its European customers. The original invest-
ment in Czech korunas would amount to K250 million, 
or $5,000,000 at the current spot rate of K32.50/$, all in 
fixed assets, which will be depreciated over 10 years by 
the straight-line method. An additional K100,000,000 
will be needed for working capital.
For capital budgeting purposes, Wenceslas 
assumes sale as a going concern at the end of the 
third year at a price, after all taxes, equal to the net 
book value of fixed assets alone (not including work-
ing capital). All free cash flow will be repatriated to 
the United States as soon as possible. In evaluating 
the venture, the U.S. dollar forecasts are shown in the 
table above.
Problem 6.
Assumptions
0
1
2
3
Original investment (Czech korunas, K)
250,000,000
Spot exchange rate (K/$)
32.50
30.00
27.50
25.00
Unit demand
700,000
900,000
1,000,000
Unit sales price
$10.00
$10.30
$10.60
Fixed cash operating expenses
$1,000,000
$1,030,000
$1,060,000
Depreciation
$500,000
$500,000
$500,000
Investment in working capital (K)
100,000,000
to maximize present value. Is the investment attrac-
tive to Wenceslas Refining?
Hermosa Beach Components (U.S.)
Use the following information and assumptions to answer 
Problems 7–10.
Hermosa Beach Components, Inc., of California 
exports 24,000 sets of low-density light bulbs per year 
to Argentina under an import license that expires in five 
years. In Argentina, the bulbs are sold for the Argentine 
peso equivalent of $60 per set. Direct manufacturing costs 
in the United States and shipping together amount to $40 
per set. The market for this type of bulb in Argentina is 
stable, neither growing nor shrinking, and Hermosa holds 
the major portion of the market.
The Argentine government has invited Hermosa 
to open a manufacturing plant so imported bulbs can be 
replaced by local production. If Hermosa makes the invest-
ment, it will operate the plant for five years and then sell the 
building and equipment to Argentine investors at net book 
value at the time of sale plus the value of any net working 
capital. (Net working capital is the amount of current assets 
less any portion financed by local debt.) Hermosa will be 
allowed to repatriate all net income and depreciation funds 
to the United States each year. Hermosa traditionally eval-
uates all foreign investments in U.S. dollar terms.
Variable manufacturing costs are expected to be 
50% of sales. No additional funds need be invested in 
the U.S. subsidiary during the period under consid-
eration. The Czech Republic imposes no restrictions 
on repatriation of any funds of any sort. The Czech 
corporate tax rate is 25% and the United States rate 
is 40%. Both countries allow a tax credit for taxes 
paid in other countries. Wenceslas uses 18% as its 
weighted average cost of capital, and its objective is 

543
Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions    CHAPTER 18 
■
■
Investment. Hermosa’s anticipated cash outlay in U.S. 
dollars in 2012 would be as follows:
Building and equipment
$1,000,000
Net working capital
1,000,000
Total investment
$2,000,000
All investment outlays will be made in 2012, and all 
operating cash flows will occur at the end of years 
2013 through 2017.
■
■
Depreciation and Investment Recovery. Building and 
equipment will be depreciated over five years on a 
straight-line basis. At the end of the fifth year, the 
$1,000,000 of net working capital may also be repatri-
ated to the United States, as may the remaining net 
book value of the plant.
■
■
Sales Price of Bulbs. Locally manufactured bulbs will 
be sold for the Argentine peso equivalent of $60 per set.
■
■
Operating Expenses per Set of Bulbs. Material pur-
chases are as follows:
Materials purchased in Argentina 
(U.S. dollar equivalent)
$20 per set
Materials imported from Hermosa 
Beach-USA
10 per set
Total variable costs
$30 per set
■
■
Transfer Prices. The $10 transfer price per set for raw 
material sold by the parent consists of $5 of direct and 
indirect costs incurred in the United States on their 
manufacture, creating $5 of pre-tax profit to Hermosa 
Beach.
■
■
Taxes. The corporate income tax rate is 40% in both 
Argentina and the United States (combined federal 
and state/province). There are no capital gains taxes 
on the future sale of the Argentine subsidiary, either 
in Argentina or the United States.
■
■
Discount Rate. Hermosa Components uses a 15% 
discount rate to evaluate all domestic and foreign 
projects.
7.	 Hermosa Components: Baseline Analysis. Evaluate 
the proposed investment in Argentina by Hermosa 
Components (U.S.). Hermosa’s management wishes 
the baseline analysis to be performed in U.S. dollars 
(and implicitly also assumes the exchange rate remains 
fixed throughout the life of the project). ­Create a proj-
ect viewpoint capital budget and a parent viewpoint 
capital budget. What do you conclude from your 
analysis?
8.	 Hermosa Components: Revenue Growth Scenario. 
As a result of their analysis in Problem 7, Hermosa 
wishes to explore the implications of being able to 
grow sales volume by 4% per year. Argentine infla-
tion is expected to average 5% per year, so sales price 
and material cost increases of 7% and 6% per year, 
respectively, are thought reasonable. Although mate-
rial costs in Argentina are expected to rise, U.S.-based 
costs are not expected to change over the five-year 
period. Evaluate this scenario for both the project and 
parent viewpoints. Is the project under this revenue 
growth scenario acceptable?
9.	 Hermosa Components: Revenue Growth and Sales 
Price Scenario. In addition to the assumptions 
employed in Problem 8, Hermosa now wishes to eval-
uate the prospect of being able to sell the Argentine 
subsidiary at the end of year 5 at a multiple of the 
business’ earnings in that year. Hermosa believes that 
a multiple of six is a conservative estimate of the mar-
ket value of the firm at that time. Evaluate the project 
and parent viewpoint capital budgets.
10.	 Hermosa Components: Revenue Growth, Sales 
Price, and Currency Risk Scenario. Melinda Deane, 
a new analyst at Hermosa and a recent MBA gradu-
ate, believes that it is a fundamental error to evalu-
ate the Argentine project’s prospective earnings and 
cash flows in dollars, rather than first estimating 
their Argentine peso (Ps) value and then convert-
ing cash flow returns to the United States in dollars. 
She believes the correct method is to use the end-
of-year spot rate in 2012 of Ps3.50/$ and assume it 
will change in relation to purchasing power. (She 
is assuming U.S. inflation to be 1% per annum and 
Argentine inflation to be 5% per annum). She also 
believes that Hermosa should use a risk-adjusted 
discount rate in Argentina that reflects Argentine 
capital costs (20% is her estimate) and a risk-
adjusted discount rate for the parent viewpoint 
capital budget (18%) on the assumption that inter-
national projects in a risky currency environment 
should require a higher expected return than other 
lower-risk projects. How do these assumptions and 
changes alter Hermosa’s perspective on the pro-
posed investment?

544
CHAPTER 18    Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
Internet Exercises
1.	 Capital Projects and the EBRD. The European Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) was 
established to foster market-oriented business devel-
opment in the former Soviet Bloc. Use the EBRD 
Web site to determine which projects and companies 
EBRD is currently undertaking.
European Bank for 
Reconstruction and 
Development
www.ebrd.com
2.	 Emerging Markets: China. Long-term investment 
projects such as electrical power generation require a 
thorough understanding of all attributes of doing busi-
ness in that country. China is currently the focus of 
investment and market penetration strategies of mul-
tinational firms worldwide. Using the Web (you might 
start with the Web sites listed below), build a database 
on doing business in China, and prepare an update of 
many of the factors discussed in this chapter.
Ministry of Foreign 
Trade and Economic 
Cooperation, PRC
english.mofcom.gov.cn
China Investment 
Trust and Investment 
Corporation
www.citic.com/wps/portal/
enlimited
ChinaNet Investment 
Pages
www.chinanet-online.com
3.	 BeyondBrics: The Financial Times’ Emerging Market 
Hub. Check the FT’s blog on emerging markets for the 
latest debates and guest editorials.
Financial Times Blog on 
Emerging Markets
blogs.ft.com/beyond-brics/

545
Answers to Selected 
End-of-Chapter Problems
Chapter 1: Multinational Financial Management: Opportunities and Challenges
	 10.	 a.	 $14.77
b.	 U.S. = 30.5%, Brazil = 27.1%, Germany = 40.1%, China = 2.4%
c.	 69.5%
	 13.	 Appreciation case: +13.9%
	
	 Depreciation case: -13.9%
Chapter 2: The International Monetary System
	
2.	  $40,257.65
	
6.	  1.1398
	
7.	  -41.82%
Chapter 3: The Balance of Payments
Australia
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
3.1  What is Australia’s 
balance on goods? 
(goods exports - 
goods imports)
-4,813
1,786 -5,431 -15,369 -18,031 -13,372 -9,596 -17,784 -4,915 -4,439 17,479 22,481 -12,186
4,390
3.2  What is Australia’s 
balance on services? 
(services credit - 
services debit)
289
-259
-201
-433
-678
542
869
588 -3,098 -1,351 -4,345 -10,244 -12,371 -14,055
3.3  What is Australia’s 
balance on goods 
and services (balance 
on goods + balance 
on services)
-4,524
1,527 -5,632 -15,802 -18,709 -12,830 -8,727 -17,196 -8,013 -5,790 13,134 12,237 -24,557 -9,665
3.4  What is Australia’s 
current account 
balance? (the sum 
of the four balances 
listed above, goods, 
services, income, and 
current transfers)
-15,103 -8,721 -17,385 -30,674 -40,066 -41,032 -41,504 -58,031 -47,786 -44,999 -37,177 -44,524 -48,738 -30,777

546
Answers to Selected End-of-Chapter Problems
Chapter 4: Financial Goals and Corporate Governance
	
1.	 a.	 25.000%
b.	 33.333%
c.	 Dividend yield = 8.333%, capital gains = 25.00%, total shareholder return = 33.333%
	
2.	 a.	 64.23%
b.	 4.19%
c.	 71.12%
Chapter 5: The Foreign Exchange Market
	
1.	 a.	 4.72
b.	 21,243
	 10.	 a.	 Profit of 26,143.79
b.	 Loss of (26,086.96)
Chapter 6: International Parity Conditions
	
4.	 a.	 1.0941
b.	 1.1155 and 948.19.
	
7.	 A CIA profit potential of -0.042% tells Takeshi he should borrow Japanese yen and invest in the higher yielding 
currency, the U.S. dollar, to earn a CIA profit of 55,000.
Chapter 7: Foreign Currency Derivatives: Futures and Options
	
1.	 a.	 ($49,080.00)
b.	 $38,920.00
c.	 ($9,080.00)
	
4.	 a.	 Sallie should buy a call on Singapore dollars
b.	 $0.65046
c.	 Gross profit = $0.05000 Net profit = $0.04954
d.	 Gross profit = $0.15000 Net profit = $0.14954
Chapter 8: Interest Rate Risk and Swaps
	
1.	
3-month
6-month
a.  Discount on sale
$6.07
$23.26
b.  Simple yield
0.0607%
0.2331%
c.  Annualized yield
0.2432%
0.4668%
	
3.	 a.	 15-year mortgage: $1,662
	
30-year mortgage: $1,261
b.	 $1,957
c.	 15-year mortgage: ($12,000)
	
30-year mortgage: ($12,000)

547
Answers to Selected End-of-Chapter Problems
Chapter 9: Foreign Exchange Rate Determination
	
1.	  -80.00%
	
3.	  -40.00%
	
6.	  -13.79%
Chapter 10: Transaction Exposure
	
3.	 Foreign exchange loss of $921,400,000
	
9.	 Do nothing: Could be anything
Forward: $216,049.38
Money market: $212,190.81
Forward is preferable choice if bank allows an expanded line
Chapter 11: Translation Exposure
	
1.	 a.	 Translation loss is ($2,400,000)
b.	 Loss is accumulated on the consolidated balance sheet, and does not pass through the consolidated income if the 
subsidiary is foreign currency functional
	
5.	  Net exposure is $21,000
Chapter 12: Operating Exposure
	
1.	 a.	 $9,984,000
b.	 To be paid out of monthly cash flow
	
3.	 Case 1: Same yuan price: $33,913,043
Case 2: Same dollar price: $54,000,000 (better)
Chapter 13: The Global Cost and Availability of Capital
	
3.	 a.	 6.550%
b.	 5.950%
	
4.	 Domestic: 7.0210%
Global: 4.7945%
Chapter 14: Raising Equity and Debt Globally
	
4.	 7.7818
	
8.	 4.960%
Chapter 15: Multinational Tax Management
	
1.	 Case 1: 38.8%
Case 2: 45.0%
	
4.	 36.4%

548
Answers to Selected End-of-Chapter Problems
Chapter 16: International Trade Finance
	
3.	 11.765%
	
5.	 a.	 5.128%
b.	 $196,000.00
Chapter 17: Foreign Direct Investment and Political Risk
No quantitative problems in this chapter.
Chapter 18: Multinational Capital Budgeting and Cross-Border Acquisitions
	
1.	 a.	 $7,912,725
b.	 $5,587,094
	
2.	  Cumulative PV = Ps28,442,771 or $3,555,346

549
Glossary
Absolute advantage.  The ability of an individual 
party or country to produce more of a product 
or service with the same inputs as another party. 
It is therefore possible for a country to have no 
absolute advantage in any international trade 
activity. See also Comparative advantage.
Absolute purchasing power parity.  The theory 
that the exact rate of exchange between two 
currencies is found by equalizing the purchas-
ing power of the two currencies.
Accounting exposure.  Another name for transla-
tion exposure. See Translation exposure.
ADR.  See American Depositary Receipt.
Affiliate.  See Foreign affiliate.
Affiliated.  In 
business, 
a 
close 
association 
between two companies. Usually implies a 
partial but not controlling equity or ownership 
position by one in the other.
Agency theory.  The costs and risks of aligning 
interests between shareholders of the firm and 
their agents, management, in the conduct of 
firm business and strategy. Also referred to as 
the agency problem or agency issue.
All-in cost (AIC).  The total cost, including inter-
est rate and fees, associated with a loan or debt 
obligation.
American Depositary Receipt (ADR).  A cer-
tificate of ownership, issued by a U.S. bank, 
representing a claim on underlying foreign 
securities. ADRs may be traded in lieu of trad-
ing in the actual underlying shares.
American option.  An option that can be exercised at 
any time up to and including the expiration date.
American terms.  Foreign exchange quotations 
for the U.S. dollar, expressed as the number of 
U.S. dollars per unit of non-U.S. currency.
Anchor currency.  See Reserve currency.
Angel investor.  An investor who provides capital 
for small business startups.
Anticipated exposure.  A foreign exchange expo-
sure that is believed by management to have a 
very high likelihood of occurring, but is not yet 
contractual, and is therefore not yet certain.
Appreciation.  In the context of exchange rate 
changes, a rise in the foreign exchange value of 
a currency that is pegged to other currencies or 
to gold. Also called revaluation.
Arbitrage.  A trading strategy based on the 
purchase of a commodity, including foreign 
exchange, in one market at one price while 
simultaneously selling it in another market at 
a more advantageous price, in order to obtain a 
risk-free profit on the price differential.
Arbitrager.  An individual or company that prac-
tices arbitrage.
Arm’s length price.  The price at which a willing 
buyer and a willing, unrelated seller freely 
agree to carry out a transaction. In effect, a 
free market price. Applied by tax authorities in 
judging the appropriateness of transfer prices 
between related companies.
Ask.  The price at which a dealer is willing to sell 
foreign exchange, securities, or commodities. 
Also called offer price.
Asset market approach.  A strategy that determines 
whether foreigners are willing to hold claims in 
monetary form, depending on an extensive set 
of investment considerations or drivers.
At-the-money (ATM).  An option whose exercise 
price is the same as the spot price of the under-
lying currency.
Aval.  An endorsement by a third party, acting as 
guarantor, for the full amount of a debt. The 
third party (guarantor) commits to cover the 
payment of the amount of the credit title and 
its interest in the event the original debtor 
does not fulfill his or her obligation.
Backlog exposure.  The period of time between 
contract initiation and fulfillment through 
delivery of services or shipping of goods.
Back-to-back loan.  A loan in which two compa-
nies in separate countries borrow each other’s 
currency for a specific period of time and 
repay the other’s currency at an agreed matu-
rity. Sometimes the two loans are channeled 
through an intermediate bank. Back-to-back 
financing is also called link financing. Also 
known as a parallel loan or a credit swap.
Balance of payments (BOP).  A financial state-
ment summarizing the flow of goods, services, 

550
Glossary
given asset and returns on the market portfolio, divided 
by the variance of returns on the market portfolio.
Bid.  The price that a dealer is willing to pay to purchase 
foreign exchange or a security. Also referred to as the 
bid rate.
Bid-ask spread.  The difference between a bid and an ask 
quotation.
Bill of exchange (B/E).  A written order requesting one 
party (such as an importer) to pay a specified amount 
of money at a specified time to the writer of the bill. 
Also called a draft. See Sight draft.
Bill of lading (B/L).  A contract between a common car-
rier and a shipper to transport goods to a named desti-
nation. The bill of lading is also a receipt for the goods. 
Bills of lading are usually negotiable, meaning they 
are made to the order of a particular party and can be 
endorsed to transfer title to another party.
Billing exposure.  The time it takes to get paid in cash after 
the issuance of an account receivable (A/R).
Black market.  An illegal foreign exchange market.
Blocked funds.  Funds in one country’s currency that may 
not be exchanged freely for foreign currencies because 
of exchange controls.
Branch.  A foreign operation not incorporated in the host 
country, in contrast to a subsidiary.
Bretton Woods Agreement.  An agreement negotiated at 
a 1944 international conference and in effect from 1945 
to 1971 that established the international monetary sys-
tem. The conference was held in Bretton Woods, New 
Hampshire, United States.
BRIC.  A frequently used acronym for the four largest 
emerging market countries—Brazil, Russia, India, and 
China.
Bridge financing.  Short-term financing from a bank, used 
while a borrower obtains medium- or long-term fixed-
rate financing from capital markets.
Bulldog.  British pound-denominated bond issued within 
the United Kingdom by a foreign borrower.
Cable.  The U.S. dollar per British pound cross rate.
Call.  An option with the right, but not the obligation, to 
buy foreign exchange or another financial contract at a 
specified price within a specified time. See also Foreign 
currency option.
Capital account.  A section of the balance of payments 
accounts. Under the revised format of the International 
Monetary Fund, the capital account measures capital 
transfers and the acquisition and disposal of nonpro-
duced, nonfinancial assets. Under traditional defini-
tions, still used by many countries, the capital account 
measures public and private international lending and 
investment. Most of the traditional definition of the 
capital account is now incorporated into IMF state-
ments as the financial account.
and investment funds between residents of a given 
country and residents of the rest of the world.
Balance of trade (BOT).  An entry in the balance of pay-
ments measuring the difference between the monetary 
value of merchandise exports and merchandise imports.
Balance on goods and services.  A sub-balance within the 
Current Account of a nation’s balance of payments, 
indicating the net position in the export and import of 
both goods manufacturing and services trade.
Balance sheet hedge.  See Money market hedge.
Bank draft.  A check for payment drawing upon a bank’s 
own account; a check whose payment is guaranteed by 
a bank.
Bank for International Settlements (BIS).  A bank in 
Basel, Switzerland, that functions as a bank for Euro-
pean central banks.
Bankers’ acceptance.  An unconditional promise by a bank 
to make payment on a draft when it matures. This comes 
in the form of the bank’s endorsement ­(acceptance) of 
a draft drawn against that bank in accordance with the 
terms of a letter of credit issued by the bank.
Barter.  International trade conducted by the direct 
exchange of physical goods, rather than by separate 
purchases and sales at prices and exchange rates set by 
a free market.
Base currency.  The base or unit currency is the USD in 
a currency quotation, such as USD1.0750 = EUR1.00.
Basic balance.  In a country’s balance of payments, the net 
of exports and imports of goods and services, unilateral 
transfers, and long-term capital flows.
Basis erosion and profit shifting (BEPS).  The reallocation 
of corporate profits to lower-tax environments, away 
from higher-tax environments that are arguably their 
proper state.
Basis point.  One one-hundredth of one percentage point, 
often used in quotations of spreads between interest 
rates or to describe changes in yields in securities.
Basis risk.  A type of interest rate risk in which the interest 
rate base is mismatched.
Bearer bond.  Corporate or governmental debt in bond 
form that is not registered to any owner. Possession of 
the bond implies ownership, and interest is obtained 
by clipping a coupon attached to the bond. The advan-
tage of the bearer form is easy transfer at the time of 
a sale, easy use as collateral for a debt, and what some 
cynics call taxpayer anonymity, meaning that govern-
ments find it hard to trace interest payments in order 
to collect income taxes. Bearer bonds are common in 
Europe, but are seldom issued any more in the United 
States. The alternate form to a bearer bond is a regis-
tered bond.
Beta.  Second letter of the Greek alphabet, used as a sta-
tistical measure of risk in the Capital Asset Pricing 
Model. Beta is the covariance between returns on a 

551
Glossary
Commercial risk.  In banking, the likelihood that a foreign 
debtor will be unable to repay its debts because of busi-
ness events, as distinct from political ones.
Commodity currency.  The currency of a country that is 
dependent on the export of a certain commodity. For 
example, the Chilean peso and copper.
Comparative advantage.  A theory that everyone gains 
if each nation specializes in the production of those 
goods that it produces relatively most efficiently and 
imports those goods that other countries produce rela-
tively most efficiently. The theory supports free trade 
arguments.
Competitive exposure.  See Operating exposure.
Consolidated financial statement.  A corporate finan-
cial statement in which accounts of a parent company 
and its subsidiaries are added together to produce a 
statement which reports the status of the worldwide 
enterprise as if it were a single corporation. Internal 
obligations are eliminated in consolidated statements.
Consolidation.  In the context of accounting for multina-
tional corporations, the process of preparing a single 
reporting currency financial statement, which ­combines 
financial statements of subsidiaries that are in fact 
measured in different currencies.
Contagion.  The spread of a crisis in one country to its 
neighboring countries and other countries with simi-
lar characteristics—at least in the eyes of cross-border 
investors.
Contingent foreign currency exposure.  The final deter-
mination of the exposure is contingent upon another 
firm’s decision, such as a decision to invest or the win-
ning of a business or construction bid.
Contingent Value Right (CVR).  A right given to share-
holders of an acquired company (or company facing 
acquisition) that promises them to receive additional 
cash or shares if a specified event occurs. CVRs are 
similar to options because they carry an expiration date 
related to the time in which the contingent event must 
occur.
Continuous Linked Settlements (CLS).  A U.S. financial 
institution that provides foreign exchange settlement 
services to members.
Contractual hedge.  A foreign currency hedging agree-
ment or contract, typically using a financial derivative 
such as a forward contract or foreign currency option.
Controlled foreign corporation (CFC).  A foreign corpo-
ration in which U.S. shareholders own more than 50% 
of the combined voting power or total value. Under 
U.S. tax law, U.S. shareholders may be liable for taxes 
on undistributed earnings of the controlled foreign 
corporation.
Convertible bond.  A bond or other fixed-income security 
that may be exchanged for a number of shares of com-
mon stock.
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM).  A theoretical 
model that relates the return on an asset to its risk, 
where risk is the contribution of the asset to the vola-
tility of a portfolio. Risk and return are presumed to 
be determined in competitive and efficient financial 
markets.
Capital budgeting.  The analytical approach used to 
determine whether investment in long-lived assets or 
projects is viable. See also Multinational capital budgeting.
Capital control.  Restrictions, requirements, taxes or pro-
hibitions on the movements of capital across borders as 
imposed and enforced by governments.
Capital flight.  Movement of funds out of a country 
because of political risk.
Capital gain.  A profit or loss arising from the sale of an 
asset of any kind such as a stock, bond, business, or real 
estate.
Capital lifecycle.  The changing capital needs, in both 
form, maturity, and amount, which a firm experiences 
from inception through maturity.
Capital markets.  The financial markets of various countries  
in which various types of long-term debt and/or owner-
ship securities, or claims on those securities, are pur-
chased and sold.
Capital mobility.  The degree to which private capital 
moves freely from country to country in search of the 
most promising investment opportunities.
Carry trade.  The strategy of borrowing in a low interest 
rate currency to fund investing in higher yielding cur-
rencies. Also termed currency carry trade, the strategy 
is speculative in that currency risk is present and not 
managed or hedged.
Caveat emptor.  Latin for “buyer beware.”
Certificate of Deposit (CD).  A negotiable receipt issued 
by a bank for funds deposited for a certain period of 
time. CDs can be purchased or sold prior to their matu-
rity in a secondary market, making them an interest-
earning marketable security.
CFR (cost and freight).  See Cost and freight.
CIF (cost, insurance, and freight).  See Cost, insurance, and 
freight.
Classical gold standard.  See Gold standard.
Clearinghouse.  An institution through which financial 
obligations are cleared by the process of settling the 
obligations of various members.
Clearinghouse Interbank Payments System (CHIPS).  A 
New York-based computerized clearing system used by 
banks to settle interbank foreign exchange obligations 
(mostly U.S. dollars) between members.
Collateral.  See margin.
Collective action clause (CCA).  A contractual clause in a 
bond or other debt agreement allowing a supermajor-
ity of bondholders to agree to a debt restructuring that 
is legally binding on all bondholders.

552
Glossary
proceeds of the forward sale to repay the original loan, 
and (6) sustaining a remaining profit balance.
Covered transaction.  A foreign currency exposure which 
has been hedged or “covered.”
Covering.  A transaction in the forward foreign exchange 
market or money market that protects the value of 
future cash flows. Covering is another term for hedg-
ing. See Hedging.
Crawling peg.  A foreign exchange rate system in which 
the exchange rate is adjusted very frequently to reflect 
prevailing rate of inflation.
Credit risk.  The possibility that a borrower’s credit worth, 
at the time of renewing a credit, is reclassified by the 
lender.
Credit spread.  The added interest cost assessed a bor-
rower to compensate the lender or investor for the 
assessed credit risk of the borrower. The spread is typi-
cally based upon the credit rating of the borrower. Also 
termed credit risk premium.
Credit swap.  See Back-to-back loan.
Crisis planning.  The process of educating management 
and other employees about how to react to various sce-
narios of violence or other disruptive events.
Cross-border acquisition.  A purchase in which one firm 
acquires another firm located in a different country.
Cross-currency interest rate swap.  See Currency swap.
Cross-currency swap.  See Currency swap.
Cross-listing.  The listing of shares of common stock on 
two or more stock exchanges.
Cross rate.  An exchange rate between two currencies 
derived by dividing each currency’s exchange rate with 
a third currency. Colloquially, it is often used to refer to 
a specific currency pair such as the euro/yen cross rate, 
as the yen/dollar and dollar/euro are the more common 
currency quotations.
Crowdfunding.  The practice of funding a startup business 
or enterprise of some kind by raising money in small 
amounts from a large number of people, typically via 
the Internet.
Cryptocurrency.  A currency created and exchanged using 
the secure information processes and principles of 
cryptography. One of the first and most well-known 
cryptocurrencies is Bitcoin.
Cumulative translation adjustment (CTA) account.  An 
entry in a translated balance sheet in which gains  
and/or losses from translation have been accumulated 
over a period of years.
Currency Adjustment Clause (CAC).  A contractual 
arrangement to share or split changes in exchange rates 
between two parties. Commonly used in long-term sup-
plier contracts.
Currency board.  A currency board exists when a coun-
try’s central bank commits to back its money supply 
entirely with foreign reserves at all times.
Convertible currency.  A currency that can be exchanged 
freely for any other currency without government 
restrictions.
Corporate governance.  The relationship among stake-
holders used to determine and control the strategic 
direction and performance of an organization.
Corporate inversion.  The reincorporation of a company 
from a low-tax country environment from a high-tax 
country environment. Nearly exclusively applies to the 
United States.
Corporate social responsibility (CSR).  A form of corpo-
rate self-regulation to pursue business in a legal, ethi-
cal manner, and consistent with a series of social norms 
such as environmental and social sustainability.
Correspondent bank.  A bank that holds deposits for and 
provides services to another bank, located in another 
geographic area, on a reciprocal basis.
Cost and freight (CFR).  Price, as quoted by an exporter, 
that includes the cost of transportation to the named 
port of destination.
Cost, insurance, and freight (CIF).  Exporter’s quoted 
price including the cost of packaging, freight or car-
riage, insurance premium, and other charges paid in 
respect of the goods from the time of loading in the 
country of export to their arrival at the named port of 
destination or place of transshipment.
Cost of capital.  The cost, expressed as a percentage and 
on a weighted average basis, of raising equity and debt 
at current market rates. More commonly referred to as 
the weighted average cost of capital, or WACC.
Counterparty.  The opposite party in a double transaction, 
such as a swap or back-to-back loan, which involves an 
exchange of financial instruments or obligations now 
and a reversal of that same transaction at an agreed-
upon later date.
Counterparty risk.  The potential exposure any individual 
firm bears that the second party to any financial con-
tract may be unable to fulfill its obligations under the 
contract’s specifications.
Country risk.  In banking, the likelihood that unexpected 
events within a host country will influence a client’s or 
a government’s ability to repay a loan. Country risk is 
often divided into sovereign (political) risk and foreign 
exchange (currency) risk. See also Country-specific risk.
Country-specific risk.  Political risk that affects the MNE 
at the country level, such as transfer risk (blocked 
funds) and cultural and institutional risks.
Covered interest arbitrage (CIA).  The process whereby an 
investor earns a risk-free profit by (1) borrowing funds 
in one currency, (2) exchanging those funds in the spot 
market for a foreign currency, (3) investing the foreign 
currency at interest rates in a foreign country, (4) selling 
forward, at the time of original investment, the invest-
ment proceeds to be received at maturity, (5) using the 

553
Glossary
Direct intervention.  The purchase or the sale of a coun-
try’s home currency by its own fiscal or monetary 
authority in order to influence the value of the domes-
tic currency.
Direct investment.  See Foreign direct investment (FDI).
Direct quote.  The price of a unit of foreign exchange 
expressed in the home country’s currency. The term has 
meaning only when the home country is specified.
Direct tax.  A tax paid directly to the government by the 
person on whom it is imposed.
Directed issue.  See Directed public share issue.
Directed public share issue.  An issue that is targeted 
at investors in a single country and underwritten in 
whole or in part by investment institutions from that 
country.
Dirty float.  A system of floating (i.e., market-determined) 
exchange rates in which the government intervenes 
from time to time to influence the foreign exchange 
value of its currency.
Discount.  In the foreign exchange market, the amount by 
which a currency is cheaper for future delivery than for 
spot (immediate) delivery. The opposite of discount is 
premium.
Dividend yield.  The current period dividend distribution 
as a percentage of the beginning of period share price.
Dollarization.  The use of the U.S. dollar as the official 
­currency of a country.
Draft.  An unconditional written order requesting one 
party (such as an importer) to pay a specified amount 
of money at a specified time to the order of the writer 
of the draft. Also called a bill of exchange. Personal 
checks are one type of draft.
Dual-currency basket.  The use of an index or basket com-
posed of two other foreign currencies to benchmark or 
manage a country’s own currency value.
Dutch Disease.  A term invented by the Economist maga-
zine, referring to the process of a country’s currency 
appreciating in value as a result of the discovery and 
development of a natural resource like natural gas or 
oil. The result of the currency appreciation is to make 
other exports from the country less competitive in the 
export market. The Dutch reference was the Econo-
mist’s use of the term to explain what happened to the 
Dutch florin after the discovery of natural gas in the 
Netherlands in 1959.
Earnings stripping.  See Basis erosion and profit shifting.
Economic exposure.  Another name for operating expo-
sure. See Operating exposure.
Effective tax rate.  Actual taxes paid as a percentage of 
actual income before tax.
Efficient market.  A market in which all relevant informa-
tion is already reflected in market prices. The term is 
most frequently applied to foreign exchange markets 
and securities markets.
Currency contract period.  The period immediately follow-
ing a change in the value of a currency in which existing 
contracts do not allow any change in prices—yet.
Currency risk.  The variance in expected cash flows arising 
from unexpected changes in exchange rates.
Currency swap.  A transaction in which two counterpar-
ties exchange specific amounts of two different curren-
cies at the outset, and then repay over time according 
to an agreed-upon contract that reflects interest pay-
ments and possibly amortization of principal. In a 
currency swap, the cash flows are similar to those in 
a spot and forward foreign exchange transaction. See 
also Swap.
Currency switching.  Where a firm uses foreign exchange 
received in the course of business to settle obligations 
to a third party, often located in a third country.
Currency wars.  A state of trade competition in which a 
country will intentionally devalue its currency in the 
hope of making its exports more competitive on the 
global marketplace.
Current account.  In the balance of payments, the net flow 
of goods, services, and unilateral transfers (such as gifts) 
between a country and all foreign countries.
Current rate method.  A method of translating the finan-
cial statements of foreign subsidiaries into the parent’s 
reporting currency. All assets and liabilities are trans-
lated at the current exchange rate.
D/A.  Documents against acceptance. D/A is an interna-
tional trade term.
Deductible expense.  A business expense that is recog-
nized by tax officials as deductible toward the firm’s 
income tax liabilities.
Degree of pass-through.  See Exchange rate pass-through.
Delta.  The change in an option’s price divided by the 
change in the price of the underlying instrument. Hedg-
ing strategies are based on delta ratios.
Demand deposit.  A bank deposit that can be withdrawn 
or transferred at any time without notice, in contrast 
to a time deposit where (theoretically) the bank may 
require a waiting period before the deposit can be with-
drawn. Demand deposits may or may not earn interest. 
A time deposit is the opposite of a demand deposit.
Depositary receipt (DR).  See American Depositary 
Receipt (ADR).
Depreciation.  A market-driven change in the value of a 
currency that results in reduced value or purchasing 
power.
Derivative.  See Financial derivative.
Devaluation.  The action of a government or central 
bank authority to drop the spot foreign exchange 
value of a currency that is pegged to another currency 
or to gold.
Dim Sum Bond Market.  The market for Chinese renminbi 
(yuan) denominated securities as issued in Hong Kong.

554
Glossary
European option.  An option that can be exercised only 
on the day on which it expires.
European terms.  Foreign exchange quotations for the 
U.S. dollar, expressed as the number of non-U.S. cur-
rency units per U.S. dollar.
European Union (EU).  The official name of the former 
European Economic Community (EEC) as of January 
1, 1994.
Eurozone.  The countries that officially use the euro as 
their currency.
Exchange rate.  See foreign exchange rate.
Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM).  The means by which 
members of the EMS formerly maintained their cur-
rency exchange rates within an agreed-upon range with 
respect to the other member currencies.
Exchange rate pass-through.  The degree to which the 
prices of imported and exported goods change as a 
result of exchange rate changes.
Exercise price.  Same as the strike price; the agreed upon 
rate of exchange within an option contract to buy or 
sell the underlying asset.
Export credit insurance.  Provides assurance to the 
exporter or the exporter’s bank that, should the foreign 
customer default on payment, the insurance company 
will pay for a major portion of the loss. See also Foreign 
Credit Insurance Association (FCIA).
Export-Import Bank (Eximbank).  A U.S. government 
agency created to finance and otherwise facilitate 
imports and exports.
Exposed asset.  An asset whose value is subject to change 
as a result of the translation of its value from local cur-
rency financial statements to home currency financial 
statements as a result of financial statement consolida-
tion. The change in value typically results from moving 
from historical to current exchange rates for translation 
and remeasurement.
Expropriation.  Official government seizure of private 
property, recognized by international law as the right of 
any sovereign state provided expropriated owners are 
given prompt compensation and fair market value in 
convertible currencies.
Factoring.  Specialized firms, known as factors, purchase 
receivables at a discount on either a non-recourse or 
recourse basis.
Fair value.  The estimated true market value of an item or 
asset.
FAS (free alongside ship).  An international trade term in 
which the seller’s quoted price for goods includes all 
costs of delivery of the goods alongside a vessel at the 
port of embarkation.
Fiat currency.  Money or currency which derives its value 
from government regulation or proclamation. Unlike 
commodity money or specie, its value is not tied or 
based on a precious metal or other physical commodity.
Equity issuance.  The issuance to the public market of 
shares of ownership in a publicly traded company.
Equity listing.  The listing of a company’s shares on a pub-
lic stock exchange.
Equity risk premium.  The average annual return of the 
market expected by investors over and above riskless 
debt.
Euro.  A single new currency unit adopted by the 11 par-
ticipating members of the European Union’s European 
Monetary System in January 1999, replacing their indi-
vidual currencies. The euro’s use has expanded with EU 
expansion since 1999, totalling 18 participating coun-
tries as of 2014.
Eurobank.  A bank, or bank department, that bids for time 
deposits and makes loans in currencies other than that 
of the country where the bank is located.
Eurobond.  A bond originally offered outside the country 
in whose currency it is denominated. For example, a 
dollar-denominated bond originally offered for sale to 
investors outside the United States.
Eurocommercial paper (ECP).  Short-term notes (30, 60, 
90, 120, 180, 270, and 360 days) sold in international 
money markets.
Eurocredit.  Bank loans to MNEs, sovereign governments, 
international institutions, and banks denominated in 
eurocurrencies and extended by banks in countries 
other than the country in whose currency the loan is 
denominated.
Eurocurrency.  A currency deposited in a bank located in 
a country other than the country issuing the currency.
Eurodollar.  A U.S. dollar deposited in a bank outside the 
United States. A eurodollar is a type of eurocurrency. 
Also termed a Eurodollar deposit.
Euroequity.  A new equity issue that is underwritten and 
distributed in multiple foreign equity markets, some-
times simultaneously with distribution in the domestic 
market.
Euronote market.  Short- to medium-term debt instru-
ments sold in the eurocurrency market.
European Central Bank (ECB).  Conducts monetary pol-
icy of the European Monetary Union. Its goal is to safe-
guard the stability of the euro and minimize inflation.
European Currency Unit (ECU).  A composite currency 
created by the European Monetary System prior to the 
euro, which was designed to function as a reserve cur-
rency numeraire. The ECU was used as the numeraire 
for denominating a number of financial instruments 
and obligations.
European Monetary System (EMS).  A system of exchange 
rate and monetary system linkages first established in 
1979 between fifteen European countries. The EMS 
laid the groundwork for the eventual creation of the 
euro. The EMS has continued to expand its member-
ship over time.

555
Glossary
Bank of the United States, that provides export credit 
insurance to U.S. firms.
Foreign currency.  Any currency other than that used offi-
cially for contracts and transactions in the domestic 
economy.
Foreign currency intervention.  Any activity or policy ini-
tiative by a government or central bank with the intent 
of changing a currency value on the open market. They 
may include direct intervention, where the central bank 
may buy or sell its own currency, or indirect interven-
tion, in which it may change interest rates in order to 
change the attractiveness of domestic currency obliga-
tions in the eyes of foreign investors.
Foreign currency option.  A financial contract or deriva-
tive which guarantees the holder the right to buy or sell 
a specific amount of foreign currency at a specific rate 
by a stated expiration or maturity date.
Foreign currency translation.  See Translation.
Foreign direct investment (FDI).  Purchase of physical 
assets, such as plant and equipment, in a foreign coun-
try, to be managed by the parent corporation. FDI is 
distinguished from foreign portfolio investment.
Foreign exchange broker.  An individual or firm that 
arranges foreign exchange transactions between two 
parties, but is not itself a principal in the trade. Foreign 
exchange brokers earn a commission for their efforts.
Foreign exchange dealer (or trader).  An individual or 
firm that buys foreign exchange from one party (at a 
bid price), and then sells it (at an ask price) to another 
party. The dealer is a principal in two transactions and 
profits via the spread between the bid and ask prices.
Foreign exchange intervention.  The active entry into the 
foreign exchange market by buying and selling a cur-
rency by an official authority in order to manage or fix 
the currency’s value relative to other traded currencies.
Foreign exchange rate.  The price of one country’s cur-
rency in terms of another currency, or in terms of a 
commodity such as gold or silver. Also termed foreign 
currency exchange rate. See also Exchange rate.
Foreign exchange risk.  The likelihood that an unexpected 
change in exchange rates will alter the home currency 
value of foreign currency cash payments expected from 
a foreign source. Also, the likelihood that an unex-
pected change in exchange rates will alter the amount 
of home currency needed to repay a debt denominated 
in a foreign currency.
Foreign subsidiary.  A foreign operation incorporated in 
the host country and owned 50% or more by a parent 
corporation. Foreign operations that are not incorpo-
rated are called branches.
Foreign tax credit.  The amount by which a domestic firm 
may reduce (credit) domestic income taxes for income 
tax payments to a foreign government.
FIBOR.  Frankfurt interbank offered rate.
Financial account.  A section of the balance of payments 
accounts. Under the revised format of the International 
Monetary Fund, the financial account measures long-
term financial flows including direct foreign investment, 
portfolio investments, and other long-term movements. 
Under the traditional definition, which is still used by 
many countries, items in the financial account were 
included in the capital account.
Financial derivative.  A financial instrument, such as a 
futures contract or option, whose value is derived from 
an underlying asset like a stock or currency.
Financing cash flow.  Cash flows originating from financ-
ing activities of the firm, including interest payments 
and dividend distributions.
Firm-specific risk.  Political risk that affects the MNE at 
the project or corporate level. Governance risk due to 
goal conflict between an MNE and its host government 
is the main political firm-specific risk.
Fisher Effect.  A theory that nominal interest rates in two 
or more countries should be equal to the required real 
rate of return to investors plus compensation for the 
expected amount of inflation in each country.
Fixed exchange rates.  Foreign exchange rates tied to 
the currency of a major country (such as the United 
States), to gold, or to a basket of currencies such as Spe-
cial Drawing Rights.
Flexible exchange rates.  The opposite of fixed exchange 
rates. The foreign exchange rate is adjusted periodically 
by the country’s monetary authorities in accordance 
with their judgment and/or an external set of economic 
indicators.
Floating exchange rates.  Foreign exchange rates deter-
mined by demand and supply in an open market that is 
presumably free of government interference.
Floating-rate note (FRN).  Medium-term securities with 
interest rates pegged to LIBOR and adjusted quarterly 
or semiannually.
Follow-on offering (FO).  Additional offerings of equity 
shares post-IPO.
Forced delistings.  The requirement by a stock exchange 
for a publicly traded share on that exchange to be 
delisted from active trading, typically from failure to 
maintain a minimum level of market capitalization.
Foreign affiliate.  A foreign business unit that is less than 
50% owned by the parent company.
Foreign bond.  A bond issued by a foreign corporation or 
government for sale in the domestic capital market of 
another country, and denominated in the currency of 
that country.
Foreign Credit Insurance Association (FCIA).  An unin-
corporated association of private commercial insurance 
companies, in cooperation with the Export-Import 

556
Glossary
Gamma.  A measure of the sensitivity of an option’s delta 
ratio to small unit changes in the price of the underly-
ing security.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP).  
Approved accounting principles for U.S. firms, defined 
by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB).
Global depositary receipt (GDR).  Similar to American 
Depositary Receipts (ADRs), it is a bank certificate 
issued in multiple countries for shares in a foreign 
company. Actual company shares are held by a foreign 
branch of an international bank. The shares are traded 
as domestic shares, but are offered for sale globally by 
sponsoring banks.
Global registered shares (GRS).  Similar to ordinary 
shares, global registered shares have the added benefit 
of being tradable on equity exchanges around the globe 
in a variety of currencies.
Global reserve currency.  See Reserve currency.
Global-specific risks.  Political risks that originate at the 
global level, such as terrorism, the antiglobalization move-
ment, environmental concerns, poverty, and cyber attacks.
Gold standard or Gold-exchange standard.  A monetary 
system in which currencies are defined in terms of their 
gold content, and payment imbalances between coun-
tries are settled in gold.
Greenfield investment.  An initial investment in a new for-
eign subsidiary with no predecessor operation in that 
location. This is in contrast to a new subsidiary created 
by the purchase of an already existing operation. An 
investment that starts, conceptually if not literally, with 
an undeveloped “green field.”
Haircut.  The percentage of the market value of a ­financial 
asset recognized as the collateral value or ­redeemed value 
of the asset.
Hard currency.  A freely convertible currency that is not 
expected to depreciate in value in the foreseeable 
future.
Hedging.  Purchasing a contract (including forward for-
eign exchange) or tangible good that will rise in value 
and offset a drop in value of another contract or tan-
gible good. Hedges are undertaken to reduce risk by 
protecting an owner from loss.
Historical exchange rate.  In accounting, the exchange rate 
in effect when an asset or liability was acquired.
Home currency.  The currency of a company’s incorpora-
tion; the currency for financial reporting purposes.
Hoover Hedges.  Hedges constructed to protect the 
value of a long-term investment or loan in a foreign 
currency.
Hot money.  Money that moves internationally from one 
currency and/or country to another in response to 
interest rate differences, and moves away immediately 
when the interest advantage disappears.
Foreign tax neutrality.  The principle that tax obligations 
or tax burdens are the same on taxable earnings, regard-
less of where the earnings were generated, in domestic 
or foreign markets.
Forfaiting (forfeiting).  A technique for arranging non-
recourse medium-term export financing, used most 
frequently to finance imports into Eastern Europe. A 
third party, usually a specialized financial institution, 
guaranteeing the financing.
Forward-ATM.  The strike rate or exercise price of a for-
eign exchange derivative set equivalent to the forward 
exchange rate.
Forward-forward swap.  The exchange of two different 
maturities of forward exchange contracts.
Forward contract.  An agreement to exchange currencies 
of different countries at a specified future date and at a 
specified forward rate.
Forward discount.  The difference between spot and for-
ward rates, expressed as an annual percentage, also 
known as the forward premium.
Forward exchange rate (Forward rate).  An exchange rate 
quoted for settlement at some future date. The rate 
used in a forward transaction.
Forward hedge.  The use of a forward exchange contract 
to hedge or protect the value of a foreign currency 
denominated transaction.
Forward premium.  See Forward discount.
Forward rate.  See Forward exchange rate.
Forward rate agreement (FRA).  An interbank-traded 
contract to buy or sell interest rate payments on a 
notional principal.
Forward transaction.  An agreed-upon foreign exchange 
transaction to be settled at a specified future date, often 
one, two, or three months after the transaction date.
Free alongside ship (FAS).  See FAS (free alongside ship).
Free cash flow.  Operating cash flow less capital expendi-
tures (capex).
Free float.  The portion of publicly traded shares of a cor-
poration that are held by public investors as opposed 
to locked-in stock held by promoters (underwriters), 
company officers, controlling-interest investors, or 
government.
Fronting loan.  A parent-to-subsidiary loan that is chan-
neled through a financial intermediary such as a large 
international bank in order to reduce political risk. Pre-
sumably government authorities are less likely to pre-
vent a foreign subsidiary repaying an established bank 
than repaying the subsidiary’s corporate parent.
Functional currency.  In the context of translating financial 
statements, the currency of the primary economic envi-
ronment in which a foreign subsidiary operates and in 
which it generates cash flows.
Futures, or futures contracts.  See Interest rate futures.

557
Glossary
Interest rate swap.  A transaction in which two counter-
parties exchange interest payment streams of differ-
ent character (such as floating vs. fixed), based on an 
underlying notional principal amount.
Internal rate of return (IRR).  A capital budgeting 
approach in which a discount rate is found that matches 
the present value of expected future cash inflows with 
the present value of outflows.
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(IBRD or World Bank).  International development 
bank owned by member nations that makes develop-
ment loans to member countries.
International CAPM (ICAPM).  A strategy in which the 
primary distinction in the estimation of the cost of 
equity for an individual firm using an internationalized 
version of the domestic capital asset pricing model is 
the definition of the “market” and a recalculation of 
the firm’s beta for that market.
International Fisher effect.  A theory that the spot 
exchange rate should change by an amount equal to 
the difference in interest rates between two countries.
International Monetary Fund (IMF).  An international 
organization created in 1944 to promote exchange rate 
stability and provide temporary financing for countries 
experiencing balance of payments difficulties.
International Monetary Market (IMM).  A branch of the 
Chicago Mercantile Exchange that specializes in trad-
ing currency and financial futures contracts.
International monetary system.  The structure within 
which foreign exchange rates are determined, interna-
tional trade and capital flows are accommodated, and 
balance of payments adjustments made.
International parity conditions.  In the context of interna-
tional finance, a set of basic economic relationships that 
provide for equilibrium between spot and forward for-
eign exchange rates, interest rates, and inflation rates.
International 
Swaps 
and 
Derivatives 
Association 
(ISDA).  A New York City trade association for over 
the country (OTC) derivatives. The ISDA maintains 
the documentation used in most of the financial ser-
vices trading of financial derivatives used globally.
Intrafirm trade.  Trade in goods and services between 
incorporated units of the same multinational business 
or enterprise.
Intrinsic value.  The financial gain if an option is exercised 
immediately.
Investment agreement.  An agreement that spells out spe-
cific rights and responsibilities of both the investing 
foreign firm and the host government.
Investment grade.  A credit rating, typically assigned 
by Moody’s, Standard & Poors, or Fitch, symbolizing 
the assured ability of a borrower to repay in a timely 
manner regardless of business or market conditions. 
Hurdle rate.  The required rate of return by a firm on a 
potential new investment in order to approve accepting 
the investment. The rate is typically based on the com-
pany’s current cost of capital, including debt and equity. 
In some cases the firm will require some premium or 
additional margin on certain investments above and 
beyond its cost of capital in the calculation of the hurdle 
rate (e.g., cost of capital + premium = hurdle rate).
Hyperinflation countries.  Countries with a very high rate 
of inflation. Under United States FASB 52, these are 
defined as countries where the cumulative three-year 
inflation amounts to 100% or more.
Impossible trinity.  An ideal currency would have exchange 
rate stability, full financial integration, and monetary 
independence.
In-the-money (ITM).  Circumstance in which an option is 
profitable, excluding the cost of the premium, if exer-
cised immediately.
Indication.  A quotation, typically in the form of a bid rate 
and ask rate, for a currency or other financial asset.
Indirect intervention.  Actions taken by central banks or 
other monetary authorities to influence the supply and 
demand for a country’s own currency. The most com-
mon form of indirect intervention is the alteration of 
interest rates.
Indirect quote.  The price of a unit of a home country’s cur-
rency expressed in terms of a foreign country’s currency.
Initial public offering (IPO).  The initial sale of shares of 
ownership of a company to the general public. The issu-
ing firm raises capital for the conduct of its business 
and return to its original owners through the IPO.
Integrated foreign entity.  An entity that operates as an 
extension of the parent company, with cash flows and 
general business lines that are highly interrelated with 
those of the parent.
Intellectual property rights.  Legislation that grants the 
exclusive use of patented technology and copyrighted 
creative materials. A worldwide treaty to protect intel-
lectual property rights has been ratified by most major 
countries, including most recently by China.
Interest rate futures.  Exchange-traded agreements calling 
for future delivery of a standard amount of any good, 
e.g., foreign exchange, at a fixed time, place, and price.
Interest rate parity (IRP).  A theory that the differences in 
national interest rates for securities of similar risk and 
maturity should be equal to but opposite in sign (posi-
tive or negative) to the forward exchange rate discount 
or premium for the foreign currency.
Interest rate risk.  The risk to the organization arising 
from interest-bearing debt obligations, either fixed or 
floating rate obligations. It is typically used to refer to 
the changing interest rates which a company may incur 
by borrowing at floating rates of interest.

558
Glossary
Margin.  A deposit made as security for a financial trans-
action otherwise financed on credit.
Marked-to-market.  The condition in which the value of a 
futures contract is assigned to market value daily, and 
all changes in value are paid in cash daily. The value 
of the contract is revalued using the closing price for 
the day. The amount to be paid is called the variation 
margin.
Market capitalization.  The total market value of a publicly 
traded company, calculated as the total number of shares 
outstanding multiplied by the market-determined price 
per share.
Market liquidity.  The degree to which a firm can issue a 
new security without depressing the existing market 
price, as well as the degree to which a change in price of 
its securities elicits a substantial order flow.
Matching currency cash flows.  The strategy of offsetting 
anticipated continuous long exposure to a particu-
lar currency by acquiring debt denominated in that 
currency.
Merchant bank.  A bank that specializes in helping corpo-
rations and governments finance by any of a variety of 
market and/or traditional techniques. European mer-
chant banks are sometimes differentiated from clearing 
banks, which tend to focus on bank deposits and clear-
ing balances for the majority of the population.
MIBOR.  Madrid interbank offered rate.
Micro risk.  See Firm-specific risk.
Monetary assets or liabilities.  Assets in the form of cash or 
claims to cash (such as accounts receivable), or liabili-
ties payable in cash. Monetary assets minus monetary 
liabilities are called net monetary assets.
Monetary/nonmonetary method.  A method of translat-
ing the financial statements of foreign subsidiaries 
into the parent’s reporting currency. All monetary 
accounts are translated at the current rate, and all 
nonmonetary accounts are translated at their histori-
cal rates. Sometimes called temporal method in the 
United States.
Money laundering.  The process of depositing or insert-
ing illegally generated money or cash into the financial 
system.
Money market hedge.  The use of foreign currency bor-
rowing to reduce transaction or accounting foreign 
exchange exposure.
Money markets.  The financial markets in various coun-
tries in which various types of short-term debt instru-
ments, including bank loans, are purchased and sold.
Moral hazard.  When an individual or organization takes 
on more risk than it would normally as a result of the 
existence or support of a secondary insuring or protect-
ing authority or organization.
Multinational capital budgeting.  The financial analy-
sis of foreign investment projects requiring the use of 
Denoted as BBB- (or equivalent by credit rating 
agency) or higher.
Islamic finance.  Banking or financing activity that is 
consistent with the principles of sharia and Islamic 
economics.
J-curve.  The adjustment path of a country’s trade balance 
following a devaluation or significant depreciation of 
the country’s currency. The path first worsens as a result 
of existing contracts before improving as a result of 
more competitive pricing conditions.
Joint venture (JV).  A business venture that is owned by 
two or more entities, often from different countries.
Lag.  In the context of leads and lags, payment of a finan-
cial obligation later than is expected or required.
Lambda.  A measure of the sensitivity of an option pre-
mium to a unit change in volatility.
Law of one price.  The concept that if an identical prod-
uct or service can be sold in two different markets, and 
no restrictions exist on the sale or transportation costs 
of moving the product between markets, the product’s 
price should be the same in both markets.
Lead.  In the context of leads and lags, the payment 
of a financial obligation earlier than is expected or 
required.
Legal tender.  A medium of payment allowed by law or 
recognized by a legal system to be valid for meeting a 
financial obligation.
Lender-of-last-resort.  The body or institution within an 
economy which is ultimately capable of preserving the 
financial survival or viability of individual institutions. 
Typically the country’s central bank.
Letter of credit (L/C).  An instrument issued by a bank, 
in which the bank promises to pay a beneficiary upon 
presentation of documents specified in the letter.
Link financing.  See Back-to-back loan or Fronting loan.
Liquid.  The ability to exchange an asset for cash at or 
near its fair market value.
London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR).  The deposit 
rate applicable to interbank loans in London. LIBOR 
is used as the reference rate for many international 
interest rate transactions.
Long position.  A position in which foreign currency assets 
exceed foreign currency liabilities. The opposite of a 
long position is a short position.
Maastricht Treaty.  A treaty among the 12 European 
Union countries that specified a plan and timetable for 
the introduction of a single European currency, to be 
called the euro.
Macro risk.  See Country-specific risk.
Macroeconomic uncertainty.  Operating exposure’s sensi-
tivity to key macroeconomic variables, such as exchange 
rates, interest rates, and inflation rates.
Managed float.  A country allows its currency to trade 
within a given band of exchange rates.

559
Glossary
Note issuance facility (nif).  An agreement by which a syn-
dicate of banks indicates a willingness to accept short-
term notes from borrowers and resell those notes in the 
eurocurrency markets. The discount rate is often tied 
to LIBOR.
Notional principal.  The size of a derivative contract, in 
total currency value, as used in futures contracts, for-
ward contracts, option contracts, or swap agreements.
NPV.  See Net present value (NPV).
Offer.  See Ask.
Offer rate.  The price of sale, or ask as in bid-ask and bid-offer.
Official reserves account.  Total reserves held by official 
monetary authorities within the country, such as gold, 
SDRs, and major currencies.
OLI Paradigm.  An attempt to create an overall frame-
work to explain why MNEs choose foreign direct 
investment rather than serve foreign markets through 
alternative modes such as licensing, joint ventures, stra-
tegic alliances, management contracts, and exporting.
Open account.  A sale where goods are shipped and 
delivered before payment is due or made. Payment is 
typically made anywhere between 30 and 90 days later, 
depending on industry and national practices.
Operating cash flows.  The primary cash flows generated 
by a business from the conduct of trade, typically com-
posed of earnings, depreciation and amortization, and 
changes in net working capital.
Operating exposure.  The potential for a change in 
expected cash flows, and thus in value, of a foreign sub-
sidiary as a result of an unexpected change in exchange 
rates. Also called economic exposure.
Option.  See Foreign currency option.
Option collar.  The simultaneous purchase of a put option 
and sale of a call option, or vice versa, resulting in a 
form of hybrid option.
Order bill of lading.  A shipping document through which 
possession and title to the shipment reside with the 
owner of the bill.
Out-of-the-money (OTM).  An option that would not be 
profitable, excluding the cost of the premium, if exer-
cised immediately.
Outright forward.  See Forward rate.
Outright forward transaction.  See Forward transaction.
Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC).  A U.S. 
government-owned insurance company that insures 
U.S. corporations against various political risks.
Overshooting.  A behavior in financial markets in which 
a major market adjustment in price changes “over-
shoots” or surpasses the likely value it will settle at 
after a longer adjustment period. A market movement 
akin to an “overreaction.”
Over-the-counter (OTC) market.  A market for share of 
stock, options (including foreign currency options), 
or other financial contracts conducted via electronic 
discounted cash flow analysis. Also termed interna-
tional capital budgeting and capital budgeting of foreign 
projects.
Multinational enterprise (MNE).  A firm that has operat-
ing subsidiaries, branches, or affiliates located in for-
eign countries.
National approach (to taxes).  See Worldwide approach 
(to taxes).
Natural hedge.  The use or existence of an offsetting or 
matching cash flow from firm operating activities to 
hedge a currency exposure.
Negotiable instrument.  A written draft or promissory 
note, signed by the maker or drawer, that contains an 
unconditional promise or order to pay a definite sum of 
money on demand or at a determinable future date, and 
is payable to order or to bearer. A holder of a negotia-
ble instrument is entitled to payment despite any per-
sonal disagreements between the drawee and maker.
Nepotism.  The practice of showing favor to relatives over 
other qualified persons in conferring such benefits as 
the awarding of contracts, granting of special prices, 
promotions to various ranks, etc.
Net international investment position (NIIP).  The net 
difference between a country’s external financial assets 
and liabilities as defined by nationality of ownership. 
A country’s external debt includes both its government 
debt and private debt, and similarly its public and pri-
vately held legal residents.
Net operating cash flow (NOCF).  The cash generated by 
the normal operations of the business. It is considered 
a measure of the value created by the business. It is 
calculated as the sum of net income, depreciation, and 
changes in net working capital.
Net present value (NPV).  A capital budgeting approach 
in which the present value of expected future cash 
inflows is subtracted from the present value of outflows.
Net working capital (NWC).  Accounts receivable plus 
inventories less accounts payable.
Netting.  The process of netting intracompany payments 
in order to reduce the size and frequency of cash and 
currency exchanges.
Nominal exchange rate.  The actual foreign exchange 
quotation, in contrast to real exchange rate, which is 
adjusted for changes in purchasing power. May be con-
structed as an index.
Nondeliverable forward (NDF).  A forward or futures 
contract on currencies, settled on the basis of the differ-
ential between the contracted forward rate and occur-
ring spot rate, but settled in the currency of the traders. 
For example, a forward contract on the Chinese yuan 
that is settled in dollars, not yuan.
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).  A 
treaty allowing free trade and investment between 
Canada, the United States, and Mexico.

560
Glossary
Project financing.  Arrangement of financing for long-
term capital projects, large in scale, long in life, and gen-
erally high in risk.
Prospectus.  A document disclosing the prospective 
risks and returns associated with the proposed public 
sale of a security. The prospectus commonly includes 
material information such as a description of the 
company’s business, financial statements, biographies 
of officers and directors, detailed information about 
their compensation, any litigation that is pending,  
a list of material properties, and any other material 
information.
Protectionism.  A political attitude or policy intended to 
inhibit or prohibit the import of foreign goods and ser-
vices. The opposite of free trade policies.
Psychic distance.  Firms tend to invest first in coun-
tries with a similar cultural, legal, and institutional 
environment.
Public debt.  The debt obligation of a governmental body 
or sovereign authority.
Purchasing power parity (PPP).  A theory that the price of 
internationally traded commodities should be the same 
in every country, and hence the exchange rate between 
the two currencies should be the ratio of prices in the 
two countries.
Put.  An option to sell foreign exchange or financial con-
tracts. See also Foreign currency option.
Qualified institutional buyer (QIB).  An entity (except a 
bank or a savings and loan) that owns and invests on a 
discretionary basis a minimum of $100 million in secu-
rities of non-affiliates.
Quota.  A limit, mandatory or voluntary, set on the import 
of a product.
Quotation.  In foreign exchange trading, the pair of prices 
(bid and ask) at which a dealer is willing to buy or sell 
foreign exchange.
Quotation exposure.  The period of time in which a seller 
has quoted a fixed price in a foreign currency to a 
potential buyer, but the buyer has yet to agree.
Quote currency.  See Price currency.
Range forward.  A complex option position that com-
bines the purchase of a put option and the sale of a 
call option with strike prices equidistant from the for-
ward rate. Also called flexible forward, cylinder option, 
option fence, mini-max, and zero-cost tunnel.
Real exchange rate.  An index of foreign exchange adjusted 
for relative price-level changes from a base point in 
time, typically a month or a year. Sometimes referred 
to as real effective exchange rate, it is used to measure 
purchasing-power-adjusted changes in exchange rates. 
Also termed real effective exchange rate or real effective 
exchange rate index.
Real option analysis.  The application of option theory to 
capital budgeting decisions.
connections between dealers. The over-the-counter 
market has no physical location or address, and is thus 
differentiated from organized exchanges that have a 
physical location where trading takes place.
Panda Bond.  The issuance of a yuan-denominated bond 
in the Chinese market by a foreign borrower.
Parallel loan.  Another name for a back-to-back loan, in 
which two companies in separate countries borrow 
each other’s currency for a specific period of time, and 
repay the other’s currency at an agreed maturity. See 
also Back-to-back loan.
Participating forward.  A complex option position which 
combines a bought put and a sold call option at the 
same strike price to create a net zero position. Also 
called zero-cost option and forward participation 
agreement.
Pass-through or Pass-through period.  The time it takes 
for an exchange rate change to be reflected in market 
prices of products or services.
Phi.  The expected change in an option premium caused 
by a small change in the foreign interest rate (interest 
rate for the foreign currency).
PIBOR.  Paris interbank offered rate.
Pip.  Percentage in point, in reference to an exchange rate 
fluctuation.
Plain vanilla swap.  An interest rate swap agreement 
exchange fixed interest payments for floating interest 
payments, all in the same currency.
Points.  The smallest units of price change quoted, given 
a conventional number of digits in which a quotation 
is stated.
Political risk.  The possibility that political events in a 
­particular country will influence the economic well-
being of firms in that country.
Portfolio investment.  Purchase of foreign stocks and 
bonds, in contrast to foreign direct investment.
Premium.  In a foreign exchange market, the amount by 
which a currency is more expensive for future delivery 
than for spot (immediate) delivery. The opposite of pre-
mium is discount.
Price currency.  The quote currency in a currency price 
quotation. The euro (EUR) is the price currency in a 
typical exchange rate quotation on the dollar-euro such 
as USD1.0750 = EUR1.00.
Price elasticity of demand.  From economic theory, the 
percentage change in the quantity demanded as a result 
of a one percent change in the product price.
Principal agent problem.  See Agency theory.
Private equity (PE).  Asset ownership in a business that 
is not publicly traded. Private equity investments are 
typically made by private equity firms or private equity 
funds.
Private placement.  The sale of a security issue to a small 
set of qualified institutional buyers.

561
Glossary
debt security issued by a government like a U.S. Treas-
ury bill, note, or bond.
Risk-sharing.  A contractual arrangement in which the 
buyer and seller agree to share or split currency move-
ment impacts on payments between them.
Roll-over risk.  See Credit risk.
Rules of the Game.  The basis of exchange rate determi-
nation under the international gold standard during 
most of the 19th and early 20th centuries. All countries 
agreed informally to follow the rule of buying and sell-
ing their currency at a fixed and predetermined price 
against gold.
Samurai bond.  Yen-denominated bond issued within 
Japan by a foreign borrower.
Sarbanes-Oxley Act.  An act passed in 2002 to regulate 
corporate governance in the United States.
Seasoned offering.  See Follow-on offering (FO).
SEC Rule 144A.  Permits qualified institutional buyers to 
trade privately placed securities without requiring SEC 
registration.
SEC Rule 415.  Security and Exchange Commission rules 
which allows shelf registration of security offerings to 
the public without a separate prospectus for each act of 
offering. A single prospectus is used for multiple future 
offerings.
Section 482.  The set of U.S. Treasury regulations govern-
ing transfer prices.
Securitization.  The replacement of nonmarketable loans 
(such as direct bank loans) with negotiable securi-
ties (such as publicly traded marketable notes and 
bonds), so that the risk can be spread widely among 
many investors, each of whom can add or subtract the 
amount of risk carried by buying or selling the market-
able security.
Seignorage.  The net revenues or proceeds garnered by a 
government from the printing of its money.
Selective hedging.  Hedging only exceptional exposures or 
the occasional use of hedging when management has a 
definite expectation of the direction of exchange rates.
Self-sustaining foreign entity.  One that operates in the 
local economic environment independent of the parent 
company.
Selling short (shorting).  The sale of an asset which the 
seller does not (yet) own. The premise is that the seller 
believes he will be able to purchase the asset for con-
tract fulfillment at a lower price before sale contract 
expiration.
Shareholder.  An individual or institution that holds legal 
ownership to a share or stock in a publicly traded 
company.
Shareholder wealth maximization (SWM).  The corporate 
goal of maximizing the total value of the shareholders’ 
investment in the company.
Shelf registrations.  See SEC Rule 415.
Reference rate.  The rate of interest used in a standard-
ized quotation, loan agreement, or financial derivative 
valuation.
Registered bond.  Corporate or governmental debt in a 
bond form in which the owner’s name appears on the 
bond and in the issuer’s records, and interest payments 
are made to the owner.
Relative purchasing power parity.  A theory that if the 
spot exchange rate between two countries starts in 
equilibrium, any change in the differential rate of 
inflation between them tends to be offset over the 
long run by an equal but opposite change in the spot 
exchange rate.
Remittance.  A transfer of money or currency from one 
party to another in payment or gift or saving.
Renminbi (RMB).  The alternative official name (the 
yuan, CNY) of the currency of the People’s Republic 
of China.
Reporting currency.  In the context of translating financial 
statements, the currency in which a parent firm pre-
pares its own financial statements. Usually this is the 
parent’s home currency.
Repositioning of funds.  The movement of funds from one 
currency or country to another. An MNE faces a vari-
ety of political, tax, foreign exchange, and liquidity con-
straints that limit its ability to move funds easily and 
without cost.
Repricing risk.  The risk of changes in interest rates 
charged or earned at the time a financial contract’s rate 
is reset.
Reserve currency.  A currency used by a government or 
central banking authority as a resource asset or cur-
rency to be used in market interventions to alter the 
market value of the domestic currency.
Residential approach.  The levy of taxes against the world-
wide income earned by a business by home country tax 
authorities regardless of where or in which country the 
income was earned.
Revaluation.  A rise in the foreign exchange value of a cur-
rency that is pegged to other currencies or to gold. Also 
called appreciation.
Rho.  The expected change in an option premium caused 
by a small change in the domestic interest rate (interest 
rate for the home currency).
Risk.  The likelihood that an actual outcome will differ 
from an expected outcome. The actual outcome could 
be better or worse than expected (two-sided risk), 
although in common practice risk is more often used 
only in the context of an adverse outcome (one-sided 
risk). Risk can exist for any number of uncertain future 
situations, including future spot rates or the results of 
political events.
Risk-free rate of interest.  The return on an asset assumed 
to possess no possibility of failure to pay. Typically a 

562
Glossary
Swap or Swap transaction.  In general it is the simultane-
ous purchase and sale of foreign exchange or securities, 
with the purchase executed at once and the sale back to 
the same party carried out at an agreed-upon price to 
be completed at a specified future date. Swaps include 
interest rate swaps, currency swaps, and credit swaps.
Swap rate.  A forward foreign exchange quotation 
expressed in terms of the number of points by which 
the forward rate differs from the spot rate.
Syndicated loan.  A large loan made by a group of banks 
to a large multinational firm or government. Syndi-
cated loans allow the participating banks to maintain 
diversification by not lending too much to a single bor-
rower. Also termed a Syndicated bank credit.
Synthetic forward.  A complex option position which com-
bines the purchase of a put option and the sale of a call 
option, or vice versa, both at the forward rate. Theo-
retically, the combined position should have a net-zero 
premium.
Systematic risk.  In portfolio theory, the risk of the market 
itself, i.e., risk that cannot be diversified away.
Tariff.  A duty or tax on imports that can be levied as a 
percentage of cost or as a specific amount per unit of 
­import.
Tax deferral.  Foreign subsidiaries of MNEs pay host coun-
try corporate income taxes, but many parent countries, 
including the United States, defer claiming additional 
taxes on that foreign source income until it is remitted 
to the parent firm.
Tax exposure.  The potential for tax liability on a given 
income stream or on the value of an asset. Usually used 
in the context of a multinational firm being able to min-
imize its tax liabilities by locating some portion of oper-
ations in a country where the tax liability is minimized.
Tax haven.  A country with either no or very low tax rates 
that uses its tax structure to attract foreign investment 
or international financial dealings.
Tax morality.  The consideration of conduct by an MNE to 
decide whether to follow a practice of full disclosure to 
local tax authorities or adopt the philosophy, “When in 
Rome, do as the Romans do.”
Tax neutrality.  In domestic tax, the requirement that the 
burden of taxation on earnings in home country opera-
tions by an MNE be equal to the burden of taxation on 
each currency equivalent of profit earned by the same 
firm in its foreign operations. Foreign tax neutrality 
requires that the tax burden on each foreign subsidiary 
of the firm be equal to the tax burden on its competi-
tors in the same country.
Tax treaties.  A network of bilateral treaties that provide a 
means of reducing double taxation.
Technical analysis.  The focus on price and volume data 
to determine past trends that are expected to continue 
Short position.  See Long position.
SIBOR.  Singapore interbank offered rate.
Sight draft.  A bill of exchange (B/E) that is due on 
demand; i.e., when presented to the bank. See also Bill 
of exchange (B/E).
Sovereign credit risk.  The risk that a host government 
may unilaterally repudiate its foreign obligations or 
may prevent local firms from honoring their foreign 
obligations. Sovereign risk is often regarded as a subset 
of political risk.
Sovereign debt.  The debt obligation or a sovereign or gov-
ernmental authority or body.
Sovereign spread.  The credit spread paid by a sovereign 
borrower on a major foreign currency-denominated debt 
obligation. For example, the credit spread paid by the 
Venezuelan government to borrow U.S. dollars over and 
above a similar maturity issuance by the U.S. Treasury.
Special Drawing Right (SDR).  An international reserve 
asset, defined by the International Monetary Fund as 
the value of a weighted basket of five currencies.
Speculation.  An attempt to make a profit by trading on 
expectations about future prices.
Speculative grade.  A credit quality that is below BBB, 
below investment grade. The designation implies a pos-
sibility of borrower default in the event of unfavorable 
economic or business conditions.
Spot rate.  The price at which foreign exchange can be pur-
chased (its bid) or sold (its ask) in a spot transaction. 
See Spot transaction.
Spot transaction.  A foreign exchange transaction to be 
settled (paid for) on the second following business day.
Spread.  The difference between the bid (buying) quote 
and the ask (selling) quote.
Stakeholder capitalism model (SCM).  Another name for 
corporate wealth maximization.
State-owned enterprise (SOE).  Any organization or busi-
ness which is owned (in-whole or in-part) and con-
trolled by government, typically created to conduct 
commercial business activities.
Statutory tax rate.  The legally imposed tax rate.
Strategic alliance.  A formal relationship, short of a merger 
or acquisition, between two companies, formed for the 
purpose of gaining synergies because in some aspect 
the two companies complement each other.
Strategic exposure.  See Operating exposure.
Strike price.  The agreed upon rate of exchange within an 
option contract. See also Exercise price.
Subpart F income.  A type of foreign income, as defined 
in the U.S. tax code, which under certain conditions is 
taxed immediately in the United States even though 
it has not been repatriated to the United States. It is 
income of a type that is otherwise easily shifted off-
shore to avoid current taxation.

563
Glossary
by an importer or purchaser, rather than a bank, and 
due at a specified future time.
Tranche.  An allocation of shares, typically to underwriters 
that are expected to sell to investors in their designated 
geographic markets.
Transaction exposure.  The potential for a change in the 
value of outstanding financial obligations entered into 
prior to a change in exchange rates but not due to be 
settled until after the exchange rates change.
Transfer pricing.  The setting of prices to be charged by one 
unit (such as a foreign subsidiary) of a multi-unit corpo-
ration to another unit (such as the parent corporation) 
for goods or services sold between such related units.
Translation.  The remeasurement of a financial statement 
from one currency to another.
Translation exposure.  The potential for an account-
ing-derived change in owners’ equity resulting from 
exchange rate changes and the need to restate financial 
statements of foreign subsidiaries in the single currency 
of the parent corporation. See also Accounting exposure.
Transnational firm.  A company owned by a coalition of 
investors located in different countries.
Transparency.  The degree to which an investor can dis-
cern the true activities and value drivers of a company 
from the disclosures and financial results reported.
Triangular arbitrage.  An arbitrage activity of exchanging 
currency A for currency B for currency C back to cur-
rency A to exploit slight disequilibrium in exchange rates.
Triffin Dilemma (or Triffin Paradox).  The potential con-
flict in objectives which may arise between domestic 
monetary policy and currency policy when a country’s 
currency is used as a reserve currency.
Trilemma of international finance.  The difficult but 
required choice which a government must make 
between three conflicting international financial sys-
tem goals: (1) a fixed exchange rate; (2) independent 
monetary policy; and (3) free mobility of capital.
Turnover tax.  A tax based on turnover or sales, and is 
similar in structure to a VAT, in which taxes may be 
assessed on intermediate stages of a good’s production.
Unaffiliated.  An independent third-party.
Unbundling.  Dividing cash flows from a subsidiary to 
a parent into their many separate components, such 
as royalties, lease payments, dividends, etc., so as to 
increase the likelihood that some fund flows will be 
allowed during economically difficult times.
Uncovered interest arbitrage (UIA).  The process by 
which investors borrow in countries and currencies 
exhibiting relatively low interest rates and convert the 
proceeds into currencies that offer much higher inter-
est rates. The transaction is “uncovered” because the 
investor does not sell the higher yielding currency pro-
ceeds forward.
into the future. Analysts believe that future exchange 
rates are based on the current exchange rate.
TED Spread.  Treasury Eurodollar Spread. The ­difference, 
in basis points, between the 3-month interest rate swap 
index or the 3-month LIBOR interest rate, and the 
90-day U.S. Treasury bill rate. It is sometimes used as an 
indicator of credit crisis or fear over bank credit quality.
Temporal method.  In the United States, term for a codifi-
cation of a translation method essentially similar to the 
monetary/nonmonetary method.
Tender.  To offer for sale or purchase.
Tenor.  The length of time of a contract or debt obligation; 
loan repayment period.
Tequila effect.  Term used to describe how the Mexican 
peso crisis of December 1994 quickly spread to other 
Latin American currency and equity markets through 
the contagion effect.
Terminal value (TV).  The continuing value of a project or 
investment beyond the period shown in detail. It rep-
resents the present value at a future point in time of all 
future cash flows assuming a stable perpetual growth rate.
Terms of trade.  The weighted average exchange ratio 
between a nation’s export prices and its import prices, 
used to measure gains from trade. Gains from trade 
refers to increases in total consumption resulting from 
production specialization and international trade.
Territorial approach (to taxes).  Also called territorial tax-
ation. Taxation of income earned by firms within the 
legal jurisdiction of the host country, not on the country 
of the firm’s incorporation.
Theory of comparative advantage.  Based on the concept 
of absolute advantage, in which each country specializes 
in the production of those goods for which it is uniquely 
suited, the theory of comparative advantage states that 
exchange between these countries will result in all par-
ties or countries being better off through specialization 
and exchange than by attempting to produce all at home.
Theta.  The expected change in an option premium caused 
by a small change in the time to expiration.
Thin capitalization.  When a company’s capital structure 
is deemed to be excessively based on debt rather than 
equity. It is typically used to reduce domestic tax liabili-
ties through interest-based deductions.
Time draft.  A draft that allows a delay in payment. It is 
presented to the drawee, who accepts it by writing a 
notice of acceptance on its face. Once accepted, the 
time draft becomes a promise to pay by the accepting 
party. See also Bankers’ acceptance.
Total Shareholder Return (TSR).  A measure of corporate 
performance based on the sum of share price apprecia-
tion and current dividends.
Trade acceptance (T/A). An international trade term.  
A bill of exchange drawn directly upon and accepted 

564
Glossary
growth and possibility as a result of unique intellectual 
property or technology.
Volatility.  In connection with options, the standard devia-
tion of daily spot price movement.
Vulture funds.  Investment funds which specialize in 
acquiring debt that is in default and then pursuing legal 
means to obtain either collateral or full payment via 
legal means.
Weighted average cost of capital (WACC).  The sum of the 
proportionally weighted costs of different sources of 
capital, used as the minimum acceptable target return 
on new investments.
Wire transfer.  Electronic transfer of funds.
Working capital management.  The management of the 
net working capital requirements (A/R plus invento-
ries less A/P) of the firm.
World Bank.  See International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development.
Worldwide approach (to taxes).  The principle that taxes 
are levied on the income earned by firms that are 
incorporated in a host country, regardless of where the 
income was earned.
Yankee bond.  Dollar-denominated bond issued within 
the United States by a foreign borrower.
Yield to maturity.  The rate of interest (discount) that 
equates future cash flows of a bond, both interest and 
principal, with the present market price. Yield to matu-
rity is thus the time-adjusted rate of return earned by a 
bond investor.
Yuan (CNY).  The official currency of the People’s Repub-
lic of China, also termed the renminbi.
Undervalued currency.  The status of currency with a cur-
rent foreign exchange value (i.e., current price in the 
foreign exchange market) below the worth of that 
currency. Because “worth” is a subjective concept, 
undervaluation is a matter of opinion. If the euro has a 
current market value of $1.20 (i.e., the current exchange 
rate is $1.20/€) at a time when its “true” value as derived 
from purchasing power parity or some other method is 
deemed to be $1.30, the euro is undervalued. The oppo-
site of undervalued is overvalued.
Unit currency.  See Base currency.
Unsystematic risk.  In a portfolio, the amount of risk that 
can be eliminated by diversification.
Usance draft.  See Time draft.
Valley of Death.  The period in capital raising for a startup 
firm between seed capital and more formal forms 
such as angel financing and venture capital. So-named 
because many business startups fail in this stage as a 
result of not finding funding sources.
Value date.  The date when value is given (i.e., funds are 
deposited) for foreign exchange transactions between 
banks.
Value firm.  A reference to a larger, older, more mature 
business that typically demonstrates little movement in 
its share price.
Value-added tax.  A type of national sales tax collected at 
each stage of production or sale of consumption goods, and 
levied in proportion to the value added during that stage.
Venture capitalist (VC).  An investor or fund that provides 
capital and funding to early-stage business startups. 
The startups are typically considered of high potential 

565
Index
A
Absolute advantage, defined, 11, 79–82
Absolute purchasing power parity, 148, 
151–152
Account payable, management of, 
287–289
Accounting
balance of payments, 60, 66
of currency swaps, 227–228
disadvantages of hedging, 227
failures in corporate governance, 
99, 104
generally accepted principles  
for, 101
Accounting exposures
operating. see Operating exposure
transaction. see Transaction 
exposure
translation. see Translation  
exposure
Acquisitions. see also Cross-border 
mergers and acquisitions
delisting, 98
funding growth by, 402
Active income, Apple’s global iTax 
strategy, 444
Advanced pricing agreement, Google 
tax strategy, 438
ADI (Apple Distribution 
International), 442–444
Affiliated party (or intrafirm trade), 
import/export relationship, 
451–452
Africa, nepotism and corruption in, 
500
Agency theory
corporate governance reform  
and, 105
disadvantages of hedging, 277
shareholder wealth maximization 
model, 91
Agreement, in forfaiting  
transactions, 466
Agriculture, host country 
protectionism of, 501
Algebraic primer, international parity 
conditions, 177–180
All-in cost
banker acceptances, 459
factoring receivables, 464
American depositary receipts (ADRs)
cross-listing to improve liquidity via, 
400–401
global registered shares vs., 398–399
mechanics of, 394–395
overview of, 393–394
program structures, 396–397
American option, defined, 185
American terms, quotes, 131
Anchor currency. see Reserve (anchor) 
currency
Angel financing, capital lifecycle, 20
Antiglobalization movement, political 
risk, 504
AOE (Apple Operations Europe), 
442–444
AOI (Apple Operations 
International), 442–444
Apache Corporation, and Egyptian 
protests, 492
Apple
basis erosion and profit shifting  
of, 439
global iTax strategy case, 441–445
ownership of, 89
paying dividends and raising debt, 
93–94
Apple Distribution International 
(ADI), 442–444
Apple Operations Europe (AOE), 
442–444
Apple Operations International 
(AOI), 442–444
Apple Sales International (ASI), 
441–444
Appreciation, currency
capital controls to prevent, 75–76
defined, 37
Arbitrage
with American depositary  
receipts, 395
covered interest arbitrage (CIA), 
159–161
intermarket, 134–135
rule of thumb for, 160–161
uncovered interest arbitrage (UIA), 
161–162
Arbitration of disputes,  
host/MNEs, 494
Argentina
crisis of 2002, 256–259
currency board of, 42, 256
large equity offering via YPF 
Sociedad Anónima, 392
vulture funds and, 231–235
Arnault, Bernard, 108–112
ASI (Apple Sales International), 
441–444
Asian Crisis of 1997–1998, 75–76, 
253–256
Ask (offer) price
foreign exchange dealers, 121
foreign exchange market quotations, 
132–134
spot and forward quotations, 
136–137
Asset market approach, exchange rate 
determination, 244, 245–247
Assets
allocating portfolio. see 
International portfolio investors
business transactions dominating 
BOP, 59–60
classifying financial, 62–65
at heart of global financial 
marketplace, 4
translating with current rate  
method, 315
translating with temporal  
method, 316
valuation of foreign  
subsidiary, 322
Atlas Copco, SEC Rule 144A 
placements, 399
At-the-money (ATM), options
foreign currency, 185
intrinsic value of, 193
sensitivity to interest rate 
differentials, 198–199
spot rate sensitivity and,  
194–195

566
Index
BBA (British Bankers Association), 
and LIBOR, 210
BCG (Boston Consulting Group), 
488–490
Before-tax average (kd)
cost of capital, 360, 364
cost of debt, 361
Beggar-thy-neighbor policy, foreign 
currency intervention, 248
Behavioral approach, foreign direct 
investment, 483–484
BEPS (basis erosion and profit 
shifting), OECD plan to  
stop, 439
Berlin G8 Conference, 2007, 79
Berne Union, export credit terms, 462
Betas
calculating cost of equity, 360–361, 
363–366
global, 366
Bid price
foreign exchange dealers, 121
quotations in foreign exchange 
markets, 132–134
in spot and forward quotations, 
136–137
Bid-ask spread, 132
Bid-offer quote, OTC market  
options, 186
“Big Mac Index,” purchasing power 
parity, 148–150
BIITS (Brazil, India, Indonesia, Turkey, 
South Africa), MNE dependency 
on, 3
Bilateral tax treaties, 424–425
Bill of exchange (drafts), 458–461
Bill of lading (B/L)
defined, 453
financing trade, 459–460
typical trade transaction, 460–461
Billing exposure, within transaction 
exposures, 278–279
Biotechnology boom, Novo  
Mini-Case, 378
BIS (Bank for International 
Settlements), 126–129
Bitcoins, 7–8, 81
Black market, Venezuelan bolivar, 
140–141
Black Swan Theory, 506–507
Block chain, bitcoins, 8
Blocked funds
as country-specific transfer risk, 
496–497
preinvestment strategy  
anticipating, 497
managing translation exposure, 
314–316, 319–322
Balance sheet hedge
justifying use of, 324
managing transaction exposure, 
282–284
minimizing translation exposure, 
322–324
Banco, defined, 458
Bank drafts, 458
Bank for International Settlements 
(BIS), 126–129
Bank market. see Over-the-counter 
market (OTC) options
Bankers’ acceptances
defined, 459
financing trade with, 463–464
in typical trade transaction,  
460–461
Banker’s Trust, 230
Banknotes, symbol for, 129
Bankruptcy
delisting companies in, 98
failure in corporate governance and, 
99, 104
optimal financial structure and, 386
as risk for MNEs vs. domestic firms, 
372, 374
sovereign default and, 235
unsystematic risk and, 91
Banks
causing Asian Crisis of 1997, 255
corporate governance regimes based 
on, 102
currency trading, 121–122
financing goods in transit/for  
sale, 454
financing trade with credit  
lines, 465
financing trade with letters of credit, 
455–457
fronting loans for blocked  
funds, 498
as import/export  
intermediaries, 453
international debt markets/
instruments of, 403
issuing depositary receipts, 393
raising debt globally with loans/
syndications, 404
Base (or unit) currency, exchange rate 
quotes, 129–130
Basis erosion and profit shifting 
(BEPS), OECD plan to  
stop, 439
Basis risk, 291
Auditing, 104, 105–106
“Aussie” (Australian dollar), 131, 
168–169
Availability of capital
assisting firms to become MNEs, 371
effect of market segmentation/
liquidity on, 369–371
financial globalization and, 358–359
for foreign direct investment, 480
improving market liquidity, 368–369
link between cost and, 368
market segmentation and, 369
MNEs vs. domestic firms, 372–373
optimal financial structure and, 
387–388
raising equity/debt globally. see 
Equity/debt, raising globally
Aval (or guarantee), forfaiting 
transactions, 467
Average rate options (AROs), 312
Average strike options (ASOs), 312
B
Back-flow, defined, 46
Backlog exposures, transaction 
exposure, 278–279, 289
Back-to-back (parallel) loans, 
managing operating exposure, 
347–348
Baht, Asian Crisis of 1997, 254–256
Balance of payments (BOP)
approach to exchange rate 
determination, 243–244
capital account in, 62
capital mobility, 72–77
China’s twin surpluses and, 67–68
current account in, 60–61
financial account in, 62–65
fundamentals of accounting, 58–60
global remittances case, 78–82
imbalances in financial 
globalization, 3
impacts on key macroeconomic 
rates, 68–70
net errors and omissions in, 65–66
official reserves account in, 66–67
overview of, 57–58
review, 77, 82–86
trade balances and exchange rates, 
70–72
U.S. tax neutrality policy  
improving, 422
Balance of trade (BOT), defined, 61
Balance sheet
conforming MNE to local financial 
structure, 418

567
Index
Capital lifecycle, 19–21
Capital market segmentation, 369
Capital markets
comparative corporate governance 
in, 102
financial globalization and  
risks of, 4
in global financial marketplace,  
4–11
Capital mobility
capital controls, 74–76
current account vs. financial account 
capital flows, 72–73
globalization of capital flows, 76–77
historical patterns of, 73–74
overview of, 72
Cash flow statement, balance of 
payments as, 58, 59–60
Cash flows
adjusting for foreign exchange risk, 
525–526
budgeting for foreign projects, 511
diversification of international,  
388
expected vs. unexpected changes in, 
333–334
financing large projects, 528
impact of hedging on, 275–277
matching currency, 344–345
measuring operating exposure, 
335–341
in parent viewpoint capital budget, 
520–522
in project viewpoint capital budget, 
519–520
repatriating, 520–522
transaction vs. operating exposure 
and, 331
Cash rates, forward quotations, 136
CCAs (Collective action clauses), 231
Cemex entering Indonesia case
analyzing potential investment, 
514–519
as capital budgeting example, 514
parent viewpoint capital budget, 
522–523
parent viewpoint, sensitivity analysis, 
524–525
project viewpoint capital budget, 
519–520
project viewpoint, sensitivity 
analysis, 523–524
repatriating cash flows to Cemex, 
520–522
Central banks
arguments against dollarization, 43
Calendar spreads, currency risk 
management, 311
Call options
buyers of, 187–188
overview of, 184–185
participating forwards, 309–311
range forwards (option collars), 
308–309
ratio spreads, 311
synthetic forwards, 306–307
writers of, 188–189
CANTV, 140–141
Capital. see Cost of capital; Global 
capital
Capital account, BOP
balances for U.S., 66
and exchange rates, 68–69
fundamentals of accounting, 58–59
overview of, 62
Capital asset pricing model (CAPM)
calculating cost of equity, 360–361
international CAPM (ICAPM), 
363–366
for parent viewpoint capital budget, 
520–522
Capital budgeting, MNE
cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions, 529–534
defined, 510
Elan and Royalty Pharma case, 
535–539
example, 519–525
foreign project complexities of, 
511–514
overview of, 510–511
project financing, 528–529
real option analysis in, 527
review, 535, 539–544
Statoil’s acquisition of Esso of 
Sweden case, 534
Capital controls
forcing devaluation in Venezuela, 525
foreign currency intervention via, 249
in Icelandic crisis, 53
overview of, 74–76
Capital flight, 76
Capital flows
Asian Crisis of 1997 rooted in, 254
current account vs. financial account, 
72–73
emerging markets vulnerable to 
stoppages of, 44
evolution of global monetary 
system, 29
globalization of, 76–77
in Icelandic crisis, 50–51
project viewpoint sensitivity analysis 
for, 523–524
strategies for moving, 497–499
Board of Directors
corporate governance  
structure, 100
good corporate governance and,  
99, 104
Sarbanes-Oxley Act regulations for, 
105–106
Bolivar, Venezuelan black market, 
138–141
Bonds
determining exchange rate, 244
eurobonds, 386, 405–408
foreign, 406
international. see International bond 
market
BOP. see Balance of payments (BOP)
Borrowing, transaction exposure due 
to, 279
Boston Consulting Group (BCG), 
488–490
Brand name, minimizing political risk 
to, 496
Brazil
as BRIC country, 3
and Crosswell International, 
469–472
Petrobrás of. see Petrobrás (Petróleo 
Brasileiro S.A.)
Bretton Woods Era (1945–1971)
hammering out agreement, 31
patterns of capital mobility in, 74
postwar international monetary 
system, 30–32
Bribery, cultural/institutional risk  
and, 500
BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India, and 
China), MNE dependency on, 3
British Bankers Association (BBA), 
and LIBOR, 210
British pound, 8–9
British Telecom, 392
Brokers, foreign exchange, 123
Budgeting, foreign project 
complexities, 511–514
Business income coverage, OPIC 
insurance, 494
Buyers, option,  
187–188, 190
C
Cable, defined, 131
CADIVI (Comisin de Administracin 
de Divisas), 139–141

568
Index
Contractual hedges
choosing, 289–290
hedging operating exposure  
with, 349
managing transaction exposure with, 
280, 289
Control
ownership vs., 89–90
risks of financial globalization, 4
Controlled foreign corporation (CFC)
Apple’s global iTax strategy, 444
defined, 428
tax principles of, 427–429
Controls, minimizing political risk, 
495–496
Convergence, implementing  
EMU, 39
Cook, Tim, 441–444
Corporate competition, from emerging 
markets, 488–490
Corporate culture, cross-border 
acquisition issues, 533
Corporate financial goals
goal of management, 90–96
LVMH vs. Hermès luxury wars case, 
108–112
overview of, 87
ownership of business, 87–90
publicly traded vs. privately held, 
96–99
review, 107–108, 112–116
Corporate governance
Asian Crisis of 1997 and, 255
comparative, 102–103
corporate reputation and good, 
104–105
corporate responsibility/
sustainability and, 106–107
and cost of capital, 371
failures in, 104
family ownership and, 103
goal of, 99
international vs. domestic, 13
reform in, 105–106
review, 107–108, 112–116
risk, 493
structure of, 99–101
Corporate income tax rates
cost of capital and, 364
cost of debt and, 361
operating exposure and, 338
Corporate inversion, 439–440
Corporate social responsibility (CSR), 
14, 106–107
Correspondent bank, eurodollar 
deposits in, 10
Collateral (margin) requirement, 
futures, 183
Collateral, for foreign currency  
futures, 183
Collectibles, and capital flight, 76
Collective action clauses (CCAs), 231
Comisin de Administracin de Divisas 
(CADIVI), 139–141
Commercial banks
as cross-border remittance  
platform, 81
defined, 4–5
Commercial paper, financing trade 
with, 466
Commitment, in forfaiting transactions, 
466–467
Commodity currency
bitcoin as, 7–8
Russian ruble as, 265
Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission (CFTC), 123
Comparable uncontrolled prices, 
transfer pricing, 433
Comparative advantage
of conforming MNEs to local 
financial structure, 418
global outsourcing of, 12–13
of hedging, 277
of manufacturing in international 
trade, 61
theory of, 11–12
Compensation plans, funding growth 
by, 402
Competitive advantage
deciding where to invest, 483–484
in foreign direct investment,  
479–480
of home market, 480–481
modes of foreign investment, 
484–487
OLI Paradigm and 
internationalization, 481–483
Competitive exposure. see Operating 
exposure
Computer currency trading, 120
Consolidated profits, MNEs, 95
Constructive ownership, controlled 
foreign corporations, 428
Contingent foreign currency exposure, 
acquisitions, 534
Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS), 
foreign exchange market, 123
Contracts
foreign currency futures, 182–184
foreign direct investment via 
management, 485–486
Central banks (Continued)
defined, 4–5
direct currency intervention of, 
248–249
European Central Bank, 40
foreign exchange trading of, 123
Icelandic crisis and, 50–54
sovereign debt and, 214–215
Certification levels, depositary receipt 
programs, 396–397
CFC. see Controlled foreign 
corporation (CFC)
Chartists, 259–260
Chávez, Hugo, 138–141
Check-the-box subsidiaries
Apple’s global iTax strategy, 444
overview of, 435
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), 220
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME)
eurodollar futures traded on, 220
foreign currency futures and, 182
foreign currency options on,  
185–186
lowering counterparty risk, 230
Chief executive officer (CEO),  
101, 105
Chief financial officer (CFO),  
101, 105
Chief operating officer (COO), 101
Chile, capital controls in, 77
China
as BRIC country, 3
China National Petroleum 
Corporation as publicly  
traded, 89
Chinese renminbi (RMB)
capital controls over currency  
value, 249
China Noah Corporation case, 
292–298
China’s twin surpluses, 67–68
EUR-RMB options growth, 186
globalization of, 3, 44–48
Classification of currency regimes, 
IMF, 33–37
Clearing House Interbank Payments 
System (CHIPS), 124
Clearinghouse services, exchange-
traded options, 186
Closing-rate method. see Current rate 
method of translation
CME. see Chicago Mercantile 
Exchange (CME)
CNPC (China National Petroleum 
Corporation), 89
Code Napoleon, 103

569
Index
for directed public share issues, 
392–393
impact on shares and share prices, 
401–402
improving liquidity, 400–401
sourcing capital globally with, 386
Cross-rate consistency, in forecasting, 
260–261
Crosswell International and Brazil, 
Mini-Case, 469–472
Crowdfunding, Kenya Mini-Case,  
19–22
Cryptocurrency, bitcoins as, 7–8
Cryptography, in cryptocurrency, 7
CSR (Corporate social responsibility), 
14, 106–107
CTA (cumulative translation 
adjustment), 316
Cuccia, Enrico, 103
Cultural/institutional risk, country-
specific
in cross-border acquisitions, 533
overview of, 499–502
Cumulative translation adjustment 
(CTA), 316
Currencies
attributes of ideal, 37–38
bitcoins as, 7–8
composition of foreign exchange 
market, 128–129
depreciation/appreciation of, 37
devaluation/revaluation of, 37
eurocurrencies and LIBOR, 11
exchange rates for global, 8–9
international system for. see 
International monetary system
linkages, 4–5
market for, 5
matching cash flows, 344–345
nicknames for, 131
pass-through and emerging market, 
154–155
symbols for, 5, 7, 9
trans-channel eras of shifts  
in, 343
Currency board
in Argentine crisis of 2002, 42, 
256–258
defined, 42
dollarization vs., 44
IMF exchange rate classification 
and, 34–35
as regime choice for emerging 
market, 43–44
Currency contract period, trade 
balance adjustment, 70–72
defined, 491
predicting, 491–492
transfer risk, 496–499
Covered interest arbitrage (CIA)
algebraic primer for, 178–179
overview of, 159–161
uncovered interest arbitrage vs., 
161–162
Crawling peg, IMF exchange rate 
classification, 35–36
Credit
in balance of payment, 58, 60
crisis of 2008–2009, 289–290
in foreign exchange market, 119
insurance for export, 462
quality, 211–214
transaction exposure from, 278
Credit (or roll-over) risk, 214, 218
Credit default swaps (CDSs), 233
Credit line, financing trade with, 465
Credit risk premium, 211–212, 226
Credit spread, 213–214
Credit swaps, operating exposure, 
347–348
Crisis planning, terrorism/war, 503
Cronyism, Asian Crisis of 1997, 255
Cross rates, currency calculations, 
134–135
Cross-border mergers and acquisitions
currency risks, 533–534
downsides to, 529–530
execution of acquisition stage, 
531–532
identification and valuation stage, 
530–531
overview of, 529–530
post-acquisition management stage, 
532–533
Statoil’s acquisition of Esso of 
Sweden, 534
Cross-border supply chain integration, 
terrorism/war, 503
Cross-crediting, tax management, 
434–435
Cross-currency swaps
counterparty risk and, 230
defined, 222
example of, 227–228
managing operating exposure, 
348–349
managing translation exposure, 
326–327
overview of, 226–227
unwinding, 228–229
Cross-listing
barriers to, 402–403
Corruption, as cultural/institutional 
risk, 500
Cost
of balance sheet hedge, 323
capital budgeting example, 517–519
forward rates and hedging, 287
Cost of capital
calculating, 359–360
calculating with ICAPM, 364–366
corporate governance and, 371
effects of market liquidity/
segmentation on, 369–371
in foreign direct investment, 480
link between availability and, 368
linking good corporate governance 
to, 105
for MNEs vs. domestic firms, 
372–375
optimal financial structure 
minimizing, 386–387
weighted average. see Weighted 
average cost of capital (WACC)
Cost of debt
calculating, 364–366
calculating cost of capital with, 360
corporate, 211–214
cost of capital and financial 
structure, 386–387
foreign exchange risk and, 388–389
lowering with plain-vanilla swap, 
225–226
measuring, 361
for MNEs vs. domestic firms, 375
Cost of equity
calculating, 360–361
calculating cost of capital with, 360
calculating with ICAPM, 364–366
equity risk premiums, 366–367
importance of accurately  
estimating, 367
Japanese example, 362–363
Nestlé of Switzerland example, 
365–366
optimal financial structure and, 369
Cost sharing, Apple global iTax 
strategy, 442
Cost-plus calculations, transfer  
pricing, 433
Counterparty risk
futures, 183
options, 185
swaps, 230
Country risk ratings services, 492
Country-specific (or macro) risks
cultural and institutional risk, 
499–502

570
Index
Deductible expense, tax credit vs., 429
Defense, host country  
protectionism, 501
Deferral. see Tax deferral
Degree of control, financial account, 
62, 63
Delistings, stock exchange, 98
Delivery of notes, in forfaiting 
transactions, 467
Dell Computer
movement to private firm, 98
supply chain interruptions after 
September 11, 503
Delta
as option premium component, 199
spot rate sensitivity of currency 
options, 194–195
Demand deposits, eurocurrency 
deposits vs., 10
Demutualization, of stock markets, 401
Denmark
maintaining individual currency, 40
Novo case, 376–379
Deposit rates, non-participation in 
euro, 11
Depositary receipts (DRs)
ADR mechanics, 394–396
ADR program structures, 396–397
global registered shares, 398–399
overview of, 393–394
who, what and where of, 397–398
Depreciation
of currency, 37
currency market intervention, 248
measuring operating exposure, 
337–341
measuring translation exposure, 
319–322
translation methods for, 315–316
Derivatives. see Financial derivatives
Devaluation
Argentine crisis of 2002, 257
Brazil’s long history of, 410
Bretton Woods guidelines for, 31
capital controls preventing, 75–76
currency market intervention  
using, 248
defined, 37
dollarization vs., 42–43
Ford Motor Company and 
Venezuelan, 335
of North Korean won, 150
trade and, 70–72
Venezuelan bolivar black market, 
140–141
Venezuelan currency, 525
example of, 320–321
in international practices, 317–318
overview of, 315–316
U.S. translation procedures, 316–317
Current transfers, current account, 60
Cyber attacks, political risks of  
MNEs, 505
Cylinder option, currency risk 
management, 308–309
D
Daewoo Auto of South Korea, 324
Day sales outstanding (DSO), project 
viewpoint, 519–520
DCF. see Discounted cash flow (DCF) 
analysis
De facto system, IMF exchange rate 
classifications, 34–36
Debit, in balance of payments, 58, 60
Debt. see also Cost of debt
conforming MNEs to local financial 
structure and, 417–418
corporate governance structure and, 
100–101
earnings stripping/allocation of, 429
floating-rate loans as source of, 
218–220
incurred by project financing, 528
interest rate futures and, 220–221
interest rate swaps and, 222–226
as largest source of interest rate risk, 
217–220
matching currency cash flows and, 
344–345
measuring cost of, 211–214
multiple-source borrowing to 
minimize political risk, 496
optimal financial structure and, 
386–387
in parent viewpoint capital budget, 
520–522
plain-vanilla swaps and, 224–226
privately held/publicly traded firms 
and, 94–95
sovereign, 214–216
Debt, raising globally
bank loans and syndications, 404
euronote market, 404–405
international bond market, 405–406
international debt markets/
instruments, 403
Islamic finance, 407
overview of, 403
unique characteristics of eurobond 
markets, 406–408
Debt-based crowdfunding, 21
Currency market intervention
capital controls, 249
currency valuation/forecasting  
with, 247
direct intervention, 248–249
for European Monetary System, 253
failure, 249–252
indirect intervention, 249
motivations for, 247–248
rules for effective, 250
Currency regimes
emerging markets and choices of, 
42–44
IMF classification of, 33–37
trade-offs between exchange rate, 48
Currency risk
of cross-border acquisitions, 533–534
disadvantages of hedging for, 277
exposure management for, 289–290
hedging pros and cons for, 275–276
second-generation management 
products for, 307–309
Currency risk, second-generation 
products
average rate options, 312
calendar spreads, 312
overview of, 307–308
participating forward, 309–311
range forward (option collar), 308–309
ratio spreads, 311
zero-premium option products, 308
Currency swaps, defined, 222
Currency switching, managing 
operating exposure, 345
Currency symbols
designating quotations with, 129
global currency exchange rates, 9
overview of, 5, 7
Currency trading
global shifts in, 128–129
market participants, 120–123
platforms and processes, 120
size of foreign exchange market, 
126–129
trading day for global, 119–120
Current account, of BOP
balancing, 58–59
China’s twin surplus in, 67–68
vs. financial account capital flows, 
72–73
global surplus in, 62
overview of, 60–61
Current Account use, globalizing 
Chinese renminbi, 46–47
Current rate method of translation
balance sheet hedge, 323–324

571
Index
EBITDA (earnings before interest, 
taxes, depreciation, and 
amortization), net cash flow, 519
ECB. see European Central Bank 
(ECB)
Economic exposure. see Operating 
exposure
Economies of scale/scope, FDI, 479
ECP (eurocommercial paper), 404
Ecuador, dollarization in, 43
EEA (European Economic Area), 50
Efficient market hypothesis, future 
spot rate, 164–165
Egyptian protests, Apache 
Corporation, 492
80% rule, corporate inversion, 439
Elan and Royalty Pharma case, 
535–539
Electronic trading, shift to, 401
Elliot Management Corp., 234–235
Emerging Era (1997–present)
international monetary system, 32
patterns of capital mobility, 74
Emerging markets
asset market approach to 
forecasting, 247
corporate competition from, 
488–490
currency development in, 129
exchange rates and disequilibrium 
in, 253–259
fixed exchange rates/corporate 
currency risk in, 341
MNE dependency on, 3
NDF swap transactions in,  
125–126
pass-through and currencies of, 
154–155
regime choices and, 42–44
venture capital little used in, 400
EMI (European Monetary  
Institute), 40
Empirical tests
of Fisher effect, 156
of international Fisher effect, 156
of purchasing power parity,  
151–152
EMS. see European Monetary  
System (EMS)
English common law, investor 
protection and, 103
Enron scandal, 99, 104
Environmental
concerns as political risks of MNEs, 
504–505
sustainability, 107
benefits of ADR to U.S. 
shareholders, 395–396
corporate competition from 
emerging markets, 489
current rate method of translation 
and, 315
joint ventures vs. wholly owned 
subsidiaries, 487
offshore profits/repatriation of, 430
returns to shareholders and, 93
temporal method of translation  
and, 316
why Apple pays cash, 93–94
withholding tax on, 425
Documents
of banks, as import/export 
intermediaries, 453
of international trade, 455–460
in typical trade transaction, 460–462
Dollarization, for emerging markets, 
42–44
Domestic firms
capital controls protecting, 75
cost of capital for MNEs vs.,  
372–375
in globalization process, 15–16
vs. international financial 
management, 13–14
link between cost/availability of 
capital, 368
raising initial capital in domestic 
market, 385–386
Domestic tax neutrality, 423
Donation-based crowdfunding, 21
Double taxation, tax treaties reducing, 
424–425
Double-Irish-Dutch Sandwich, 438
Drafts (or bill of exchange), 458–461
Drawee, draft, 458
DRs. see Depositary receipts (DRs)
Drugs, public policy, and death  
penalty, 502
DSO (day sales outstanding), project 
viewpoint, 519–520
Dual-currency basket, 263
Dual-currency floating rate band, 
ruble, 263–265
Dutch Disease case, 76
Dynamic operating exposure,  
332–333
E
Earnings stripping, allocation of  
debt, 429
EBIT (earnings before interest, taxes), 
capital budget, 519–520
Differentiated products, foreign direct 
investment, 480
Direct currency intervention,  
248–249
Direct investment, balance of 
payments, 62–63
Direct quotes, defined, 131–132
Direct tax, 425
Directed public share issues, raising 
equity capital, 392–393
Disclosure
barriers to cross-listing/selling equity 
abroad, 402–403
comparative corporate governance 
and, 103
as double-edged sword, 403
as goal of corporate governance, 99
of joint venture vs. wholly owned 
subsidiary, 487
less stringent in eurobond market, 
406–407
tax morality of full, 422
Discount rates, for foreign exchange 
risk, 525–526
Discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis
project example of, 525–526
of project variables, 511
real option analysis vs., 527
shortcomings of, 526
Discounting, in forfaiting  
transactions, 467
Disequilibrium
advantages of hedging during, 277
in emerging markets, 253–259
managing operating exposure in, 342
medium run cash flows  
assuming, 336
Disregarded entity, check-the-box 
subsidiaries, 435, 444
Distributions, translation methods for, 
315–316
Diversification
globalization of securities markets 
reducing, 371
as operating exposure strategy, 
342–344
optimal financial structure, MNEs 
and, 388
portfolio risk reduction. see 
International portfolio theory/
diversification
risk of international, 361–363
of stock markets in recent  
years, 401
Dividends
Apple’s global iTax strategy, 441

572
Index
Euronote market, raising debt globally, 
404–405
European Central Bank (ECB)
EU replacing central banks with, 39
European sovereign debt and, 215
intervention in Japanese yen,  
2010, 252
overview of, 40
post 2009 financial crisis  
strategy, 169
in rocketing of Swiss franc, 6
European Economic and Monetary 
Union (EMU), 39, 40–41
European Economic Area (EEA), 50
European Monetary Institute  
(EMI), 40
European Monetary System (EMS)
creation of, 32–33
currency intervention in, 253
the euro and, 39
European option, defined, 185
European terms quotations, foreign 
currency, 130–132, 134
European Union (EU)
antiglobalization movement  
toward, 504
euro and, 39–41
Greek/EU debt crisis of 2011, 41
impossible trinity dilemma, 38–39
MNEs reducing protectionism  
via, 501
sovereign debt of, 215
Euro-Renminbi (EUR-RMB) options 
growth, 186
Eurozone
current countries in, 40–41
defined, 39
Exchange rate indices, 152–153
Exchange rate pass-through, 152–155
Exchange rate regimes
choices for emerging markets, 42–44
corporate governance factors in, 
102–103
fixed vs. flexible exchange rates in, 
37–39
historical patterns of capital 
mobility, 73
IMF classification of, 33–37
what lies ahead, 48
Exchange rates. see also Fixed 
exchange rates
balance of payments and, 68–69
Bretton Woods Agreement (1944), 31
determining foreign. see Foreign 
exchange rate determination
dynamics, 262–263
Equity/debt, raising globally
designing strategy for, 385–386
financial structure of foreign 
subsidiaries, 417–420
optimal financial structure, 386–387
optimal financial structure and 
MNEs, 387–389
overview of, 384–385
Petrobrás of Brazil and cost of 
capital, 409–412
raising equity globally. see Equity 
capital, raising globally
review, 408, 412–417
Equity-related international bond, 
eurobonds, 406
Esso of Sweden, 534
Ethics, tax morality and, 422
Euro
dominating global currency  
market, 36
eurocurrency vs., 10
exchange rate conventions for, 8–9
Greek/EU debt crisis and, 41
history of, 39–40
international monetary system and, 
39–41
JPMorgan Chase forecast of dollar 
and, 260
launch of, 40–41
rocketing of Swiss franc against,  
6–7
symbol/ISO code for, 129
Toyota’s European operating 
exposure and, 350–352
Euro medium-term note (EMTN) 
market, 404
Eurobanks, defined, 10
Eurobonds
overview of, 405–406
raising capital abroad using, 386
unique characteristics of market, 
406–408
Eurocommercial paper (ECP), 404
Eurocredits, 403–404
Eurocurrencies, and LIBOR, 11
Eurodollar futures, 220, 230
Euroequity issue
as equity alternative in global 
market, 390–391
overview of, 392
of PA Resources of Sweden, 393
SEC Rule 144A/Atlas Copco  
and, 399
strategizing to source capital 
globally, 385–386
Euronext, merger of NYSE with, 401
Equilibrium
fundamental path for currency  
and, 261
interest rates/exchange rates in, 
162–164
measuring operating exposure by 
medium run cash flows, 335–336
prices/interest rates/exchange rates 
in, 165–166
Equitable treatment of shareholders, 
corporate governance, 99
Equity
cost of. see Cost of equity
financing cash flows for payment of, 
333–334
minimizing political risk to foreign 
subsidiaries, 496
in parent viewpoint capital budget, 
520–522
translation loss as decrease in, 320
translation methods and, 316
Equity capital, raising globally
alternatives for, 391
depositary receipts (DRs), 393–399
directed public share issues, 392–393
euroequity issue, 392
foreign equity listing and issuance, 
400–403
initial public offerings (IPOs), 
390–391
overview of, 389–390
private placement, 399–400
Equity issuances
depositary receipts and, 398
equity listings vs., 389–390
foreign equity listing and, 400–403
promoting shares/share prices, 402
Equity listings
equity issuance vs., 389
foreign equity issuances and, 400–403
overview of global, 96–97
sourcing capital globally via, 385
Equity markets
capital gains in, 93
in corporate governance structure, 
100–102
gradual deregulation of, 367
market liquidity/segmentation 
affecting, 370
in shareholder wealth maximization 
model, 91
sourcing equity in global, 389–393
in stakeholder capitalism model, 92
trends in global, 96–99
Equity risk premiums, 366–367
Equity-based crowdfunding, 21

573
Index
translating for foreign  
subsidiaries, 314
translation methods for, 315–318
Financial structure
cost of capital for MNEs vs. 
domestic firms, 372–373
of foreign subsidiaries, 417–420
optimal, 386–387
optimal for MNEs, 387–389
Financial trade-offs, of emerging 
markets, 488–489
Financing
availability of capital. see 
Availability of capital
capital budgeting example, 515–516
cash flows, 333–334
diversifying sources of, 344
foreign subsidiaries, 417–420
global cost of capital. see Global 
capital
of joint venture vs. wholly owned 
subsidiary, 487
OLI Paradigm and, 482–483
project, 528–529
Finite projects, financing, 528–529
Firm-specific (or micro) risks, 491, 493
Fisher effect
algebraic primer for, 179
in equilibrium, 166
international, 156, 179–180
overview of, 155–156
Fixed exchange rates
Argentina’s experiment with,  
42, 126
balance of payments and, 68–69
in Bretton Woods and IMF, 1944, 
31–32, 74
capital controls for BOP, 74–75
currency losses at Greenpeace  
and, 282
currency risk in emerging markets 
and, 341
emerging markets and regime 
choices, 42
European Monetary System and, 
39, 48
financial globalization and risk, 3
vs. flexible, 37
in global monetary system evolution, 
29, 73
IMF classification for, 35–36
impossible trinity and, 38, 72, 155
many countries moved from, 247
Official Reserves Account and, 
66–67
Flexible exchange rates, 37
F
Factoring, financing trade with, 
464–465
Failures
corporate governance, 104
currency market intervention, 
249–252
Fair value, technical analysis theories 
of exchange rate, 245
Family-owned businesses
corporate governance in, 102, 
103–104
as dominant in emerging markets, 90
LVMH vs. Hermès case, 108–112
private equity funds used by, 400
superior performance of, 95–96
FCIA. see Foreign Credit Insurance 
Association (FCIA)
FDI. see Foreign direct investment 
(FDI)
Fence, currency risk management, 
308–309
Fiat currency, Bitcoin as, 7–8
FIBOR (Frankfurt Interbank Offered 
Rate), 210
Finance theories, international vs. 
domestic, 13
Financial account, BOP
balancing, 58–59
China’s twin surplus in, 67–68
vs. current account capital flows, 
72–73
direct investment, 62–63
net international investment 
position of country, 64–65
other asset investment, 65
overview of, 62
portfolio investment, 63–64
Financial assets, dominating balance of 
payments, 59
Financial derivatives
as assets of global finance, 4
foreign currency. see Foreign 
currency derivatives
options. see Foreign currency options
speculation and hedging with, 181
Financial destabilization, preventing, 75
Financial hedges, 280
Financial instruments, international vs. 
domestic, 13
Financial management. see 
Multinational enterprise (MNE) 
financial management
Financial statements
reflecting exchange rate  
changes, 334
emerging markets and regime 
choices, 42–44
expected vs. unexpected changes in 
cash flows, 333–334
fixed (1945–1973), 32
fixed vs. flexible, 37–39
floating era (1973–1997), 32
global currency, 9
gold standard (1876–1913), 30
IMF classifications for, 33–37
and interest rates. see Interest rates 
and exchange rates
international parity conditions and. 
see International  
parity conditions
margin in remittance costs, 79
quotations and terminology, 8
trade balances and, 70–72
Exchange-traded options, 186, 230
Execution of acquisition stage, cross-
border acquisitions, 531–532
Exercise (or strike) price, currency 
options
alternative, 199
for complex hedges, 305–312
cost of debt, 213
defined, 184
hedging, 288
overview of, 184–187
pricing and valuation, 192–194
quotations and prices, 187–191
Expected cash flows, 333–334
Export credit insurance, 462
Export-Import Bank (Eximbank), 
462–463
Exports
adjusting to exchange rates, 70–72
bilateral tax treaties for, 425
of economic international 
transactions, 59
financing. see International trade 
finance
as goods traded in current  
account, 61
government financing  
of, 462–463
moving blocked funds with 
unrelated, 498
production abroad vs., 484
Expropriation
OPIC foreign investment  
insurance, 494
project viewpoint sensitivity analysis 
for, 523–524
External forces, corporate  
governance, 100

574
Index
overview of, 478
predicting political risk, 490–496
review, 507–509
strategic portfolio theory, black 
swans and avoiding being the 
turkey, 505–507
sustaining/transferring competitive 
advantage, 479–481
transfer risk, 496–499
Foreign equity listing and issuance
barriers to cross-listing/selling equity 
abroad, 402–403
establishing liquid secondary 
markets, 402
improving liquidity, 400–401
increasing visibility and political 
acceptance, 402
overview of, 400
promoting shares and share prices, 
401–402
Foreign exchange
brokers, 123
contracts, 280
dealers, 121–122
defined, 118
exposure, 274–275, 295–296
intervention, 123
letters of credit and, 457
Foreign exchange market
defined, 118
functions of, 119
rates/quotations. see Foreign 
exchange rates/quotations
review, 138, 142–146
size of, 126–129
structure of, 119–123
transactions, 123–126
Venezuelan bolivar black market 
case, 138–141
Foreign exchange rate determination
asset market approach to, 244
asset market approach to 
forecasting, 245–247
balance of payments approach to, 
243–244
currency market intervention. see 
Currency market intervention
disequilibrium in emerging markets, 
253–259
forecasting in practice, 258–263
monetary approach to, 244
overview of, 241
purchasing power parity approaches 
to, 243
review, 263, 266–271
Russian ruble roulette  
case, 263–266
Foreign Credit Insurance Association 
(FCIA), 462
Foreign currency
forward quotation in terms  
of, 137
intervention. see Currency market 
intervention
percentage change in spot rates 
with, 136
quotations in foreign exchange 
markets, 131–132
Foreign currency derivatives
futures, 182–184
options. see Foreign currency  
options
overview of, 181–182
prudence in practice and, 199
review, 200, 203–208
Foreign currency futures
contract specifications, 182–183
forward contracts vs., 184
overview of, 182
using, 183–184
Foreign currency options
buyer of call, 187–188
buyer of put, 190
credit crisis of 2009 and volatilities 
in, 289–290
defined, 184
fundamentals of, 184–185
hedging foreign exchange exposure, 
295–297
KiKos and the South Korean won, 
200–203
markets, 185–186
pricing and valuation of, 192–193
pricing sensitivity. see Price 
sensitivity, currency options
quotations and prices, 186–187
review, 200, 203–208
writer of call, 188–189
writer of put, 191–192
Foreign currency-denominated asset, 
foreign exchange risk, 362
Foreign direct investment (FDI)
corporate competition from 
emerging markets, 488–490
cultural/institutional risk, 499–501
deciding where to invest, 483–484
drugs, public policy, and death 
penalty, 502
financial account, 50
managing global specific risks, 
502–505
modes of, 484–487
OLI Paradigm and 
internationalization, 481–483
Flexible forward, currency risk 
management, 308–309
Floating band, Russian ruble, 264–265
Floating Era (1971–1997)
international monetary system and, 
32–33
patterns of capital mobility in, 74
Floating exchange rates
as choice for emerging market, 43
impact on BOP for countries  
with, 69
managing operating exposure  
for, 346
overview of, 34–36
Floating-rate loans
in cross-currency swaps, 226–229
interest rate futures and, 221
interest rate swaps for, 222–226
overview of, 218–220
Floating-rate note (FRN),  
eurobonds, 406
Florence, as birthplace of trading, 458
Florins, 458
Follow the cash flow, BOP  
accounting, 58
Follow-on-offerings (FOs), raising 
equity capital, 391
Fooled by Randomness (Taleb), 506
Forced delistings, stock exchange, 98
Forced reinvestment, blocked funds, 499
Ford Motor Company
economies of scale/scope in foreign 
investment, 479
and Venezuela devaluation, 334
Forecasting, measuring operating 
exposure, 332–333
Forecasting exchange rates
asset market approach to, 244, 
245–247
balance of payments approach to, 
243–244
cross-rate consistency in, 260–261
currency market intervention and. 
see Currency market intervention
exchange rate dynamics in, 262–263
JPMorgan Chase forecast of dollar/
euro, 260
monetary approach, 244
overview of, 258–259
purchasing power parity  
approaches, 243
synthesis of thought on, 261–262
technical analysis, 245, 259–260
Foreign affiliate, defined, 486
Foreign bonds, 406
Foreign capital investment, MNE 
capital budgeting for, 512

575
Index
in translation exposure, 316,  
320–322
Gambler’s dilemma, 199
Ganado, as hypothetical U.S.-based 
firm, 15
GDRs (global depositary receipts), 
393, 398–399
General Electric, acquisition of 
Honeywell, 532
Generally accepted accounting 
principles (GAAP), 99
Geographical distribution, of foreign 
exchange market, 127–128
Georgia-Pacific, 89
German automobile industry, and 
hedging, 278
Germany, approach to national taxes, 
423–424
Geronzi, Cesare, 103
Global betas, 366
Global capital
cost of capital, 359–360
cost of capital for MNEs vs. 
domestic firms, 372–375
cost of debt, 361
cost of equity, 360–361
demand for foreign securities. see 
International portfolio investors
equity risk premiums, 366–367
financial globalization and strategy, 
358–361
foreign exchange risk, 361–363
global betas, 366
globalization of securities markets, 
371–372
International CAPM, 363–366
international portfolios. see 
International portfolio theory/
diversification
link between cost/availability of 
capital, 368
market liquidity improvement, 
368–369
market liquidity/segmentation 
effects, 369–371
market segmentation and, 369
markets, 4–5
Novo case, 376–379
overview of, 358
portfolio risk reduction, 361
raising equity/debt. see Equity/debt, 
raising globally
review, 375, 379–383
Global challengers, corporate 
competition from, 488–490
Global depositary receipts (GDRs), 
393, 398–399
Forward rate agreements (FRAs), 219, 
220–221
Forward rates
algebraic primer for, 178
constructing range forward (option 
collar), 308–309
constructing synthetic forward, 
306–307
and cost of hedging, 287
in covered interest arbitrage, 159–161
in foreign exchange market, 136–137
hedging foreign exchange  
exposure, 295
in interest rate parity, 157–159
interest rates linked to exchange 
rates, 156–158
as predictor of future spot rate, 
164–165, 166
pricing sensitivity of currency 
options and, 194
pricing zero-premium products  
on, 308
Forward transactions. see Outright 
forward (or forward) transactions
Forward-forward swap transactions, 125
Forward-looking volatility, 197
Fragile Five, BIITS, 3
Frankfurt Interbank Offered Rate 
(FIBOR), 210
FRAs (forward rate agreements), 219, 
220–221
Fraud, counteracting, 123
Free cash flow (net cash flow), 519
Free float, raising equity capital, 391
Free-floating regime, emerging 
markets, 43–44
FRN (floating-rate note), eurobonds, 406
Front-end investment, exporting vs. 
production abroad, 484
Fronting loans, moving blocked  
funds, 498
Full financial integration, impossible 
trinity, 37–38
Functional currency, of foreign 
subsidiary, 315, 317
Fund positioning effect, transfer 
pricing, 432
Future date, foreign exchange 
transactions, 124
Futures
foreign currency, 182–184
interest rate, 220–221
G
Gain
in operating exposure, 335, 339
in transaction exposure, 279–280
technical analysis of, 245
theoretical determinants of,  
242–243
Foreign exchange rates/quotations
cross rates, 134
currency symbols, 129
forward quotations, 136–138
intermarket arbitrage, 134–135
market conventions, 130–134
overview of, 129
percentage change in spot  
rates, 136
quotes, 129–130
Foreign exchange risk
adjusting discount rates to account 
for, 525–526
cost of debt and, 388–389
international portfolios and,  
361–363
international vs. domestic financial 
management, 13
Novo case, 377
project viewpoint sensitivity analysis 
for, 524
protection from in international 
trade, 454
transferring, 119
Foreign stock exchanges, 386
Foreign subsidiaries
characterization of, 314
determining functional currency  
of, 315
FDI and. see Foreign direct 
investment (FDI)
financial structure of, 417–420
methods of translation, 315–318
translating financial statements  
for, 314
valuation of, 322
Foreign tax credits
cross-crediting, 434–435
and deferral, 429–430
naked inversion and, 439
Foreign tax neutrality, 423
Forfaiting transactions, 466–468
Forward (outright forward) 
transactions, 124–126, 156–158
Forward contracts
constructing synthetic forward for, 
306–307
foreign currency futures vs., 184
transaction exposure from, 278
Forward market hedge, 281–282, 287
Forward participation agreement, 
309–311
Forward premium, 137
Forward quotations, 136–138

576
Index
McDonald’s British pound exposure 
case, 326–327
money market hedge, 282–284
options market hedge, 284–285
proportional, 290
pros and cons, 276–277
risk-sharing at Harley-Davidson 
and, 346
strategy choice and outcome, 286
unhedged position, 280–281
what is gained by, 275
when business dictates results of, 324
Hermès International, ownership of, 
89, 108–112
Historic volatility, 197–198
History
of IMF classifications, 33
of international monetary system, 
29–33
of patterns of capital mobility, 72
Home currency
calculating forward rate, 157
in direct and indirect quotations, 
131–132
forward quotations in percentage 
terms, 138
percentage change in spot  
rates, 136
in relative PPP, 151
Honeywell International, proposed 
acquisition of, 532
Hoover Hedges, 325–326
Hostile takeovers
in cross-border acquisitions, 531
Elan and Royalty Pharma case of, 
535–539
Human resource norm, cultural/
institutional risk and, 500
Hungarian mortgages, 163–164
Hybrid entities, tax management, 435
Hybrids, MNE operational goals for 
public/private, 95–96
Hyperinflation
Argentine crisis of 2002, 256
U.S. translation practices for, 317
using balance sheet hedge in 
countries with, 324
I
ICAPM (International CAPM), 
363–366
Icelandic crisis, Mini-Case, 49–54
Ideal currency, attributes of, 37–38
Identification stage, cross-border 
acquisitions, 530
IGCF (Investment-geared 
crowdfunding), 21
Governments
conflicts between MNEs and host, 493
financing exports, 462–463
investment agreements with MNEs 
and host, 493–494
managing transfer risk with host, 
496–498
Grammercy, as holder of Argentine 
debt, 233–234
Gray market, Venezuelan bolivar, 
140–141
Great Britain pound, symbol/ISO code 
for, 129
Great Depression (1930s), 30
Greek/EU debt crisis, euro and, 41
Greenfield investments
capital budgeting example. see 
Cemex entering Indonesia case
cross-border acquisitions vs., 
529–530
defined, 486
Greenpeace, currency losses at, 282
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), NIIP 
as percentage of, 64–65
Growth firms, 93–94
Growth vs. dividends, global 
challengers, 488–489
GRS (Global registered shares), 398–399
Guarantees
in forfaiting transactions, 467
OPIC foreign investment, 494
Gucci, euroequity issues, 392
H
Hard peg regimes, 34–36, 43
Harley-Davidson, risk-sharing at, 346
Hashing, mining for bitcoins, 8
Hedging
Argentina and, 231–234
balance sheet hedge, 322–324
comparing alternatives, 285–286
cross-currency swaps for, 326–327
defined, 276
financial derivatives for, 181
in foreign exchange market, 119
forward market hedge, 281–282
forward rates and cost of, 287
German automobile industry  
and, 278
Hoover Hedges, 325–326
by individuals/firms in foreign 
exchange market, 122
managing account payable, 287–289
managing operating exposure 
proactively, 344–349
managing transaction exposure, 
275–278, 290–292
Global eclectic monetary system, 
36–37
Global financial marketplace
assets, institutions and linkages, 4–5
eurocurrencies and LIBOR, 10–11
market for currencies, 5–9
Global monetary system, evolution of, 
29, 73–74
Global portfolio, world portfolio  
vs., 366
Global registered shares (GRS), 
398–399
Global remittances
as current transfers, 60
Mini-Case, 78–82
Global Remittances Working Group, 
78–82
Globalization, financial
limits of, 17–18
Novo case, 377
process of, 15–17
and risk, 3–4
of securities markets, 371
Globalization of capital flows, 76–77
Global-specific (or macro) risks
defined, 491
management strategies for,  
502–505
predicting, 492–493
GM Asia, 324
Goals
corporate governance, 99
corporate governance and financial. 
see Corporate governance
of management, 90–96
managing transaction exposure  
risk, 289
Godé, Pierre, 111
Gold standard (1876–1913)
international monetary system and, 
29–30
patterns of capital mobility  
during, 73
U.S. modified (1934–1944), 30
Gold-exchange standard, 31
Good news, in effective  
intervention, 250
Goods and services. see International 
trade finance
Goods trade, current account,  
60–61
Google and profit repositioning, 
437–439
Governance. see Corporate 
governance
Government-affiliated corporate 
governance regimes, 102

577
Index
covered interest arbitrage (CIA) 
and, 159–161
and equilibrium, 162–163, 166
theory of, 157–159
Interest rate risk
Argentina and vulture funds case, 
231–235
corporate cost of debt and,  
211–214
credit risk/repricing risk and, 214
cross-currency swaps for, 226–230
debt structures/strategies, 218
floating-rate loans and, 218–220
foundations of, 210–211
interest rate futures and FRAs for, 
220–221
managing with futures, 220–221
overview of, 217–218
review, 230, 236–240
sovereign debt and, 214–216
sovereign spreads and, 216–217
swaps for, 220, 222–226
the trouble with LIBOR, 210
Interest rates
BOP and, 69
in countries with managed  
floats, 69
eurocurrency, 11
Icelandic crisis and rising, 49–54
indirect currency intervention  
using, 249
international calculations for, 217
overview of, 209
sensitivity of options to changing, 
198–199
Interest rates and exchange rates
covered interest arbitrage, 159–161
equilibrium between, 162–164
Fisher effect, 155–156
forward rate, 156–157
interest rate parity, 157–159
international Fisher effect, 156
uncovered interest arbitrage, 
161–162
Intermarket arbitrage, 134–135
Intermediaries, banks as import/
export, 453
Internal financing of foreign subsidiary, 
418–419
Internal forces, corporate governance 
structure, 100
Internal rate of return (IRR), 520, 521
International Accounting Standards 
Committee (IASC), 317
International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (IBRD). see 
World Bank
Indirect foreign currency intervention, 
249–250
Indirect quotes, 131–132
Indirect tax, 425, 426
Indonesia
capital budgeting example. see 
Cemex entering Indonesia case
China Noah Corporation case, 
294–298
a MINT country, 3
nepotism under Suharto, 500
Infant industries, host country 
protectionism of, 501
Inflation rates
budgeting for foreign projects, 511
Fisher effect and, 155–156, 179
impact of BOP on, 69–70
international Fisher effect and, 
179–180
leading to exchange rate pass-
through, 154–155
monetary approach to, 244
purchasing power parity and, 
177–178
relative PPP and, 151–152
sovereign debt and, 214
use of balance sheet hedge  
for, 317
Information gap, Novo Mini-Case, 376, 
377–378
Inheritance tax, 427
Initial public offerings (IPOs)
in capital lifecycle, 20
defined, 89
euroequity issues as, 392
raising equity capital globally, 
390–391
venture capital funds using, 400
Institutional risk, country-specific, 
499–502
Institutions, of global finance, 4
Insurance
Eximbank financing U.S. exports 
through, 462–463
export credit, 462
OPIC foreign investment, 494
Integrated foreign entity, 314–315, 
317–318
Intellectual property rights, 500
Interbank market
currency trading in, 121–122
interest rates in, 210
linking financial institutions, 4–5
map of global capital markets, 5
Interest, withholding tax on, 425
Interest rate parity (IRP)
algebraic primer for, 178–179
IMF. see International Monetary Fund 
(IMF)
IMM (International Monetary 
Market), 181
Impatient capitalism, of management/
investors, 92
Imperfections, MNEs using market, 
14–15
Implied volatility, foreign  
currency, 197
Imports
of economic international 
transactions, 59
financing. see International trade 
finance
goods trade in current account  
as, 61
potentially lowering inflation rates, 
69–70
trade adjustment to exchange rates 
for, 70–72
Impossible trinity
current account vs. financial account 
capital flows and, 72
euro and Greek/EU debt crisis, 41
overview of, 37–38
pass-through/emerging market 
currencies and, 154–155
Income, current account, 60
Income statement
capital budgeting example, 518–519
measuring operating exposure, 
337–338, 340
translating for foreign  
subsidiaries, 314
translating with current rate  
method, 315
translating with temporal  
method, 316
translation exposure example, 
318–319
Income taxes
comparative OECD corporate tax 
rates, 427
deferral of corporate, 424
as direct taxes, 425
effect of transfer pricing on, 432
foreign tax credits for, 429
overview of, 425
Inconvertibility, OPIC foreign 
investment insurance, 494
Independent monetary policy, 43–44
India
as BRIC country, 3
global outsourcing in, 12–13
Indication, over-the-counter market 
options, 186

578
Index
patterns of capital mobility  
during, 73
In-the-money (ITM), options
foreign currency, 185
intrinsic value of, 193
spot rate sensitivity (delta) and, 
194–195
Intrafirm trade (affiliated party), 
import/export relationship, 
451–452
Intra-market trading accounts, 
American depositary  
receipts, 395
Intrinsic value, options, 193
Inventory management, during 
political risk, 504
Inverse relationship, 66
Investment
blocked funds requiring forced, 499
foreign direct. see Foreign direct 
investment (FDI)
in forfaiting transactions,  
467–468
U.S. policy on tax neutrality for, 422
Investment grade borrowers, cost of 
debt, 212–213
Investment horizon, firms, 92
Investment-geared crowdfunding 
(IGCF), 21
Investments
capital controls for, 74–76
capital flows and returns on, 72
in current account, 60–61
expected changes in exchange rates 
and, 334
in financial account, 62–65
proactive vs. defensive, 15
sequence for foreign direct, 17
use of currency for international, 47
Investors
barriers to cross-listing/selling equity 
abroad, 402–403
financing large projects, 528
publicly traded companies reaching 
potential, 390
reaching with euroequity issues, 392
IPOs. see Initial public offerings (IPOs)
IRR (Internal rate of return),  
520, 521
Irrevocable letter of credit, 456
ISDA (International Swaps and 
Derivatives Association), 125
Islamic finance, 407
ISO (International Organization for 
Standardization) codes, 5, 7, 129
iTax global strategy, Apple, 441–444
ITM. see In-the-money (ITM), options
International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) codes, 
currency symbols, 5, 7, 129
International parity conditions. see 
Parity conditions, international
International portfolio investors
euroequity privatization issues, 392
expectations of, 389
globalization of securities markets, 
371–372
link between cost/availability of 
capital, 368
market liquidity improvement, 
368–369
market liquidity/segmentation 
effects, 369–371
market segmentation and, 369
overview of, 367–368
International portfolio theory/
diversification
equity risk premiums, 366–367
foreign exchange risk, 361–363
global betas, 366
International CAPM, 363–366
portfolio risk reduction, 361
International Swaps and Derivatives 
Association (ISDA), 125
International trade finance
with bank credit lines, 465–466
with bankers’ acceptances, 463–464
benefits of system, 453–455
bill of lading in, 459–460
Crosswell International and Brazil, 
469–472
documentation in typical 
transaction, 460–462
draft in, 458–459
with factoring, 464–465
Florence, as birthplace of trading, 458
forfaiting in, 466–468
government programs financing 
exports, 462–463
letter of credit in, 455–457
overview of, 450
review, 468, 472–475
with securitization, 464–465
with trade acceptances, 464
trade relationships in, 450–453
International trade phase, 
globalization process, 16–17
International translation practices, 
317–318
Internationalization, OLI Paradigm 
and, 482–483
Interwar years and WW II (1914–1944)
international monetary system and, 
29–30
International bank loans, raising debt 
globally, 404
International bond market
definition of, 405
eurobonds, 405–406
foreign bonds, 406
Islamic finance and, 407
overview of, 403
raising capital abroad via, 386
unique characteristics of eurobond 
markets, 406–408
International CAPM (ICAPM), 
363–366
International diversification, foreign 
exchange risk, 361–363
International financial management, 
13–14
International Fisher effect
algebraic primer for, 179–180
in equilibrium, 166
overview of, 156
International Monetary Fund (IMF)
Bretton Woods and, 30–32
classification of currency regimes, 
33–37
on currency manipulation, 248
International Monetary Market 
(IMM), 181
International monetary system
emerging markets and regime 
choices, 42–44
the euro, 39–41
fixed vs. flexible exchange rates, 
37–39
globalizing Chinese renminbi,  
44–48
history of, 29–33
Icelandic crisis case, 49–54
IMF classification of currency 
regimes, 33–37
overview of, 28–29
review, 48–49, 54–56
as risk of financial globalization, 3
International monetary system,  
history of
Bretton Woods and IMF, 1944, 30–32
emerging era, 1997–present, 32
fixed exchange rates, 1945–1973, 32
floating era, 1973–1997, 32–33
gold standard, 1876–1913, 29–30
interwar years and WW II,  
1914–1944, 29–30
overview of, 29
International offshore financial centers
activities of, 437
map of, 436
as tax havens, 435–437

579
Index
Long positions, futures, 183–184
Long run cash flows, in operating 
exposure, 336
Long-term trends, forecasting 
exchange rates, 261–262
Long-term value maximization, SWM 
model, 91–92
Lookback options, 312
Look-through-rules, taxation of 
disregarded entities, 435
“Loonie” (Canadian dollar), 131
Losses
buyer of call options, 188
buyer of put options, 190
in operating exposure, 340–341
Toyota’s European operating 
exposure and, 350–352
in translation exposure, 316, 320–322
writer of call options, 189
writer of put options, 191–192
Low leverage vs. rapid expansion, 
global challengers, 488–489
LSE. see London Stock Exchange 
(LSE)
Luxury Wars—LVMH vs. Hermès, 
Mini-Case, 108–112
M
Maastricht Treaty, 39
Macroeconomic rates, BOP impact on 
key, 68–70
Macroeconomic uncertainty, 334
Madrid Interbank Offered Rate 
(MIBOR), 210
Mahathir Mohamad, 255
Maker (drawer or originator),  
draft, 458
Malaysia, capital controls in, 75–76
Managed floats, impact of BOP on, 69
Management
corporate governance, 101, 102–103
currency risk. see Currency risk, 
second-generation products
effect of transfer pricing on, 433–434
exchange rates and, 334
foreign direct investment budgets, 
511–512
foreign direct investment contracts, 
485–486
foreign direct investment  
expertise, 479
of global specific risks, 502–505
good corporate governance, 104
of joint ventures, 486
operating exposure proactively. see 
Proactive management, operating 
exposure
defined, 453
eliminating risk of noncompletion 
with, 454, 455–456
revocable vs. irrevocable, 456
Levels of certification, depositary 
receipts, 396–397
Liabilities, methods for translating, 
315, 316
Licensing
foreign direct investment via, 
485–486
risks of exporting vs. production 
abroad, 484
Link financing, 498
Linkages, currency in global 
marketplace, 4–5
Liquidity. see Market liquidity
Liquidity seekers, foreign exchange 
market, 121
Listings measurement, on stock 
exchange, 97–98
Loans
budgeting for foreign project, 512
Eximbank financing U.S. exports via, 
462–463
financing cash flows for payment of, 
333–334
floating-rate, 218–220
fronting, 498
international bank, 403–404
measuring cost of debt from, 361
raising debt globally with 
international bank, 404
Local sourcing, predicting political 
risk, 495
Location
deciding where to invest, 483–484
minimizing political risk, 495
OLI Paradigm and advantages of, 
482–483
Lock Law, Argentina, 232
London Interbank Offered Rate 
(LIBOR)
core component of global financial 
system, 5
eurocredits tied to, 404
eurocurrencies and, 11
floating-rate loans and, 218–220
interest rate swaps and, 223–226
as most often used reference rate, 
210–211
trouble with, 210
London Stock Exchange (LSE)
liquidity of NYSE over, 401
in Novo case, 377–378
raising equity by cross-listing on, 392
shift to electronic trading, 401
J
Japanese yen
carry-trade case, 167–170
currency intervention of 2010, 250–252
equity example, 362–363
symbol/ISO code for, 129
technical analysis of JPY/USD  
rate, 245
J-curve, 69
J-curve adjustment path, trade balance, 
70–71
Joint venture (JV)
cultural/institutional risk and, 499
effect of transfer pricing on, 434
foreign direct investment via, 486
ownership in, 88
risks of exporting vs. production 
abroad, 484
strategic alliances formed as, 487
Just-in-time (JIT) near-zero inventory 
systems, 503–504
K
Kenya, crowdfunding, 19–22
Keynes, Lord John Maynard, 31
KiKos and the South Korean won, 
Mini-Case, 203–208
“Kiwi” (New Zealand dollar), 131, 192
Knowledge, as rationale for MNEs, 15
Koch Industries, 89
Krieger, Andrew, 192
Krona, in Icelandic crisis, 49–54
L
Labor flows, between countries, 12
Lambda. see Volatility, sensitivity to 
(lambda)
Latin American Free Trade 
Association (MERCOSUR), 501
Law of one price
algebraic primer for, 177
defined, 148
purchasing power parity and, 
148–150
Leaning into the wind, for effective 
intervention, 250
Legal advisers, corporate governance, 
100–101
Legal liabilities, of MNEs, 501
Legal system, corporate governance 
regimes, 103
Lending, transaction exposure due  
to, 279
Letter of credit (L/C)
advantages/disadvantages of, 
457–458
confirmed vs. unconfirmed, 456

580
Index
Migrant remittances, Mini-Case, 78–82
Mini-Cases
Apple’s global iTax strategy,  
441–445
Argentina and vulture funds, 
231–235
Crosswell International and Brazil, 
469–472
crowdfunding Kenya, 19–22
Elan and Royalty Pharma, 535–539
global remittances, 78–82
Hermès vs. LVMH luxury wars, 
108–112
Icelandic crisis, 49–54
Japanese yen carry-trade, 167–170
KiKos and the South Korean won, 
203–208
McDonald’s, Hoover Hedges, and 
cross-currency swaps, 325–327
Petrobrás of Brazil and cost of 
capital, 409–412
Russian ruble roulette, 263–266
Strategic Portfolio Theory, Black 
Swans and avoiding being the 
turkey, 505–507
Toyota’s European operating 
exposure, 350–352
Venezuelan bolivar black market, 
138–141
Mini-max, currency risk management, 
308–309
Mining bitcoins, 8
MINT (Mexico, Indonesia, Nigeria, 
Turkey), MNEs and, 3
MNE. see Multinational enterprise 
(MNE)
Modern Portfolio Theory (MFT), 
505–507
Monetary approaches, foreign 
exchange rate determination, 244
Monetary assets, translating with 
temporal method, 316
Monetary independence, impossible 
trinity, 37–38
Monetary system. see International 
monetary system
Money laundering, 76
Money market hedge
for foreign exchange exposure, 
297–298
managing account payable, 287–288
managing transaction exposure, 
282–284
Money markets, reinvesting blocked 
funds in local, 499
Money transfer operators (MTOs), 81
Morgan, J.P., 393
Market-based corporate governance 
regimes, 102
Markets
competitiveness of home, 480–481
controls minimizing political risk, 
495–496
Elan and Royalty Pharma valuation, 
537–539
exporting vs. production abroad, 484
foreign direct investment expertise 
in, 479
global financial marketplace 
currency, 5–9
strategic alliances formed for, 487
Markowitz, Harry, 505–507
Matching
currency cash flows, 344–345
with money market hedge, 282–283
Maturities
cost of debt changing over, 213
financing sovereign debt by  
selling, 215
Maturity, forfaiting transactions, 468
MCC (marginal cost of capital), 370, 
373–374
MCCD (marginal domestic cost of 
capital), 370
McDonald’s Corporation
Big Mac Index, 149
investment/translation risks case, 
325–327
Panda Bonds issued by, 46
Measurement
cost of capital, 359–360
cost of debt, 361
cost of equity, 360–361
of operating exposure, 335–341
of transaction exposure, 278–280
Medium run cash flows, measuring 
operating exposure, 335–336
Merck (U.S.), 349
MERCOSUR (Latin American Free 
Trade Association), 501
Mergers
cross-border. see Cross-border 
mergers and acquisitions
delisted from stock exchange, 98
with large/small foreign firms as 
corporate inversion, 440
Mexico
as MINT country, 3
role of remittances in, 81
symbol/ISO code for peso, 129
MFT (Modern Portfolio Theory), 
505–507
MIBOR (Madrid Interbank Offered 
Rate), 210
Management (Continued)
operating exposure strategically, 
341–344
operational goals of, 93–96
overview of, 90–91
post-acquisition, 532–533
purchase compensation plans for, 402
responses to shareholder 
dissatisfaction, 106
of risk, using hedging. see Hedging
Sarbanes-Oxley Act regulations for 
senior, 105–106
separating ownership from, 90
shareholder wealth maximization 
model for, 91–92
stakeholder capitalism model for, 
92–93
translation exposure, 322–324
translation gain or loss and, 322
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 505–507
Margin (or collateral) requirement, 
futures, 183
Margin vs. volume, global challengers, 488
Marginal cost of capital (MCC), 370, 
373–374
Marginal domestic cost of capital 
(MCCD), 370
Marginal return on capital (MRR), 
370, 374
Marked-to-market, futures, 183
Market index (km)
CAPM, 360
ICAPM, 364
Market liquidity
eurocurrency deposits holding 
excess, 10
for firm’s securities, 359
foreign equity listing/issuance for, 
400–401
foreign exchange market structure 
and, 119
improving, 368–369
of interest rate futures, 220
over-the-counter options for, 185
private placements not affecting, 399
secondary markets for, 402
segmentation/cost of capital and, 
362, 368–371
Market return (km g), ICAPM, 363–366
Market risk premium (km g - krf
g ),
ICAPM, 363–366
Market segmentation
budgeting for foreign project, 511
effect of, 369–371
in Novo case, 376–379
overview of, 369
Market value, of exchange rate, 245

581
Index
O
OCI (Other Comprehensive Income), 
327
OECD. see Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development 
(OECD)
Official Reserves Account, BOP, 58–59, 
66–67
Offshore tax strategy
avoiding taxes on Subpart F  
income, 428
financial centers and tax havens, 
435–437
Google and profit repositioning, 
437–439
profits and dividend  
repatriation, 431
tax deferral on outsourced  
services, 424
Offshore two-market structure,  
RMB, 45–46
Offshoring, defined, 424
Oil prices, Russian ruble, 265–266
OLI Paradigm, 481–483
One-share-one-vote rule, shareholder 
wealth maximization model, 91
Online services, cross-border 
remittances, 81
Onshore two-market structure, 
Chinese renminbi, 45–46
Operating cash flows
capital lifecycle, 20
measuring operating exposure, 
333–334, 337–341
operating hedges utilizing, 280
types of contractual hedges  
utilizing, 275
Operating exposure
cross-border acquisitions, 534
defined, 275
expected vs. unexpected changes in 
cash flows, 333–334
measuring, 335–341
operating and financing cash flows, 
333–334
overview of, 331
proactive management of,  
344–349
review, 350, 353–356
static vs. dynamic, 332–333
strategic management of,  
341–344
structure/operations of MNE 
determining, 331–332
Toyota’s European case, 350–352
transaction exposure vs., 331
Operating hedges, 280
in Novo case, 378
regulations, 101
shift to electronic trading, 401
Nicknames
currency, 131
foreign bond, 406
Nifs (note issuance facilities), 
euronotes, 404
NML Ltd. v Republic of Argentina, 
234–235
NOCF (Net operating cash flow), 
terminal value, 520
Noise, forecasting exchange rates, 
261–262
Nominal effective exchange rate index, 
152, 155–156
Non-amortizing swaps, 227–228
Nonbank foreign exchange dealers, 
121–122
Noncompletion risks, international 
trade finance, 453–455
Nondeliverable forwards (NDFs), 
125–126
Non-tariff barriers, host country 
protectionism of, 501
Nonunderwritten facilities, euronote 
market, 404
North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA)
antiglobalization movement, 504
globalization process and, 16
MNEs reducing protectionism  
via, 501
North Korean won, revaluation of, 150
Norway
maintaining individual currency, 40
Statoil’s acquisition of Esso of 
Sweden, 534
Note issuance facilities (nifs), 
euronotes, 404
Notional principle
cash flows of interest rate swaps 
applied to, 222
counterparty risk and, 230
in cross-currency swaps, 227
forward rate agreements on, 221
interest rate futures applied to, 220
in interest rate swaps, 223–226
options that vary by  
amount, 185
Novo (Novo Industri A/S)
Mini-Case, 376–379
raising of initial capital, 386
NPV (Net present value), 520, 521
Nycomed firm, 392–393
NYSE. see New York Stock Exchange 
(NYSE)
Morgenthau, Henry, Jr., 31
MRR (marginal return on capital), 
370, 374
MTOs (money transfer operators), 81
Multinational capital budgeting. see 
Capital budgeting, MNE
Multinational enterprise (MNE)
cost of capital for domestic firms vs., 
372–375
operational goals for, 94–96
optimal financial structure and, 
387–389
Multinational enterprise (MNE) 
financial management
crowdfunding Kenya case, 19–22
financial globalization and risk, 3–4
global marketplace. see Global 
financial marketplace
globalization process, 15–18
international vs. domestic, 13–14
review, 19, 22–27
as subject of this book, 2–3
theory of comparative advantage, 
11–13
using market imperfections, 14–15
Multinational phase, globalization 
process, 16–17
N
NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement), 16
Nakamoto, Satoshi, 7
Naked inversions, 439
NASDAQ (New York), 401
National tax environments, 423
Natural hedges, 280, 345
NDFs (nondeliverable forwards), 
125–126
Negotiable instruments, creating drafts 
as, 458–459
Nepotism, as cultural/institutional  
risk, 500
Nestlé of Switzerland, ICAPM, 365–366
Net errors and omissions account, 
balance of payments, 58–59, 65–66
Net international investment position 
(NIIP), 59, 64–65
Net operating cash flow (NOCF), in 
terminal value, 520
Net present value (NPV), 520, 521
Network perspective, foreign direct 
investments, 484
Neutral zone, Russian ruble, 264
Neutrality, tax, 422–423
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)
equity markets of, 101
liquidity of, 401

582
Index
Participation rate, participating 
forwards, 311
Partnerships, defined, 88
Passive income
as Subpart F income, 428
withholding tax on, 425
Pass-through period, trade balance 
adjustment, 70–72
Payables, matching currency cash flows 
for, 345
People’s Republic of China (PRC), 
45–47
Percentages
changes in spot rates, 136
forward quotations in, 137
Perfect hedge, defined, 291
Permanent establishment (PE), 
Google tax strategy, 438
Person, U.S., 428
Petrobrás (Petróleo Brasileiro S.A.)
and cost of capital case, 409–412
as global beta, 366
ownership of, 88–89
Phi value
as option premium component, 199
sensitivity of options to differential 
between interest rates, 198–199
Philadelphia Stock Exchange (PHLX)
exchange-traded options, 186
lowering counterparty risk with, 230
PIBOR (Paris Interbank Offered 
Rate), 210
Pink sheets (over-the counter) DR 
programs, 396
Plain-vanilla swap
cross-currency swaps vs., 227
defined, 222
example application of, 223–224
strategies, 224–225
Planned divestment, 494
Plaza Agreement, September 1985, 249
Point of financial distress, defined, 277
Policies, in good corporate  
governance, 104
Policy, U.S. tax neutrality, 422–423
Political risk
acquiring MNEs for safety, 15
budgeting for foreign project, 512
controls to minimize, 495–496
country-specific, cultural/
institutional risk, 499–502
country-specific, predicting, 491–492
country-specific, transfer risk, 
496–499
defining and classifying, 490–491
for exporting vs. production  
abroad, 484
Over-the counter (or pink sheets) DR 
programs, 396
Over-the-counter market (OTC) 
options
counterparty risk in, 230
defined, 185
overview of, 185–186
Overvaluation
exchange rate indices determining, 
152–153
measuring with law of one price, 
149–150
Ownership
of bitcoins, 8
capital controls preventing  
foreign, 75
comparative corporate governance 
and, 102–103
constructive, in controlled foreign 
corporations, 428
cultural/institutional risk and, 499
in foreign direct investment via joint 
venture, 486
joint venture vs. wholly owned 
subsidiary, 486–487
OLI Paradigm and advantages of, 
482–483
risks of financial globalization, 4
separating management from, 90
types of business, 87–90
P
Panama, dollarization in, 42
Paper currency, symbols for, 129
Parent viewpoint
capital budget, 522–523
constructing capital budget, 521–522
vs. project viewpoint, 512–514
sensitivity analysis, 524–526
pari passu clause, 231
Paris Interbank Offered Rate 
(PIBOR), 210
Parity conditions, international
defined, 147
forward rate as predictor of spot 
rate, 164–165
interest rates and exchange rates. see 
Interest rates and exchange rates
Japanese yen carry-trade case, 
167–170
overview of, 147
prices and exchange rates, 148–155
prices/interest rates/exchange rates 
and, 165–166
review, 167, 170–176
Participating forwards, currency risk 
management, 308, 309–311
Operating strategies, foreign direct 
investment, 494–495
Operational band, Russian ruble, 264
Operational goals
maximizing shareholder value with, 
93–95
for MNEs, 94–96
Operational risk, 91, 92
OPIC (Overseas Private Investment 
Corporation), 494
Optimal financial structure
and MNEs, 387–389
overview of, 386–387
Optimal hedge ratio, 290–291
Option collar (range forward), 
currency risk management, 
308–309
Option fence, currency risk 
management, 308–309
Option hedges
managing account payable, 288
managing transaction exposure, 
284–285
Option hedges, complex
constructing synthetic forward, 
306–307
currency risk products. see Currency 
risk, second-generation products
overview of, 305–306
Options. see Foreign currency options
Options Clearing Corporation  
(OCC), 186
Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development 
(OECD)
Committee on Fiscal Affairs, 433
globalization of securities markets, 
371, 379
goal of corporate governance, 99
stopping basis erosion/profit  
shifting, 439
territorial tax system of, 424
Other Comprehensive Income  
(OCI), 327
Outcome, hedging transaction 
exposure, 286
Out-of-the-money (OTM)
foreign currency options, 185
intrinsic value of, 193
spot rate sensitivity of currency 
options, 194–195
Outright forward (or forward) 
transactions, 124–126, 156–158
Overseas Private Investment 
Corporation (OPIC), 494
Overshooting, exchange rate dynamics, 
262–263

583
Index
global shift from publicly traded to, 
96–99
MNE operational goals for hybrid, 
95–96
ownership vs. control in, 89
publicly traded companies moving 
to, 90
shareholder return objectives of, 
94–95
Proactive management, operating 
exposure
back-to-back (or parallel) loans, 
347–348
cross-currency swaps, 348–349
hedging with contractual  
hedges, 349
matching currency cash flows, 
344–345
overview of, 344
risk-sharing agreements,  
345–346
Procter & Gamble Co. (P&G)
and Banker’s Trust, 230
on challenges of MNEs, 2–3
Product innovation, in global 
remittances, 81
Production
abroad vs. exporting, 484
cross-border supply chain 
integration with, 503
efficiency when rationalizing  
MNEs, 15
of joint ventures vs. wholly owned 
subsidiaries, 487
reinvesting blocked funds into  
local, 499
Profit
buyer of call options, 188
buyer of put options, 190
in covered interest arbitrage, 
159–162
Google’s repositioning of, 437–439
linking good corporate governance 
to, 105, 107
MNEs maximizing consolidated, 95
motivating portfolio investments, 
63–64
tax incentives for repatriating, 429
taxes on undistributed, 427
writer of call options, 189
writer of put options, 191–192
Profit seekers, foreign exchange 
market, 121
Project viewpoint
capital budget, 519–520
vs. parent viewpoint, 512–514
sensitivity analysis, 523–524
PRC (People’s Republic of China), 
45–47
Precious Diaper, 469–472
Precious metals, moving cash via, 76
Predictability, hedging the 
unhedgeable, 349
Preinvestment strategy, anticipating 
blocked funds, 497
Premium price, options
alternative strike prices and, 199
for buyer of call, 187–188
for buyer of put, 190
calculating time to maturity, 195–196
pricing sensitivity. see Price 
sensitivity, currency options
pricing/valuation and, 192–193
for writer of call, 189
for writer of put, 191
Prenegotiation, governance risks, 493
Pre-seed capital, capital lifecycle, 19–20
Price (or quote) currency, exchange 
rate quotes, 129–130
Price controls, investment agreements 
with host/MNEs, 494
Price elasticity of demand, 154
Price sensitivity, currency options
alternative strike prices/ 
premiums, 199
changing interest rate differentials, 
198–199
forward rate, 194
overview of, 193–194
spot rate, 194–195
time to maturity, value/deterioration, 
195–196
volatility, 196–197
Prices
currency options, 186–190
in equilibrium with interest rates/
exchange rates, 165–166
and exchange rates, 148–155
remittance, 79–80
Principal agent (or agency)  
problem, 90
Private enterprises, defined, 88
Private equity, capital lifecycle, 20–21
Private equity funds, 399–400
Private pathway, raising equity  
capital, 390
Private placement
overview of, 399
private equity funds, 399–400
raising equity through, 389–391
SEC Rule 144A, 399
Swedish example of, 393
Privately held businesses
defined, 88
facility location minimizing, 495
FDI via licensing/contracts and, 
485–486
firm-specific, governance risk, 493
firm-specific, predicting, 491
foreign direct investment operating 
strategies and, 494–496
foreign equity listings and, 402
global-specific, managing, 502–505
global-specific, predicting, 492–493
of international vs. domestic 
financial management, 13
investment agreements and, 493–494
of joint ventures vs. wholly owned 
subsidiaries, 487
local sourcing and, 495
multiple-source borrowing 
minimizing, 496
in Novo case, 377
OPIC investment insurance/
guarantees, 494
overview of, 490
project viewpoint sensitivity analysis 
of, 523–524
thin equity base and, 496
Political risk analysts, 491
Portfolio investment
balance approach to exchange rate 
determination, 244
defined, 62
as financial account of BOP, 63–64
international theory of. see 
International portfolio theory/
diversification
in Novo case, 376–377
risk reduction, 361
strategic alliances formed as, 487
Portfolio investors, international
expectations of, 389
globalization of securities markets, 
371–372
link between cost/availability of 
capital, 368
market liquidity improvement, 
368–369
market liquidity/segmentation 
effects, 369–371
market segmentation and, 369
overview of, 367–368
risk measurement, 526–527
Post-acquisition management stage, 
cross-border acquisitions,  
532–533
Poverty, political risks of MNEs and, 
505
PPP. see Purchasing power parity 
(PPP)

584
Index
Relative real interest rates
asset market approach to 
forecasting, 245–246
determining foreign exchange  
rates, 242
Religious heritage, cultural/
institutional risk and, 500
Remittance Prices Worldwide (RPW), 
79–82
Remittances
budgeting for foreign project, 511
capital budgeting example, 520–521
global migrant worker, 78–82
Renminbi (RMB). see Chinese 
renminbi (RMB)
Repositioning of profit, Google, 
437–439
Repricing risk, 214, 218
Reputation, corporate governance  
and, 104
Resale prices, transfer pricing, 433
Reserve (anchor) currency
Chinese renminbi and, 47
in good corporate governance, 68
in Official Reserves Account of 
BOP, 58–59, 66–67
Russian ruble and, 266
Triffin Dilemma and, 47–48
Residential approach, to national 
taxes, 423
Residual regimes, IMF exchange rates, 
34–36
Responsibility, corporate, 14, 106–107
Revaluation of currency, 37
Revenue, capital controls for  
general, 75
Revenues
capital budgeting example of, 
515–517
income tax as government source 
of, 425
U.S. policy on tax neutrality for 
raising, 422
value-added tax as major source  
of, 427
Revocable letter of credit, 456
Revolving underwriting facilities 
(rufs), euronotes, 404
Rewards-based crowdfunding, 21
Rho value, options, 198–199
Ricardo, David, 11
Risk
basis, 291
counterparty, 183, 185, 230
currency. see Currency risk
currency hedging reducing.  
see Hedging
Quantitative easing (QE), and  
LIBOR, 211
Quantity adjustment period, trade 
balance, 71–72
Quotation exposures, 278–279, 289
Quotations
currency option, 186–187
foreign exchange. see Foreign 
exchange rates/quotations
Quote (price) currency, exchange rate 
quotes, 129–130
R
Range forward (option collar), 
currency risk management, 
308–309
Rapid expansion vs. low leverage, 
global challengers, 488–489
Ratings, eurobonds vs. U.S., 407
Ratio spreads, currency risk 
management, 311
Raw materials, rationalizing MNEs, 14
Real assets, dominating balance of 
payments, 59
Real effective exchange rate index
Fisher effect and, 155–156
overview of, 152–153
Real option analysis, 526
Receivables
matching currency cash flows  
for, 345
operating cash flows, 333
Red-tape charges, public services, 427
Reference rate, defined, 210
Refinancing, managing interest rate 
risk, 219
Reform, corporate governance, 105–106
Regional markets
in antiglobalization movement, 504
MNEs reducing protectionism via, 
501
Regulations
for cross-border acquisitions, 532
and eurobond market, 406
Regulators
Continuous Linked System, 123
corporate governance, 100–101, 
105–106
Reinvestment, forced, 499
Relationships, trade, 450–453
Relative price of bonds approach, 
exchange rate determination, 244
Relative purchasing power parity
empirical tests of, 151–152
in foreign exchange rate 
determination, 243
overview of, 150–151
Proof of concept, capital lifecycle, 
19–20
Property tax, 427
Prospectus, IPO, 391
Protectionism, managing, 501
Psychic distance, behavioral approach 
to FDI, 484
Public enterprise, defined, 88
Public float, raising equity capital, 391
Public pathway, raising debt  
globally, 390
Public reporting, good corporate 
governance, 104
Public services, red-tape charges for, 427
Publicly traded companies
control of, 89–90
defined, 88
formation of, 89
global shift in decline of, 96–99
MNE operational goals for, 95–96
regulators in corporate governance 
structure, 101
risks of, 94–95
separation of ownership from 
management in, 90
Publicly traded shares
businesses choosing, 89
defined, 88
global shift in decline of, 96–99
Purchasing power, in foreign exchange 
market, 119
Purchasing power parity (PPP)
absolute, 148
algebraic primer for, 177–178
approach to exchange rate 
determination, 243
capital budgeting example, 514–519
empirical tests of, 151–152
in equilibrium, 165–166
exchange rate indices and, 152
exchange rate pass-through and, 
152–155
and law of one price, 148–150
relative, 150–151
Put options
buyers of, 190
overview of, 184–185
participating forwards, 309–311
range forwards (option collars), 
308–309
ratio spreads, 311
synthetic forwards, 306–307
writers of, 191
Q
Qualified institutional buyers (QIBs), 
private placements, 399

585
Index
in cross-border acquisitions, 532
from emerging markets, 488–490
maximizing wealth of, 91
operational goals maximizing 
returns of, 93–96
ownership vs. management of, 90
responses to dissatisfaction of, 107
shareholder wealth maximization 
model, 91–92
stakeholder capitalism model and, 
92–93
U.S. taxes on foreign source income 
and, 428–429
Shares
global registered shares (GRS), 
398–399
promoting prices of, 401–402
Shelf registration, EMTN  
market, 405
Shipping, Subpart F income  
from, 428
Short positions, futures, 183, 221
Short run cash flows, operating 
exposure, 335
Short-term value maximization, SWM 
model, 91–92
Shuhei, Toyoda, 350–352
SIBOR (Singapore Interbank Offered 
Rate), 210
Sight drafts
defined, 453
time drafts vs., 459
Signature clause, Sarbanes-Oxley  
Act, 105
“Sing dollar” (Singapore dollar), 131
Singapore Interbank Offered Rate 
(SIBOR), 210
Singer, Paul, 234
Singular projects, financing, 528
Smith, Adam, 11
Snifs (standby note issuance facilities), 
euronotes, 404
Soft peg regimes, 34–36
Sole proprietorship businesses, 88
Soros, George, 255–256
Source (or territorial) international tax 
system, 423–424
Sourcing, hedging interruptions in 
political risk with, 504
South Africa, as MINT country, 3
South Korean won and KiKos, Mini-
Case, 203–208
Sovereign debt
Argentina and vulture funds case, 
231–235
overview or, 214–216
Sovereign spreads, 216–217
Scale, foreign direct investment, 479
SCM (Stakeholder capitalism model), 
92–93
Scope, foreign direct investment, 479
Scorecard, stakeholder capitalism 
model, 92–93
SDRs (Special Drawing Rights), 32
Seasoned offerings, raising equity 
capital, 391
SEC (Securities and Exchange 
Commission), 101, 406–407
SEC Rule 144A, private equity 
placement, 399
SEC Rule 415, growth of EMTN 
market, 405
Section 482, U.S. IRS, 433
Securities
as assets of global finance, 4–5
foreign exchange risks of portfolio, 
361–363
globalization of markets for, 371, 379
interest rate risk of marketable, 217
measuring cost of debt from, 361
trading in interbank market, 5
turnover tax on, 427
Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), 101, 406–407
Securitization, of export receivables, 
464–465
Seigniorage, and dollarization, 43–44
Selective hedging
in disequilibrium, 277
as speculation, 290
Self-fulfilling prophecies, blocked 
funds, 498–499
Selfridges Provincial Stores Limited, 
ADRs, 393
Self-sustaining foreign entity, 314–315, 
317–318
Selling short, 30
Semen Indonesia. see Cemex entering 
Indonesia case
September 11, 2001
negative outlook after, 246
predicting global-specific risk, 492
supply chain interruptions after, 
503–504
Serial defaulters, 231
Services
strategic alliances formed for, 487
Subpart F income from financial, 428
Services trade, current account, 60–61
Settlement price, futures, 220
Shareholder wealth maximization 
(SWM) model, 91–93
Shareholders
corporate governance and, 99, 105
equity risk premiums, 366–367
of exporting vs. production  
abroad, 484
financial globalization, 3–4
foreign exchange. see Foreign 
exchange risk
interest rate. see Interest rate risk
measuring portfolio, 526–527
of noncompletion in international 
trade, 453–455
Novo case of financial, 377
operational, 91, 92
over-the-counter market  
options, 185
privately held vs. publicly traded 
firms, 94–95
project financing, 528–529
reducing international portfolio, 
361–362
roll-over (credit), 214, 218
shareholder wealth maximization 
model and, 91–92
stakeholder capitalism model  
and, 92
systematic, 91, 360, 372–373
tolerance, 286–287
of uncovered interest arbitrage, 
161–162, 164
Risk-free rate of interest (kU S
       $), cost of 
debt, 211–212
Risk-sharing agreements, 345–346
RMB. see Chinese renminbi (RMB)
Roll-over (credit) risk, 214, 218
Royalties, withholding taxes, 425
Royalty Pharma case, 535–539
Ruble, Russian ruble roulette mini-
case, 263–266
Rufs (revolving underwriting 
facilities), euronotes, 404
Rules
arbitrage, 160–161
currency market intervention, 250
gold standard (1876–1913), 29–30
Rupiah (IDR or Rp). see Cemex 
entering Indonesia case
Russia
as BRIC country, 3
ruble roulette case, 263–266
S
Salotto buono, shareholding and end 
of, 103
Samurai bonds, 406
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX)
corporate governance reform and, 105
decline of share listings in U.S.  
and, 98

586
Index
Swaps
counterparty risk and, 230
credit, 347–348
cross-currency. see Cross-currency 
swaps
currency, 222
in foreign exchange market,  
125–126
interest rate, 220, 222–226
Sweden
Atlas Copco, 399
maintaining individual currency, 40
planned directed equity issue of PA 
Resources, 393
School of economists, 483–484
Statoil of Norway’s acquisition of 
Esso of, 534
Swiss franc, 6–7
SWM (shareholder wealth 
maximization) model, 91–93
Symbols. see Currency symbols
Symmetry, hedge, 291
Syndicated bank credits, 404
Syndications
international debt markets/
instruments, 403
raising debt globally with, 404
Synthetic forwards, constructing with 
options, 306–307
Systematic risk
cost of capital for MNEs vs. 
domestic firms, 372–373
measuring for cost of equity, 360
shareholder wealth maximization 
model, 91
T
Taleb, Nassim Nicholas, 506–507
Taper Program, U.S. Federal Reserve, 
250
Tariff barriers, host country 
protectionism of, 501
T/As (Trade acceptances), 459, 464
Tax credits
cross-crediting foreign, 434–435
naked inversion and, 439
overview of, 429–430
Tax deferral
in Apple’s global iTax strategy, 444
overview of, 424
Subpart F income and, 427–428
tax incentives for repatriating 
profits, 429
tax management and, 430
via International Offshore Financial 
centers, 435–437
Tax equity, tax neutrality vs., 423
Stakeholder capitalism model (SCM), 
92–93
Stakeholders, corporate governance 
and, 99, 100
standby note issuance facilities (snifs), 
euronotes, 404
State-owned enterprises (SOEs)
large-scale privatization programs 
of, 392
public trading of, 89
separation of ownership from 
management in, 90
Static operating exposure, 332–333
Statoil of Norway’s acquisition of Esso 
of Sweden, 534
Statutory tax rates, decline of, 425
Stock exchanges, 401
Straight fixed-rate issue,  
eurobonds, 406
Strategic alliances
foreign direct investment via, 487
risks of exporting vs. production 
abroad, 484
Strategic alliances, international 
portfolio investors, 372
Strategic exposure. see Operating 
exposure
Strategic management, of operating 
exposure, 341–344
Strategic Portfolio Theory, 505–507
Strategy
hedging transaction exposure, 286
motives of MNEs, 14–15
sourcing capital globally, 385–386
Street markets, North Korean, 150
Strike rate(s)
buyer of call options, 187–188
option premiums and alternative, 199
over-the-counter market options, 186
spot rate sensitivity, 194–195
writer of call options, 189
Subpart F income, taxation
Apple’s global iTax strategy, 444
overview of, 427–428
Substantial business presence, 
corporate inversion, 439–440
Supply chains
cross-border integration of, 503
terrorism and interruptions to, 
503–504
Surpluses
capital controls correcting BOP, 75
China’s twin, 67–68
as risk of financial globalization, 3
Sustainability, corporate, 14, 106–107
Swap rates, forward quotations, 
136–137
SOX (Sarbanes-Oxley Act)
corporate governance reform  
and, 105
decline of share listings in U.S. and, 98
Special dispensation, for moving 
blocked funds, 498
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), 32
Specialists, role of stock exchange, 401
Speculation
Asian Crisis and, 255–256
asset approach to, 242
definition of, 200
financial derivatives for, 181
foreign exchange crises caused  
by, 246
futures contracts for, 184
interest rate futures for, 221
selling short as technique of, 30
trading nondeliverable forwards 
for, 125
in uncovered interest arbitrage, 156
Speculative grade borrowers, cost of 
debt, 212–213
Speculators, foreign exchange,  
122–123
Sponsored ADR program, 396
Spot against forward, swap  
transaction, 125
Spot rate(s)
absolute purchasing power parity 
and, 148
buyer of call options, 187–188
buyer of put options, 190
covered interest arbitrage and, 
159–161
foreign exchange market and, 
136–137
forward rate as predictor of future, 
164–165
forward rate calculation using, 
156–158
hedging foreign exchange  
exposure, 295
interest rate parity and, 157–159
international Fisher effect and, 156
Japanese yen carry-trade and, 
168–169
option pricing/valuation, 192–193
pricing sensitivity of currency 
options (delta), 194–195
relative purchasing power parity 
and, 151
risk-sharing at Harley-Davidson, 346
writer of call options, 188–189
writer of put options, 191–192
Spot transactions, foreign exchange 
market, 123–124, 126

587
Index
Trade acceptances (T/As), 459, 464
Trade balances, and exchange rates, 
70–72
Trade draft, 458
Trade finance. see International trade 
finance
Trademarks, minimizing political  
risk, 496
Trade-offs, of emerging markets, 
488–489
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual 
Property Rights (TRIPS), 500
Tranches, for euroequity privatization 
issues, 392
Transaction exposure
China Noah Corporation case, 
292–298
complex option hedges. see Option 
hedges
credit crisis of 2009 and, 289–290
cross-border acquisitions, 534
defined, 274, 278
hedging, 275–278, 290–292
life span of, 278
measurement of, 278–280
measuring operating exposure of 
firm via, 332–333
operating exposure vs., 275, 331
overview of, 274
review, 292, 298–304
risk management in practice, 
289–290
translation exposure vs., 275
types of foreign exchange exposure, 
274–275
Transaction exposure, managing
of account payable, 287–289
comparing alternatives, 285–286
with forward market hedge,  
281–282
forward rates and cost of  
hedging, 287
with money market hedge, 282–284
with options market hedge, 284–285
strategy choice and outcome, 286
with unhedged position, 280–281
Transaction fee, in remittance costs, 79
Transactions
BOP, 58
economic international, 59
foreign exchange, 118, 123–126
Trans-channel eras of currency  
shift, 343
Transfer pricing
effect on joint-venture partners, 434
fund positioning effect, 432
income tax effect, 432–433
Technology
controls to minimize political risk, 495
in foreign direct investment, 479
in foreign direct investment via joint 
venture, 486
risks to intellectual property  
rights, 500
Telefonos de Mexico, 392
Temporal method, translation
balance sheet hedge, 324
example of, 321–322
in international practices, 317–318
overview of, 316
Tenor, defined, 459
Tequila effect, 255
Terminal value (TV), 512, 520
Territorial (or source) international tax 
system, 423–424
Terrorism
foreign direct investments risking, 
503–504
as global-specific risk, 503–504
predicting global-specific risk, 
492–493
The Fragile Five, BIITS, 3
The Wealth of Nations (Smith), 11
Theoretical determinants, of exchange 
rate, 242–247
Theory of comparative advantage, 
11–13
Theta, 195–196, 199
Thin capitalization, defined, 429
Third parties, financing large projects, 
528–529
Thomas, Patrick, 108–112
Time drafts, 459, 460–461
Time of day trading, foreign exchange 
market, 119–120
Time to maturity, value and 
deterioration of options, 195–196
Time value, options, 193, 194–195
Timing
hedge, 291–292
rules for effective intervention, 250
Total shareholder return  
(TSR), 488
Toyota’s European operating exposure, 
Mini-Case, 350–352
Trade
capital controls limiting currency 
for, 249
foreign exchange market functions 
for, 119
foreign exchange market structure 
for, 119–123
liquidity of stock exchanges, 401
shift to electronic trading, 401
Tax evasion
MNE tax management to  
reduce, 429
via International Offshore Financial 
centers, 437
Tax havens
defined, 424
international offshore financial 
centers, 435–437
Subpart F income and, 427
Tax management, MNE
allocation of debt and earnings 
stripping, 429
Apple’s global iTax strategy, 441–445
check-the-box and hybrid entities, 
435
corporate inversion, 439–440
corporate/indirect tax rates for 
selected countries, 426
cross-crediting, 434–435
deferral, 430
foreign tax credits, 429–430
Google and profit repositioning, 
437–439
introduction to, 421–422
investment agreements with host 
country, 494
offshore profits and dividend 
repatriation, 431
overview of, 429
review, 440, 445–449
tax havens/international offshore 
financial centers, 435–437
tax principles. see Tax principles
transfer pricing, 431–434
Tax morality, 422
Tax neutrality, 422–423
Tax principles
controlled foreign corporations, 
427–429
national tax environments, 423–424
overview of, 421–422
tax morality, 422
tax neutrality, 422–423
tax treaties, 424–425
types of taxes, 425–427
Tax Reform Act of 1986, 427
Tax treaties, 424–425
Taxes
eurobonds offering anonymity  
for, 407
in Novo case, 376–377
optimal financial structure and, 386
Technical analysis theories
example of, 245
of exchange rate, 245
forecasting with, 259–260

588
Index
international monetary system 
based on, 30–31
JPMorgan Chase forecast of euro 
and, 260
nondeliverable forwards in foreign 
exchange using, 125–126
run-up and peak in 1985 of,  
32–33
sovereign spread and, 216
symbol/ISO code for, 129
technical analysis of exchange rate 
with JPY, 245
U.S. dollars per euro, quotation, 131
U.S. person, defined, 428
U.S. Treasury Bond Futures, 220, 230
V
Valley of Death, capital lifecycle, 20
Valuation
cross-border acquisitions stage, 
530–531
Elan and Royalty Pharma debate, 
536–538
foreign subsidiary, 322
market, 537–539
measuring operating exposure, 
335–341
Value chain, trade financing, 451
Value date, spot transactions, 124
Value firms, 93–94
Value maximization, SWM model, 91, 
92–93
Value-added tax, 425–426
Venezuela
bolivar black market case, 138–141
capital controls forcing devaluation 
of business in, 525
Ford Motor Company and 
devaluation in, 334
Venture capital funds, private equity 
funds vs., 400
Venture capitalists (VCs), capital 
lifecycle, 20
Visibility, with foreign equity  
listings, 402
Volatility, sensitivity to (lambda)
credit crisis of 2009 and option, 
289–290
as option premium component, 199
options, 196–198
overview of, 196–198
smoothing with risk-sharing 
agreements, 346
Volume vs. margin, global  
challengers, 488
Vulture funds, Argentina and,  
231–235
Undervaluation
exchange rate indices determining, 
152–153
measuring with law of one price, 
149–150
Underwritten facilities, euronote 
market, 404
Undistributed profits, taxes on, 427
Unexpected cash flows, vs. expected, 
333–334
Unhedged position, 280–281, 287
Unit (base) currency, exchange rate 
quotes, 129–130
United Kingdom
corporate governance reform in, 
105–106
maintaining individual currency, 40
ownership vs. management in, 90
shareholder wealth maximization 
model of, 91–92
size of foreign exchange market  
in, 128
United States
corporate governance reform in, 
105–106
decline of share listings in, 98–99
export credit insurance in, 462
failures in corporate governance, 104
foreign market exchange  
regulator, 123
ownership vs.management in, 90
shareholder wealth maximization 
model of, 91–92
size of foreign exchange market  
in, 128
taxation on foreign-source income, 
422–423, 428–429
translation procedures in, 316–317
worldwide approach to taxes  
of, 423
Unrelated exports, moving blocked 
funds with, 498
Unsecured promissory notes, financing 
trade with, 466
Unsponsored ADR program, 396
Unwinding currency swaps, 228–229
U.S. dollar
devaluation in 1934 of, 30
dominating global currency  
market, 36
emerging markets and dollarization, 
42–43
exchange rate conventions and, 8
fixed exchange rates from 1945–1973 
and, 32
as focus of currency trading since 
1940s, 8–9
Transfer pricing (Continued)
investment agreements with host/
MNEs, 493
of joint venture vs. wholly owned 
subsidiary, 487
managerial incentives and 
evaluation, 433–434
overview of, 431
Transfer risk, foreign direct investment, 
496–499
Translation exposure
current rate method of, 315–316
defined, 275
example of, 318–322
foreign subsidiary valuation, 322
functional currency, 315
international practices of, 317
managing, 322–324
McDonald’s, Hoover Hedges, and 
cross-currency swaps Mini-Case, 
325–327
overview of, 313–314
review, 325, 327–330
subsidiary characterization, 314–315
temporal method of, 316
U.S. procedures of, 316–317
Transnational firms, defined, 484
Transparency, and corporate 
governance, 99, 103
Transportation, and political risk, 495, 504
Treasuries, foreign exchange trading 
by, 123
Triffin Dilemma, and Chinese RMB, 
47–48
Trilemma of international finance. see 
Impossible trinity
TSR (Total shareholder return), 488
Turkey
lira crisis of 2014, 249–250
as MINT country, 3
Turnover tax, 427
TV (terminal value), 512, 520
Twin surpluses, of China, 67–68
Two-market currency development, 
Chinese renminbi, 45–46
U
Unaffiliated known, import/export 
relationship, 451–452
Unaffiliated unknown, import/export 
relationship, 451–452
Unbiased prediction, of future spot 
rate, 164–165
Uncovered interest arbitrage (UIA)
in global markets today, 164
Japanese yen carry-trade and, 167–168
overview of, 161–162

589
Index
Z
Zero-cost ratio option, currency risk 
management, 309–311
Zero-cost tunnel, currency risk 
management, 308–309
Zero-premium option products, 
currency risk management
average rate options, 312
calendar spreads, 312
overview of, 308
participating forward, 309–311
range forward (option collar), 
308–309
ratio spreads, 311
in parent viewpoint capital budget, 
521
Welch, Jack, 532
What, of global depositary receipts, 397
Where, of global depositary receipts, 398
White, Harry D., 31
Who, of global depositary receipts, 397
Withholding tax, 425
World Bank, 30
World portfolio, global portfolio vs., 
366
Worldwide international tax system, 
423
WW II, international monetary system 
in, 29–30
Y
Yankee bonds, 406
Yen carry-trade, 161–162, 167–170
Yield curve, cost of debt, 213–214
YPF Sociedad Anónima, Argentina, 
385
W
War
foreign direct investment risk of, 
503–504
global-specific risk of, 503–504
OPIC foreign investment insurance 
for, 494
Weighted average cost of capital 
(WACC)
calculating, 360
effects of market liquidity/
segmentation, 369–371
link between cost/availability of 
capital, 368
measuring cost of debt, 361
minimizing for risk/capital budget, 
418
for MNEs vs. domestic firms, 
373–375
in Novo case, 378–379
optimal financial structure and, 
386–387

This page intentionally left blank 

Country
Currency
ISO-4217
Code
Symbol
Afghanistan
Afghan afghani
AFN
Albania
Albanian lek
ALL
Algeria
Algerian dinar
DZD
American Samoa
see United States
Andorra
see Spain and France
Angola
Angolan kwanza
AOA
Anguilla
East Caribbean dollar
XCD
EC$
Antigua and Barbuda
East Caribbean dollar
XCD
EC$
Argentina
Argentine peso
ARS
Armenia
Armenian dram
AMD
Aruba
Aruban florin
AWG
f
Australia
Australian dollar
AUD
$
Austria
European euro
EUR
€
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijani manat
AZN
Bahamas
Bahamian dollar
BSD
B$
Bahrain
Bahraini dinar
BHD
Bangladesh
Bangladeshi taka
BDT
Barbados
Barbadian dollar
BBD
Bds$
Belarus
Belarusian ruble
BYR
Br
Belgium
European euro
EUR
€
Belize
Belize dollar
BZD
BZ$
Benin
West African CFA franc
XOF
CFA
Bermuda
Bermudian dollar
BMD
BD$
Bhutan
Bhutanese ngultrum
BTN
Nu.
Bolivia
Bolivian boliviano
BOB
Bs.
Bosnia-Herzegovina
Bosnia and Herzegovina konvertibilna marka
BAM
KM
Botswana
Botswana pula
BWP
P
Brazil
Brazilian real
BRL
R$
British Indian Ocean Territory
see United Kingdom
Brunei
Brunei dollar
BND
B$
Bulgaria
Bulgarian lev
BGN
Burkina Faso
West African CFA franc
XOF
CFA
Burma
see Myanmar
Burundi
Burundi franc
BIF
FBu
Cambodia
Cambodian riel
KHR
Cameroon
Central African CFA franc
XAF
CFA
Canada
Canadian dollar
CAD
$
Canton and Enderbury Islands see Kiribati
Cape Verde
Cape Verdean escudo
CVE
Esc
Cayman Islands
Cayman Islands dollar
KYD
KY$
Central African Republic
Central African CFA franc
XAF
CFA
Chad
Central African CFA franc
XAF
CFA
Chile
Chilean peso
CLP
$
Country
Currency
ISO-4217
Code
Symbol
China
Chinese renminbi
CNY
¥
Christmas Island
see Australia
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
see Australia
Colombia
Colombian peso
COP
Col$
Comoros
Comorian franc
KMF
Congo
Central African CFA franc
XAF
CFA
Congo, Democratic Republic
Congolese franc
CDF
F
Cook Islands
see New Zealand
Costa Rica
Costa Rican colon
CRC
C
Côte d’Ivoire
West African CFA franc
XOF
CFA
Croatia
Croatian kuna
HRK
kn
Cuba
Cuban peso
CUC
$
Cyprus
European euro
EUR
€
Czech Republic
Czech koruna
CZK
Kcˇ
Denmark
Danish krone
DKK
Kr
Djibouti
Djiboutian franc
DJF
Fdj
Dominica
East Caribbean dollar
XCD
EC$
Dominican Republic
Dominican peso
DOP
RD$
Dronning Maud Land
see Norway
East Timor
see Timor-Leste
Ecuador
uses the U.S. Dollar
Egypt
Egyptian pound
EGP
£
El Salvador
uses the U.S. Dollar
Equatorial Guinea
Central African CFA franc
GQE
CFA
Eritrea
Eritrean nakfa
ERN
Nfa
Estonia
Estonian kroon
EEK
KR
Ethiopia
Ethiopian birr
ETB
Br
Faeroe Islands (Føroyar)
see Denmark
Falkland Islands
Falkland Islands pound
FKP
£
Fiji
Fijian dollar
FJD
FJ$
Finland
European euro
EUR
€
France
European euro
EUR
€
French Guiana
see France
French Polynesia
CFP franc
XPF
F
Gabon
Central African CFA franc
XAF
CFA
Gambia
Gambian dalasi
GMD
D
Georgia
Georgian lari
GEL
Germany
European euro
EUR
€
Ghana
Ghanaian cedi
GHS
Gibraltar
Gibraltar pound
GIP
£
Great Britain
see United Kingdom
Greece
European euro
EUR
€
Greenland
see Denmark
Currencies of the World

Country
Currency
ISO-4217
Code
Symbol
Liechtenstein
uses the Swiss Franc
Lithuania
Lithuanian litas
LTL
Lt
Luxembourg
European euro
EUR
€
Macau
Macanese pataca
MOP
P
Macedonia (Former Yug. Rep.) Macedonian denar
MKD
Madagascar
Malagasy ariary
MGA
FMG
Malawi
Malawian kwacha
MWK
MK
Malaysia
Malaysian ringgit
MYR
RM
Maldives
Maldivian rufiyaa
MVR
Rf
Mali
West African CFA franc
XOF
CFA
Malta
European Euro
EUR
€
Martinique
see France
Mauritania
Mauritanian ouguiya
MRO
UM
Mauritius
Mauritian rupee
MUR
Rs
Mayotte
see France
Micronesia
see United States
Midway Islands
see United States
Mexico
Mexican peso
MXN
$
Moldova
Moldovan leu
MDL
Monaco
see France
Mongolia
Mongolian tugrik
MNT
T
Montenegro
see Italy
Montserrat
East Caribbean dollar
XCD
EC$
Morocco
Moroccan dirham
MAD
Mozambique
Mozambican metical
MZM
MTn
Myanmar
Myanma kyat
MMK
K
Nauru
see Australia
Namibia
Namibian dollar
NAD
N$
Nepal
Nepalese rupee
NPR
NRs
Netherlands Antilles
Netherlands Antillean gulden
ANG
NAf
Netherlands
European euro
EUR
€
New Caledonia
CFP franc
XPF
F
New Zealand
New Zealand dollar
NZD
NZ$
Nicaragua
Nicaraguan córdoba
NIO
C$
Niger
West African CFA franc
XOF
CFA
Nigeria
Nigerian naira
NGN
N
Niue
see New Zealand
Norfolk Island
see Australia
Northern Mariana Islands
see United States
Norway
Norwegian krone
NOK
kr
Oman
Omani rial
OMR
Pakistan
Pakistani rupee
PKR
Rs.
Palau
see United States
Country
Currency
ISO-4217
Code
Symbol
Grenada
East Caribbean dollar
XCD
EC$
Guadeloupe
see France
Guam
see United States
Guatemala
Guatemalan quetzal
GTQ
Q
Guernsey
see United Kingdom
Guinea-Bissau
West African CFA franc
XOF
CFA
Guinea
Guinean franc
GNF
FG
Guyana
Guyanese dollar
GYD
GY$
Haiti
Haitian gourde
HTG
G
Heard and McDonald Islands
see Australia
Honduras
Honduran lempira
HNL
L
Hong Kong
Hong Kong dollar
HKD
HK$
Hungary
Hungarian forint
HUF
Ft
Iceland
Icelandic króna
ISK
kr
India
Indian rupee
INR
Indonesia
Indonesian rupiah
IDR
Rp
International Monetary Fund
Special Drawing Rights
XDR
SDR
Iran
Iranian rial
IRR
Iraq
Iraqi dinar
IQD
Ireland
European euro
EUR
€
Isle of Man
see United Kingdom
Israel
Israeli new sheqel
ILS
Italy
European euro
EUR
€
Ivory Coast
see Côte d’Ivoire
Jamaica
Jamaican dollar
JMD
J$
Japan
Japanese yen
JPY
¥
Jersey
see United Kingdom
Johnston Island
see United States
Jordan
Jordanian dinar
JOD
Kampuchea
see Cambodia
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstani tenge
KZT
T
Kenya
Kenyan shilling
KES
KSh
Kiribati
see Australia
Korea, North
North Korean won
KPW
W
Korea, South
South Korean won
KRW
W
Kuwait
Kuwaiti dinar
KWD
Kyrgyzstan
Kyrgyzstani som
KGS
Laos
Lao kip
LAK
KN
Latvia
Latvian lats
LVL
Ls
Lebanon
Lebanese lira
LBP
Lesotho
Lesotho loti
LSL
M
Liberia
Liberian dollar
LRD
L$
Libya
Libyan dinar
LYD
LD
Currencies of the World (continued)

Country
Currency
ISO-4217
Code
Symbol
Panama
Panamanian balboa
PAB
B./
Panama Canal Zone
see United States
Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinean kina
PGK
K
Paraguay
Paraguayan guarani
PYG
Peru
Peruvian nuevo sol
PEN
S/.
Philippines
Philippine peso
PHP
P
Pitcairn Island
see New Zealand
Poland
Polish zloty
PLN
Portugal
European euro
EUR
€
Puerto Rico
see United States
Qatar
Qatari riyal
QAR
QR
Reunion
see France
Romania
Romanian leu
RON
L
Russia
Russian ruble
RUB
R
Rwanda
Rwandan franc
RWF
RF
Samoa (Western)
see Western Samoa
Samoa (America)
see United States
San Marino
see Italy
São Tomé and Príncipe
São Tomé and Príncipe dobra
STD
Db
Saudi Arabia
Saudi riyal
SAR
SR
Sénégal
West African CFA franc
XOF
CFA
Serbia
Serbian dinar
RSD
din.
Seychelles
Seychellois rupee
SCR
SR
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leonean leone
SLL
Le
Singapore
Singapore dollar
SGD
S$
Slovakia
European Euro
EUR
€
Slovenia
European euro
EUR
€
Solomon Islands
Solomon Islands dollar
SBD
SI$
Somalia
Somali shilling
SOS
Sh.
South Africa
South African rand
ZAR
R
Spain
European euro
EUR
€
Sri Lanka
Sri Lankan rupee
LKR
Rs
St. Helena
Saint Helena pound
SHP
£
St. Kitts and Nevis
East Caribbean dollar
XCD
EC$
St. Lucia
East Caribbean dollar
XCD
EC$
St.Vincent and the Grenadines East Caribbean dollar
XCD
EC$
Sudan
Sudanese pound
SDG
Suriname
Surinamese dollar
SRD
$
Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islandssee Norway
Country
Currency
ISO-4217
Code
Symbol
Swaziland
Swazi lilangeni
SZL
E
Sweden
Swedish krona
SEK
kr
Switzerland
Swiss franc
CHF
Fr.
Syria
Syrian pound
SYP
Tahiti
see French Polynesia
Taiwan
New Taiwan dollar
TWD
NT$
Tajikistan
Tajikistani somoni
TJS
Tanzania
Tanzanian shilling
TZS
Thailand
Thai baht
THB
B
Timor-Leste
uses the U.S. dollar
Togo
West African CFA franc
XOF
CFA
Trinidad and Tobago
Trinidad and Tobago dollar
TTD
TT$
Tunisia
Tunisian dinar
TND
DT
Turkey
Turkish new lira
TRY
YTL
Turkmenistan
Turkmen manat
TMM
m
Turks and Caicos Islands
see United States
Tuvalu
see Australia
Uganda
Ugandan shilling
UGX
USh
Ukraine
Ukrainian hryvnia
UAH
United Arab Emirates
UAE dirham
AED
United Kingdom
British pound
GBP
£
United States of America
United States dollar
USD
US$
Upper Volta
see Burkina Faso
Uruguay
Uruguayan peso
UYU
$U
Uzbekistan
Uzbekistani som
UZS
Vanuatu
Vanuatu vatu
VUV
VT
Vatican
see Italy
Venezuela
Venezuelan bolivar
VEB
Bs
Vietnam
Vietnamese dong
VND
d
Virgin Islands
see United States
Wake Island
see United States
Wallis and Futuna Islands
CFP franc
XPF
F
Western Sahara
see Spain, Mauritania, and Morocco
Western Samoa
Samoan tala
WST
WS$
Yemen
Yemeni rial
YER
Zaïre
see Congo, Democratic Republic
Zambia
Zambian kwacha
ZMK
ZK
Zimbabwe
Zimbabwean dollar
ZWD
Z$
© 2011 by Werner Antweiler, University of British Columbia.All rights reserved.The Pacific Exchange Rate
Service is located in Vancouver, Canada.A continuously updated version of this table can be found on the Web
at http://pacific.commerce.ubc.ca/xr/currency_table.html.This Web site was accessed in May 2011 to create the
table shown here.
Currencies of the World (continued)

