Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
     ©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
1
SMOOTH & CARDIAC MUSCLE TYPES  
Emma Jakoi, Ph.D. 
 
Learning Objectives 
 
1. Describe the structure and function of cardiac and smooth muscle types. 
2. Explain how smooth muscle myofilaments are regulated. 
3. Name three ways in which smooth muscle contraction is initiated. 
4. Explain spontaneous electrical activity (pacemaker) in smooth muscle. 
5. Contrast single unit and multiunit smooth muscles. 
6. Explain how cardiac muscle myofilaments and contraction are regulated 
7. Explain the contractile cardiac myocyte action potential. 
8. Explain the absence of tetanus in the contractile cardiac myocyte.  
9. Describe the structure of the heart.   
 
SMOOTH MUSCLE 
 
Smooth muscle fibers are cigar shaped cells that range in size from 20µm in the walls of the 
blood vessels to 200 µm in the wall of the intestine. As in striated muscle, the cytoplasm of the 
smooth muscle cell is filled with contractile proteins, actin and myosin. In smooth muscle the 
sarcomeres are not well ordered so no striated pattern is seen in light microscopy (Fig 1).   
 
 
 
Figure 1. Light microscope image of longitudinal and cross sectioned smooth muscle shows close 
packed, cigar shaped cells with central nuclei (arrows) and no cross striations.   
 
Thin filaments contain actin. They are attached to dense bodies which in turn are anchored to 
the plasma membrane.  
 
Thick filaments contain myosin which has two subunits (heavy chain and light chain). The 
heavy chain contains the myosin ATPase activity. The light chain regulates this myosin ATPase. 
When the light chain is phosphorylated by an enzyme (myosin light chain kinase), cross bridges 
form between myosin and actin; contraction begins. The myosin light chain kinase is regulated by 
Ca++. Consequently, the thick filament regulates contraction in smooth muscle.    
 
XS 
LS 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
     ©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
2
Smooth muscle myosin ATPase has a slow rate of hydrolysis. It hydrolyzes ATP at about 10% 
of the rate observed in skeletal muscle.  Consequently smooth muscle produces slow, sustained 
contractions using only 10% of the ATP that skeletal muscle would require for the same work.  
 
A special characteristic of smooth muscle is the variability of the tension it exerts at any given 
length. Some smooth muscles (blood vessels) will exert increased tension when stretched. In 
contrast, smooth muscle of the bladder shows little change in tension as the bladder fills but once 
full the bladder contracts forcefully.   
 
Membrane activation 
Contraction of smooth muscle, like skeletal muscle, is dependent on a rise of cytosolic Ca++ due 
to changes in the plasma membrane. However, smooth muscle does not have T tubules. Instead 
Ca++ enters from the ECF by diffusion through calcium channels in the plasma membrane. These 
Ca++ channels include: voltage-gated channels, ligand-gated channels and mechano-gated 
channels. The inputs that regulate contraction include: 
 
1. Autonomic nervous system (parasympathetic, sympathetic and enteric) via voltage   
gated Ca++ channels. 
2. Hormones via ligand-gated Ca++ channels. 
3. Stretch via mechano-gated Ca++ channels. 
 
At any one time, multiple inputs, some excitatory and others inhibitory, can be activated in a 
single cell. The net effect is dependent on the relative intensity of these inputs. Note that the 
intracellular Ca++ of smooth muscle can increase (or decrease) due to changes in the membrane 
potential from graded depolarization, hyperpolarization, or an action potential.  
 
Spontaneous pacemaker potentials 
Some smooth muscle exhibits spontaneous contractile activity in the absence of either nerve or 
hormonal stimuli. The plasma membranes of these fibers do not maintain a stable resting 
membrane potential. Instead the resting membrane potential gradually drifts towards threshold 
where it triggers an action potential (Fig 2). Following repolarization the membrane again begins 
to depolarize. This is property is called pacemaker activity. Pacemakers are found within the GI 
tract.   
 
Figure 2. Pacemaker cells exhibit an unstable resting membrane potential leading to rhythmic 
states of depolarization followed by repolarization.   
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
     ©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
3
Single versus multi- unit fibers  
Smooth muscle fibers do not have a specific neuro-muscular junction. Instead as the autonomic 
nerve enters the region of the smooth muscle it divides into many branches each containing a 
series of swellings (called varicosities) filled with vesicles of neurotransmitters.  
 
In the multi-unit smooth muscle, each fiber is innervated independently. The fibers are not 
connected by gap junctions. Depolarization of one fiber is followed by contraction of that fiber 
only. These fibers are richly innervated by the autonomic nervous system. Nervous stimuli and 
hormones cause contraction (or relaxation) of these fibers, not stretch. The smooth muscle of the 
lung airways, in the walls of large arteries, and attached to the hair of the skin are multi-unit 
fibers.  
 
In the single unit smooth muscle, the fibers are connected by gap junctions. Depolarization of 
one fiber triggers synchronous depolarization throughout the bundle followed by contraction of 
the fiber bundle. That is, many fibers act as one sheet. Single unit fibers are found in the walls of 
small blood vessels, the GI tract, and uterus where stretching of one fiber creates a coordinated 
contraction. 
 
CARDIAC MUSCLE 
 
Cardiac muscle is a striated fiber containing the same arrangements of contractile filaments as 
skeletal muscle. In addition, cardiac muscle fibers exhibit densely staining cross bands called 
intercalated discs (Fig 3). These intercalated discs join the muscle fibers end-to-end. They are 
highly specialized attachment sites which prevent the cells from pulling apart. On the lateral 
component of the intercalated discs are gap junctions which permit the cells to act as an electrical 
syncytium.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Cardiac myocytes are blunt ended with central nucleus (outline). Cells are mechanically 
coupled at the intercalated discs (ID) and electrically coupled by gap junctions.   
 
There are two types of cardiac muscle cells: conducting and contractile.  
 
Conducting cardiac muscle cells are ~ 1% of the cardiac muscle cells. These are large diameter 
cells that do not produce tension, instead they are specialized for excitation. They constitute a 
network in the heart known as a conduction system. They are connected to the contractile cells by 
gap junctions. The conducting fibers are filled mostly with glycogen and have few myofilaments. 
ID 
Gap 
Junction 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
     ©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
4
These cells are the intrinsic pacemakers. We will deal with their action potentials in the next 
lecture.    
 
Contractile cardiac muscle cells are slow oxidative muscle fibers. These fibers form the walls of 
the heart, shorten and produce tension. They use glucose and fatty acids as substrates. We will 
consider their action potentials below. 
 
Electrical –Contraction (E-C) Coupling 
As in skeletal muscle, contraction in cardiac muscle is dependent on the entry of Ca++ from the T 
tubule (Fig 4). Depolarization of the T tubule membrane opens the voltage gated Ca++ channels 
(dihydropyridine receptor), permitting the entry of a small amount of Ca++. This Ca++ opens the 
Ca++ gated Ca++ channel (ryanodine receptor) on the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) thereby 
releasing a lot of Ca++ into the cytoplasm.  In turn, Ca++ binds to troponin which unmasks the 
actin (thin filament), cross bridges form, and shortening occurs. With repolarization of the T 
tubule membrane, no further Ca++ enters the cells and the SR CaATPase removes Ca++ from the 
cytoplasm. This removal of Ca++ ends the contractile cycle and the muscle relaxes.   
There are two other proteins located at the plasma membrane which help to return Ca++ to its 
basal level inside the cardiac muscle cell.  The plasma membrane CaATPase uses ATP to actively 
pump Ca++ out. The Na+ - Ca++ exchanger transports Na+ into the cell for each Ca++ moved 
out of the cell (i.e., exchanges Na+ for Ca++).  
 
 
Figure 4. E-C coupling in cardiac muscle cells. Step 1, Ca++ entry via the voltage gated Ca++ 
channel, dihydropyridine receptor, causes the SR Ca release channel to open. Ca++ exits the SR. 
Step 2, myofilaments are activated by the binding of Ca++ to the thin filaments. Step 3. SR 
CaATPase removes Ca++ from the cytoplasm causing contraction to cease and the muscle 
relaxes. Step 4. The Na-Ca++ exchanger and the plasma membrane Ca++ ATPase help to remove 
Ca++ from the cytoplasm.   
 
Membrane activation in contractile cardiac cells 
The action potential of the contractile cardiac muscle fiber (Fig 5) is longer in duration (200-220 
msec) than that seen in skeletal muscle (2 msec). In cardiac cells there are four phases to the 
action potential.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NCX 
ATP 
ATP 
Ca++ 
3Na+ 
3Na+ 
2K+ 
SR 
RYR 
CaATP 
RYR 
Ca++ 
Ca++ 
PLB 
T tubule 
sarcolemma 
1 
2
3 
4 
action potential 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
     ©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
5
 
Figure 5. The action potential of the contracting cardiomyocyte is called the fast action 
potential. The plateau phase 2 is due to opening of the L type voltage gated Ca++ channel.  
 
Phase 0, voltage gated Na+ channels open. 
Phase 1, voltage gated Na channels inactivate and voltage gated K+ channels open. 
Phase 2 (plateau), voltage gated Ca++ channels (L type) open and voltage gated K channels 
remain open. 
Phase 3, only voltage gated K+ channels are open and cells repolarize. 
Phase 4, all of the voltage gated channels are closed and the resting membrane potential is 
restored by the Na/K ATPase.   
 
Note that the entry of Ca++ in phase 2 is essential for initiating contraction and triggering the 
opening of the Ca++ gated Ca++ release channel (ryanodine receptor).  One other point, each 
action potential results in one contraction. One contraction (twitch) is ~250 msec, almost the 
same duration as the action potential (200 msec).  This is due to the prolonged plateau phase 2.  
 
Refractory period and absence of tetanus   
Recall that these voltage gated Na+ channels must undergo a conformational change from an 
“inactivated” state to a “closed” state before they can reopen and initiate another action potential. 
As a consequence of phase 2, the voltage gated Na+ channels remain “inactivated” for an 
extended period of time and do not “close” until repolarization in phase 3 (~180 msec). This time 
period during which the voltage gated Na+ channels are inactivated is called the absolute 
refractory period (Fig 6). No amount of stimulus can cause an action potential during the 
absolute refractory period.  
 
Note that the absolute refractory period (180 msec) is almost equal in duration to the action 
potential (200-220 msec).  From ~180 msec to 200 msec is called the relative refractory period. 
During this time period, a second action potential can be fired but the stimulus required is greater 
than normal. This is because there are fewer voltage gated Na channels in the “closed” state and 
therefore it is harder to reach threshold.  
 
An important point regarding the refractory period is that contractions cannot sum and therefore 
there is no fused tetanus (summed contractions). Fused tetanus in the heart would lead to death as 
it would prevent the rhythmic pumping of blood. 
 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
     ©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
6
 
Figure 6. The absolute refractory period of the cardiac muscle action potential refers to the time 
interval when the voltage gated sodium channels are inactivated. The absolute refractory period 
lasts ~180 msec.  The action potential lasts 200-220 msec. A single contraction is 250 msec.   
 
Absence of muscle fiber recruitment 
The contractile cells of the heart act as an electrical syncytium with all of the cells contracting 
during a single beat. Therefore it is not possible to increase the force of contraction by fiber 
recruitment.  Instead the heart has developed other strategies to increase the force of contraction 
which we will consider below and in the cardiovascular lectures.  
 
Muscle fiber length and tension 
The relationship between initial fiber length and total tension in cardiac muscle is similar to 
skeletal muscle; there is a fiber length at which tension development is maximal. However in the 
heart, the length of the cardiac muscle fiber is determined by the filled state of the heart chamber. 
At the beginning of diastole when the heart begins to fill with blood, the muscle fibers are relaxed 
and the sarcomeres are not at optimal length for generating tension (Fig 7). Filling the heart with 
blood stretches the muscle fibers. This stretching produces optimal overlap of the myofilaments 
(optimal sarcomere length) and enhances contraction. This is known as Starling’s Law of the 
heart.    
 
 
Figure 7 Diagram depicts the correlation between muscle fiber length and tension in the heart.  
Filling of the heart increases sarcomere length such that optimal force is generated. In contrast the 
resting length of skeletal muscle in the body provides optimal overlap of the thick and thin 
filaments to generate tension.  Less tension is generated when the sarcomere is “too short” or 
when there is little or no overlap of the myofilaments.  
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
     ©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
7
HEART STRUCTURE 
 
Cardiac muscle comprises the walls of the heart. The inner surface facing the blood is lined by a 
thin epithelium called endothelium. The heart is divided into right and left halves. Each half 
contains upper chamber called the atrium and a lower chamber called the ventricle.  Located 
between the atrium and ventricle are valves (A-V valves) which permit blood to flow in a 
unidirectional manner from the atria to the ventricles. There are two other valves: the pulmonic 
valve permits blood to flow from the right ventricle to the lung circulation and the aortic valve 
(aorta) allows blood to flow from the left ventricle to the systemic circulation (every organ). 
 
All of the valves open and close depending on the pressure differences across them. In each heart 
beat, blood moves from the right side of the heart to the lung to pick up oxygen, returns to the left 
side of the heart from which it is pumped to the systemic circulation for delivery of oxygen and 
nutrients and removal of wastes.  
 
In the next three lectures on the cardiovascular system we will consider the mechanical and 
electric properties of the heart as a pump and its regulation.      
 
  
KEY CONCEPTS 
   
• 
Smooth muscle is an involuntary, non-striated type associated with blood vessels and 
visceral organs. Cardiac muscle is the involuntary, striated type that forms the heart wall. 
• 
Both smooth and cardiac muscle have two sets of overlapping protein myofilaments, 
actin and myosin, the relative sliding of which produces shortening and generates force. 
This process involves cross bridge formation between actin and myosin which is driven 
by ATP.  
• 
In both smooth and cardiac muscle, coupling between the membrane action potentials 
and contraction is mediated by calcium ions. In cardiac muscle Ca++ regulates the thin 
filament (actin) to enable cross bridge formation. In smooth muscle, Ca++ regulates the 
thick filament (myosin) to enable cross bridge formation and contraction. 
• 
Cardiac and smooth muscle is regulated by the autonomic nervous system. Some smooth 
muscle is regulated by stretch and hormones. 
• 
Relaxation of cardiac and smooth muscle, like skeletal muscle, is by removal of Ca++.  
• 
The force of contraction in cardiac muscle is increased by stretch (Frank-Starling law). 
This is in contrast to skeletal muscle which increases force either by recruiting more 
muscle fibers or by summing twitches (fused tetanus).  
• 
Cardiac muscle comprises the walls of the heart. The heart consists of two separate 
pumps that move blood in a unidirectional manner through the pulmonary circulation for 
gas exchange and then to the systemic circulation for the delivery of O2 and nutrients and 
removal of waste products. 
 
 

