
2
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
All rights reserved. No part of this e-book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without the expressed written permission from Jason
Ferruggia. We have unique tracking codes embedded, designed to detect illegal distribution of this e-book and the download links. Do not
risk breaking international copyright infringement laws and getting yourself in major trouble. Fines start at $150,000 and include a possi-
ble prison sentence upon conviction. 
Muscle Gaining Secrets 2.0
T r a i n i n g  M a n u a l
By Jason Ferruggia
Mantesh

ou must get your physician’s approval before beginning this exercise program. These rec-
ommendations are not medical guidelines but are for educational purposes only. You
must consult your physician prior to starting this program or if you have any medical
condition or injury that contraindicates physical activity. This program is designed for
healthy individuals 18 years and older only.
The information in this report is not meant to supplement, nor replace, proper exercise train-
ing. All forms of exercise pose some inherent risks. The editors and publishers advise readers to
take full responsibility for their safety and know their limits. Before practicing the exercises in this
book, be sure that your equipment is well-maintained, and do not take risks beyond your level of
experience, aptitude, training and fitness. The exercises and dietary programs in this book are not
intended as a substitute for any exercise routine or treatment or dietary regimen that may have
been prescribed by your physician. 
Don’t lift heavy weights if you are alone, inexperienced, injured, or fatigued. Always ask for
instruction and assistance when lifting. Don’t perform any exercise without proper instruction.
See your physician before starting any exercise or nutrition program. If you are taking any med-
ications, you must talk to your physician before starting any exercise program, including Muscle
Gaining Secrets. If you experience any lightheadedness, dizziness, or shortness of breath while
exercising, stop the movement and consult a physician.
You must have a complete physical examination if you are sedentary, if you have high choles-
terol, high blood pressure, or diabetes, if you are overweight, or if you are over 30 years old.
Please discuss all nutritional changes with your physician or a registered dietician. This publica-
tion is intended for informational use only. Jason Ferruggia and www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com
will not assume any liability or be held responsible for any form of injury, personal loss or illness
caused by the utilization of this information.
3
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Disclaimer
Y

4
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
“What more could I say, 
I wouldn’t be here today if the old school 
didn’t pave the way.”
—Grand Puba, Brand Nubian
Before we get started I have to thank the Iron Game pioneers for teaching me, guiding me and
allowing me to do what I do for a living. 
I’m old school through and through (as you’ll see from the quotes throughout this manual) and
have always done my best to honor those who paved the way. I’m talking about guys like Arthur
Saxon, George Hackenshmidt, Paul Anderson, Herman Goerner, Bill Pearl, Larry Scott, Vince
Gironda, Reg Park, Ed Coan, Bill Kazmaier, Kirk Kawoski, Dorian Yates, Louie Simmons,
Marvin Eder, Peary Rader, Anthony Ditillo, John McCallum, Steve Reeves, John Grimek, Leroy
Colbert, Dave Draper, Ed Corney, Mike Mentzer, Don Howorth, Bob Gajda, Dr. Ken Leistner,
Bill Starr and, of course, Arnold Schwarzenegger. (My apologies to anyone who I forgot). 
Thanks
Dedication

5
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
How Bad Do You Want It?................................................7
Train, Don’t “Work Out”................................................10
The Importance of Physical Strength...............................13
Progressive Overload .......................................................17
The 7 Critical Factors......................................................21
Intensity ...........................................................................33
Recovery Methods...........................................................36
Mass Building Nutrition..................................................41
The Workouts..................................................................44
Questions & Answers......................................................78
Meet The Program Creator .............................................98
Resources.........................................................................99
Contents
Mantesh

“No citizen has the right to be an 
amateur in the matter of physical 
training; it is part of his profession as a
citizen to keep himself in good condition,
ready to serve his state 
at a moments notice… 
What a disgrace it is for a man to grow
old without ever seeing the beauty and
strength of which 
his body is capable.”
—Socrates
Mantesh

How Bad Do
You Want It? 

8
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
wasn’t born with Herculean genetics. I was
skinny-fat for most of my childhood. No mus-
cle, no definition; just small, soft and weak. If
ever there was a true “hardgainer” it was me. I
started strength training at twelve years old,
and five years later graduated high school weighing
a massively muscled 147 pounds (please note the
strong sarcasm) at six feet tall. When the wind blew
I had to grab onto the nearest tree. 
If you’re reading this chances are good that
you’re in the same boat. You’ve tried and failed
before and may be getting frustrated or ready to
give up. But you don’t have to. There is hope for
guys like us… IF, and only if, you’re willing to work
for it. 
If you were looking for an easy solution to your
problems and for me to wave a magical wand over
you that would instantly add twenty pounds of
muscle to your frame I’m sorry to say but you’re
shit out of luck. You may as well stop reading right
now and take up chess. 
To get big you have to put in the time and effort.
You have to train your balls off, eat, sleep and
repeat; over and over again. You have to be willing
to do what others are not. You have to have the
dedication of a championship athlete and be relent-
less in the pursuit of your goals. 
I
“It is a well-known fact that the majority of
men today are relatively weak.”
—George Hackenshmidt, The Way to Live, 1908
Mantesh

9
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Most people can’t do that. They can’t commit to any-
thing. They can’t put in the hard work required for great-
ness. They’ll miss training sessions, skip meals and go out
drinking ‘til all hours of the night. As a result they never get
anywhere. Their physiques always look the same, year after
year, and they will make excuse after excuse for their fail-
ures. 
Don’t be like everyone else. Don’t get caught up in pro-
gram hopping or constantly surfing the internet for a better
way or a faster, easier solutions to your problems. If it were
easy everyone would do it. If there were a magic bullet we’d
all look like Arnold in his prime. 
But there isn’t. There’s only commitment, hard work and
patience. Without those three things you’ll never make any
sort of impressive gains no matter what program or supple-
ment you use. Hell, you could even take steroids and get
lackluster results if the required dedication isn’t in you. 
Be one of the few; one of the five percent of people on this earth that can actually set their sights
on a goal and then do whatever it takes to achieve it. Make your mark and prove the naysayers
wrong. Don’t swim in the cesspool of mediocrity with everyone else. Rise above and become the
person you truly want to be. 

Train, Don’t
“Work Out” 

11
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
“train”, I don’t “work out”. I have
never “worked out” in my entire life.
There is a huge difference between the
two. I can’t work out. I don’t know
how. Even if I did I would never do it.
It’s what “they” do, and I will never be one
of “them.” I only know one way and that
is to go to the gym and train hard. If I can’t
do that, I won’t bother going. Mindlessly
going through the motions to get a “good
workout” is not something I have ever
been interested in. I train and I constantly
strive to make progress.
I
“The Iron never lies to you. You can walk 
outside and listen to all kinds of talk, get told
that you're a god or a total bastard. 
The Iron will always kick you the real deal.
The Iron is the great reference point, the 
all-knowing perspective giver. 
Always there like a beacon in the pitch black. 
I have found the Iron to be my greatest friend.
It never freaks out on me, never runs. 
Friends may come and go. But two hundred
pounds is always two hundred pounds."
—Henry Rollins

12
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Training is so much more than working out. It helps you get to know yourself better. It shows
you what you’re really made of and how hard you’re willing to work and persevere to overcome
an obstacle. Training is a release. It's a time to leave all the problems of the world behind and go
to battle with yourself or your training partners. The iron can be your best friend and your worst
enemy all at once. But it will always be there for you when you need it. 
When you establish this kind of relationship with the iron you will have something so much
more meaningful than those who simply go to the gym to get a pump, pick up girls, and socialize. 
Working out is what the general public does to get in a little better shape. They go to the gym
because they have to. They don’t love it, and they don’t live for it. But to those of us who feel most
at home pushing heavy weight in some hole-in-the-wall hardcore gym, training is our passion.  
I've gone to battle with the iron and come out on the losing end many times.  I've sweat, bled,
and puked…all in the same workout. But I do it because I love it.
The quest for strength is one of man’s basic instincts. It is something that has been pursued fer-
vently since the beginning of time, because, as the old cliché goes, only the strong survive. Lifting
weights can have an endless array of health benefits, but let’s be honest—that's not why we do it.
The people at the local fitness center do it for those reasons, but not us. 
We do it for that feeling of going to battle, the rush of hitting a new max, and to meet the chal-
lenge of pain and suffering that come along with it. We do it because we love to set goals and bust
our asses in pursuit of them. We do it because it allows us to release all our pent-up anger and
aggression. We do it because we know most others don't have the balls to train like we do. We do
it for that feeling of camaraderie and competition amongst training partners. 
We do it for the high that you can only get when you have a mind-numbingly heavy weight in
your hands, straining for all that you're worth, while your training partners are screaming in your
ear, loud metal or hip hop is blasting on the radio, and you’re slowly grinding toward that goal
you've been chasing. 
That is why we do what we do.

The
Importance
of Physical
Strength

14
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
here are few things more important in life
than physical strength. This may sound
outlandish to some of you given that the
technology in today’s world has replaced
the need to do so much manual labor, but
it’s true. It’s been true since the beginning of time
when we had to fight for our survival, and it will
remain true no matter how many machines they
build or how advanced technology gets. 
There is no more basic alpha-male instinct than the
quest for strength. The old saying “only the strongest
shall survive” has never lost its meaning or relevance
because it is an eternal and universal truth. 
T
“Every man in every walk of life is certain,
sooner or later, to be confronted with a heavy
object, bulk or otherwise, which he strongly
desires to lift. This may occur both in his busi-
ness and in his private life, and I am willing to
bet that each and every man on such an occa-
sion entertains a certain amount of regret for
the wasted hours which he might have advan-
tageously devoted to practice with weights.”
—Arthur Saxon, 1910

15
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Though we no longer need to capture and kill our food and we now have the comfort of mod-
ern amenities, physical strength is no less important. Every physical task that you engage in will
be significantly easier and done with much greater proficiency if you are strong. High levels of
strength boost confidence levels and help you survive in today’s society. Given the statistics on
crime and other unforeseen problems such as storms, natural disasters and car accidents that the
average man can encounter on a regular basis, it’s irresponsible not to maximize your strength lev-
els which in turn maximize your chances of survival. 
Without strength, how can you even consider yourself a real man? How can you look in the
mirror and live with yourself if you see a pathetically weak image staring back at you? How can
you protect your wife or girlfriend, command the respect of your peers, or be a role model to your
kids? 
Strength is what separates the men from the boys in today’s society, and despite what certain
individuals may try to tell you, the quest for it is nothing to be ashamed of. Those who put you
down for going to a gym to lift heavy weights are ashamed of who they are. They call us “meat-
heads” and make jokes when we are not around (they rarely have the balls to say them to our
faces), but it’s their own lack of strength, and their lack of the discipline it takes to make gains that
makes them feel inferior. They have either tried to improve their bodies and failed, or they never
had the guts to try at all. They’ll try to tell you you’re wasting your time—“be normal and come
out drinking with us instead of going to the gym,” they’ll say. 
Forget about them. If you were satisfied with being normal, you wouldn’t be reading this.
Train, eat, sleep, follow the programs in this manual, and stay the course—you’ll make fools of
those people in no time.
Now, I know that some of you may be thinking to yourselves right now, “I just want to get big,
I don’t care about getting strong.” Not only is that the wrong attitude to take but it will cause you
to fail in your attempt to build massive amounts of size. 
For those that don't already know, there are a few different ways to make progress in your
workouts; you can increase the load (lift heavier weights), you can increase the density (do more
work in the same time frame), and you can even do the same amount of work in less time. But I
can guarantee you that if you are still using the same weights today that you were using two years
ago, or even three months ago, you are not making progress. 
You simply cannot get significantly bigger without lifting heavier weights. You can set the stop-
watch and do all your little supersets and drop sets until you are blue in the face, but a 135-pound
squat is still a 135 pound-squat, no matter how you do it.
The fastest and easiest way to get bigger is to lift more weight and get stronger. People want to
make every excuse under the sun and will try every system they can find to get around this simple

16
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
fact. One of my favorite excuses is that what I am suggesting is impossible because no one can
continue to get strong forever and continually add weight to the bar. If that were possible, then the
world would be filled with 1,000-pound bench pressers, they say. As opposed to all of the 405-
pound benchers out there, right? Right. How many times do you ever see a single human being in
a public gym bench press 405 pounds?! One guy out of 1,000 maybe? Give me a freaking break!
Yes, it’s true; no one can keep adding weight to the bar indefinitely. But who (name me one guy
you know personally) has ever maxed out their strength levels?! Not one person! Not a single,
solitary soul! Why don't you see tons of extremely strong guys in the gym everyday? Because most
people have no idea how to train properly and make progress. 
To further emphasize my point about the importance of getting brutally strong, I ask you to
look at powerlifters—guys whose only purpose in training is to lift really heavy weights— and the
incredible size and thickness they possess (this holds true even with lighter powerlifters). Tons of
people lift weights on a regular basis; many of them would even consider themselves body-
builders. But why aren’t more of them significantly bigger? Why do so many people who use light
weights and pumping workouts not possess anywhere near the muscularity of the average power-
lifter? 
I’ll tell you why; it’s because the only way to build that kind of real, lasting muscular size is by
training heavy.
THE BOTTOM LINE
If you only take a few ideas from this manual, this is one of the most important ones. You must
strive to get stronger and consistently be adding weight to the bar if you ever want to see signifi-
cant, head turning muscle growth. If this wasn’t the case then why is it that everyone who is
incredibly strong is also usually incredibly big? Have you ever seen someone who can bench press
four hundred pounds or squat five hundred and is small? Probably not, because not too many of
those people exist. 
Now, that doesn’t mean you have to, nor will you be able to increase weight or reps at every
single workout (and attempting to do so when you’re not feeling it on that particular day will lead
to injury). The point to remember is that over time, on a month-to-month basis, you should grad-
ually be getting stronger and stronger. And when you compare your weights from today with your
weights six months from now they should be significantly different. 
Remember…
Only the strong survive.

Progressive
Overload

18
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
ost people spend the majority of their time in a state of homeostasis. This means that
they aren’t building muscle and they aren’t losing muscle. The only way to disrupt
this state of homeostasis is to impose great stress on the body. Stress can come in
many different forms, such as mental, emotional, and physical. For the purpose of
building muscle, we want to focus on physical stress. 
Here’s a basic example of the effects of a physical stress. When a person lies out in the sun for
the first time at the beginning of summer, he is applying a form of stress to the body. The body
adapts to the stress by darkening the skin—either burning or tanning. If you lie out for just the
right amount of time, you will get tan. If you lie out for too long, you will get burned. The body
will adapt in one way or the other. 
Let’s assume that you didn’t overdo it and were able to get tan in the 15 minutes you spent lying
out. What would happen if you continued to lay in the sun for 15 minutes every day? Would you
get tanner? Only for a short time and then you’d plateau. Your body will adapt to the 15 minutes
of daily sun exposure and that becomes your new level of homeostasis. To achieve a deeper tan,
you will need to lie out for a longer amount of time or use less sunblock. But doing the same thing
over and over again will not elicit an adaptation response. 
You need to remember this important point when you are training: doing the exact same thing
over and over, be it lying out in the sun for the same amount of time or lifting the same weight for
the same number of sets and reps, will not force the body to adapt in any significant way. So keep
in mind that you need to force the body to do more over the course of time. 
M
“Everybody wanna be a bodybuilder, 
but don’t nobody wannna lift 
no heavy ass weight!”
—Mr. Olympia, Ronnie Coleman

19
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Another example of this is a person who just starts a manual labor job. The new demands
placed upon the body will leave the worker extremely fatigued at the end of each day. The body,
however, will begin to accept this level of activity as the new homeostasis and, in time, will adapt.
Eventually the worker will not be overly fatigued from his daily regimen because the body will
have successfully adapted to it. You need to impose stress on the body in a way that it is not used
to in order to force adaptation. For the purposes of building size and strength that can be done by
lifting more weight, doing more reps with the same weight or increasing your training volume.
Once you impose the new demands, your body will adapt and reach a new level of homeostasis.
After imposing a new demand on the body, the initial response is always fatigue. The body will
fight to return to its previous level of homeostasis, but will not stop there. It wants to be prepared
for that demand the next time it’s faced with it, so the body will actually super or overcompensate
and build itself up bigger and stronger. That is the training effect. 
How do you know if you have recovered and thus achieved the training effect? It’s very simple;
you will be able to exceed your previous performance in the gym (lift heavier weights or do more
reps with the same weight). If you have two workouts in a row where you can’t exceed your pre-
vious performance you probably either did too many sets, trained for too long, didn’t take enough
time between workouts, didn’t eat or sleep properly, or didn’t use proper recovery methods.
HOWEVER, this does not mean that you will be able to make progress at every single work-
out. If that were possible you would be setting world records within just a few years. Take what I
just said into account and keep it in the back of your mind at all times but realize that you’re only
human and you will have good days and bad days. Some days you may be able to go up five
pounds with no problem. Other days you may barely be able to repeat your previous perfor-
mance. This is not the end of the world. 
It’s actually quite normal to have one bad workout for every six to eight good ones. Some days
you may be able to improve on two exercises, maintain one and might even be weaker on another.
The workout would still be considered a success. And despite everything I said above homeosta-
sis can actually be a good thing from time to time for the simple fact that your muscles adapt
faster than your joints and tendons do. 
Read that last line again and let it sink in. What that means is that although the muscles may be
capable of lifting a heavier weight, the connective tissue needs a little bit more time to adapt. If
you continually push your weights up at too fast of a rate you may end up with connective tissue
damage, achy joints and maybe even some serious injuries. 

20
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
So take it slow and invest in some Fractional Plates http://jasonferruggia.com/fractionalplates.
Go up little by little and don’t be overanxious to add ten pounds per workout. Sure, you will be
capable of this at the beginning but realize over time that this rate of progress will not be sustain-
able or healthy. 
The main thing to remember is that you want to be getting stronger every month, not necessar-
ily on every exercise at every single workout. If, at the end of this month you can squat five
pounds more than you could at the beginning of the month your training would be considered a
success that would have you on pace to add sixty pounds to your squat this year. That’s nothing
to shake a stick at and is a great rate of progress. Moving significantly faster than this can lead to
earlier stagnation or injury.
THE BOTTOM LINE
Remember, effective training in its simplest form is applying a new stress to the body that it is
not used to or prepared for which forces adaptation and then recovery. This can also be called the
law of progressive overload. The end result is a bigger and stronger muscle. This is why, over
time, you must strive to get stronger by adding weight to the bar or doing more reps with the
same weight. You simply cannot do the same thing over and over again, for months on end or are
you are wasting your time and will never get anywhere. 

The
7 Critical
Factors

22
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
hen it comes to constructing the ultimate training plan, there are seven critical fac-
tors that need to be addressed and they are: 
•
Exercise selection
•
Training volume
•
Number of reps used
•
Rep speed
•
Rest intervals between sets
•
Training session length
•
Training session and body part frequency
FACTOR # 1: EXERCISE SELECTION
The best exercises are always multi-joint, compound, movements such as squats, deadlifts,
rows, dips, chin ups and military presses that use free weights or bodyweight as resistance. There
are no machine exercises that could ever compare. My advice is to avoid the majority of them.
Leg presses are one of the few exceptions. 
Here’s another good rule of thumb: Any exercise that makes you look like a fruitcake in any
manner is instantly disqualified as a useful exercise. Remember that important tip.
Another characteristic of the best exercises is that they are usually those that allow you to use
the most weight. The more weight you can handle for a particular body part, the greater the
growth stimulus. For example, a close-grip bench press is way more effective than a triceps exten-
sion because you can use triple or quadruple the amount of weight. A Romanian deadlift is a far
better hamstring exercise than a leg curl for the same reason. Along those lines, bench presses will
always blow flys and cable crossovers off the map because someone who can bench 315 usually
can only use 40’s on a fly. That’s more than a 200-pound difference between the two exercises. 
Yet another marker of a great mass building exercise is that it allows you to move your body
through space instead of simply moving your limbs. Let me explain…
W

23
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Every four years, when the Summer Olympics roll around, I am, without fail, asked the same
question on an almost daily basis. “What do I have to do to look like those Olympic gymnasts?”
With gymnastics being one of the most widely covered Olympic sports, everyone talks about the
awe-inspiring physiques displayed by these amazing athletes. 
What’s really interesting about gymnasts is the fact that they do not train for size, yet they dis-
play unbelievable levels of muscularity. This is because of the kinds of exercises they do. Every
exercise a gymnast does involves moving his body through space. He never moves a fixed object
around his body (like you do with most weight training machines). By moving your own body
weight (such as you do in a chin up or parallel bar dip) or your own body weight plus added resis-
tance (such as when you do a traditional barbell squat) through space, you increase neuromuscu-
lar activation. 
A higher level of neuromuscular activation means that the nerves are sending a stronger signal
to the muscles to recruit more fibers. This is very important because the nerves control muscle
maintenance and development. If you cut a nerve to a muscle you will find that atrophy begins
almost immediately. The loss of a nerve signal will actually induce muscle loss faster than lack of
use. On the other hand, when you force the nerves to organize the action of a lot of muscle fibers
at once, you allow for a lot of growth and strength to develop. 
Besides just moving your body through space, exercises that require balance and coordination
will further increase the nervous system activity. Stabilizer muscles are also called upon heavily to
steady the load, so you get more complete muscular development. 
For all of the reasons above I am a huge proponent of exercises like dips, chin ups, inverted
rows, weighted pushups and squats. 
FACTOR # 2: TRAINING VOLUME
Training volume can basically be defined in its simplest form as the total number of sets you do
at any given workout. A more complete definition would be the total amount of weight lifted dur-
ing the workout. This can be determined by multiplying the weight lifted by the total number of
sets and reps. Therefore if you squatted 150 pounds for three sets of ten, the formula would look
like this: 150lbs x 3 sets x 10 reps= 4500. 
Research and empirical evidence has shown that most people will make their fastest gains in
muscular bodyweight with a total of 50-100 reps per week, per body part. Any more than that
and you will start running into recovery issues which will lead to overtraining. 

24
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
How many sets should I do per workout?
Despite what you see most people doing in public gyms (and getting nowhere because of it),
total training volume should be limited to no more than 15-20 total, top-end work sets per work-
out.  When you focus on quality sets and always try to beat the logbook while making progressive
strength gains you’ll soon realize that all of those other junk sets were a waste of time. Once
you’ve beaten your previous best the muscle doesn’t need much more stimulation. All the extra
sets will do is make recovery between workouts harder and harder. 
FACTOR # 3: NUMBER OF REPS USED
Most typical bodybuilding programs advocate that you always train with 8-12 reps. I am here
to tell you that is one of the single biggest mistakes you can ever make as a skinny hardgainer. The
best rep range for skinny guys trying to build muscle is 5-8; that’s where the magic happens.
Following is a closer look at each rep range and a brief description of what they’re good for. 
1-4 Reps: 
Training in this range improves the firing rate of the central nervous system (CNS). This is the
best rep range for pure strength gains. It should be included your program from time to time since
the maximal strength developed training in this rep range will allow you to use more weight on
your higher rep sets which will lead to more muscle growth. 
5-8 Reps: 
Training is this range causes hypertrophy (growth) of the fast twitch muscle fibers. These fibers
have the greatest potential for growth and thus, this range should be the main focus of your train-
ing. The type of growth that results from this type of training is called myofibrillar hypertrophy
and is the longest lasting form of muscle growth; meaning that if you stopped training for a while
these size gains would remain with you longer than size gains made with lighter weights and
higher reps. 
The great thing about lower reps versus higher reps when it comes to training for size and
strength is that they don’t induce anywhere near as much overall systemic fatigue or soreness. If
you aren’t as sore or fatigued you are able to train at a higher level more frequently. This will, of
course, lead to faster gains. 

25
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
“The best programs for building size are those
utilizing approximately six to eight repetitions
and multiple sets of the same exercise.”
—Larry Scott, the first Mr. Olympia
9-14 Reps: 
It is typically thought that training in this range causes growth of the slow twitch muscle fibers
and leads to sarcoplasmic hypertrophy. Sarcoplasm is basically filler goo inside the muscles that
pumps up with higher volume training. It is also said that gains made in this rep range have little
effect on maximal strength or performance. 
Time has taught us that both of these concepts are largely mythical. What higher reps actually
do is increase your muscles ability to store glycogen locally. Therefore if you train in this range
your muscles will appear slightly bigger but it’s only because of the fact that you are storing more
fluid in them. Your body gets more effective at doing that by training in this rep range. 
More rock solid, lasting muscle growth can be built in the lower rep ranges but if you want to
look as big as possible you should also include a small amount of work in this rep range in your
training program on a regular basis. The one caveat that needs to be mentioned is that I consider

26
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
“Due to the nervous emotional make up of the
underweight hardgainer, I never recommend
more than 3-4 sets of 6-8 repetitions.”
—The Iron Guru, Vince Gironda
high reps to be about eight, with some occasional sets of ten. Anything above ten reps will be a
waste of time for just about all drug-free skinny guys who are serious about packing on muscle. 
FACTOR # 4: REP SPEED
Muscles are made for speed. Don’t ignore this fact and try to force them to do something they
are not meant to do. Any time you see a program written with a slow concentric (the lifting por-
tion of the exercise) speed, get up and walk away; it's garbage. 
You should never lift a weight slowly if you’re trying to get big and strong. It makes no sense.
When would you ever consciously lift something slowly in real life? If you bend down to pick up
a box, do you count a full four seconds on your way up? Of course not. It’s a ridiculous and
incredibly flawed concept. The fact is your fast-twitch muscle fibers have the greatest potential
for growth, and are only called upon maximally when a load is either heavy or the attempt to
move it is made with great speed.

27
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
A slow rep speed ensures that the load cannot be incredibly heavy, nor will it be moved with
great speed—so it basically limits the involvement of the fast-twitch fibers and thus the potential
for growth. Brilliant idea, huh? 
So always try to accelerate the load when lifting weights and never go purposely slow to “feel
the burn” or any of that nonsense. 
The lowering portion of an exercise is a different story. You should always control the eccen-
tric (or lowering) phase of every exercise you do. You never want to drop the weight, but rather
take about two seconds to lower it under control. That’s it, though! Just be sure that if you had
to you could stop the exercise at any point in the range of motion; it should not be just flying
down out of control. Don’t purposefully go any slower than two seconds, however. 
The problem with using slow, heavy eccentrics on a regular basis is that doing so takes a lot out
of you and leads to much greater levels of soreness. The result is that you are not as fresh and
ready to train as frequently as you should be. If you want to get stronger faster, then you need to
be able to train a muscle more frequently. 
The more frequently you can train the same muscle group or lift, in a fresh and recovered state,
the faster progress you’ll make. 
FACTOR # 5: 
REST INTERVALS BETWEEN SETS
Rest intervals are dependent on a few different variables such as the exercise being used, the
size and experience of the lifter and the desired training effect. In simple terms, long rest periods
(2-3 minutes) allow for greater recovery of the nervous system. Shorter rest intervals (45-90 sec-
onds) target the metabolic system and are linked with an increase in growth hormone and testos-
terone production. 
Beginners can get away with shorter rest periods than more experienced lifters. They don’t
have the capability of recruiting a large number of motor units and thus don’t tire out as easily.
Beginners are also weak, in most cases, so they are not using very heavy loads that would demand
longer recovery periods. 
A bigger, heavier lifter will require more rest between sets than a lighter lifter. Even at the same
body weight, a stronger lifter will require more rest as well. This is because the stronger lifter is
more neurologically efficient and is able to recruit more muscle fibers, which is more draining
and takes longer to recover from. 

28
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
What this means is that as a beginner you can recruit, let’s say, 70% of your available muscle
fibers. As you get more advanced you can recruit a greater percentage of muscle fibers, maybe
upwards of 90 or even closer to 100%. This is far more demanding and requires a longer rest
period. If someone is in great anaerobic condition, he requires less rest than his not-so-well con-
ditioned counterparts—all other factors being equal. 
Another thing that needs to be addressed when you are picking the optimal rest periods is that
they can vary widely from one exercise to the next. You don’t need anywhere as much rest after
a set of dips as you do after a set of deadlifts. So it is actually the exercise, how many muscles it
works, how much weight you are able to use on it, and how draining it is on the body that needs
to be considered when determining optimal rest periods. 
All that being said, I believe in keeping rest periods as short as possible. Of course, this should
be within reason and you never want to be out of breath when starting a set. But you should
strive to increase your work capacity and be able to use lower rest periods over time. 
This builds more muscle mass, burns more body-fat, improves conditioning and is more “func-
tional.” By that I mean that there will never be a time in real life or on the sporting field where
you will exert force for 10-20 seconds and then have four or five minutes to sit on your ass. 
For these reasons I recommend always keeping rest periods in the range of 45-90 seconds. The
exception to this rule would be if you were doing straight sets of a big exercise like squats or
deadlifts. In that case you could extend the rest periods as high as three minutes. 
“For God’s sake, people, STAY IN SHAPE!”
—Louie Simmons

29
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
STRAIGHT SETS 
This is the typical approach to training that nearly everyone uses. Straight sets means doing one
set of a particular exercise, followed by a rest period, and then another set of the same exercise
and so on. You do not mix in another exercise between sets; you simply continue to do the same
exercise you are doing until you have completed all of the prescribed sets. This method is usually
used with speed work such as Olympic lifts and jumps and with full–body exercises like squats
and deadlifts or when working up to a heavy set of barbell presses. However, straight sets are not
very time-efficient, and in a lot of cases, using them is not the optimal way to train; especially on
assistance exercises. 
ANTAGONISTIC OR NON-COMPETING SUPERSETS
These are very time efficient and highly effective techniques that should be used as often as pos-
sible. Antagonistic supersets are when you pair up exercises that work opposing muscle groups,
such as the pecs (chest) and lats (back). These muscles move the arms and shoulders in opposite
directions, so by training them together, you can work a lot of muscle in a short time and see that
both areas get equal attention (helping guarantee muscle balance). You do a set for one muscle
group, rest, then do a set for the other muscle group, rest again, and repeat for all the prescribed
sets. 
For example, after a heavy set of six reps on the bench press, it may take you two minutes to
be able to repeat that effort. Rather than just sit on the bench waiting for all that time, you could
alternate your bench presses with an antagonistic exercise like an incline dumbbell row and
divide the rest period in half. So now you would rest sixty seconds after your bench presses and
then move on to the rows. After the rows, you would rest another sixty seconds and then go back
to the bench press, and so on until you completed all of the prescribed sets. 
Due to workout design there will be times when you won’t be able to pair up antagonists effec-
tively. This is where non-competing supersets come in. Non-competing supersets usually pair
muscles that have no apparent relation to each other, such as the neck and biceps or shrugs and
abs. 

30
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
FACTOR # 6: 
TRAINING SESSION LENGTH
In 1925 Alan Calvert wrote a manual titled, “The First Course in Body-Building and Muscle
Development Exercises.” He advised that workouts were never to exceed 45 minutes. I agree and
have always abided by this rule. 
When you begin a training session, your body starts to increase the secretion of growth hor-
mone and testosterone. The release of these anabolic hormones falls back to baseline at around
45 minutes then drop off significantly after that. These are, of course, rough numbers and every-
one is different but I like to stick with the 45-minute time frame as a general rule. Training for sig-
nificantly longer than this can also start to increase the release of cortisol, which is a catabolic
hormone that eats away muscle tissue and increases the storage of body-fat. 
When trying to remain in an anabolic state (a condition wherein your body can build muscle),
you want to keep your testosterone levels higher and your cortisol levels lower. For this reason I
recommend that you always limit your workouts to 45 minutes (not including warm up time). 
After the 45-minute mark, you will also find your performance starting to suffer. Your mental
focus will begin to fade. It is difficult for most people to give all they have, set after set for much
longer than 45 minutes. Limiting your workouts to this amount of time ensures that your mental
focus will be high right from the get go and remain so throughout the duration of your workout. 
If you enter the gym knowing that you have two hours ahead of you, it can often be difficult to
get fired up enough to really attack the task as hand. If you know you will be in and out of the
gym in under an hour, it’s a lot easier to get amped up for the hard work ahead. For all these rea-
sons, I recommend that you get a stopwatch or Gym Boss Interval Timer
http://jasonferruggia.com/gymboss and use it to keep your workouts in the 45-minute range.
This is a great way to guarantee consistent progress and to avoid overtraining. 

31
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
FACTOR # 7: TRAINING FREQUENCY
Most skinny guys get their best size gains by doing four hard workouts per week. Three is okay
but when you consider how many hours there are in the week you’ll see that four is really a bet-
ter option. It doesn’t really make sense to have more off days per week than training days. It’s a
little lazy if you ask me. Four strength training days and maybe one or two extra conditioning ses-
sions should be the norm for most. 
Guys who only train three days per week usually end up getting fat and don’t seem to gain size
as quickly. I experimented with having many of my clients do three-day programs for a while and
the results just never compared to the four-day workouts. Now, if you truly can only get to the
gym three days per week, after eliminating all the wasted TV & Facebook time from your life
then that’s fine. You’ll do the best you can and will still be able to get results. 
Some can do more than four lifting days per week and even excel, but those are guys who really
have their workouts, sleep, nutrition and recovery dialed in and are completely on point with
every detail. The rest of us have the reality of jobs, relationships, kids and numerous other factors
that would prevent us from training and recovering from more than four hard strength workouts
per week. 
Intense training places a significant demand on the body and you need to allow time to recover
from that if you ever want to get big and strong. As we discussed earlier, stress comes in many dif-
ferent forms, and all of them cut into your recovery ability. Just because you don’t work a job that
includes a ton of manual labor doesn’t mean that your job doesn’t negatively affect your recovery
ability if it’s very stressful. Maybe you have a ton of stress in your personal life or are just a high-
strung person in general. All of this cuts into your recovery ability and has to be taken into con-
sideration.
How often should I train each body part?
Forget about workout programs that have you train chest on Monday, legs on Tuesday, back
on Thursday and arms on Friday or any other body part split along those lines.  
And don’t worry about the fact that your favorite steroid using, genetic freak, professional
bodybuilder trains like that or the fact that all the muscle mags tell you to. Those training splits
are a waste of time for anyone with average genetics who isn’t on steroids. Training in that man-
ner will not help you build the physique you’re after.

32
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
If you want to build serious muscle you need to train each body-part with a higher frequency
than once per week. For optimal growth stimulation you should be doubling that training fre-
quency. When you’re looking to improve anything in life it’s always best to do it with a somewhat
high frequency. If you were trying to improve your golf swing, for example, you would do it a few
days per week, not once. That is what body part split advocates are telling you to do- train each
muscle group only once per week. Therefore you only get 52 growth stimulating workouts per
body-part each year.  
However, if you follow a more intelligently laid out program you can train each muscle group
104 times per year! That’s twice the anabolic stimulus. The way to do this is to split your work-
outs up into upper body and lower body days. With four training days each week you’d hit both
the upper and lower body twice.
The key to effective training is to do just enough work to stimulate a hypertrophy response and
then get out of the gym, start recovering and get back in as soon as possible to train that muscle
again. When you do the typical ten to fifteen sets per body part you are forced to train with a
lower frequency because it will take you longer to recover. 
The problem is that some point you will actually start to detrain and lose some of your size and
strength gains over the seven-day period. If you schedule your workouts properly you can actually
train a muscle with enough volume to elicit a growth response and then be fully recovered and
ready to train it again within 72 hours. 
THE BOTTOM LINE
In order to devise the optimum training plan all seven of the critical factors must be addressed.
To recap, the ultimate muscle building system will consist of:
1.
Big, compound exercises.
2.
Do no more than 15-20 total, top-end work sets per workout.
3.
An average of 5-8 reps on most exercises. 
4.
Always lowering the weight under control and lifting it explosively.
5.
Resting 45-120 seconds between sets (or sometimes up to 180 seconds on straight sets
of squats or deadlifts).
6.
Workouts that last an average of 45 minutes or less. 
7.
Four workouts per week; two for the upper body and two for the lower body.

“One very useful trick which the
weightlifter should adopt is a wisely
moderated contempt of his weights…
(but) don’t despise them, for they are very
formidable adversaries, and anything
resembling contempt will lead to failure.”
—Arthur Saxon, 1910 
Intensity

34
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
here’s really no way to beat around the bush so I’m just gonna come right out and say
it… Training like a pansy will get you absolutely nowhere. Train like that and you will
be small and weak forever; there are no ifs, ands or buts about it. Like Arthur Saxon
said, you should have contempt for the weights you are attempting to move. There
should be purposeful, focused anger and aggression. However, that does not mean you
should train to failure. 
To be clearer… you should never train to failure! This is just bodybuilding nonsense that sells
magazines but doesn’t help you make progress in the least. Strong and jacked athletes that most
people would kill to look like never train to failure. I’m talking about Olympic lifters, gymnasts,
sprinters and Cirque Du Soleil performers. If these guys don’t I think it’s fair to say that you
shouldn’t either. It’s unnecessary and counterproductive.  
T
“A strong man never extended himself unless
it was absolutely necessary. Once in a while he
would cut loose. It might be against a particu-
larly strong competitor, or just with the desired
to see whether he could
improve his record.”
—Earle Liederman, Secrets of
Strength, 1925

35
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
What does training to failure actually mean?
By definition, training to failure is literally just that; you keep doing reps until you fail to com-
plete another one. For example, if you were doing an incline dumbbell press and struggled to get
the fifth rep—then collapsed halfway up on the sixth rep without being able to completely lock it
out—that would mean you trained to failure. You literally failed in your attempt to lift the weight
and had it come back down on you. Most people get confused but this is the true meaning of
training to failure. Training like this leads to CNS burnout and injuries and will slow down your
gains in a hurry. 
You should finish each set when you know that you have at least another one or two good,
solid reps left in the tank. You never want to finish a set shaking like a leaf while screaming at the
top of your lungs. This is largely unnecessary and, in fact, counterproductive. You just want to
work as hard as you can without causing yourself to have a nervous breakdown or go into con-
vulsions.  Therefore if rep number four comes up slow, is a little shaky and takes a significant
effort to lock out, you should immediately stop the set there even if you were hoping to get six
reps in the set. 
What I recommend is for you to work hard and complete as many reps as you can with picture
perfect form and without compromising your safety or losing significant speed on each rep. A
good rule of thumb is to make sure that the last rep of every set looks exactly like the first, only
slightly slower.
THE BOTTOM LINE
Building muscle is hard work and you had better be prepared for it. This means that you
approach every workout with a tenacious killer instinct. If you do this, you will be on the path to
success and can laugh at all the little pussies in the gym as they mindlessly sleep walk through
another set of leg extensions while you’re busy getting stronger than they could ever imagine.
But NEVER train to failure. 

Recovery
Methods

37
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
ou don’t grow during your workouts; you grow during the recovery period. Therefore
you have to do all you can to help your body recover from the demands you are impos-
ing upon it in your workouts. Training is only half the battle when it comes to getting
big and strong. Without using proper recovery techniques, you will never reach your
true potential. Below are the most important recovery methods, which should be used
to maximize your rate of progress.
TAKE A CONTRAST BATH AFTER TRAINING 
This is an old technique that originated in Eastern Bloc countries many years ago to speed up
the recovery of their elite athletes. It entails submerging yourself in a tub of hot water for one or
two minutes, and then immediately jumping into a tub of ice-cold water for another minute—you
then repeat this process for up to 10 minutes. Of course, I don’t expect you to have two bathtubs
to do this, so a more practical method would be simply switching the water temperature back and
forth in your shower. Just be sure to use extreme temperatures that you really have to grit and
bear your way through. This is never fun but it definitely works. 
TAKE NAPS
Naps are a great way to speed up your recovery. During sleep, your body releases growth hor-
mone and repairs the damage that has been done to your muscles during intense workouts.
Taking a 20–60-minute nap once or twice a day is a great way to make faster progress.
SLEEP AT LEAST 8 HOURS PER DAY
Deep sleep is the best form of recovery there is and the time when the majority of muscle
growth takes place. Without sufficient sleep (8-10 hrs per day), your results will be nowhere near
optimal. Sleep deprivation also leads to decreased insulin sensitivity, so not only will you not
grow but also you will actually get fatter because your body won’t tolerate carbohydrates as effec-
tively. 
Some people claim they can get by on only 5-6 hours per night and they are 100% right; but
they are only “getting by.” Just “getting by” is not enough. Make time for sleep or make time for
illness and injury… and forget about getting big. If you have difficulty sleeping, please do not
ignore this—you have to do whatever you can to find a way to improve your sleep. There are
many books that deal with improving the quality of your sleep and I highly recommended that
you read one. A few tips that have helped people achieve better sleeping habits are the following:
Y

38
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
• Go to bed and get up at the same time every day.
• Unwind for an hour before bed. During this time you should be doing nothing but relaxing.
Reading is ok here as long as it is not something that gets your mind over stimulated; fiction
or something that is not at all related to anything you do is usually best. 
• Make your room as dark as possible. There was a study once that showed that even a tiny
light shining directly on the back of a subject’s leg negatively affected sleep quality. 
• Avoid alcohol. It lessens sleep quality. 
• Don’t eat too much protein immediately before bed. Protein contains tyrosine which is the
amino acid that sends a signal to your brain to become more alert (it’s also a major ingredient
in many energy drinks). Having a huge protein meal before bed can keep you up for hours. 
• Don’t drink too much water before bed. This is another way to disrupt your sleep quality
because you will be up visiting the bathroom when you should be sleeping and recovering. 
• Keep your bedroom very cool. The optimal sleeping temperature is around 68–70 degrees for
most people. Keeping your room temperature much warmer than this can negatively affect
the quality of your sleep. 
• Try theNightwave Sleep Assistant http://jasonferruggia.com/nightwave. I use this myself and
swear by it for a good nights sleep. 
• Try to train earlier in the day. If I train past 4pm I always have trouble sleeping. Hundreds of
people I have polled have reported the same. Obviously, if that’s the only time you can train
so be it. But if you have a choice and a sleeping problem it would be wise to move your
workout time up a few hours. 
STRETCH ON YOUR OFF DAYS
This is a great way to increase blood flow to the muscles and helps shuttle in the nutrients nec-
essary for optimal recovery.  This should be done after you work up a sweat from jumping rope or
even walking for 10-30 minutes. Stretch the muscle to a point where you feel it in the belly of the
muscle but not the joint. This shouldn’t be anywhere as near intense as the extreme stretching you
do post workout. Instead, just lightly stretch the muscles that are sore and hold the positions for
30-60 seconds each. You could do this while watching TV at night. 

39
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
UTILIZE ACTIVE RECOVERY TECHNIQUES
Activities like swimming, biking, walking or some bodyweight calisthenics like jumping jacks
and mountain climbers, performed the day after a hard workout will pump some nutrient rich
blood into the muscles which will help hasten the recovery process. 
GET A MASSAGE ONCE PER WEEK 
This is a great way to relax and speed up the healing process of sore muscles. Be sure to drink
lots of water in the hours following a massage to help rid the body of toxins released during the
treatment. If you cannot afford a massage, you could always do self-massage with a lacrosse ball
and/or foam roller. 
Most people are familiar with proper foam roller use these days but may not be as well versed
in self-massage with the lacrosse ball. It works the same way in that you get down on the floor
and lay on the ball and move around in various directions, working out the knots in your muscles.
For achy shoulders try placing the ball behind your shoulder blades or in your armpit. Find a ten-
der area and just lie there or move around slightly. A great way to loosen up the hips is to sit down
with one glute on the ball, while crossing one foot over the opposite knee and moving around
until you find the tender areas that need to be worked out. Be prepared for some serious pain,
however. Trust me, though; the results will be worth it. 
LIMIT YOUR CONSUMPTION OF 
ALCOHOL & RECREATIONAL DRUGS
As mentioned earlier, drinking can negatively affect your sleep quality. It can also decrease your
testosterone and leaving you feeling less than 100% for a day or two after getting drunk. The
honest truth is that if you want to build a rock hard, muscular physique you should limit your
consumption of alcohol as much as possible. Recreational drugs are just as bad and can have the
same negative effects as drinking. 
I understand, however, that as much as most of us want to build more muscle we also don’t
want to give up our social life and do enjoy an occasional night of drinking. Having said that it
should be noted that drinking one night a week won’t kill you and won’t completely eliminate any
chances you have of ever getting big or strong. I have known plenty of people who drank one and
sometimes even two nights a week and got incredibly big and strong. In fact, up until my mid thir-
ties I had probably gotten drunk a few times per month for as long as I can remember. It’s not as
bad as some people make it out to be. Besides, there are very few goals that are worth giving up
your entire social life for and I would never recommend that. Just don’t do it all the time. When
you do, be sure to drink a ton of water the following day. Also do some kind of activity to really
get your blood flowing and flush your system. 

40
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
AVOID STRESS
This is obviously easier said than done, but it should be noted that excessive amounts of psy-
chological or emotional stress could wreak havoc on your results. Stress causes the body to release
cortisol, a hormone that eats muscle tissue. Excessive amounts of cortisol can also cause an
increase in body-fat levels, especially around the abdomen. Make time to relax throughout the
day and use whatever aids are available to help you manage stress.
PRACTICE MEDITATION 
In today’s fast paced, busy society the majority of people are stressed beyond anything that
could be considered a healthy level. Meditation has long been known to reduce stress and relax
the mind. Unfortunately, the majority of bodybuilders and other fitness obsessed individuals have
largely ignored the benefits of meditation and how much of an impact it can have on your train-
ing and your physique, not to mention your overall health and recovery ability. 
A 
few 
years 
back 
I 
was 
turned 
on 
to 
the 
Holosync 
Meditation 
CD’s
http://jasonferruggia.com/meditate and the results were noticeable within just the first few days.
These are the only mediation CD’s out there that actually work. I have turned several friends and
clients on to them and they have all noticed great benefits that carried over to their performance
in the gym and changes in their physiques. I highly recommend that you give the program a try. 
TAKE 4-7 DAYS COMPLETELY OFF 
EVERY 12-16 WEEKS
After 12-16 weeks of hard training your body will demand a rest. Taking a few days off will
actually allow you to get stronger and come back fresh and ready to train hard again. You simply
cannot train balls to the wall for 52 weeks per year and expect to make progress. Injuries will start
to accumulate and your desire to be in the gym and work hard will start to dwindle. One thing
that I have noticed is that people get very nervous about taking time off because they think they
are going to get small and weak. You are going to have to trust me here when I promise you it’s
not going to happen. 

Mass
Building
Nutrition

42
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
his is a strength-training manual so we’re not going to get too in depth with nutrition
here. To keep it simple take your bodyweight and multiply it by 16. That will give you
a good starting point for your total calories each day. Eat one gram of protein per
pound of bodyweight. On training days have two grams of carbs per pound of body-
weight. On off days have one gram of carbs per pound of bodyweight. Eat most of
your carbs during the four hours after training. Fill in the rest of your calories each day with
healthy sources of fat like grass fed beef, organic egg yolks, wild caught salmon and coconut oil. 
1 gram of protein = 4 calories
1 gram of carbs = 4 calories
1 gram of fat = 9 calories
If you weigh 150 pounds and multiply that by 16 you would get 2400 calories. Eating 150
grams of protein would give you 600 calories. On a training day you would consume 300 grams
of carbs, which will give you 1200 calories. That gives you 1800 total calories, which you sub-
tract from 2400 to see how much fat you need. Knowing that 2400 minus 1800 equals 600 you
would now simply divide 600 by 9 (the number of calories in a gram of fat) to determine how
much fat you can eat. In this case it would be 66 grams. On non-training days the carbs will be
lower and the fat will be higher. 
Eat three or four meals per day spaced 3-4 hours apart. Run that plan for the first two weeks
and then assess your gains. If you are not gaining any weight add 300 calories per day, equally
divided between protein, fat and carbs. If you are getting fat cut 300 calories per day. It will be a
process of trial and error and will take a bit of time to dial in 100% correctly. 
Always do your best to eat organic food as much as possible and avoid low quality junk that
will make you fat and sick. That means sugars, fried foods, trans fats, and pretty much anything
that comes in a box or a bag. 
T

For protein focus on Lean, grass fed beef http://jasonferruggia.com/grasslandbeef, turkey,
chicken, wild caught fish, cage free eggs and Chemical free, grass fed protein powder 
http://jasonferruggia.com/proteinpowder . For carbs focus on yams, potatoes, Jasmine rice, fruits
and vegetables. Avoid most grains; especially wheat. 
Drink at least half your bodyweight in ounces of water per day and skip out on most other bev-
erages other than an occasional cup of black coffee or tea. 
For all the nitty gritty details on eating for lean muscle
growth, health and performance check out the most effec-
tive body recomposition plan ever created, The Renegade
Diet http://renegadedietbook.com/ . Nutrition is at least
50% of the battle when it comes to building muscle and get-
ting lean, and there is simply no other way of eating that
will transform your body quite as efficiently as The
Renegade Diet. 
Click http://renegadedietbook.com/ to check it out. 
43
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
“If man made it,
don’t eat it.”
—Jack LaLanne

The
Workouts

45
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
f I had one wish it would be that everyone would read the rest of this manual before starting
the workouts. That would definitely ensure greater progress because there will be a greater
understanding of the muscle building process. However, I understand the desire to get started
right away. If you’re going to do that right from the get go I just need to tell you not to train
to failure and never to let your form break down on any exercise. Risking an injury is never
worth it. 
If you can’t make strength gains on a consistent basis you’re either not eating enough, not sleep-
ing enough, partying too much or are too stressed out. Overtraining is not a likely option since I
have designed the workouts to ensure against it. Something else is wrong, though, and you need
to address and fix it immediately if you want to achieve your goals. Don’t over think or over ana-
lyze things; simply follow the workouts to the letter, eat like a horse, get lots of rest and you will
get bigger and stronger faster than just about everyone else in your gym. 
The workouts should be performed four times per week. Ideally you’d want to set up your
schedule so that you only have back-to-back training days one time per week. By that I mean you
should train on Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday or Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and
Saturday. If that’s not an option, just pick whatever you can make work for you schedule and
lifestyle. 
If you can truly only make it to the gym three days it’s not the end of the world. In that case you
would do all four workouts over the course of ten days instead of seven. 
It would look like this:
Monday- Day 1
Wednesday- Day 2
Friday- Day 3
Monday- Day 4
Wednesday- Day 1
Friday- Day 2
And so on and so on. 
I

46
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Pre Workout Warm Up
Before we get into the workouts let’s cover the pre workout warm up plan. Warming up is a
very important component of a successful muscle-building workout. It is not a good idea to come
in cold, right off the streets and jump straight into heavy lifting. When you warm up properly you
lubricate your joints and elevate your core temperature, which will help you perform much better
during your workout. Although warming up is critically important it also needn’t be a workout in
itself as some people like to make it. Simply follow my recommendations below and you should
be thoroughly warmed up and ready to train safely in ten minutes or less.
The first part of an effective warm up consists of three to five minutes of continuous movement.
This could be done by riding a stationary bike, walking on a treadmill, or jumping rope. Do this
just long enough to break a sweat and stop; don’t turn it into an aerobic workout. You could also
do the following circuit:
1. Jumping Jacks – 30 seconds
2. Overhead Squats (Hold your arms straight up, fully extended overhead like the top position
of a military press)– 10 reps
3. Mountain Climbers (Get down into a pushup position and basically run in place by bring-
ing your knees up to your chest. Be sure to keep your back flat and abs tight throughout the
exercise)– 30 seconds
4. Rest 30 seconds between each exercise and repeat the entire circuit 2-3 times.
Upper Body Days
After you complete the general warm up you should then perform a very brief shoulder warm
up. Start with 20 shoulder dislocations with a band or broomstick followed by 20 scap pushups.
Follow those two exercises up with the following dumbbell circuit. Do all the exercises with a 3-
5 pound dumbbell and minimal rest between them. Perform ten reps each. 
1)
Lateral Raise
2)
Bent Over Lateral Raise
3)
Dumbbell Front Raise
4)
Bent Over Y-Raise
5)
External Rotation on Side
6)
Shrug
This can be done forever with a pair of five-pound dumbbells and there is really no need to ever
increase the weight on this. You simply want to lubricate the joints and increase blood flow to the
area to help prevent injuries. 

47
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
After you have completed the shoulder warm up you can then move directly into the first exer-
cise that you are going to be doing that day. 
Lower Body Days
After the general warm up move into the following circuit of exercises, doing ten reps each:
1)
Bodyweight Prisoner Squat
2)
Overhead Split Squat
3)
Dynamic Hip Flexion
4)
Cossack Squat
5)
Cat/ Camel
6)
Bird/ Dog
7)
Fire Hydrant
8)
Glute Bridge
After your general warm up you can then move into your first exercises of the day. If it’s a squat
or dead lift, you can also do some static stretching for any tight muscle groups such as the ham-
strings, hip flexors, glutes, piriformis and calves if you need to. 
Static stretching has been condemned in recent years but the truth of the matter is that it’s com-
pletely fine. Some of the biggest and best athletes of all time have stretched statically and they all
made out pretty well. Don’t believe everything you read. 
The studies that showed that static stretching was dangerous involved holding a static stretch
and then immediately testing your max right afterwards. Of course your max will be down after
that! That is probably not the best idea. But doing a few static stretches for chronically tight areas
and then gradually warming up to a heavy weight is a far better idea than skipping the stretches
and attempting to squat 300 pounds with the flexibility of a conference table. 
A trick to use, which will really ensure that static stretching has no negative effect on your
workout, is to only hold each stretch for ten seconds, and then immediately flex the muscle being
stretched. You can repeat this as many times as necessary. 
If you can do it, PNF stretching is actually a better option than static stretching in most cases,
it’s just a bit difficult to explain and to grasp without actually seeing and doing it. Basically what
you want to do when you are using PNF stretching is to contract the muscle that is being stretched
with 25% of your strength against resistance (preferably, manual resistance given by a partner) for
6-8 seconds. After 6-8 seconds, you take a deep breath, hold it for a second, and then simultane-
ously exhale and increase the range of the stretch. You would repeat this three to four times or
until you can’t increase the range any further. 

48
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Exercise Specific Warm Up Sets
When you are ready to start on your first exercise there is a basic, simple progression you
should follow. On the first set you are going to use either the empty bar or light dumbbells,
depending on what exercise you are doing, and perform 10-20 reps. From there you’ll move to
approximately fifty percent of the starting weight for another set of 5-8 reps. Then jump up to sev-
enty five percent for a set of five followed by an optional set with about 90% of your starting
weight for three reps. 
So it’s:
Warm up set 1- bar or light dumbbells x 10-20
Warm up set 2- 50% of starting weight x 5-8
Warm up set 3- 75% or starting weight x 5
Warm up set 4- 90% of starting weight x 3 (optional for beginners but recommended for all
intermediate and advanced lifters)
For the sake of simplicity, and to save time, we usually only use 45’s, 25’s and 10’s when warm-
ing up. For this reason, the percentages are not exact but they don’t need to be, just as long as they
are in the ballpark. You don’t need to actually whip out a calculator and figure out what your
warm up weights should be. 
After warming up for your first big set of each day you probably don’t have to do as many
warm up sets.
MGS BEGINNER WORKOUT PLAN
The beginner workout is for those with less than one year of proper training experience. The Big
Four exercises (bench press, squat, military press, deadlift) are each trained twice per week. This
increased exposure will give you a better chance to learn and master these lifts. 
Go heavy on Days 1 & 2 then lighten up the weight a bit for Days 3 & 4 when you repeat the
same exercise in a slightly higher rep range. Start with a weight that allows you to get four sets of
five reps and stick with it until you can get four sets of seven reps, then increase the weight by five
pounds and repeat. On Days 3 & 4 do the same thing but with a six-rep weight, sticking with it
until you can get it for sets of eight. 
Follow this plan for 4-8 weeks, or until you are comfortable enough with your form to move on
to the main program. 

If you only have 2.5 pound plates to work with you may plateau sooner than you should,
which is why I highly recommend getting a set of Fractional Plates
http://jasonferruggia.com/fractionalplates if they’re in your budget. 
Be conservative with your weight increases and don’t try to rush anything. Slow and steady
wins the race every time. With Fractional Plates you will be able to make 1, 2 and 3-pound jumps
along with other possible combos in between. 
49
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Before Starting the Workouts
Please be sure to go through and read this section again thoroughly
before you go to the gym and get started on the Muscle Gaining
Secrets program. Having a full understanding of both the general and
specific warm up, the workout structure, schedule, and progression
scheme is of critical importance and will make a huge difference in
your ultimate progress over the next twelve weeks.

Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
MGS BEGINNER
WORKOUT PLAN
50
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Bench Press 
4
5-7
90
2) Military Press 
4
5-7
90  
3) Incline Dumbbell Row 
4
6-8
90  
4) Chin Up  
4
6-8
90 
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat 
5
5-7
120 
2) Rack Deadlift (Just Above Knee)
4 
5-7 
120  
3) EZ Bar Curl  
3 
8-10  
90
4) Sled Push or Bike Sprint
8 
20 sec  
60
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Bench Press  
3 
6-8  
90
2) Military Press  
3 
6-8  
90
3) Pull Up  
3  
AMAP  
90
4) 1 Arm Dumbbell Row  
3 
6-8  
90
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat  
3  
6-8  
120
2) Romanian Deadlift 
3  
6-8  
120
3) Hammer Curl  
3  
8-10 
120
4) Sled Push or Bike Sprint
8 
20 sec  
60

51
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
MGS MAIN WORKOUT PLAN
The main program follows the same type of template used by Iron Game legends like Ed Coan,
Kirk Karwoski and Bill Kazmaier. One of the Big Four lifts starts each workout day, and over the
course of twelve weeks the reps will decrease and the weight will increase on these exercises, fol-
lowing an old school linear periodization scheme. Quite simply, that means that you’ll be starting
with sets of eight and working your way down to sets of five in Phase 2, and then sets of three reps
in Phase 3. 
On Week 1 you’ll be doing three sets of eight (or five or three, depending on the phase) reps on
the Big Four. After a few warm up sets pick a weight that you’ll easily be able to use for all three
sets. This is the intro week so you DO NOT want to go too heavy on the main lift or you will
burn out way too soon. Remember that you have twelve weeks ahead of you so you need to be
conservative and give yourself a lot of room to make progress. 
On Week 2 you’re going to use the same weight you did on Week 1 but add two more sets. So
you’ll be doing five sets of eight. The increased volume will help build size and strength. 
On Week 3 you’re going to cut the sets down to just two and increase the weight. Pick a weight
you can definitely do for two sets without hitting failure or having to lower it. A five or ten pound
jump is usually the norm here. 
On Week 4 you’re simply going to work up to an eight-rep max (8RM) by warming up until
you can’t go any heavier. This is the day where you really let it rip and don’t hold anything back.
You should never be at failure but it should be the hardest set you do out of all four weeks. Hit
your one top-end set, after doing 4-8 progressively heavier warm up sets, and then move on to
your assistance exercises. 
Here’s a real world example of how this will look over the course of four weeks:
Week 1- 200 x 8 x 3
Week 2- 200 x 8 x 5
Week 3- 210 x 8 x 2
Week 4- 220 x 8RM
When you start the following phase use about 80% of what you finished the previous phase
with. So if your 8RM was 200 pounds, start Week 1 of Phase 2 with 160 pounds for five reps. Do
the same thing on Phase 3, taking 20% off your best 5RM and starting with that for three sets of
three. 

52
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Big Four Modifications 
Although the Big Four are commonly thought of as the bench press, squat, military press and
deadlift I prefer some slight modifications. They are listed below but please don’t feel like you
have to use them. If you just want to use the basic versions of each that’s fine. 
Instead of flat bench presses I recommend 15-30° incline presses (45° is too steep). These are
safer on the shoulder. An even better option would be to these with a neutral or angled grip bar. 
If you have any type of shoulder mobility issues squatting with a specially designed yoke or
safety squat bar would be a better option to you if it were available. If not the straight bar is fine. 
Instead of deadlifts with a straight bar from the floor I recommend using a trap bar or setting
the bar on low pins in a power rack (or on stacked rubber mats) to the lowest position you can
maintain a neutral spine. Most people will round their lower backs when attempting to pull a
straight bar from the floor and this can result in serious injuries sooner or later. If, however, you
can deadlift from the floor while keeping a perfectly neutral spine then you have nothing to worry
about. 
Assistance Exercises 
Anything that is not one of the big compound barbell lifts is typically referred to as an assis-
tance exercise. Most of the big assistance exercises will be done for sets of 6-8 reps. Some will be
done for higher reps simply because those muscle groups respond better to more volume or
because going too heavy on certain exercises is too risky. 
Take the same approach to these exercises as you do to the Big Four on Week 1 of each phase,
meaning that you want to stay far from failure and don’t train too hard. It’s an intro week and
needs to be treated as such. Going all out on Week 1 always leads to worse results down the road.
Patience is key. 
On the upper body days higher rep upper back work is included toward the end of each work-
out. This is to ensure shoulder health and will also help add some size to those often neglected
muscle groups back there. 
The quad dominant work that puts more stress on the knees is restricted to one of the lower
body days while hip dominant work is restricted to the other day. This is purposely done to make
it possible for you to run hill sprints or push/drag a sled one or two days per week without your
knees taking a beating and being unable to recover. 

53
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
The exception is the back extensions on Day 2. These are included to keep the lower back
healthy. A strong lower back is a must for athletes and should be the goal of every trainee, regard-
less of whether they play a sport or not. Your lower back comes into play every time you pick
something up and strong spinal erectors help prevent injuries and back pain. Not to mention that
they look very impressive on the beach. 
The worlds leading spine expert, Dr. Stuart McGill, has said that endurance of the lower back
muscles is more important than strength when it comes to safety and performance. So while you
still want to deadlift heavy you’d also want to include some higher rep back extensions or swings
in your training as well to prevent injuries and maximize your performance. 
Neck work is included on Days 2 & 4 for the simple reason that I believe everyone should train
their neck. Even during the dead of winter, when you are covered up with hats, jackets and gloves,
there is still one body-part that will be exposed and will let people know if you are serious about
training or not. A big neck screams power and authority and intimidates anyone in your path.
There is nothing worse than seeing primped up bodybuilders with a decent amount of mass and
a pencil neck. To avoid that dreaded scenario you need to start training your neck immediately.
Just be sure not to use excessive ranges of motion on neck exercises and do them slowly and cau-
tiously.
Biceps are trained on the lower body days since they recover faster from just about any other
muscle group. When programmed like this the biceps receive indirect stimulation on the upper
body days and direct stimulation on the lower body days. This works out very nicely for packing
size on the guns. 

54
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
1) Low Incline Bench Press 
3  
8  
120
2a) Dumbbell Military Press  
3  
6-8  
60
2b) Inverted Row  
3  
6-8  
60
3a) Rope/Band Face Pull*  
2 
8-10  
60
3b) Diamond Pushup  
1 
AMAP 
60
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat  
3 
8 
120
2) Dumbbell Split Squat  
1 
12-15  
120 
3) Back Extension 
1  
20-25  
90
4) EZ Bar Curl  
3 
8-10 
90
5) Farmers Walk
3
30 sec
90
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Military Press 
3  
8  
120
2a) Neutral Grip Chin Up 
3  
6-8 
60
2b) Suspended Pushup 
3 
6-8  
60
3a) Pronated Band Pull Apart 
2  
8-10 
60
3b) Triceps Dip  
1  
AMAP  
60
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Deadlift  
3   
8  
120
2) Romanian Deadlift  
2  
6-8  
120
3a) Incline Hammer Curl 
3  
8-10  
60
3b) Neck Extension 
3 
15-20  
60
4) Sled Push or Drag* 
3 
20 sec  
90
*Can run incline sprints here or push car 
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
Phase 1 _ Week 1

Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
1) Low Incline Bench Press 
5 
8  
120
2a) Dumbbell Military Press 
3 
6-8  
60
2b) Inverted Row  
3 
6-8  
60
3a) Rope/Band Face Pull*  
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Diamond Pushup  
1 
AMAP 
60
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat 
5  
8  
120
2) Dumbbell Split Squat  
1  
12-15  
120 
3) Back Extension 
2  
20-25  
120
4) EZ Bar Curl 
3  
8-10  
90
5) Farmers Walk 
3  
30 sec  
90
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Military Press  
5 
8  
120
2a) Neutral Grip Chin Up  
3  
6-8  
60
2b) Suspended Pushup  
3  
6-8 
60
3a) Pronated Band Pull Apart  
2 
10-12  
60
3b) Triceps Dip  
1  
AMAP 
60
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Deadlift 
5 
8  
120
2) Romanian Deadlift  
2  
6-8  
120
3a) Incline Hammer Curl  
3  
8-10  
60
3b) Neck Extension 
3 
15-20  
60
4) Sled Push or Drag* 
3 
20 sec  
90
*Can run incline sprints here or push car 
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
Phase 1 _ Week 2
55

Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
1) Low Incline Bench Press 
2  
8  
120
2a) Dumbbell Military Press  
4  
6-8 
60
2b) Inverted Row  
4  
6-8  
60
3a) Rope/Band Face Pull*  
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Diamond Pushup  
1  
AMAP 
60
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat  
2  
8  
120
2) Dumbbell Split Squat 
2 
12-15  
120 
3) Back Extension 
2  
20-25  
120
4) EZ Bar Curl  
3  
8-10  
90
5) Farmers Walk 
4  
30 sec  
60
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Military Press  
2  
8  
120
2a) Neutral Grip Chin Up  
4  
6-8  
60
2b) Suspended Pushup  
4  
6-8  
60
3a) Pronated Band Pull Apart  
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Triceps Dip  
1  
AMAP 
60
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Deadlift  
2  
8  
120
2) Romanian Deadlift  
3  
6-8  
120
3a) Incline Hammer Curl 
3 
8-10 
60
3b) Neck Extension 
3  
15-20  
60
4) Sled Push or Drag* 
4 
20 sec  
90
*Can run incline sprints here or push car 
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
Phase 1 _ Week 3
56

Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
1) Low Incline Bench Press 
1
8RM
60-120
2a) Dumbbell Military Press  
4 
6-8  
60
2b) Inverted Row  
4 
6-8 
60
3a) Rope/Band Face Pull*  
3 
10-12  
60
3b) Diamond Pushup  
2 
AMAP 
60
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat  
1
8RM
60-120
2) Dumbbell Split Squat 
3 
15-20  
120 
3) Back Extension
3
20-25
120
4) EZ Bar Curl  
3 
8-10 
90
5) Farmers Walk 
5  
30 sec  
90
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Military Press  
1
8RM
60-120
2a) Neutral Grip Chin Up  
4  
6-10 
60
2b) Suspended Pushup 
4  
6-8  
60
3a) Pronated Band Pull Apart  
3  
10-12  
60
3b) Triceps Dip  
2  
AMAP 
60
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Deadlift  
1
8RM
60-120
2) Romanian Deadlift  
4  
6-8  
120
3a) Incline Hammer Curl  
3  
8-10  
60
3b) Neck Extension 
3  
15-20  
60
4) Sled Push or Drag* 
5 
20 sec  
90
*Can run incline sprints here or push car 
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
Phase 1 _ Week 4
57

58
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Phase 1 Exercise Descriptions
(Listed in the order in which they appear in the program with alternate variations given as well)
Day 1
Low Incline Bench Press
•
Use an incline bench set at 15-30°
•
Squeeze shoulder blades together
•
Grip bar tightly with a shoulder width grip
•
Keep elbows at 45° angle to torso
•
Lower bar to your nipple line or just above 
•
Explosively push bar back up to lockout while simultaneously driving feet into ground
Bench Press
•
Same as incline press but on a flat bench
Standing Dumbbell Press
•
Hold dumbbells with palms facing forward at shoulder height
•
Press directly overhead to lockout
•
Brace abs and squeeze glutes throughout  
Inverted Row
•
Set a bar at around waist height in a power rack or Smith machine
•
Get under it and grab the bar with a shoulder width grip
•
Put your feet up on a bench or box so that your body is now parallel to the ground 
•
Keep body perfectly straight
•
Squeeze glutes & brace abs
•
Pull chest to bar and squeeze shoulder blades together
•
Hold for one second at top
•
Can also be done on Jungle Gym XT or Rings
Rope Face Pull
•
Attach a rope to a high cable station
•
Grab it with palms facing down
•
Pull rope to your face
•
Try to touch elbows together behind your back
•
Shoulder blades should be squeezed fully
•
Hold for two seconds in fully contracted position

59
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Band Face Pull
•
If you don’t have a cable station this can be done by looping a band around a chin up bar
or power rack upright. 
Diamond Pushup
•
Get in pushup position with body perfectly straight
•
Brace abs and squeeze glutes
•
Form diamond position with hands 
•
Descend under control in three seconds
•
Pause for two seconds at bottom 
•
Explode up, being sure to focus on working the triceps
•
If diamond grip is too stressful on wrists move hands out a bit
Day 2
Squat
•
Take an evenly spaced, crushing grip on bar, 6-12 inches outside of shoulder width
•
Squeeze shoulder blades together
•
Rest bar on traps, not on neck
•
Take slightly wider than shoulder width stance and point toes out 15-30°
•
Keeping chest held high inhale deeply, fill your abdomen with air and hold it
•
Start descent by breaking at the hips and sitting back and down
•
Go down until top of thighs are parallel with ground (or slightly above)
•
Don’t allow lower back to round
•
Explode back up, slowly letting air out about 2/3 of the way up
Dumbbell Split Squat
•
Hold a dumbbell in each hand
•
Get into a lunge position
•
Lower yourself by squatting down
•
Push hips forward slightly so that hamstrings touch calves in bottom position
•
Pause for one second at bottom
•
Be sure to keep a perfectly upright posture throughout the set
•
Concentrate on feeling stretch in hip flexors
•
Push back up using entire foot; not just the ball of your foot

60
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Back Extension
•
Can be done on either 45-degree back extension bench or basic back extension bench 
•
Position yourself on the apparatus so that your hips are completely off the end of the pad
•
Lower your body by breaking at hips and pushing butt back
•
Don’t allow lower back to round
•
Initiate positive portion of reps by squeezing glutes
•
Pause for one second at top
•
If necessary increase difficulty by holding weight on chest or wrapping a band around
neck 
EZ Bar Curl
•
Grab bar with an underhand, shoulder width grip
•
Keep chest out and shoulders back
•
Start with arms 99% straight
•
Curl weight up until forearms touch biceps
•
Don’t allow elbows to drift forward excessively 
Farmers Walk
•
Grab a pair of heavy dumbbells or kettlebells and stand perfectly upright
•
Walk around the gym, down the block or whatever for 30 seconds
•
If that’s not possible just hold heavy dumbbells for 30 seconds
Day 3 
Standing Military Press
•
Set bar in a rack at upper chest height
•
Take shoulder width (or slightly wider) crushing vice grip on bar
•
Stand perfectly upright, brace abs and squeeze glutes
•
Press in slight arc to get around your head
•
Move head back out of way then move it back forward to lock out the weight
•
Bar should finish directly overhead
•
Hold it for a second before lowering under control. 
•
Do not lean backward excessively

61
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Neutral Grip Chin Up
•
Hang from chin up bar handles with palms facing each other
•
Use a thumbless grip (thumb on the same side of the bar as fingers) to reduce the
involvement of forearms and biceps
•
Elbows should be 99% straight
•
Don’t let shoulders come out of sockets and up by ears
•
Keep them tightly “sucked in”
•
Initiate pull by using lats; not biceps
•
Pull up until chest hits bar
•
Keep chest up and back arched throughout
•
Squeeze shoulder blades together at top
Suspended Pushup
•
Use Jungle Gym XT or Rings
•
Attach them on chin up bar or top of power rack
•
To increase difficulty move them further apart or added weighted vest or chains
•
Keep body perfectly straight; no A-framing or sagging hips
•
Brace abs and squeeze glutes
•
Lower under control, allowing elbows to drift out a bit
•
Press/ squeeze your way back up on each rep
Pronated Band Pull Apart
•
Grab a strength training band at upper chest height with palms down
•
Keep elbows 99% straight
•
Pull band apart as far as possible
•
Squeeze shoulder blades all the way together on each rep
•
Hold contracted position for two seconds
Triceps Dip
•
Use parallel bars or rings
•
Keep torso upright
•
Lower until triceps are parallel with ground then explode up
•
Concentrate on making the triceps do the work

62
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Day 4
Deadlift
•
Set bar about an inch away from shins
•
Take shoulder width grip and slightly narrower stance
•
Unless you’re a competitive powerlifter use a double overhand grip and lifting straps
when needed
•
Keep head in line with spine and back flat (no rounding of lower back)
•
Body should be at approximately a 45° angle to floor in start position
•
Grip bar tightly, trying to crush it
•
Maximize full body tension
•
Take huge breath and hold it in abdomen
•
Don’t rip bar off the floor but rather grind it up slowly
•
Don’t allow hips to rise before shoulders
•
Once bar clears your knees explosively drive hips through while squeezing glutes and
pulling shoulders back
•
Return to start position by pushing hips back then lowering the bar
•
Bar should remain in contact with quads the entire time
•
Don’t star squatting back down until bar clears knees
•
Let plates touch ground and repeat
•
A slow negative on the deadlift is dangerous and should be avoided
Romanian Deadlift
•
Set bar on hooks at knee height
•
Grab it and stand perfectly upright
•
Bend knees slightly 
•
Descend in same manner as conventional deadlift
•
But exaggerate the hips back action
•
Concentrate on feeling the hamstrings stretch
•
Lower the bar as far as you can without squatting down 
•
This is usually somewhere right around knee height for most
•
Knees should remain slightly bent throughout 

63
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Incline Hammer Curl
•
Set incline bench to 60-75°
•
Grab dumbbells with neutral (palms facing grip)
•
Start with elbows 99% straight
•
Curl up until forearm touches biceps
Neck Extension
•
Lay face down on a bench with head of end
•
Have partner provide resistance by placing a towel over your head
•
Or use the neck harness
•
Move head back and forth like you’re looking over a really tall, really hot model
•
Don’t go down too low
•
Don’t come up too high by jamming your head all the way back into your traps
Heavy Sled Push or Drag
•
Load a few plates on a sled and push it or drag it for 20 seconds

Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
1) Bench Press 
3  
5
120
2a) Neutral Grip Dumbbell Military Press  
3  
6-8  
60
2b) Pull Up 
3  
6-8  
60
3a) Hammer Grip Face Pull* 
2 
10-12  
60
3b) Feet Elevated Diamond Pushup  
1  
AMAP 
60
* Use band or rope cable attachment
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat  
3  
5  
120
2) Rear Foot Elevated Split Squat 
1  
10-12  
120
3) Back Extension 
1  
15-20
120
4) Hammer Curl  
3  
8-10 
90
5) Farmers Walk  
3  
30 sec 
90
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Military Press  
3  
5  
120
2a) Chest Supported Row  
3  
6-8  
60
2b) 45 Degree Incline Dumbbell Press  
3  
6-8  
60
3a) Supinated Band Pull Apart  
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Dumbbell Floor Press  
1  
8-10 
60
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Deadlift  
3 
5  
120
2) Clean Grip Shrug Pull  
2 
6-8  
120
3a) Incline Curl  
3 
8-10 
60
3b) Neck Extension 
3 
20  
60
4) Sled Push or Drag
3
20 sec
90 
*Can run incline sprints here or push car 
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
Phase 2 _ Week 1
64

Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
1) Bench Press  
5  
5  
120
2a) Neutral Grip Dumbbell Military Press 
3  
6-8  
60
2b) Pull Up 
3  
6-8  
60
3a) Hammer Grip Face Pull* 
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Feet Elevated Diamond Pushup  
1  
AMAP 
60
* Use band or rope cable attachment
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat  
5  
5  
120
2) Rear Foot Elevated Split Squat 
1  
12-15  
120
3) Back Extension 
1  
15-20  
90
4) Hammer Curl  
3  
8-10 
90
5) Farmers Walk  
4  
30 sec  
60
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Military Press  
5  
5  
90
2a) Chest Supported Row  
3  
6-8  
60
2b) 45 Degree Incline Dumbbell Press  
3  
6-8  
60
3a) Supinated Band Pull Apart  
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Dumbbell Floor Press  
1  
8-10 
60
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Deadlift  
5  
5  
120
2) Clean Grip Shrug Pull  
2  
6-8  
120
3a) Incline Curl  
3 
8-10 
60
3b) Neck Extension 
3  
20  
60
4) Sled Push or Drag
4
20 sec
90
*Can run incline sprints here or push car 
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
Phase 2 _ Week 2
65

Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
1) Bench Press  
2  
5  
120
2a) Neutral Grip Dumbbell Military Press 
4  
6-8  
60
2b) Pull Up  
4  
6-8  
60
3a) Face Pull* 
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Feet Elevated Diamond Pushup  
1  
AMAP 
60
* Use band or rope cable attachment
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat  
2  
5  
120
2) Rear Foot Elevated Split Squat 
3  
12-15  
120
3) Back Extension 
2 
15-20  
120
4) Hammer Curl  
3  
8-10
90
5) Farmers Walk  
4  
30 sec  
90
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Military Press  
2  
5  
90
2a) Chest Supported Row  
4  
6-8  
60
2b) 45 Degree Incline Press  
4  
6-8  
60
3a) Supinated Band Pull Apart  
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Dumbbell Floor Press  
1  
8-10 
60
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Deadlift  
2  
5  
120
2) Clean Grip Shrug Pull  
4  
6-8  
120
3a) Incline Curl  
3  
8-10 
60
3b) Neck Extension 
3  
20  
60
4) Sled Push or Drag
5
20 sec
90
*Can run incline sprints here or push car
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
Phase 2 _ Week 3
66

67
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
1) Bench Press  
1
5RM
60-120
2a) Neutral Grip Dumbbell Military Press 
4  
6-8  
60
2b) Pull Up  
4  
6-8  
60
3a) Face Pull* 
3  
10-12  
60
3b) Feet Elevated Diamond Pushup  
2  
AMAP 
60
* Use band or rope cable attachment
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat  
1
5RM
60-120
2) Rear Foot Elevated Split Squat  
3  
12-15  
120
3) Back Extension 
2  
15-20  
120
4) Hammer Curl  
3  
8-10 
90
5) Farmers Walk 
5 
30 sec  
90
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Military Press  
1
5RM
60-120
2a) Chest Supported Row  
4 
6-8  
60
2b) 45 Degree Incline Press  
4  
6-8  
60
3a) Supinated Band Pull Apart  
3  
10-12  
60
3b) Dumbbell Floor Press  
2 
8-10 
60
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Deadlift  
1
5RM
60-120
2) Clean Grip Shrug Pull  
4  
6-8  
120
3a) Incline Curl  
3  
8-10 
60
3b) Neck Extension  
3  
20  
60
4) Sled Push or Drag
5
20 sec
90
*Can run incline sprints here or push car 
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
Phase 2 _ Week 4

68
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Phase 2 Exercise Descriptions
Day 1
Bench Press
•
See Phase 1
Neutral Grip Dumbbell Military Press
•
Same as Phase 1 except with palms facing in towards each other
Pull Up
•
Same as neutral grip chin up except with palms facing away from body
Hammer Grip Face Pull
•
Same as Phase 1 except grabbing ropes with a hammer grip so palms face each other
Feet Elevated Diamond Pushup
•
Same as Phase 1 except with feet on 12-14” box
Day 2
Squat
•
Same as Phase 1
Rear Foot Elevated Split Squat
•
Same as Phase 1 except with rear foot on 12-16” box
Back Extension
•
Same as Phase 1
•
If you have access to both a flat and 45° back extension feel free to use a different one
this phase than last
Hammer Curl
•
Same as Phase 1 except standing instead of incline
Farmers Walk
•
Same as Phase 1

69
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Day 3
Military Press
•
Same as Phase 1
Chest Supported Row
•
Grab a pair of dumbbells
•
Lay face down on 30-60° incline bench
•
Row dumbbells up as far as possible, squeezing shoulder blades together at top
•
Hold for one second in contracted position
45° Incline Dumbbell Press
•
Lay face down on incline bench with dumbbells in hand and crushing vice grip
•
Squeeze shoulder blades together & keep them there throughout set
•
Drive feet into ground
•
Press straight up to lockout
•
Lower under control
Supinated Band Pull Apart
•
Same as Phase 1 except with a palms up grip
Dumbbell Floor Press
•
Lay down on floor with dumbbells in each hand
•
Squeeze shoulder blades together
•
Lower until triceps lightly touch ground; not elbows
•
Pause for one second then push back up to lockout

70
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Day 4
Deadlift
•
Same as Phase 1
Clean Grip Shrug Pull
•
Perform exactly like Romanian deadlift but add explosive shrug with calf raise at top of
each rep
•
Only lower until bar is just above knee height
Incline Curl
•
Lay back on 60-75° incline bench with dumbbells in hand
•
Extend elbows 99% of the way
•
Curl the weights up until forearms touch biceps
Neck Extension
•
Same as Phase 1
Sled Push or Drag
•
Same as Phase 1

Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
1) Bench Press  
`
3  
3  
90
2a) 1 Arm Dumbbell Clean and Press  
3  
6-8  
60
2b) Chin Up  
3  
6-8  
60
3a) Suspended Face Pull*  
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Band Resisted Diamond Pushup 
1  
15-20  
60
*Use Jungle Gym XT or Rings
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat  
3 
3 
120
2) Squat  
1 
10  
120
3) Back Extension 
2 
12-15 
120
4) Cross Body Hammer Curl  
3  
8-10 
90
5) Farmers Walk 
3  
20  
90
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Military Press  
3  
3  
90
2a) 1 Arm Dumbbell Row  
3  
6-8  
60
2b) Flat Dumbbell Press  
3 
6-8  
60
3a) Pronated Band Pull Apart  
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Triceps Dip  
1 
10-12  
60
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Deadlift  
3  
3  
120
2) Snatch Grip Shrug Pull  
2  
6-8  
60
3a) Dumbbell Curl  
3  
8-10 
60
3b) Neck Extension 
3  
15-20  
60
4) Sled Push or Drag
3
20 sec
90
*Can run incline sprints here or push car 
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
Phase 3 _ Week 1
71

Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
1) Bench Press  
5 
3  
90
2a) 1 Arm Dumbbell Clean and Press  
3 
6-8  
60
2b) Chin Up  
3  
6-8  
60
3a) Suspended Face Pull*  
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Band Resisted Diamond Pushup 
1  
15-20  
60
*Use Jungle Gym XT or Rings
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat  
5  
3  
120
2) Squat  
1  
10  
120
3) Back Extension 
2  
12-15  
120
4) Cross Body Hammer Curl  
3  
8-10
90
5) Farmers Walk 
3 
20  
90
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Military Press  
5  
3  
90
2a) 1 Arm Dumbbell Row  
3  
6-8  
60
2b) Flat Dumbbell Press  
3 
6-8  
60
3a) Pronated Band Pull Apart  
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Triceps Dip  
1  
10-12  
60
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Deadlift  
5  
3  
120
2) Snatch Grip Shrug Pull  
3  
6-8  
60
3a) Dumbbell Curl  
3  
8-10 
60
3b) Neck Extension 
3  
15-20 
60
4) Sled Push or Drag
3
20 sec
90
*Can run incline sprints here or push car 
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
Phase 3 _ Week 2
72

Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
1) Bench Press  
2 
3  
90
2a) 1 Arm Dumbbell Clean and Press  
4  
6-8  
60
2b) Chin Up  
4  
6-8  
60
3a) Suspended Face Pull*  
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Band Resisted Diamond Pushup 
1  
15-20  
60
*Use Jungle Gym XT or Rings
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat  
2  
3  
120
2) Squat  
2  
10  
120
3) Back Extension 
3  
12-15  
120
4) Cross Body Hammer Curl  
3  
8-10  
90
5) Farmers Walk
4 
30 sec  
60
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Military Press  
2  
3  
90
2a) 1 Arm Dumbbell Row  
4  
6-8  
60
2b) Flat Dumbbell Press  
4 
6-8  
60
3a) Pronated Band Pull Apart  
2  
10-12  
60
3b) Triceps Dip  
1  
10-12  
60
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Deadlift  
2  
3  
120
2) Snatch Grip Shrug Pull  
4  
6-8  
60
3a) Dumbbell Curl  
3 
8-10 
60
3b) Neck Extension 
3  
15-20  
60
4) Sled Push or Drag
5
20 sec
90
*Can run incline sprints here or push car 
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
Phase 3 _ Week 3

Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
1) Bench Press  
1
3RM
60-120
2a) 1 Arm Dumbbell Clean and Press  
4 
6-8 
60
2b) Chin Up  
4  
6-8  
60
3a) Suspended Face Pull* 
3  
10-12
60
3b) Band Resisted Diamond Pushup 
2  
15-20  
60
*Use Jungle Gym XT or Rings
Day 2
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Squat  
1
3RM
60-120
2) Squat  
2  
10  
120
3) Back Extension 
3  
12-15  
120
4) Cross Body Hammer Curl  
3 
8-10 
90
5) Farmers Walk 
5  
30 sec  
90
Day 3
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Military Press  
1
3RM
60-120
2a) 1 Arm Dumbbell Row  
4  
6-8  
60
2b) Flat Dumbbell Press  
4  
6-8  
60
3a) Pronated Band Pull Apart  
3  
10-12  
60
3b) Triceps Dip  
2 
10-12 
60
Day 4
Sets
Reps
Rest
1) Deadlift 
1  
3RM  
60-120
2) Snatch Grip Shrug Pull  
4  
6-8 
60
3a) Dumbbell Curl  
3  
8-10 
60
3b) Neck Extension  
3  
15-20  
60
4) Sled Push or Drag
6
20 sec
90
*Can run incline sprints here or push car 
PRINTABLE WORKOUT SHEETS
Day 1
Sets
Reps
Rest
Phase 3 _ Week 4
74

75
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Phase 3 Exercise Descriptions
Day 1
Bench Press
•
Same as Phase 1 & 2
1 Arm Dumbbell Clean and Press
•
Hold a dumbbell in one hand with other hand out to side
•
Start with weight directly in front of you
•
Use slightly wider than shoulder width stance to straddle the dumbbell
•
Bend over by pushing hips back until dumbbell is at knee height
•
Explosively pop hips forward while pulling dumbbell up to shoulder height
•
Flip and catch the bell in the bottom position of a military press
•
Now press it straight up to lockout
•
Lower and return to start position
Neutral Grip Chin Up
•
Same as Phase 1
•
Can also do mixed grip chin up, angled grip chin up or rings instead
Suspended Face Pull
•
Use Jungle Gym XT or Rings
•
Done exactly like inverted row except that elbows are straight out to side
•
Pull handles directly toward face
•
Squeeze shoulder blades together and hold for two seconds at top
•
Try to touch elbows together behind back
Band Resisted Diamond Pushup
•
Same as Phase 1 & 2 except you’ll be wrapping band behind back to increase resistance 

76
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Day 2
Squat
•
Same as Phase 1 & 2
Back Extension
•
Same as Phase 1 & 2
•
Can use different bench
Cross Body Hammer Curl
•
Stand upright with dumbbells at side
•
Curl weight across your body, one arm at a time with hammer grip
•
Alternate arms on each rep, doing an equal number per side
•
Finish position should have your hand over your heart
Farmers Walk
•
Same as Phase 1 & 2
Day 3
Military Press
•
Same as Phase 1 & 2
1 Arm Dumbbell Row
•
With a dumbbell in one hand, place opposite hand on a bench or stationary object for
support
•
Upper body should be slightly above parallel with ground
•
Split legs so that if you’re rowing with left hand left leg is forward and right leg is back
•
Arch back and stretch lats fully in start position
•
Initiate movement by pulling with lats and row the weight up until bottom of dumbbell
is next to your hip

77
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Flat Dumbbell Press
•
Grab two dumbbells and lie down on a flat bench
•
If you have trouble getting heavy dumbbells in position be sure to pick them up and sit
them on your quads
•
When you’re ready to begin set, kick legs up and rock dumbbells back into position
•
Keep shoulder blades squeezed all the way together throughout set
•
Elbows should be tucked at 45° to sides with palms facing in
•
Press weights up in straight line while squeezing them as tightly as possible
Pronated Band Pull Apart @ Navel
•
Same as Phase 1 but instead holding band at navel height 
•
This is noticeably harder than when holding it higher so a lighter band may be needed
Triceps Dip 
•
Same as Phase 1
Day 4
Deadlift
•
Same as Phase 1 & 2
Snatch Grip Shrug Pull
•
Same as the clean grip shrug pull except with a wide grip
Dumbbell Curl
•
Stand upright with a dumbbell in each hand
•
Extend elbows to 99% of lockout
•
Curl weights up until forearms touch biceps
Neck Extension
•
Same as Phase 1 & 2
Sled Push or Drag
•
Same as Phase 1 & 2

Questions &
Answers

79
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
What does it mean when you say 
6-8 reps or 8-10 reps?
Start each workout with the lower end of the rep range. So if the rep range is 6-8 you would
pick a weight you can do for six reps for all sets on week one. On week two stick with the same
weight and try to get more reps with it. Once you can get eight reps with that weight for every set
it is time to increase the weight by five pounds. 
What does it mean when the exercises have the
same number but a different letter next to them?
When exercises have the same number but a different letter, it means that you are supposed to
alternate those two exercises back and forth. For example if 1a) is a bench press and 1b) is a 1 arm
dumbbell row you would do one set of bench presses, rest a minute and then do a set of 1 arm
dumbbell rows. After the rows you would again rest one minute before going back to do your sec-
ond set of bench presses. If an exercise just has a number with no letter next to it that simply
means that you do straight sets of the exercise with the prescribed rest period between sets. 
I need to lose 20 pounds of fat and gain 
20 pounds of muscle. Should I do one before 
the other or can I do both at the same time?
Yes, it is possible to lose body-fat and build muscle at the same time. However, you will really
be compromising both goals to some extent. You are better off picking one goal and focusing on
that until you achieve it. In your case you should get leaner first. The body is much more anabolic
when you are leaner. Not only that, but your insulin sensitivity is higher when you are leaner.
What that means is that you can eat more calories, and especially carbohydrates, without fear of
them turning to fat. 
When you are between 10-12% body-fat a greater percentage of excess calories will be used to
build muscle. When you are over 12% body-fat a greater percentage of excess calories will be
stored as fat. So overeating for a lean person can result in muscle gain while overeating for a fat
person will result in fat gain. For this reason you should always be under 12% body-fat when you
go on a true mass building phase. 

80
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
How important is it for me 
to keep a training journal?
Keeping a training journal is one of the most important things you can do. Don’t forget this.
Without a journal, your training will be completely haphazard and you will never know if you are
making progress. It is imperative that you keep detailed records of every workout. This gives you
a goal to beat in each succeeding week or month, and allows you to look back and make adjust-
ments when things are not going as well as you had planned. If you don’t keep a training journal,
everything you do is just guesswork and your progress will be much slower than it could be. 
How should I track my muscle building progress?
There are five tools you should be using to track your progress and they are:
•
Your training journal
•
The scale
•
Body-fat calipers
•
Measuring tape
•
The mirror
The first way to track your progress is through your training journal. If you are getting stronger
you will get bigger. The second way of measuring your progress is by weighing yourself. You
should do this once every two weeks on the same day at the same time. The next way to track
your progress is to measure your body-fat. This can be tricky and I recommend that you have
someone who knows exactly how to do this help you with it. Next on the list is a measuring tape.
You should take flexed measurements of your chest, upper arm, waist, thigh and calf every two to
three weeks. 
If they are going up but so is your body-fat, this is not good. If your measurements are increas-
ing while your body-fat remains the same or decreases, this is very good news and means you are
gaining muscle. By the same token, if you are gaining weight on the scale while your body-fat
remains the same or decreases, you are gaining muscle. Finally, if you are not gaining weight on
the scale but your measurements are increasing and/or your body-fat is decreasing that means you
are gaining muscle as well. 
The last way you should measure your progress is by looking at the mirror. That is the simplest
and most effective ways of measuring your progress. That is all you need to track your progress. 

81
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
How should I breathe when performing exercises?
Breathing properly can make a huge difference in your training and should never be an after-
thought. A good general rule is to always exhale on the lifting or concentric portion of the exer-
cise and inhale right before the negative or lowering portion of the exercise. After taking a deep
breath, hold it in your abdomen and brace your abs like you were about to take a punch. Slowly
let your air out when you reach the top of finished position of each rep and then take another
breath. Specific exercises require special breathing techniques that are covered in further detail in
the exercise sections. 
Should I train any differently 
during times of high stress?
Yes, you should. Stress has a negative impact on your recovery ability and will have a detri-
mental effect on your training. During times of excessively high stress, your workouts should be
shorter and you should not train as often. Also, your rest periods should be longer than normal.
What is the best time of the day to train?
Studies by Y.V. Shcerbin and P.M. Mironenko (1980) show that there are fluctuations in a
weightlifter’s work capacity during the 24-hour daily cycle. According to Leputin and Oleshko,
“Strength measurements over a 24-hour period (standing and grip dynamometer, ability to differ-
entiate muscular force and explosive strength of the lower extremities) also indicate that there are
two periods during the day when there are rises in strength—from 11 to 14:00 hours and from 18
to 21:00 hours. Muscular power increases by 10-30% at these times.”  (Leputin & Oleshko,
1982) Others have stated that the optimal times to train are either three or 11 hours after waking. 
The best time to train is different for everyone, but I usually recommend that people train later
in the day. The reasoning for this is that your blood sugar levels are more stable, your body tem-
perature is up, and you have more food in your system. Also, training first thing in the morning
can be dangerous, as spinal fluid settles in the discs overnight. According to renowned back
expert, Dr. Stuart McGill, you should be awake for at least a few hours before you hit the weights. 
Can I train when I’m sick?
This depends on how sick you are. The usual rule of thumb is that if it’s above the neck, mean-
ing just a head cold, you are fine to train. If it’s below the neck and in your chest and you feel
weak and tired, then you probably shouldn’t train.

82
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Should I train if I am still sore 
from a previous workout?
It depends on the level of soreness. You can definitely train through some light to moderate
soreness. Deep, painful soreness, however, is a different story. If you are extremely sore and even
basic movements hurt, you should definitely not be training. However, you should never be get-
ting that sore. So scale back the intensity a bit and make sure you are doing all that is necessary to
recover properly.
Is soreness an indicator of a good workout?
No, soreness is not an indicator of a good workout. Getting sore only means that you did some-
thing that you weren’t used to doing. Usually, you get sore during the first week or two of a new
training program because of the new stimulus. During the following weeks, the soreness subsides.
I heard overhead pressing is dangerous. 
Is that true?
When overhead presses were the main upper body lift, long before people start to bench press
regularly, no one had ever heard of rotator cuff problems. That is because the overhead press
strengthens your shoulders and your rotator cuff muscles better than any other exercise there is.
Too much bench pressing and not enough overhead pressing is a common problem that plagues
countless lifters and always leads to shoulder problems. 
I always lean back too much when pressing
overhead. What should I do to fix that?
First of all, try lightening the weight. That is usually the first problem. If that doesn’t work, try
bracing your abs like you are about to take a punch and squeeze your butt as hard as you can
throughout the set. Also, don’t overly arch your back and allow your butt to stick out too much.
Instead, you should keep your butt tucked under while pressing overhead.
Should I stagger my feet when overhead pressing?
No, even though you see a lot of guys doing this I do not recommend it. This will place an
uneven, dangerous stress on your spine. Stand with your feet shoulder width apart and your knees
slightly bent at all times. 

83
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Are there any other tips or tricks you can share to
make my overhead pressing more effective?
On the lowering portion of every rep you should try to actively “pull” the bar or dumbbells
back down to your shoulders. When you do this you will engage the lats which will create a shelf
for you to rebound off of at the bottom position and will help protect the shoulder. Be sure to try
and keep the lats flared throughout the set.
What if I can’t do any chin-ups at all?
If you can’t do any chin-ups, you can have a partner assist you by holding your feet. You can
also loop a strength-training band over the bar and put your feet in the band to assist you. The lat-
ter is the recommended option.
In your opinion what is the single most important
muscle group to train?
A massive upper back, big traps and a thick neck give you “the power look.” They are the most
intimidating muscles to have when you really think about it. I mean, when you see a guy with a
bull neck, and mountainous traps out at a bar he instantly becomes the last guy in the joint that
you would want to mess with, right? You assume that he either is or was a football player or
wrestler and may even compete in some form of mixed martial arts right now. You’re not sure but
you don’t exactly want to find out. 
Why aren’t bent over rows included in the
program?
I’ve rarely found too many people that can do them properly. With improper form, this exercise
can be a back breaker, which is why I don’t think they are worth the risk for most beginners and
intermediates. Another problem with bent over rows is that the lower back already takes a pound-
ing on your squat and deadlift days so hitting it again with heavy bent over rows isn’t always the
best option. The lower back recovers more slowly than any other muscle group, so working it too
often is a bad idea. Not only that, but being sore from heavy rows will take away from the
amount of weight you can do on your squats and deadlifts. 

84
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
I heard deadlifts are dangerous. Is that true?
Absolutely not. Bending down to pick something up is one of the most basic movements in
every day human life. It would only make sense to strengthen this movement pattern as much as
possible if you want to make your life easier and prevent injury. Improper form on any exercise is
dangerous but as long as you practice your deadlifts with picture perfect technique they are per-
fectly safe. 
Having said that I must reiterate that picture perfect technique on this exercise is crucial to your
safety. If you do it properly you should be fine. If you deadlift with sloppy form you will probably
get injured. Sloppy form means your lower back is rounding. If that is happening you should stop
deadlifting until you strengthen the appropriate muscles and develop the necessary flexibility and
mobility to get all the way down. 
In the mean time I would stick with deadlifts that are elevated in the power rack or up on blocks
or mats. By not lowering yourself all the way to the ground it will be a lot easier to keep an arch
in your lower back. 
Take is slow and always be smart and safe. Never, ever allow the lower back to round whatso-
ever. You need to check your ego at the door on this one and lift only what you are capable of
doing with text book form. Risking an injury simply is not worth it. 
What can I do to stop my back from 
getting tight after training?
There are a few things you can do to prevent this, which are listed below.  
1. First, get a training partner to check your form and make sure that you are not rounding
your lower back on your deadlifts. 
2. Utilize The McKenzie Backbend. According to well-known physical therapist Robin
McKenzie you should do five back bends immediately before and after lifting heavy objects
off the floor. To perform this properly, stand straight up and put both of your hands on
your lower back. Lean back as far as you can comfortably can and hold the position for a
second. McKenzie states that, “By standing upright and bending back before lifting, you
ensure that, as you begin the lift, there is no distortion already present in the joints of the
lower back.”
3. Be sure to perform your heavy deadlifts later in the day if you have back problems. Most
injuries occur within the first 4-5 hours of waking. 

85
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Why don’t my chin-ups improve as fast as other
lifts, and what can I do about it?
This is a phenomenon that has been experienced by nearly anyone who has ever worked out
before. One thing you need to be sure of when you are doing chin ups is that you stay further
away from failure than you do on every other exercise. There are no studies on this that I can
quote to help me explain why, it’s just something that I have tested over the years with countless
clients and it is advice that I strongly recommend you heed. 
Always leave a few reps in the tank on your chin-ups and finish your sets with absolute picture
perfect form. If you can’t go up in reps every week, it’s not the end of the world. Be patient with
this exercise and you will improve dramatically in good time.
What should I do if I can’t do chin-ups?
Until you can do chin-ups on your own I strongly recommend that you get a band HERE and
loop it over the chin up bar. Pull down on the band (or have a partner do it) and put your feet on
the bottom of it, so that you are now standing on it. Jump up and grab the chin up bar and do
assisted chins this way. You can also put your knees on the band if that is more comfortable. Start
with a band that offers more assistance and over time work your way down to a weaker band.
Finally, remove the band and start doing them on your own. 
The other option is to have a partner hold your feet while you perform your chin-ups. Simply jump
up to the bar and bend your knees ninety degrees while in the dead hang position. Now have your
partner grab the tops of your feet to assist you in getting up. You should push down on his hands to
help yourself get up and over time try to push less and less until you can do them on your own. 
I got pipe cleaners for arms. Got any tips I should
keep in mind when training biceps?
On all variations of curls you should consciously flex your biceps as hard as you can on the lift-
ing portion of the movement and flex your triceps on the lowering or eccentric portion of the lift.
In other words don’t just yield to gravity but try to pull the weight back down by imagining that
you are doing a pushdown and flexing your triceps. Anytime you contract an antagonistic muscle
(which is what the triceps are to the biceps) immediately before lifting it dramatically increases the
contraction force of the agonist. This is a great tip that should be used on every set of curls. 

86
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
What if I don’t have a back extension? What I can
replace them with?
Kettlebell swings, barbell glute bridges or barbell hip thrusts. See descriptions below:
Kettlebell Swing
•
Stand upright with feet wider than shoulder width
•
Hold a moderately heavy kettlebell with both hands between legs
•
Break at the hips and explosively push your butt back while swinging bell through legs
•
Think about hiking a ball to the quarterback
•
Don’t let bell go below knees or a lower back injury will be likely
•
Torso should be slightly above parallel to ground in bottom position
•
To reverse movement drive hips forward until your body is fully straight and locked up
like a statue
•
Bell should come to upper chest height or where arms are parallel to ground
•
Squeeze glutes at lockout
Barbell Glute Bridge
•
Lie flat on ground and roll a padded barbell up on to your hips
•
Bend knees 90° with feet flat on floor
•
Hold barbell with wide grip to prevent rolling
•
Drive feet into floor and lift hips until body is in a straight line
•
Squeeze glutes and hold for two seconds at top
Barbell Hip Thrust
•
Exactly like barbell glute bridge except that your shoulders are on a flat bench
Should I keep my wrist neutral, 
flexed or bent back when I curl?
Some experts have advised that keeping your wrists bent back when performing a curl will
negate the contribution from the forearms and thus isolate the biceps even better. This is true, but
like I have mentioned many times already, isolation is useless and should be avoided not sought
after. The other problem is that when you bend your wrists back you greatly increase the stress on
them, which could lead to problems. Keep your wrists straight throughout the set and squeeze the
barbell or dumbbell as hard as you possibly can. 
Once you get comfortable with that form you could try what the first Mr. Olympia, Larry Scott
used to recommend, which is curling your wrists before initiating the curl motion at the elbows.
This shortens the lever arm and allows you to use more weight to overload your biceps. 

87
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Why are there no pushdowns or triceps
extensions?
A study by Travil found that the majority of work during a triceps focused exercise is handled
by the medial head of the muscle. It is only when the load is heavy that the lateral and long heads
kick in. What this means is that the triceps respond best to high loads and if you wan them to
grow optimally you have to hit them hard, with heavy weight. Therefore the heavy bench presses
will do far more for you than isolation movements. The long head works best when the arms are
extended overhead so the military presses will also pack meat on the triceps. The dips and close
grip pushups are added to give them a nice pump and put the finishing touches on them. And even
though they are done for higher reps it will still be with far more weight than you could ever do on
an isolation exercise. 
Can I add some direct forearm work?
A thick, vascular pair of forearms never fails to impress people. However, I’d like everyone to
follow the program as is, then add extra work for weak body parts later on down the road. The
forearms receive ample stimulation from all of the chins, rows and deadlifts you will be doing thus
should grow just fine. For now I would highly recommend ordering a pair of Fat Gripz and using
them on all of your dumbbell presses and curls. These are a very hard, dense rubber tube that goes
over the dumbbell and increases the diameter, thus making your grip and forearm muscles work
that much harder. Click HERE to order a pair of Fat Gripz.
Are squats really the “king of all exercises?”
If the squat is not the reigning king it’s definitely top three. When it comes to quad development
there is no other exercise that can compare.
Why do I fall forward when I squat?
It could be weak abs and lower back muscles or excessively tight hip flexors. Stretch the hip
flexors several times per week and especially right before squatting. As for the abs and lower back,
that will improve with time. Be sure you are filling your belly with air and bracing your abs before
you descend and drive your traps back into the bar while pushing your chest out and keeping your
shoulder blades fully retracted. One other option is to try to widen your stance slightly. 

88
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
What should I do if I can’t get all the way down
when squatting?
This could be a flexibility issue so the first thing I recommend is that you stretch your calves, hip
flexors, glutes and hamstrings. Also, be sure when you are descending on the squat that you
actively pull yourself down into the bottom position with your hip flexors. To understand how
this should feel, lie down flat on your back with your knees bent 90 degrees and have a partner
pull on your ankles. Place your index and middle finger on your hip flexors and resist his force and
try to bring your knees to your chest by actively pulling with your hip flexors. Try to lock that feel-
ing in mentally and replicate it when squatting. 
Keep practicing each week and you will get better. Another thing that will help you is con-
sciously opening up the knees when you get closer to parallel. Try to remember that you squat
between your legs and not above them. That makes a big difference. 
My heels come up when squatting. 
What should I do to fix that problem?
Try stretching your calves several times per week for the next month. Stand on a step and allow
your heel to hang all the way down toward the ground. Hold that position for 30 seconds and
repeat two more times. Do this before squatting as well. And get a really good pair of Squat Shoes.
I don’t recommend squatting without them.
How do I stretch my hip flexors?
Get down into a lunge position while keeping your front foot flat on the floor and pushing your
body as far forward as possible. Stay upright and drive your front knee over your toes. Now lean
back and hold that position for ten seconds. To further increase the stretch, lean toward the oppo-
site side while reaching over your head in that direction. So if you were to stretch your left hip
flexor, you would lunge with your right foot forward and lean to your right side while reaching
over your head with your left arm. Repeat this stretch as many times as needed before squatting.
What do I do if my knees buckle 
in when squatting?
A great quick fix that I learned about from Louie Simmons of Westside Barbell Club is to wrap
a jump stretch band around your knees when squatting. Obviously you can’t do this with a bar
but should do a few sets with just bodyweight or while holding a plate or kettlebell on your chest
for a couple of weeks or months until this is no longer a problem. Be sure to really push your
knees out against the bands throughout the set. 

89
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Can I squat with a towel or pad on the bar?
Unless you want the rest of us to laugh and make fun of you I would strongly advise that you
don’t. Not only that, but padding the bar increases the risk of it slipping during your set and can
throw your form off. Build up your traps with heavy deadlifts and shrugs and you will no longer
need to ask that question. 
What kind of sneakers should I wear when I squat?
When you play basketball you wear a basketball shoe. When you play golf you wear a golf
shoe. Squatting should be no different and you should wear a squat shoe. The kind I use and rec-
ommend is the Rogue Do Win http://jasonferruggia.com/do-wins . These shoes will instantly
improve your squat form and eliminate the dangerous tucking or rounding of the lower back.
Therefore they will also make the squat dramatically safer. 
If you don’t have a pair of the Rogue Do Win squat shoes your next best option would be a flat-
soled sneaker like the New Balance Minimus. This is especially important when you are squat-
ting, deadlifting, or overhead pressing. You do not want any heel compressibility at all. Wearing
running sneakers or anything with any type of air sole or gel sole is unsafe and reduces foot sta-
bility and power. Running sneakers and the like also cause you to fall forward while squatting or
deadlifting. 
Another problem with switching shoes and going from one brand of cross trainers to another
brand of running sneakers from one squat day to the next is that it always becomes a new exer-
cise. When your footing changes, the exercise changes. Therefore, it is difficult to reproduce the
movement exactly the same way. This is horrible for learning and mastering an exercise and will
lead to frustration and injury. 
Research has shown that always wearing shoes greatly reduces the sensitivity of the foot. It is
also worth noting that barefoot populations suffer far fewer injuries than Americans who are
always wearing jacked up running sneakers like the Nike Shox. Scientists have said that running
sneakers actually cause injuries that would not have occurred without them. For this reason, I
actually recommend that you train in socks or barefooted as often as possible. 
The only exercises I actually recommend shoes for are squats. This may not always be possible
in a public gym but you can always slip your shoes off discreetly right before a set of heavy dead-
lifts or overhead presses; two exercises where it really helps to be barefoot. If going native is not
an option in your public gym, the next best option is to get yourself a pair of Vibram Five Fingers.
These are a sock-like shoe with rubber bottoms made to simulate barefoot training as closely as
possible. 

90
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
What should I do for cardio?
First of all you want to think conditioning and not cardio. Traditional cardio makes you small
and weak. It’s not very effective for fat burning either. Some guys make the mistake of ignoring
conditioning all together in their quest for more size and strength. But this is a mistake. 
Conditioning is very important and everyone needs to do it regardless of their goals. It used to
be thought that conditioning would cut into your size and strength gains but nothing could be
further from the truth. Look at athletes like NFL players or UFC fighters. They do tons of condi-
tioning work yet are jacked and muscular. By being in good shape and regularly doing some form
of conditioning you will be able to eat more without getting fat and you will be less likely to over-
train since your body will actually be in shape and able to tolerate the demands you are placing
upon it. 
So never skimp on the conditioning and be sure to always get it in no matter what. That way
you’ll be big, strong, lean and in shape instead of big, strong, fat and out of shape. 
Conditioning is already included at the end of the two lower body workouts in the form of
farmers walks and sled work. If you still need some extra conditioning you can add 5-10 minutes
to the end of one or both upper body days. The best option would be battling ropes. You can do
various patterns for 10-20 seconds followed by a sixty-second rest period. Another option would
be to jump rope for 30-60 seconds on, as fast as you can, followed by 30-60 seconds off. 
If you don’t want to add conditioning to the end of upper body days you can run hill sprints or
do sled work on one weekend day per week. Some other options are: jumping rope, hitting a
heavy bag, doing the battling ropes or swinging a sledgehammer. Simply try to go all out, as hard
as you can for 20-30 seconds followed by a brief rest period of 30-90 seconds. Repeat for ten
minutes. Have a puke bucket nearby just to be safe. 
On two or three of your non-training days per week you could do some low intensity cardio to
help you stay lean and recover from your strength training sessions. This could be something as
simple as going for a fast paced walk first thing in the morning. Thirty minutes will get the job
done perfectly. 
“Whenever you come across a hill, run up it.”
—George Hackenshmidt, The Way to Live, 1908

91
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
How do I ensure that I will make continual,
consistent progress in my workouts?
As long as you strive to continually lift heavier weights or do more reps you will make consistent
progress. It’s simple as that. I have already told you what the optimal rep ranges are for each body
part. Those are not likely to change any time soon. As long as you train within those rep ranges
you will grow. There is no need to experiment with different rep ranges on a regular basis in the
hopes that the new stimulus will lead to more muscle growth. It won’t. Consistency and patience is
of the utmost importance if you want to achieve extraordinary results from your training. 
How should I alter the workouts if I am a female?
Females recover faster between sets and workouts and also tend to respond better to a slightly
higher training volume than males do. The MGS workouts are designed specifically for males but
if a female wants to do them she should make the following changes:
• Add one set to every exercise in the main program. The beginner program can remain the
same.
• Add one rep to the rep ranges. So if the rep range is 6-8 reps you would do 7-9. If the rep
range is 8-10 you would do 9-11 and so on and so on. 
• Cut 120 second rest periods to 90. Cut 90 second rest periods to 60. Cut 60 second rest
periods to 45. 
Why are there no calf exercises included in any of
the workouts?
This program is for skinny guys who just need to put on a ton of overall size. Calf training
doesn’t fit into that equation. If your calves really bother you feel free to do a couple of sets of sin-
gle leg bodyweight calf raises on your stairs a few days per week. This can be done on off days.
Simply do 2-3 sets till near failure with minimal rest in between legs. But don’t make it a major
priority that you are obsessing over right now. Your goal is to pack on 20-30 pounds as fast as
possible. If you do that your calves will grow just from the lower body work and the overall
weight gain. 

92
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Why are there no abdominal exercises included in
any of the workouts?
No other muscle group gets more attention than the abs. Every time you pass the magazine
stand or turn on the TV there is some new high tech gizmo or ab workout being promoted that
will supposedly give you a six pack in less time than it takes to eat a bowl of ice cream.
Unfortunately, what they don’t tell you is that you will never see your abs until you get near sin-
gle digit body-fat levels. A lot of guys may see abdominal definition at around 15% body-fat but
you won’t be shredded and really be able to see a six-pack until you are under 10%. The only way
to do that is through proper diet and conditioning… and a lot of hard work. 
Endless sets of crunches and sit-ups will do nothing to burn abdominal fat but will break your
back and ruin your posture. It is physically impossible to spot reduce so please ignore the tempta-
tion to do 500 sit ups per day because you heard that your favorite pro athlete did it every day
while growing up. He is where is and looks like he does due in large part to elite genetics; not
because of all the sit-ups. 
Most of the big compound exercises you will be doing, such as overhead presses, pushups,
squats, deadlifts and farmers walks work your abs to the max; therefore additional isolation work
is largely unnecessary and often counterproductive for the hardgainer looking to gain size rapidly.
Not only that, but loaded spinal flexion, which is what most guys do when they perform sit ups
and machine crunches, can lead to a degeneration of the discs, shortening of the hip flexors and a
lifetime of back pain. 
Forget about direct isolation ab work for the next twelve weeks and just worry about getting
jacked. 
I’m an athlete and need to add some explosive
speed training to the workouts. How do I do that?
First of all, these workouts are perfect for athletes because there are no machines used and
everything you do is designed to build functional real world muscle and strength. Also, because
higher reps are minimized so is excessive soreness and fatigue. That means you will always be
fresh and explosive on off days between workouts for when you want to run, practice or play. 
As already mentioned, all reps should be performed explosively on every exercise. Never do
slow grinders or go anywhere close to failure. However, if you are an athlete you will also need to
add in some specialized explosive power exercises like Olympic lifts and jumps. To add this to the
MGS workouts you have a few different options. 

93
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
My first choice in explosive work will always be some type of jump. You can simply choose
some a jump (box jump, vertical jump, triple jump, standing broad jump, kneeling jump, hurdle
jump, etc.) and do it for five sets of three reps with about a 60-90 seconds rest between sets. Do
them immediately before squats and deadlifts. If you are playing a sport during the week the need
for plyometric work and your ability to recover from it will be reduced. 
Also, remember that there are Olympic pull variations on Day 4 during Phase 2 & 3, which will
build explosive power as well. 
Is it ok to use any lifting equipment like straps,
wrist wraps, knee wraps, knee sleeves, elbow
sleeves, gloves and/or a belt?
Let’s address each of these, one at a time.
• Straps- These can be used on exercises such as dead lifts, heavy rows and shrugs when the
weights you are able to use exceed your grip strength. At that point, not only can you use
straps but you should use straps because you don’t want your grip strength to be the limiting
factor. If you can dead lift 405 with straps but only have the grip strength to hold 350, you are
robbing your body of growth potential. 
• Wrist wraps- Unless you have some kind of wrist problem I wouldn’t recommend that you use
wrist wraps.
• Knee wraps- I don’t recommend ever using knee wraps unless you are competing in power-
lifting. If you are competing in powerlifing, knee wraps can aid you greatly and are, in fact, a
must use item. But otherwise, skip the knee wraps. 
• Knee sleeves- Neoprene knee sleeves can be worn when training to keep the knees warm
which way may help some lifters feel better and may also keep the knees safer. They are not
required.
• Elbow sleeves- These can be worn for the same reasons as knee sleeves. If you have any kind
of elbow problems I recommend that you invest in a pair of elbow sleeves. 
• Gloves- Gloves do nothing but prevent calluses and keep your hands pretty. If you’re a man
and would like to remain one, I highly recommend that you avoid ever being seen wearing
lifting gloves. 

94
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
• Lifting belt- A lifting belt is an artificial aid that will allow you to lift more weight than you
could on your own without. The downside is that by covering up a weak link in the chain, in
this case your abs or lower back, the extra stress has to go somewhere. This usually ends up
being your knees or spine, often times resulting in serious injuries. 
You should only wear a belt if you have a preexisting back injury, and then in that case on only
on heavy squats and deadlifts. In all other cases I do not recommend it. Strengthen your entire
core and build your own belt; don’t buy one. You’ll thank me in the long run.
What happens if I gain a lot of muscle and then
stop working out? Will it all turn to fat?
No, this is one of the oldest myths in the book. Muscle and fat are two completely different
types of tissue and one cannot turn into the other; it is impossible. If you stop training you will
lose muscle and you will probably gain fat, since your metabolism will slow down. But the muscle
itself will not turn to fat. By the same token, a fat guy cannot expect to magically transform his fat
into muscle when he begins a serious training program. His best bet would be to lose the fat first
and then start building muscle. 
I’m stuck on certain dumbbell exercises since a
ten-pound jump is too much for me right now. Is
there any way around this?
When weight increases become more difficult it is always beneficial to have Plate Mates to add
to dumbbells. These are tiny magnetic weights and come in 1.5 and 5/8 pound increments.
Sometimes it can be very difficult on a dumbbell exercise to increase from 70’s to 75’s because it is
actually a ten-pound jump when you add the two dumbbells together. Therefore, with the Plate
Mates, you now have the option of going to 71.25 or 72.5 on the next workout. Small increases
add up big time in the long run. 
I’d also recommend ordering your own set of Fractional Plates http://jasonferruggia.com/fractionalplates.
This is another great investment you can make to ensure consistent progress. Whereas going up
from 185 pounds to 190 pounds may be too big of a jump sometimes, you can now go from 185
to 186 or 187.5 with the use of these smaller plates. These small plates will help you keep making
progress while avoiding frustration and injury. I can’t recommend them highly enough. 

95
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Can I use the safety squat bar in place 
of a regular straight bar for squats?
Yes, if you have a safety squat bar please feel free to use it. This is a great option and my per-
sonal favorite bar to squat with. 
Can I replace the free squat with a box squat? 
Yes, as long as you are doing so for the right reasons. I would only do that if you can’t squat
properly due to some type of knee issues. Box squats are, indeed, a bit less stressful on the knees,
however they don’t build mass in the legs anywhere nearly as effectively as an Olympic style free
squat. 
Can I use a Swiss bar or football bar in 
place of the straight bar for presses?
Absolutely! I highly recommend it, in fact. If own or have access to a bar with angled or neutral
grips that will always be the preferred option for pressing since those types of bars will place far
less stress on the wrists, elbows and shoulders. 
What exercises should I use Fat Gripz on?
All dumbbell presses and curl variations. You can also add them to your dumbbell handles or
farmers walk implements to thicken up the grip. I don’t recommend them for rows or pull ups
because the grip becomes too hard to hold on to and thus, you don’t train your back muscles with
adequate load. 
I really want to build up this stack of dimes 
I have for a neck. Can I do some extra neck work
besides what’s included on Day 4 each week?
Yes. On Day 2 you can add in some manual resistance front neck raises (flexion). Have a part-
ner hold a towel over your head to provide resistance. You can also fold a towel up for padding
then place a plate on your forehead. The third option is to order a ten-pound neck weight that
wraps around your head with Velcro. Whatever option you choose the technique will be the same-
lay face up with your head hanging off the end of bench (or your bed, couch, etc.) and simply nod
and up and down. These can be done 4-6 hours before or after your main workout. Do three sets
of 15-20 reps.

96
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
How do I make inverted rows harder?
Firstly, be sure you are doing them on rings or the Jungle Gym XT. Secondly, hold each rep at
the top for 2-3 seconds in the fully contracted position while squeezing your shoulder blades
tightly together and keeping your entire body in one straight line. Once this gets too easy you can
start loading them with a weighted vest or chains wrapped around your back. You can also have
a partner place a sandbag on your chest. Or you can go with the poor mans McGuyver option
and throw some weight in a backpack. 
How do I make suspended pushups harder?
The same way you do inverted rows. In addition to those changes you can also set the straps
farther apart. The function of the pecs is to draw the arms across the midline of the body. So by
setting the straps further apart you make the pecs have to work even harder to pull the handles
together as you press your way up.  You can also experiment with a modified planche pushup
variation on the rings where you start to supinate your palms (move them into a curl grip) and
down towards your hips as you descend. Be warned, though, that this is an advanced progression
and should only be attempted after you have dominated regular suspended pushups. 
I don’t have a Jungle Gym XT or rings. 
What should I replace suspended pushups with?
Flat dumbbell presses or weighted pushups. 
I don’t have access to neutral grip 
chin up handles. What should I do? 
You should set up your Jungle Gym XT or rings and do chins on them. If you don’t have either
of those then you will just have to do regular pull ups. 
Should I add weight to the bodyweight exercises
like suspended pushups, inverted rows, chin ups
and dips when I can get more reps than the
program calls for?
You have to make the exercises more challenging over time. So you should either add an iso-
metric pause to the most difficult portion of the exercise or you should add weight with chains,
weighted vests or a dip belt. 

97
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
What else can I do on off days to keep my
shoulders strong and healthy?
Do fifty reps of shoulder dislocations with a band and fifty reps of band pull aparts every day.
These should be done in one continuous set with light resistance, but enough to get a pump and
a pretty good burning sensation. After you’ve doing that for a few months you can add a second
set in each day. 
What does AMAP mean?
As many as possible. But that doesn’t mean you should go to failure. Always leave a rep or two
in the tank. 
What should I do when I finish the program?
If you want to continue to make incredible gains
after you finish Muscle Gaining Secrets your best bet
will be to move on to another 12 week strength and
mass building program found in The Renegade Inner
Circle (http://www.RenegadeInnerCircle.com)

98
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Meet The
Program
Creator
ason Ferruggia is a former skinny-fat-ass who gained over 80
pounds of drug-free muscle by using the techniques in this
book. He is also a highly sought after, world-renowned
strength and conditioning specialist based out of the New
York/New Jersey area. Since 1994 he has trained more than
700 athletes from over 90 different professional and collegiate organiza-
tions. He has also worked extensively with firefighters, police officers and
military personnel as well as numerous weekend warriors, Hollywood
stars and entertainers. Jason is known for his ability to help people gain
muscle and shed body-fat as fast as humanly possible and for the incredible
transformations he makes in all of his clients’ physiques. 
Jason is currently the chief training adviser for Men’s Fitness magazine where he also has his own
monthly column called The Hard-Gainer. He is also an advisory board member to Live Strong and has
authored hundreds of articles for various other fitness related websites and magazines such as Muscle &
Fitness, Men’s Health, Maximum Fitness, MMA SportsMag, Today’s Man, Muscle and Fitness, Hers and
Shape.
A regular lecturer and media consultant, Jason has given seminars all over the country on the subject of
fitness and performance enhancement, and his cutting edge training techniques have been featured on over
30 radio and TV stations such as CBS, ESPN, FOX, ABC, 1010 Wins: New York, America Tonight and
many others.
For more information about Jason and his training methods and products, please visit
www.JasonFerruggia.com 
Note: A special thanks goes to Sean Hyson for all of his help on this project.
J

99
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
Resources
Jungle Gym XT ( http://jasonferruggia.com/junglegymxt )
Gymnastics Rings ( http://jasonferruggia/trainingrings )
Kettlebells ( http://jasonferruggia.com/kettlebells )
Fractional Plates ( http://jasonferruggia.com/fractionalplates )
Jump Rope ( http://jasonferruggia.com/jumprope )
Pushing Sled ( http://jasonferuggia.com/sled )
Dragging Sled ( http://jasonferruggia.com/dragsled ) 
Strength Training Bands ( http://jasonferruggia.com/strengthbands )
Fat Gripz ( http://jasonferruggia.com/fatgripz )
Squat Shoes ( http://jasonferruggia.com/do-wins )
Battling Ropes ( http://jasonferruggia.com/battlingropes )

100
Copyright © 2012 by Jason Ferruggia. All Rights Reserved  http://www.MuscleGainingSecrets.com/
FTC Disclosure
As of December 1st, 2009 the FTC requires that we disclose whenever there could be hidden
interests or unspoken biases related to recommendations. As I have already stated I only
recommend products that I wholeheartedly recommend and would use myself. However, to
cover my ass, please assume that for every link I have placed in this manual I will be getting
paid thousands of dollars, flown around the world first class and provided with a lifetime
supply of free hookers by the owners of said companies. 

