www.mymobileindia.com
Tested
Honor View 10, 
Galaxy A8+, Bharat 5, 
iVOOMi i1, Redmi 5A, 
t-phone P and many 
more…
Neeraj Sharma, 
Country Head, 
Spreadtrum India
Jai Mani, 
Lead Product Manager, 
Xiaomi India
10 Ways How 
AI Will Make  
Smartphones  
Smarter!
Chief Speak
faCe to faCe
february 2018  rs 100 
®
your gateway to the world of mobility
PHONE OF THE MONTH
GooGle Pixel 2 xl
www.mymobileindia.com

THE PERFECT DUO
Our Chipset. Your Smartphone.
A world of possibility opens up when the latest 
MediaTek Helio chipsets meet your phone.
mediatek.com


tage is all set for a new era in smartphone 
evolution! Your smartphone is going to be 
smarter, rather one should say it will soon 
have a brain of its own. And the catalyst 
for the next stage of evolution will be the fusion of 
Artificial Intelligence or AI with the phone device 
which is underway at a frenzied pace. A Gartner 
study has forecasted that by 2022, 80 percent of 
all smartphones shipped will have on-device AI 
capabilities, up from 10 percent in 2017. So from a device 
which worked primarily at your command, it will soon have 
a mind of its own. The device will become intuitive, will 
have impressive cognitive capability and will be intelligent 
enough to advice and guide you with your daily chores. The 
next stage of evolution will not be so much about hardware 
or specs but software. The future is indeed here!
Stage is also set for India finally becoming a 
manufacturing hub for mobile handset. Years of unrelenting 
efforts on policy front and regulatory roadmap by Indian 
Cellular Association is bearing fruit in a massive way. Our 
effort is to push this momentum to the next level by making 
India a hub for just not mobile and batteries but entire 
electronics devices. Good news on this front too will be 
heard soon.
This is our anniversary issue! We have completed 13 
years of glorious leadership, both in terms of readership 
and mindshare as well as impact. Evolution with times by 
making continuous improvement in content, design and 
presentation is what has kept us at leadership position ever 
since our launch. And very soon, we are going to launch our 
totally new, international class website which will provide 
our readers and aficionados with a most in-depth platform 
for the world of mobility. For our advertising associates and 
brands, our new website will provide the most distinguished 
platform for outreach and promotion.
Readers, advertisers and associates – thank you very 
much for this wonderful journey and your support. Keep 
showering your love and affection.
And Yes, Happy Reading!  n
firstcall
MYMOBILE
Editorpage
04 | FEbRuARY 2018
Pankaj Mohindroo
editor-in-chief 
S
The Future is Here and How!
Follow Us:
Facebook
facebook.com/mymobilemag
Twitter
twitter.com/MyMobileMag
the publishers regret that they cannot accept liability for errors 
and omissions contained in this publication, however caused. 
the opinions and the views contained in this publication are not  
necessarily those of the publishers. readers are advised to 
seek specialist advice before acting on information contained in 
this publication, which is provided for general use and may not 
be appropriate for the reader’s particular circumstances. the 
ownership of trademarks is acknowledged.
Volume Xiii, issue i, february 2018
e d i t o r i a L
Pankaj Mohindroo  | editor-in-chief
Shelley Vishwajeet |  editor
ramesh Kumar raja |  assistant editor
haider ali Khan |  Senior correspondent
nijhum rudra |  correspondent
Vanshika Malhotra |  correspondent
d e S i G n
ajit Kumar Parashar |  Sr. Graphic designer
M a r K e t i n G
Puja Mohindroo |  Manager - business
Sandeep Kumar |  Sr. Manager – Marketing
o P e r a t i o n S
K. rajagopalan |  advisor-Legal, accounts & 
 
          administration
deepak Kohli |  Manager – accounts
Varun Lama |  Sr. Manager – human resources
b. G. Mathur |  Manager- Production
c i r c u L a t i o n
bhupender Singh bisht   |  Manager – circulation 
a d V i S o r y  b o a r d
bejon Misra
rajan Mathews
S.d.  Saxena
Subhash chandra
Sunil dutt
Sonu bhasin
uvaraj natarajan
edited, published, printed and owned by Pankaj Mohindroo, Published 
from flat no. 25, first floor, Shankar Market, connaught Place, new 
delhi – 110001. Printed at ht Media Ltd. b-2, Sector 63, noida.
 G e t  i n  t o u c h
Editorial : shelley@mymobile.co.in
Marketing : sandeep@mymobile.co.in
Circulation : bhupender@mymobile.co.in
Phone : 011—46206161 Fax : 011—41520637


Style Notes
10  LETTERS
12  CELL SPEAK
14  RUMOR MILL
16  NEWS
21  BIG NEWS
109  MY GUIDE
26  JUST IN 
 
 Get a close look at new mobile 
 
 
devices now in the market
42  LEAD STORY
 
 
10 Ways How AI Will Make 
 
 
Smartphones Smarter!
46  CHIEF SPEAK
 
 
Neeraj Sharma – Country Head  
 
 
(India), Spreadtrum 
 
 
Communications
 
 FACE TO FACE:  
 
 Interviews with business/industry 
 
 
leaders
48  
Jai Mani – Lead Product  
 
 
Manager, Xiaomi India
51  
Prashant Bora – CEO, East Sun 
 
 
Electronics India
56   Sukesh Jain – Vice-President, 
 
 
IT & Mobile Enterprises  
 
 
Business, Samsung India
84  
Ramakant Khandelwal – Chief 
 
 
Marketing Officer, PAYBACK 
 
 
India
86  
Doug Suttles – Co-Founder and 
 
 
General Manager, Ookla
135  Dilip Venkatraman – Founder 
 
 
 & CEO, VideoTap 
 
 MARKET INSIGHT
52  
Chinese mobile brands’ profit 
 
 
soars but they still have a long 
 
 
way to go
58  
IoT connected devices to cross 
 
 
the billion mark by 2020
54  CONSUMER  
 
 INSIGHT
 
 
App is still the way to go!
  The Burntest
62  GOOGLE PIXEL 2 XL
64  HONOR VIEW 10
46
58
contents
06 | FEBRuARY 2018
MYMOBILE
42
88


contents
MYMOBILE
What's Inside
Total number of pages = 148
66  SAMSUNG GALAXY A8+   
 
 (2018)
68  AMAZON 10. OR D
70  MICROMAX CANVAS  
 
 
 INFINITY PRO
72  XIAOMI REDMI 5A
74  INFOCUS VISION 3
76  SMARTRON T-PHONEP
78  COMIO C2
80  MICROMAX BHARAT 5
82  IVOOMI I1  
 
 INDUSTRY INSIGHT
88  
Samsung displaces Intel as 
 
 
the undisputed leader of the 
 
 
global semiconductor  
 
 
business
98  
Global IT spending forecasted 
 
 
to reach USD3.7 trillion in 
 
 
2018
 
 SPECIAL FEATURE
92  Expectations MWC 2018!
131 The Best Smartphones  
 
 
Under 10K!
134 Where’s my Kitty Cat?
 
 BY INVITATION
94  
Here is how chatbots are  
 
 
redefining human/business  
 
 
interactions – Aakrit Vaish,  
 
 
Co-Founder & CEO, Haptik
104 5 Digital Marketing Trends 
 
 
To Watch Out For In 2018 
 
 
– Vaibhav Vats, Co-Founder,   
 
 
Digiperform
100  SHOWBIZ
 
 
CES 2018: Innovations  
 
 
Showcased
106 BAZAAR 
 
 BARGAIN
 
 
Four phones which are smart 
 
 
buy today
136 ADD ONS
 
 
The latest and the best of 
 
 
gadgets and accessories, from 
 
 
gaming peripherals to  
 
 
fitness-centric accessories
146 VANTAGE POINT 
 
 
“G’Five will invest INR 1,000 
 
 
crore by 2020” – Aashish 
 
 
Kumar, Director SSIC
109
131
104

M O B I L E S
YEAR
1
For Trade  
Enquiries, 
 Contact :  
+91 9810026272
KBR TRADING PVT. LTD.
Go beyond with KARA...
BRIGHT
ELIGHT
K-20
K-16
SPORTS+
Head Off: E-33, Prashant Vihar, Delhi- 110005. Tel: 011-25757636. E-mail: thukral51@yahoo.co.in
Factory: Plot No. 351, Phase-V, EHTP, HSIIDC, Sector-56, Sonipat, Kundli-Haryana-101028
Sales Office: 8A/21G, W.E.A. Karol Bagh, Delhi-110005.  
E-mail: kannav.thukral@karamobiles.in, Mob: +91 9811988088
K-18
K-15
K-19
KARA Mobiles 
has more than
service centers
400
K-17
6.09 cm (2.4”) 
Colour Display
4,000 mAh  
Battery
Digital 
Camera
Expandable 
Upto 32GB
Big Yamaha 
Speaker
Big  
Speaker
5 LED Torch
Hi-end Selfie 
Camera
Curved  
IMF Glass
Emergency 
Button
Dual SIM
6.09 cm (2.4”) 
Colour Display
Dual  
High Definition  
Digital Camera
Big Yamaha 
Speaker
High Definition  
Camera
Big Battery
Big Battery
Dual SIM
Dual SIM
Super LED Torch
10 
DAY
A
S
S
U
R
E
D
S
E
R
V
I
C
E
4.6cm (1.8”) Colour 
Display
Big Battery
Dual High Definition 
Digital Camera
Extra Large  
Multimedia Speaker
Dual SIM Dual 
Standby
12.7cm (5.0") HD LCD
Front 2.0 MP 
Back 5.0 MP
2200mAh
AVI/MP3/3GP/MP4/RMVB
Dual SIM
1GB RAM 
8GB ROM
Quad Core

My trust and passion of 
reading My Mobile keeps on 
increasing as the topics 
which you have been 
covering these days are 
wonderful like the last issue 
of January (Hot Consumer 
Trends 2018) has been very 
informative, well timed and 
properly researched one. 
While the Big News and 
Consumer Insights are 
wholesome informative, the 
Bazaar Bargain helps us to 
know the latest price of the 
already launched products 
on which we could get the 
best bargain. My best 
wishes to My Mobile team. 
—Shilpa Kanwal, New Delhi
Dear My Mobile team, it 
gives me an immense 
knowledge of mobile 
ecosystem which you guys 
deliver through the 
magazine and it’s simply 
brilliant. I would also 
suggest you to add few more 
devices and gadgets like you 
did of OnePlus 5T in your 
burn tests. Majority of 
readers or the users might 
not be aware of the whole 
insight about any latest 
mobile or technology but 
what we get from it, which is 
very helpful and deep. I am 
a regular reader of your 
magazine and I also 
recommend it to my friends 
and family. It is a must have 
for those who want to get 
useful and correct 
information. 
—Vikas Singh, Varanasi
My Mobile has been 
associated with me since I 
was in my college and has 
been a part of my growing 
up. I am very fond of this 
unique and informative 
magazine present in the 
country. Since I am a 
dedicated reader since my 
young age, I have been 
admired as the one who 
knows everything in my 
friends and neighbors about 
mobile and technology. I 
want to thank the whole 
team of My Mobile for their 
continuous support.
—Prashant Kumar, Patna
We, as the regular reader 
and subscriber of My 
Mobile, love to read the 
gadgets, mobiles and apps 
more often in the magazine 
rather than going to any 
website. The main source of 
our tech content comes 
from My Mobile magazine. 
The unmatched quality of 
the product keeps it in a 
different league altogether. 
Just-ins, Consumer and 
Industry Insights always 
come handy. An ideal tech 
magazine should follow your 
footsteps.
—Ramandeep Singh, 
Chandigarh
The January issue’s editorial 
was well elaborated and very 
timely as were quite 
interested in knowing the 
trends that have dominated 
the year. The new service 
provider has taken everyone 
by storm. The burn tests, 
chief speak and games you 
did were pretty good. It has 
been my guide to all the 
tech queries and hence 
developing my knowledge as 
a consumer. I want you to 
include more gadgets and 
mobiles in your Burn Test 
section.
—Priyanka, Mumbai
My Mobile has been my 
boredom buster during long 
trips and journeys. We get 
all the information about the 
apps and new features 
running onto our handsets. 
You guys always do in-
depthstory. Waiting for your 
next issue.
—Rajamik Doley, Gauhati
The best way to get 
knowledge about all the 
available mobile devices 
and their prices is My 
Mobile. The kind of 
collective information 
available in My Guide 
section of the magazine is 
very helpful, especially  
for a customer and reader 
like me. We get all the 
brands, their specifications 
and price range at the  
same place. Rather than 
flipping through the  
entire magazine, one  
would get the idea  
about any particular  
mobile.
—Sushant, Pune
www.mymobileindia.com
Tested
Honor 7X, Moto X4, Vivo 
V7, Centric L3, Redmi Y1, 
Comio P1, and more…
Sudhin Mathur, 
MD Motorola & Country 
Head Lenovo
HOT CONSUMER TRENDS 2018
CHIEF SPEAK
JANUARY 2018  Rs 100 
®
YOUR GATEWAY TO THE WORLD OF MOBILITY
PHONE OF THE 
MONTH
ONEPLUS 5T
www.mymobileindia.com
Are you crazy about cellphones and have the  
potential to pen a few lines? 
Do you have a nose for news and can also key in a dream  
headline? Do you crave to lay your hands on the latest  
gizmos and tell the world about them? If you think you have 
it in you, we are looking for you. Rush your CV to  
team@mymobile.co.in to see your name in My Mobile, 
India’s best mobile magazine.
letters
MYMOBILE
Inbox
10 |  feBRuARY 2018


Quotes
cellspeak
MYMOBILE
“I told DoT that I am not quitting telecom, I am 
exiting the mobile business. We are in cloud, 
IoT (internet of things), data 
centre, submarine cables”
 
— Anil Ambani,
Chairman, Reliance Group, spoke to ET 
in his first interview in 10 years
“We are one of the biggest 
companies on planet to 
effectively leverage AI (artificial 
intelligence) and ML (machine 
learning) for efficient global 
supply operations and for 
planning and management of manufacturing”
— Ken Wong,  
President - Asia Pacific, Lenovo, on the sidelines of Consumer 
Electronics Show 2018
“Digital India can greatly benefit from 5G, 
you will get digital content that would be 
for public use across all markets. India is 
extremely powerful today in all 
aspects - IT, local industry, on 
application”
— Emmanuel Coelho Alves, 
Wireless Marketing Director, Huawei, in an 
interaction with a news daily
“Digital India has to be implemented, 
which will offer many benefits to other 
sectors as well. Telecom ministry should 
be seen as a facilitator, rather than a 
revenue generator. It’s a valid point”
— Manoj Sinha,
Union Telecom Minister,  
in an interview to a newspaper
“We are 
planning a 
robust data 
protection 
framework 
to empower 
the digital 
mandate. Data 
protection 
is beyond 
Aadhaar; issue 
of privacy is a 
global threat”
 — Aruna 
Sundararajan,
Secretary, DoT, at an 
event in New Delhi
12 | fEbRUARy 2018


Google Duo lets you call 
people who don’t have 
the app installed
There is a buzz in the air that Google 
Duo, the Google’s video calling app 
works on devices that don’t have the 
app installed. According to reports, the 
users, who have installed the latest 
Android version on their smartphone, 
can access Google Duo without down-
loading the app. However, on iOS 
platform, the app will be required for 
making calls on Duo. The company is 
also reportedly working on versions of 
the app for web browsers, and group 
calls with better audio quality. Google’s 
video chats mobile app was announced 
at the company’s developer conference 
in May 2016 and began its worldwide 
release in August the same year. Google 
Duo lets users make video calls in high 
definition. It is optimised for low-band-
width networks. End-to-end encryption 
is enabled by default. Duo is based on 
phone numbers, allowing users to call 
someone from their contact list. The 
app automatically switches between 
Wi-Fi and cellular networks.
Xiaomi Redmi Note 5 
likely to come with QS 
632 SoC
Xiaomi is expected to unveil a new 
smartphone in its Redmi Note series, 
dubbed the Redmi Note 5 soon. 
Rumours have started building up and 
the latest one hints about the possible 
specs of the forthcoming smartphone. 
According to a Chinese site MyDrivers.
com, the Redmi Note 5 (which is cur-
rently in the testing phase) is expected 
to be powered by the future Qualcomm 
Snapdragon 632 mobile platform 
clocked at 1.8GHz, which is expected  
to launch soon. The smartphone is 
likely to come with a bezel-less display, 
rated at 5.99-inch with an aspect ratio 
standing at 18:9. It is likely to come 
equipped with 4GB of RAM, however, 
the internal storage configuration is  
still not known. Moreover, the smart-
phone is expected to feature dual rear 
cameras, rated at 12-megapixel, howev-
er, there is no word on the front camera. 
The smartphone is reported to come 
with a price tag of CNY 1,599 (around 
Rs 15,630).
LG to rebrand its G 
series this year
South Korean tech major LG reportedly 
plans to repackage its flagship G series 
of smartphones with a new naming 
scheme, which means that there will  
no longer be an LG G7 this year. The 
name might be replaced with a two  
digit number, among other options 
that the company is yet to announce. 
According to a report by The Investor, 
“LG is preparing a new brand  
strategy for the G series in the first  
half of the year. Numbering the phone 
with a two-digit number and  
rebranding the phone with a new  
name are some of the options on the 
table.” LG, in 2012, had began pro-
ducing the high-end G series with the 
launch of the Optimus G, followed 
by the removal of the word ‘Optimus’ 
and keeping the ‘G’ for the series. The 
report suggests that this decision is 
an industry standard with Apple and 
Samsung having indulged similarly in 
the past. n
Talk in Tech 
Corners
RumouR mill
MYMOBILE
14 | FEBRuARY 2018
team@mymobile.co.in 


Samsung to grow its presence across 
channels in India
Samsung is looking to grow its business 
across channels, including online, as the 
year progresses, Asim Warsi, Global Vice 
President, Samsung India, said recently. 
“We are wherever our users are. And that’s 
why we have the largest retail network in the 
country with over 150,000 touch points. 
We are constantly looking to grow our 
business and are looking to pave growth 
stories in all channels including the online 
space,” Warsi said. Samsung, which is 
gearing up to take on Chinese rivals in the 
online segment, has launched two back-to-
back “online exclusive” handsets. The two 
devices -- Galaxy A8+ and Galaxy On7 
Prime -- are from different price segments. 
Samsung has 43 per cent market share in 
the offline market, which account for nearly 
75 per cent of all smartphones sales.
Vivo unveils online store to sell smartphones 
in India
Chinese handset maker Vivo has launched 
its e-store to sell Vivo smartphones in the 
country. It has also rolled out a host of 
benefits like discount coupons up to Rs 
2,000 on selected smartphones and 12-
month zero-cost EMI, to name a few. “Vivo’s 
strategy of launching an e-store is an 
affirmation of the Indian market maturing 
in terms of internet penetration, payment 
and fulfillment infrastructure, thus 
representing a huge growth potential,” said 
Kenny Zeng, Chief Marketing Officer, Vivo 
India. Additionally, the offer includes “Book 
My Show” couple vouchers up to Rs 500, 
free delivery on all orders across the country 
and a lucky draw where 10 customers will 
get a chance to win premium Bluetooth 
speakers worth Rs 2,999. Vivo said that its 
online store is catering to more than 10,000 
pin codes covering most of the serviceable 
areas in the country.
Huawei upgrades its OS with AI 
capabilities
Chinese smartphone major Huawei recently 
unveiled EMUI 8.0 -- its custom Operating 
System (OS) based on Android Oreo 
platform that promises to boost productivity 
with Artificial Intelligence (AI) capabilities. 
The EMUI 8.0, already available on Honor 
View 10, will be rolled out on devices such 
as Honor 8 Pro, Honor 9i, Honor 7X and 
Honor 8 Lite soon. “The update significantly 
cuts down on the number of steps needed 
to achieve the desired function through its 
smart applications like navigation dock and 
smart screen. It enables the user to reach 
90 per cent of the core functions in a single-
click,” Huawei said in a statement. The 
custom OS engages in low-memory 
management by allocating resources in a 
way to provide more space to ensure holistic 
experience coupled with AI capabilities. 
EMUI 8.0 has features like smart resolution, 
dynamic wallpaper, navigation bar 
customisations and more.
Apple revamps App Store web interface 
with iOS 11-like design
Apple has updated its cumbersome App 
Store web interface similar to the user-
friendly iOS 11 App Store. “The new 
redesign takes cues from the all-new App 
Store in iOS 11, which offers larger images, 
a focus on curation and reviews, and more. 
On the new webpage, you’ll see a larger app 
heading, preceded by ‘this app is only 
available on the App Store for iOS devices’,” 
9to5Mac reported recently. As part of the 
design overhaul, Apple is showcasing app 
screenshots from its latest iPhone X. 
“Previously, the web interface used the old 
square interface of screenshots from older 
iPhone devices. In the case of screenshots 
from apps that are not optimised for iPhone 
X, Apple still shows the older images,” the 
report added. The Cupertino-based giant 
redesigned and launched the iOS 11 App 
Store in September last year.
Honor rolls out new update for Honor View 
10, brings ‘Face Unlock’ feature
Huawei’s sub-brand Honor recently 
announced the roll-out of a software update 
that will bring ‘Face Unlock’ feature to its 
“View 10” smartphones. To enable the 
feature, you need to register your face by 
accessing face-recognition feature in phone 
settings menu. The Rs 29,999 Honor View 
10 detects the positioning between a user 
and the device and adjusts the direction 
accordingly. The Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
technology not only unlocks the device 
when sensors recognise your face but also 
turn off the screen when it senses that the 
users are no longer reading. It also detects 
newsbits
MYMOBILE
What’s Up
16 | FEBRUARy 2018

)LJKWHU)
1RZLQ,1',$
8GK\RJ0DUJ)%ORFN6HFWRU
1RLGD8WWDU3UDGHVK
FDUH#LQYHQVPRELOHLQ


newsbits
MYMOBILE
What’s Up
18 | february 2018
users’ position and adjusts the direction 
accordingly. The update will also enable 
closed-eye face-unlock prevention and 
intelligent screen-on. Honor View 10 has 
octa-core Kirin 970 chipset, 6Gb raM, 
128Gb on-board memory and eMuI 8.0.
Xiaomi picks three joint sponsors for IPO
Chinese tech major Xiaomi has picked Citic 
Securities, Goldman Sachs and Morgan 
Stanley as joint sponsors for its proposed 
IPO, according to reports quoting people 
familiar with the development. The IPO of 
the company, which could be the world’s 
biggest tech float this year, is expected to 
come in the second half of the year and 
likely to be in Hong Kong, according to the 
people. The company is expected to add 
more banks to the transaction later, say the 
reports, adding that Credit Suisse, Deutsche 
bank, JP Morgan and around two Chinese 
banks are likely to be added as joint global 
coordinators. The deal, which could value 
Xiaomi at as much as uS$100bn, is highly 
anticipated by investors. Xiaomi earlier told 
bankers it would top its annual revenue 
target by as much as 18%. It is estimated 
to post a net profit of at least uS$1bn in 
2017, banker projections based on the 
company’s revenue estimate of uS$17bn-
$18bn show.
itel Mobile launches itel A40, a 4G VoLTE-
enabled smartphone at Rs 3,099
itel Mobile recently rolled out its latest 4G 
smartphone offering, itel a40, at an effective 
price of rs 3,099 in association with 
telecom operator airtel, under its ‘Mera 
Pehla Smartphone’ initiative. Customers 
need to make a down payment of rs 4,599 
to own the all-new itel a40 and will get an 
attractive cashback benefit of rs 1,500 
over a period of 36 months. at the end of 
18 months, customers who have done 
recharges worth rs 3,000 (in any 
denomination of their choice) will be eligible 
for the first cashback installment of rs 500. 
They will be eligible for the second 
installment of rs 1000, provided they 
complete another set of recharges worth rs 
3,000 over the next 18 months. The 
smartphone will come bundled with a 
monthly recharge pack of rs 169 from 
airtel, offering generous data and calling 
benefits.
Smartron welcomes golfer Anirban Lahiri on 
board
after Sachin Tendulkar, technology firm 
Smartron has added ace Indian golfer 
anirban Lahiri to give it a sporty edge in the 
competitive market. anirban will endorse 
the brand on a five-year contract on the 
global stage. In return, Smartron, the global 
OeM and IoT brand, will be the main 
sponsors involving anirban and will support 
his journey on the global stage. Tendulkar 
has been involved with the company as its 
brand ambassador and strategic shareholder 
from its early days. With this association, 
Smartron wants to bring alive on the global 
stage Indian stories from all walks of life. It 
wants to put India on the innovation map of 
the world through its powered tronX platform 
and ecosystem, said an official press 
release. Lahiri, an arjuna awardee is the 
highest ranked Indian golfer in the world, 
and was no 75 in the PGa Championship in 
2017. He has 20 professional wins to his 
credit.
Reliance Jio posts Rs 504 crore profit in 
Q3
Telecom major reliance Jio Infocomm has 
reported a net profit of rs 504 crore for the 
fiscal third quarter, its first within 15 months 
of start of commercial operations, buoyed 
by strong subscriber additions and cost 
efficiencies, including sharply lower 
payments on account of interconnect 
charges. The company, which upended the 
market since its entry in September 2016 
with its initially free voice and data and now 
much cheaper mobile internet services, has 
posted a revenue of rs 6.879 crore, up 
nearly 12% on quarter. India’s fourth largest 
telco by user base had recorded a net loss 
of rs 271 crore in the previous three-month 
period ended September, which was also 
the first quarter when it formally reported 
results. The new telecom entrant’s average 
revenue per user (arPu) - a key performance 
parameter - stood at rs 154, the same as 
in the fiscal second quarter. 
Vodafone 4G VoLTE rollout begins in India
Vodafone has started rolling out its 4G 
VoLTe services in the country by kick-
starting the new experience in Gujarat. The 
telco announced its plans to launch 4G 
VoLTe services in December. alongside 
Gujarat, Vodafone 4G VoLTe services are set 
to reach Delhi, Karnataka, Kolkata, and 
Mumbai. Subscribers in the Gujarat region 

who have a Vodafone 4G SIM card and a 4G 
LTe-supported smartphone will be able to 
make VoLTe calls. Jio and airtel already 
offer 4G VoLTe network in India. “The 
introduction of VoLTe will enhance customer 
experience with HD quality calling and offer 
our customers newer possibilities,” Sunil 
Sood, Managing Director and Chief 
executive Officer, Vodafone India, had said 
while announcing the rollout of its 4G VoLTe 
services.
Xiaomi unveils Qualcomm Quick Charge 
3.0 charger for select models
Xiaomi has launched the India Standard 
adapter 9V 2a that supports Qualcomm’s 
Quick Charge 3.0. earlier, Xiaomi sold the 
standard 5V-2a charger in India. The new 
charger from Xiaomi is available on the 
company’s website and has been priced at 
rs 449. according to Qualcomm, select 
smartphones are compatible with the 
company’s Quick Charge 3.0 Technology. 
While Xiaomi Mi 5, Xiaomi Mi 5s, Xiaomi Mi 
5s Plus, Xiaomi Mi 6, Xiaomi Mi Max, 
Xiaomi Mi Max 2, Xiaomi Mi Note 2, and 
Xiaomi MIX 2 are listed, only three of the 
handsets are currently available in India. 
So, Mi 5, Mi Max 2 and Mi MIX 2 users can 
purchase the new adapter. The new Xiaomi 
charger has a power output of 5V-3a/9V-
2a/12V-1.5a. It has surge protection up to 
380V and features automatic Temperature 
Control. The Xiaomi Qualcomm Quick 
Charge 3.0 Charger comes only in black 
colour. 
Airtel to offer Amazon Prime membership 
to postpaid, broadband customers
bharti airtel has entered into a partnership 
with amazon India to offer one year amazon 
Prime membership to its postpaid customers 
with an Infinity plan of rs 499 or above, and 
V-fiber broadband customers. The 
membership is worth rs 999 and includes 
unlimited access to amazon Prime Video, 
as part of their plan benefits. airtel said that 
the offer for one year of amazon Prime is 
activated exclusively through the airtel TV 
app. Vijay Subramaniam, Director, Content, 
amazon Prime Video India, said this 
exclusive offer enables the company to 
reach airtel’s customer base across the 
country. “This partnership is a major 
milestone in airtel’s endeavour to build a 
world-class content platform… We look 
forward to working with amazon to delight 
customers with great benefits backed by a 
seamless experience,” said Sameer batra, 
CeO - Wynk.
New Google app feature to match selfies 
with artwork
Google’s arts and Culture app has rolled out 
a new feature that allows users to take a 
selfie, upload it and then match it with a 
doppelgänger in one of several art museums 
worldwide. “The update to the Google arts 
and Culture app has catapulted it to the 
most-downloaded free app on the apple 
app Store. It claimed the No. 1 spot in the 
uS, according to the app metrics site 
appannie,” recode reported recently. The 
app uses computer-vision technology to 
examine what is similar about the user’s 
face to the thousands of pieces of art that 
are shared with Google by museums and 
other institutions. The tech giant said this 
new feature is merely experimental, the 
report added. formerly known as the Google 
art Project and launched in february 2011, 
the new initiative from the tech giant aims 
to make great art more accessible in this 
digital age.
Truecaller introduces Backup feature for 
Android
Popular communication app Truecaller has 
launched Truecaller backup for android, a 
new feature which allows users to backup 
and restore their contacts, call history, block 
list and settings to Google Drive. every day 
thousands of Truecaller users are switching 
to a new phone, getting new SIM card, 
resetting their device or in general having to 
start their Truecaller journey anew. This 
inevitably leads to lost contacts, blank call 
logs and data gone missing. Truecaller 
backup has been one of the most highly 
requested features by its users, and will 
simplify a user’s transition to a new phone 
or SIM card by securely backing-up their 
contacts and settings, and stored on your 
Google Drive. users also have the power to 
customize the frequency of backup between 
daily, weekly, monthly and on demand.
PhonePe now lets FreeCharge customers 
pay at PhonePe partner merchants
flipkart’s payments arm PhonePe has 
partnered mobile wallet company 
freeCharge to allow the latter’s customers 
pay for transactions at PhonePe’s partner 
merchants. as per the deal terms, PhonePe 
has now enabled its over 45 million users to 
link their existing freeCharge wallets to the 
PhonePe app. Once linked, PhonePe 
customers will be able to spend their 
freeCharge wallet balance at all online and 
offline merchant outlets that accept 
payments via PhonePe. “This is in line with 
our vision of making PhonePe India’s first 
truly open payments platform, where 
customers can use any and all payment 
instruments of their choice,” PhonePe 
Head banking Products and Strategic 
Partnerships Hemant Gala said. To pay via 
www.mymobileindia.com
newsbits
february 2018 | 19
What’s Up

newsbits
MYMOBILE
What’s Up
20 | february 2018
freeCharge on PhonePe, customers can 
link freeCharge from ‘My account-Other 
Wallets’ section, following which they can 
pay using freeCharge or PhonePe wallet 
balance.
93.5 Red FM launches mobile app
radio network 
93.5 red fM 
has launched its 
application from 
which users can 
listen or watch 
their favourite 
content anytime 
by selecting the 
city of choice. 
Through the 
app, the users 
can catch live 
broadcast if they have missed it. “Itemisation 
of on-air content creates flexibility and 
allows the listeners to exercise control over 
the audio content of their choice,” red fM 
said in a statement. The mobile application 
gives the option to handpick curated content 
from localised red fM station. “The red 
fM app cuts away from the usual practice 
of radio content which has a low shelf life 
and when broadcasted once disappears,” 
93.5 red fM COO Nisha Narayanan said. 
She further said the app works as a great 
retention strategy where it can be reused on 
other platforms like mobile and social 
media. The application is available on iOS 
app Store and Google Playstore.
Alibaba-owned DingTalk enterprise chat 
app forays into India
alibaba-backed platform DingTalk recently 
unveiled an english version that caters to 
the small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMes). The english version of the app, also 
available in Malaysia, is the first concerted 
push outside of China since launching three 
years ago. Over five million enterprises and 
organisations in China are already using the 
Chinese version. DingTalk aims to ramp up 
its user count in India and Malaysia by the 
end of the fiscal year ending in March. “Our 
endeavour is to empower SMes so they can 
scale and become part of the global 
marketplace. With DingTalk, we will enable 
organisations to seamlessly communicate 
and collaborate across locations, thereby 
increasing productivity,” Chris Wang, Head 
of Global business Development for 
DingTalk, said in a statement.
New app to help locate people in areas 
without network
Scientists have developed a smartphone 
app that can be used in emergency 
situations arising due to earthquakes, floods 
or forest fires, where mobile phone 
infrastructure is often rendered useless. The 
system created by researchers at the 
universidad de alicante (ua) in Spain 
makes it possible to locate people who have 
suffered an accident in remote locations 
without a phone signal and where a speedy 
rescue is essential to save lives. “We have 
designed an application that can be 
incorporated to any smartphone and that, 
without a signal, emits a Wi-fi signal which 
in turn acts as a distress beacon over a 
distance of several kilometres,” said Jose 
angel berna, creator of the technology and 
professor at ua. This signal contains the 
location (coordinates) of the person who has 
suffered the accident or disappeared and is 
using the smartphone emitter, along with a 
short message that can be altered depending 
on the situation, with examples such as “I 
am injured,” “I am disorientated,” or “I 
need help,” said reports quoting berna.
Western Digital unveils next generation 
storage drives
Data storage company Western Digital 
recently announced that it is expanding its 
portfolio for enterprise customers with a 
new, mid-range series of 4Tb, 6Tb and 8Tb 
hard drives. The new products help corporate 
data centres having data-set sizes smaller 
than ones in hyper-scale environments to 
harness the power of data in applications 
such as analytics and distributed file 
systems, the company said in a statement. 
“Our new enterprise solutions blend the 
technology and total cost of ownership of 
Western Digital’s capacity enterprise 
product line will allow OeMs to offer data 
centres a solution to keep big Data on-
premises, rather than transition entirely to 
the Cloud,” brendan Collins, Vice President 
of Marketing, Devices business unit at 
Western Digital, said in a statement.
GPS, panic buttons mandatory on public 
transport from April 1
all taxis, buses and public transport 
vehicles, barring three-wheelers and 
e-rickshaws, will have to install location 
tracking device or GPS and an alert button 
from april 1. The road transport ministry has 
reiterated the deadline amid reports that 
most of the states had not done much to 
meet the target. “from 1st april, 2018, 
passenger transport vehicles including taxis 
and buses are to be mandatorily equipped 
with GPS devices,” the ministry tweeted 
recently. according to reports quoting a 
senior official, there will be no extension to 
roll out these passenger safety measures in 
public transport vehicles. Though initially 
the ministry had proposed mandatory 
installation of CCTV cameras in buses 
having more than 23 seats, the proposal 
was dropped due to privacy concerns. n
team@mymobile.co.in 

bignews
What’s Up
www.mymobileindia.com
february 2018 | 21
L
enovo-owned Motorola recently announced the opening of 50 
new Moto Hubs in New Delhi to further its retail presence. Moto 
Hub is a key destination for consumers to experience the latest 
Motorola technology and get a hands-on demo of the entire product 
portfolio, in a fun, easy to access setup that is conveniently located 
at consumer hangout areas. Delhi has emerged as one of the 
biggest markets for the smartphone industry and the same is true 
for Motorola. as per GKf, out of the total estimated sales of 7 
million units per month, Delhi contributes 8-9% to the total sales, 
necessitating the need for Motorola to be accessible across the 
city and hence the augmented presence.
Sudhin Mathur, Managing Director, Motorola Mobility India, 
said, “Offering premium customer experiences is a pillar of our 
strategy. More than two-thirds of the smartphone customers make 
their purchase at retail, however, while there is access; experience 
has been a pain point for most of the buyers. Moto Hub addresses 
this need of customers by offering a platform to interact, engage 
and purchase. encouraged by the customer response, we have 
accelerated the retail expansion significantly to ensure that we are 
present where our customers want us to be.” as part of the strategy 
to consolidate its offline presence, earlier in 
December 2017, Motorola had announced a 
strategic partnership with Poorvika Mobiles across 
43 cities in Tamil Nadu, Pondicherry and Karnataka 
and with big C and Lot Mobile stores across 55 
cities in andhra Pradesh and Telangana to provide 
easy access to customers to experience the wide 
range of Motorola products. The Moto Hub store 
will house the entire portfolio of Motorola devices, 
including the online exclusives such as Moto X4 
and Moto MODs. They will also house Motorola 
accessories like on-ear and in-ear headphones, 
Moto shells and covers. n
C
hinese smartphone maker Coolpad recently announced it 
has received a fresh investment of $300 million. With this 
fresh funding from Power Sun Ventures, a family trust, the 
Shenzhen-based Coolpad plans to expand its capabilities in 
artificial Intelligence (aI), the company said in a statement. 
“With this new investment, Coolpad aims to shift its focus from 
being just into mobile business to an aI-focused technology 
company. We plan to expand this by creating aI-focused 
applications across communications, health, education and 
gaming,” said Jiang Chao, CeO, Coolpad Group. Chinese 
property mogul Chen Hua, founder and Head of Kingkey 
Group, is leading the new investment through Power Sun 
Ventures. With this, Coolpad India will look forward to 
strengthen its position in the domestic market with some 
aggressive products in the coming months.
The last product launched by Coolpad in the country was 
“Cool Play 6”. In 2016, the company launched eight 
smartphone models in India. “It’s a very positive development 
for Coolpad, especially after a few ups and downs last year. 
With fresh 
investment and 
road map ready, we 
are looking forward to 
have a new start to Coolpad 
in India,” said Syed Tajuddin, 
CeO, Coolpad India. “apart from 
benchmarking the products, we will also 
be looking forward to introduce some inventive 
technologies, which will eventually benefit the end users,” he 
added. The company has been producing 34 million 
smartphones globally every year, raking up $3 billion in revenue 
each year. In terms of market share in online space, Coolpad 
ranks among top three smartphone brands on amazon.in. The 
struggling Leeco has sold more than half of its stake in Coolpad 
Group, media reports said recently. Leeco has been repaying 
its debt after selling shares in Coolpad Group. Leeco recently 
repaid $103.20 million of its debt owed to China Merchants 
bank. n
Motorola expands retail footprint, announces 50 
Moto Hubs in Delhi
Coolpad eyes fresh innings 
in India with $300 mn 
funding

bignews
MYMOBILE
What’s Up
Xiaomi to expand India store network in 
tussle with Samsung
I
n a bid to grab the lead in a smartphone market which South 
Korea’s Samsung has dominated for more than five years, Chinese 
company Xiaomi plans to expand its store network in India. a 
little over three years after Xiaomi entered India, its cheap, high- 
spec handsets have helped the start-up, which is now valued at  
close to $100 billion and plans to list this year, to pull neck-and-
neck with Samsung in its biggest market behind China. “If you look 
at 2017 and 2018 combined, the biggest change in our strategy is 
our focus on offline,” Manu Kumar Jain, Managing Director of 
Xiaomi India, told a news agency recently. Xiaomi opened its first 
Mi Home, an apple store-style sales and experience centre, in May 
last year and already operates 17 such outlets in India. Jain said 
Xiaomi is ahead of schedule on its plans to open 100 Mi Home 
stores by mid-2019 in India and also plans to add more preferred 
partner stores - multi-brand outlets that stock largely Xiaomi 
products.
Interestingly, Xiaomi is looking to strengthen its network beyond 
online, which accounts for some 70 per cent of local revenue. Its 
strategy in India has so far rested on flash sales on leading homegrown 
e-commerce player flipkart and uS tech giant amazon.com’s Indian 
sites, an approach that helped Xiaomi save on expensive marketing 
spends and grab market share. Jain said Xiaomi will launch six to 
eight new smartphones across key price ranges in 2018. “We want 
to improve on whatever we launched in 2017 and also launch and 
plug whatever we think are the big use cases where we are not 
present,” he said. Last year, Xiaomi launched eight smartphones 
priced from 4,999 Indian rupees ($78) to 32,999 rupees ($516). 
Samsung, by comparison, offers more than 40 smartphone models 
in India. n
Optiemus aims 10% of India’s premium 
phone market with BlackBerry
O
ptiemus Infracom, which holds the rights for manufacturing and 
distribution of blackberry phones in India and other countries, 
eyes to garner 10 per cent share of the domestic premium 
smartphone market by the end of this year. bSe-listed Optiemus 
had signed a licensing deal with blackberry last year which includes 
rights for India, Sri Lanka, bangladesh and Nepal. blackberry has 
a similar partnership with TCL for some other markets. Optiemus 
Infracom executive Director Hardip Singh said the company plans 
to scale up its product portfolio by bringing in a number of models 
across price segments. “year 2018 will be significant for our 
business and we are targeting a 10 per cent market share in India 
in the rs 20,000-plus premium segment category by end of this 
year,” he told a news agency recently.
The company recently expanded to Sri Lanka and bangladesh. 
“We are looking at launching blackberry Keyone Limited edition 
black in Nepal in the first quarter of 2018, which will mark the 
entry of Optiemus in Nepal,” he said. Singh said the company 
makes the devices in India and will continue to explore opportunities 
in these key markets. “We expect International markets to contribute 
approximately 25 per cent of our total business volume to blackberry 
business by the end of calendar year 2018,” he added. Once a 
dominant player in the smartphone category, blackberry struggled 
to compete against global competitors like Samsung and apple. It, 
then, agreed to license its brand to handset manufacturers TCL and 
Optiemus. India is one of the fastest growing smartphone markets 
globally. Players like Samsung, Xiaomi, Lenovo and Vivo have 
aggressively eaten into the market share of domestic players like 
Micromax and Lava. n
22 | february 2018

bignews
www.mymobileindia.com
february 2018 | 23
R
eliance Industries Ltd (rIL) will invest as much as rs 5,000 
crore in West bengal to bolster telecom arm reliance Jio 
Infocomm’s operations, its digital ecosystem as well as the group’s 
retail and fuel retail businesses, chairman Mukesh ambani said 
recently. The group will also be “working with multiple partners to 
explore the setting up of state-of-the-art, next-gen electronics 
manufacturing facilities” to make West bengal an innovation hub 
for “consumer devices such as mobile phones and set-top boxes,” 
he said at the fourth bengal Global business Summit in Kolkata 
recently. He said West bengal was a leader in “ease of business,” 
attributing this to “industrial peace” under the government of 
Chief Minister Mamata banerjee. 
reliance Industries will also set up digital service centres 
(DSCs) in West bengal to provide government-to-citizen (G2C) 
services, initially in five districts. The move is part of the company’s 
plans to set up DSCs across India to bring such services within 
easy reach of every citizen, especially in the rural hinterland. “The 
move will give birth to digital entrepreneurs in villages and small 
towns, kickstart ecommerce, support agriculture as well as small 
and medium enterprises (SMes),” said ambani, signalling Jio’s 
plans for a countrywide digital revolution. reliance Industries is 
already one of the largest investors in West bengal, having pumped 
in rs 15,000 crore, most of this for setting up the telecom network, 
ambani said. Jio’s initiatives had created employment opportunities 
-- both direct and indirect – for more than 100,000 people in the 
state, he said. In the immediate term, ambani said the country’s 
newest 4G carrier will expedite steps to ensure 100% network 
coverage in West bengal by end-2018. n
I
ndia has recorded the second-largest number of 
mobile app downloads, beating the uS and trailing 
only China, according to a report from app annie, an 
app insights company. The data collated is inclusive of 
apple’s iOS Store, Google Play and third-party android 
stores. app usage grew rapidly in India, driven by the 
introduction of subsidised, unlimited 4G access by 
reliance Jio in September 2016, the report noted. 
India saw a growth of about 215% while uS saw a 
degrowth of 5% during 2017. India, which is seen as 
an emerging market in the app economy, came on top 
of the list for highest monthly average number of apps 
used and installed. On an average, Indians use more 
than 40 apps in a month, while having a total base of 
close to 80 apps. On this parameter, China and brazil 
are behind India.
Incidentally, the report threw light on consumer spending 
behaviour of Indians with regards to mobile apps. Despite the 
popular perception that Indians shy away from paying for in-app 
purchases, dating app Tinder and over-the-top (OTT) entertainment 
platform Netflix topped the chart as far as spends on apps go. 
Chinese video app bigo Live and Google Drive are the other top 
apps where Indians have spent significantly in 2017, the data in 
the report pointed out. Star India-owned Hotstar is another OTT 
player in the top 10 apps here with high consumer spends. The 
report did not specify the amount consumers spent on these  
apps throughout last year. The data indicates an interesting  
trend where Indians are starting to pay for various apps. The more 
mature a market is, the higher chances of monetisation, the report 
added.  n
Reliance to manufacture mobiles, set top boxes 
in West Bengal
India ranks second in app downloads
What’s Up

bignews
MYMOBILE
What’s Up
WhatsApp targets small businesses with 
new service
Hike unveils ‘Total’ to let users access services 
without data
P
opular messaging app Whatsapp has 
launched a new service Whatsapp business, 
aimed at small businesses that have thus far 
been using their accounts meant for individuals, 
a move that brings it closer to monetising its free 
platform. While the focus, at present, is to get 
small business on the platform for free, the firm 
plans to charge them in the future. The app has 
been launched on Google Play in many countries. 
“Through our research, we know that over 84% 
of small businesses who use Whatsapp in India 
think that it helps them communicate with their 
customers, and 80% of them think that it helps 
them grow their business,” Whatsapp chief 
operating officer Matt Idema told a newspaper 
recently. “People can continue using Whatsapp as usual — there’s 
no need to download anything new. and people will continue to have 
full control over the messages they receive, with the ability to block 
any number, including businesses, as well as report spam,” the 
company reportedly said in its blog.
according to reports, Whatsapp business gives users a verified 
green checkmark badge next to account name. businesses will be 
able to create a company profile with information such as address, 
business hours, and description of product or service offered. Its 
messaging tool will help businesses manage consumer chats -- 
quick replies that provide fast answers to frequently asked questions, 
greeting messages that introduce customers to your business, and 
away messages that let them know you’re busy. It also has a web 
interface. as per reports, Whatsapp could go live with its much 
awaited payments feature soon, possibly this month only. n
T
argeting the lower end of smartphone users to better take on 
leader Whatsapp, Indian messaging app Hike has come out with 
a mobile operating system that will offer services such as messaging 
and recharging without using data. Services offered on the system 
called Hike Total include financial transactions via Hike Wallet, 
news, horoscopes and rail information. The operating system will 
be pre-installed in entry-level smartphones from Intex and Karbonn 
priced between rs 3,500 and rs 5,000. unlike Whatsapp and 
facebook Messenger, the micro-apps on Hike Total will work even 
without data. Hike Total uses uSSD (unstructured supplementary 
service data), a technology that transmits information through GSM 
network channels, which are normally used to make voice calls and 
send messages.
The objective was to get more users on the Hike platform, Kavin 
Mittal, founder of Hike, said recently. “We decided to invert the 
pyramid and go bottom-upwards because there are still around 200 
million users of the total 400 million smartphone users who have 
smartphones but do not use data… we have to break into that 
market,” he said. Intex will integrate Hike’s services in lower-priced 
smartphone models for the benefit of consumers, who will also get 
customised and differential data packs at cheaper rates, said 
director Keshav bansal. Hike, backed by Tencent, foxconn, Tiger 
Global, Softbank and bharti airtel, is in talks with Lava and 
Micromax, besides Samsung and Chinese smartphone makers. On 
the carrier side, it has tied up with bharti airtel, aircel and bSNL. 
reliance Jio Infocomm users will have to wait a while because the 
company’s Voice over LTe network does not support uSSD service. 
Hike Total’s services work on its new patented technology called 
uTTP, a version of uSSD, which is often used to check a phone’s 
serial number or data usage. Hike will give rs 200 to each user  
on purchase of the phones, which will be available beginning  
March 1. n
24 | february 2018

bignews
What’s Up
www.mymobileindia.com
february 2018 | 25
US tech firm Redmorph enters India with 
smartphone security app
Trai okays mobile services during air travel
A
fter its launch in the uS, Pittsburgh-based redmorph forayed 
into the Indian market recently with ‘The ultimate Privacy and 
Security Solution’, its comprehensive privacy and security app for 
smartphone users. The security solution allows users to control and 
protect their privacy and security online. The app allows users to 
clearly visualize what is happening in the background behind apps, 
OS and websites in real time. The product is equipped with 
algorithms to audit all system and user apps to determine and 
minimize risks. With behavioral and predictive analysis, it uses 
contextual logic to identify and block suspicious 
or malicious apps. The solution monitors 
background behaviour and proactively prevents 
malicious apps from spying on banking, email, 
social and other critical apps. equipped with 
daily tracker and app definitions updates, the app 
ensures full protection from threatening behaviour 
from apps on the customer’s phone.
as per a study by Zenith, India is poised to 
have the second highest number of smartphone 
users by 2018, in excess of 530 million users, 
resulting in a mobile first economy. The 
proliferation of apps and websites for our everyday 
needs also enables unknown third party vendors 
to track users and steal data weakening personal 
privacy and security. Significantly, India has surpassed the uS, the 
second largest market in the world in terms of android app 
downloads, says a recent Mary Meeker report on Internet trends. 
according to the Indian Computer emergency response Team 
(CerT-In), at least one cybercrime was reported every 10 minutes 
in India in the first six months of 2017, calling for a concerted effort 
to treat cybercrimes. The recent Supreme Court verdict stating 
privacy as a fundamental right stands testimony to government’s 
efforts to address concerns around privacy and data protection. n
T
he Telecom regulatory authority of India (Trai) recently 
recommended allowing mobile telephony and Internet services 
for passengers during air travel in the country through both satellite 
and terrestrial network. “The authority recommends that both, 
Internet and Mobile Communication on aircraft (MCa) service 
should be permitted as In-flight Connectivity (IfC) in the Indian 
airspace,” Trai said in its recommendations on ‘In-flight 
Connectivity’ (IfC). The Department of Telecom had sought views 
of the Trai on august 10, last year over proposal to introduce voice, 
data and video services over Indian airspace for domestic, 
international and overflying flights in Indian air space. Trai said that 
for mobile services, there should be flexibility to IfC service 
providers in terms of use of technology and frequencies inside the 
aircraft cabin that should be consistent with international standards, 
provided no harmful interference is caused.
The telecom regulator said that Internet services through Wi-fi 
onboard should be made available when electronic devices are 
permitted to be used only in-flight or airplane mode and 
announcement regarding this should be made after boarding is 
completed and the aircraft is about to taxi. The regulator 
recommended creation of an IfC Service Provider for IfC services 
at annual licence fee of re 1 only initially, after entering into an 
arrangement with telecom licence holder having appropriate 
authorisation. It said that the IfC service provider should be 
permitted to use either INSaT systems (Indian Satellite System or 
foreign satellite capacity leased through Department of Space) or 
foreign satellites outside INSaT systems in the Indian airspace. Trai 
added that routing of traffic through satellite gateway in India 
should be imposed regardless of whether the satellite in question 
is an Indian satellite system or not. n
team@mymobile.co.in 

MYMOBILE
justin
First Look
26 | february 2018
u
nveiled recently in China, 
the new Lava red colour 
variant of the OnePlus 5T is now 
official in India. The special 
edition smartphone, painted in 
red, comes with 8Gb of raM and 
128Gb of internal storage 
Talking about the technical 
specifications, the OnePlus 5T 
comes with a 6.01-inch full HD+ 
full Optic aMOLeD display with 
an aspect ratio rated at 18:9. It 
is powered by the same 
Qualcomm Snapdragon 835 
processor.
The camera department 
houses a dual rear camera setup, 
rated at 16-megapixel and 20-
megapixel. However, the 
secondary camera at the back 
comes with changed aperture 
rated at f/1.7 as compared to the 
OnePlus 5, with the absence of a 
telephoto lens. The front-facing 
shooter is rated at 16-megapixel 
with improvements for low-light 
photography, using Intelligent 
Pixel Technology.
The limited edition 
smartphone is powered by a 
3300mah battery with the 
company’s Dash Charge tech for 
fast charging. The smartphone 
runs OnePlus’ OxygenOS based 
on android 7.1.1 Nougat. 
additionally, the OnePlus 5T 
comes with a fingerprint scanner 
now at the back, and also 
supports facial recognition.
additionally, the OnePlus 5T 
comes in existing Midnight black 
and Star Wars edition variants.
The Lava red OnePlus 5T is 
now up for grab at amazon India 
at the price of rs 37,999. n
OnePlus 5T Lava Red

First Look
f
ollowing a series of teasers, Samsung has finally made the 
Galaxy On7 Prime official in India. The main highlight of the 
smartphone is the new Samsung Mall feature which allows the 
users to shop by simply capturing a product’s image.
The users, after capturing the image can search for the product 
across various online portals using visual search and can purchase 
the product using universal Cart feature.
Talking about the technical specifications, the Galaxy On7 
Prime comes with a 5.5-inch full HD display and is powered by 
an octa-core exynos 7870 processor ticking at 1.6GHz. The 
smartphone comes in two raM/rOM options- 3Gb of raM/32Gb 
of rOM and 4Gb of raM/64Gb of rOM, both the options being 
expandable up to 256Gb with the use of a microSD card.
On the camera front, there is a 13-megapixel primary shooter 
with LeD flash and autofocus and the front-facing snapper too 
stands at 13-megapixel for selfies and video calling. 
Moreover, the Galaxy On7 Prime supports Samsung Pay 
feature for making payments, which now is integrated with uPI. 
additionally, the device houses a fingerprint scanner embedded 
in the home button and comes in black and gold colour 
options.
The Samsung Galaxy On7 Prime comes with a price tag of rs 
12,990 (3Gb raM/32Gb rOM) and rs 14,990 (4Gb raM/64Gb 
rOM) and is available via amazon India and Samsung Shop. n
Samsung Galaxy On7 Prime
february 2018 | 27
justin
www.mymobileindia.com

MYMOBILE
justin
First Look
28 | february 2018
Energizer Power Max P600S
e
xclusively known for producing batteries, energizer has 
officially launched a new smartphone, dubbed the Power 
Max P600S.
The main highlight of the smartphone is the 4500mah 
battery it is backed by, with a standby time of up to 16 days 
and usage time of up to 12 hours. The battery also supports 
fast charging.
In terms of the spec sheet, the Power Max P600S comes 
with a 5.99-inch full HD display with an aspect ratio rated at 
18:9, making it a member of the bezel-less clan. The 
smartphone is powered by octa-core MediaTek Helio P25 
chipset clocked at 2.45GHz. 
The smartphone comes in two variants: one with 3Gb of 
raM, 32Gb of internal storage, painted in black colour and 
the model with 6Gb of raM, 64Gb of rOM, in blue 
colour.
In the camera department, the Power Max P600S houses 
a dual- camera module by Samsung, rated at 13-megapixel 
and 5-megapixel, while the front-facing snapper stands at 
8-megapixel. 
With a carbon fiber-looking rear side, the smartphone  
runs android 7.1 Nougat. The Power Max P600S is also 
accompanied by uSb Type-C port and a rear-mounted 
fingerprint scanner. n

Samsung Galaxy Tab A 7.0
S
amsung has launched a new tablet in its Galaxy Tab a 
series, dubbed the Galaxy Tab a 7.0 in India. 
Speaking of the technical specs, the Galaxy Tab a 7.0 comes 
with a 7-inch HD display and is powered by quad-core processor 
ticking at 1.5GHz. The tablet comes equipped with 1.5Gb of 
raM and 8Gb of inbuilt storage which can be further expanded 
up to 200Gb with the use of a microSD card. 
In the camera department, there is a 5-megapixel primary 
shooter with autofocus, while the front-facing snapper is rated 
at 2-megapixel for selfies and video calling.
The Galaxy Tab a 7.0 sources power from a 4000mah 
battery with up to nine hours of video playback. 
furthermore, the tablet supports Kids Mode which provides 
the kids with content specified for them and the Parental 
Control mode which lets the parents take control of their kids’ 
usage, with features such as setting usage time limits and 
restricting app access.
The Samsung Galaxy Tab a 7.0 comes in white and black 
colour options.
On purchase of the Galaxy Tab a 7.0, reliance Jio users, 
after a recharge of rs 299, will get a cashback of rs 2,000 in 
his or her JioMoney after 24 continuous recharges of the rs 
299 plan, with rs 800 to be credited after 12 months and rs 
1,200 to be credited after 24 months.
The new tablet comes with a price tag of rs 9,500 and is 
available exclusively via amazon India. n
february 2018 | 29
justin
First Look
www.mymobileindia.com

First Look
justin
30 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
Gionee S10 Lite
C
hinese handset maker Gionee has launched a new smartphone 
in the mid-segment, dubbed the Gionee S10 Lite in India. 
The smartphone is a toned down variant of the Gionee S10.  
In terms of the technical specifications, the Gionee S10 Lite 
comes with a 5.2-inch HD display and is powered by Qualcomm 
Snapdragon 427 processor clocked at 1.4GHz. The smartphone 
comes equipped with 4Gb of raM and 32Gb of internal storage 
which can be further expanded up to 128Gb with the use of a 
memory card.
On the camera front, the device features a 13-megapixel rear 
shooter with LeD flash and autofocus, with the front-facing 
snapper (which is the highlight of the smartphone) rated at 16-
megapixel for selfies and video calling. The smartphone sources 
power from a 3100mah battery and runs the company’s amigo 
4.0 OS based on android 7.0 Nougat.
The Gionee S10 Lite comes with several connectivity options 
such as 4G VoLTe, bluetooth v4.0, Wi-fi 802.11 b/g/n, GPS, 
a-GPS, micro uSb, fM radio, and a 3.5mm audio jack. The 
smartphone is also accompanied by a fingerprint scanner 
embedded in the home button.
additionally, customers will get additional 5Gb data on the 
reliance Jio rs 309 pack or more, and Paytm coupons worth rs 
250 and rs 350, for purchases worth rs 350 or more via Paytm 
Mall.
The Gionee S10 Lite is up for grabs for rs 15,999, via offline 
as well as online stores in the country.n

First Look
justin
february 2018 | 31
www.mymobileindia.com
Karbonn 
Titanium 
Frames S7
H
omegrown Karbonn Mobiles has 
launched a new budget smartphone, 
dubbed the Karbonn Titanium frames S7 in 
India. The main highlight of the smartphone is 
the camera department which houses rear and 
front cameras, both rated at 13-megapixel, 
featuring LeD flash.
The smartphone comes with airtel cashback 
services for which the users are required to pay rs 
6,999 and make 36 continuous recharges of rs 199, 
following which the customers will get a cashback of 
rs 500 after 18 months and another cashback of rs 
1,500 after 18 months, totaling to a cashback of rs 
2,000.
additionally, the users using Mobikwik will get flat rs 
2,100 SuperCash on a purchase of the smartphone. The 
IndusInd bank and Standard Chartered bank cardholders 
will get a discount of 10 per cent of the purchase using debit 
or credit cards.
In terms of technical specs, the Karbonn Titanium frames 
S7 comes with a 5.5-inch full HD IPS display with a layer of 
2.5D curved glass and is powered by a quad-core processor 
clocked at 1.45GHz. The smartphone has 3Gb of raM and 32Gb 
of internal storage, expandable up to 128Gb via a memory card. 
The device is backed by a 3000mah battery and runs android 
7.0 Nougat. The 4G dual-SIM Titanium frames S7 comes with 
connectivity options such as 4G VoLTe, Wi-fi, bluetooth, GPS and 
OTG support.
furthermore, the Titanium frames S7 is accompanied by a rear-
mounted fingerprint sensor and a virtual assistant, dubbed Niki.aI for 
making payments, recharges and much more.
The smartphone comes with a price tag of rs 6,999 exclusively via 
ShopClues. The Karbonn Titanium frames S7 is available in black, 
Champagne, and red colour options. n

First Look
justin
Honor 9 Lite
a
fter several rumours and leaks, Huawei’s sub-brand 
Honor recently launched the Honor 9 Lite smartphone 
at an event in India.
The main highlight of the Honor 9 Lite is the camera 
department which contains four cameras; two at the back 
rated at 13-megapixel and 2-megapixel and another pair at 
the front, also standing at 13-megapixel and 2-megapixel.
another highlighting is the 5.65-inch full HD+ IPS 
fullView display with an aspect ratio rated at 18:9, making 
way for minimal bezels.
The smartphone is powered by the company’s 64-bit 
octa-core Kirin 659 processor along with Mali T830-MP2 
GPu. The device comes in two raM /rOM configurations- 
3Gb raM/32Gb rOM and 4Gb raM/64Gb rOM, both the 
options expandable up to 128Gb via a memory card. The 
Honor 9 Lite is backed by a 3000mah battery and runs 
android 8.0 Oreo with Huawei’s eMuI 8.0 on top.
The glass-bodied smartphone houses dual SIM card slots 
and is topped with connectivity options such as 4G VoLTe, 
Wi-fi 802.11 b/g/n, bluetooth, GPS, a-GPS, 3.5mm audio 
jack, Micro-uSb, and OTG support. additionally, the 
smartphone is accompanied by a rear-mounted fingerprint 
scanner.
The Honor 9 Lite comes with a price tag of rs 10,999 
(3Gb raM/32Gb rOM) and rs 14,999 (4Gb raM/64Gb 
rOM) and is available exclusively via flipkart, in Sapphire 
blue, Glacier Grey and Midnight black colour options.
furthermore, the Honor 9 Lite comes with a free back 
cover and the Citibank credit and debit cardholders can avail 
a 10 per cent discount on purchase. n
MYMOBILE
32 | february 2018

First Look
february 2018 | 33
justin
OPPO A83
e
xpanding its a series, Oppo has come up 
with its new mid-segment smartphone, 
dubbed the Oppo a83 in India. 
The major highlights of the smartphone 
are the 5.7-inch HD+ LCD display featuring 
minimal bezels with an aspect ratio standing 
at 18:9 and facial recognition. The smartphone 
also comes with aI beauty recognition 
technology that enhances the picture quality 
and makes them look real.
The smartphone is equipped with 3Gb of 
raM and 32Gb of internal storage which 
comes with the ability to be expanded up to 
256Gb with the use of a microSD card. The 
Oppo a83 gets its fuel from a 3180mah 
battery and runs the company’s ColorOS 3.2 
based on android 7.1.1 Nougat. 
In terms of the optics, the smartphone 
comes with a 13-megapixel primary snapper 
with LeD flash, while the one situated at the 
front is rated at 8-megapixel.
The smartphone houses dual SIM card 
slots and is topped with several connectivity 
options such as 4G VoLTe, Wi-fi 802.11 
a/b/g/n, bluetooth v4.2, GPS, GLONaSS, 
and a 3.5mm audio jack.
Priced at rs 13,999, the Oppo a83 
comes in black and Gold colour variants, 
and is available via amazon India and 
flipkart. n
www.mymobileindia.com

MYMOBILE
justin
First Look
34 | february 2018
T
ranssion Holdings-owned Tecno Mobile has come up with 
a new budget smartphone, dubbed the Tecno Camon I in 
India.
The major highlight of the smartphone is the fullView 
display rated at 5.65-inch and is HD+ IPS in nature. The 
display comes with an aspect ratio rated at 18:9 with thin 
bezels.
Talking about other specs, the Tecno Camon I is powered by 
a 64-bit quad-core processor, coupled with 3Gb of raM. The 
smartphone comes equipped with 32Gb of internal storage 
which comes with the option to expand up to 128Gb via a 
microSD card. 
In terms of optics, there is a 13-megapixel rear snapper with 
5p lens, Quad LeD flash. The one at the front is also rated at 
13-megapixel featuring front flash and screen flash.
The Camon I gets its fuel from a 3050mah battery and runs 
the company’s HiOS based on android 7.0 Nougat. The 
smartphone houses dual SIM card slots and is stacked with 
connectivity options such as 4G LTe, Wi-fi 802.11 b/g/n, 
bluetooth, 3.5mm audio jack, GPS, OTG, and micro uSb port. 
The Camon I is also accompanied by a fingerprint scanner 
situated at the back.
The Tecno Camon I comes with a price tag of rs 8,999 and 
will be available in Champagne Gold, Midnight black and City 
blue colour variants via offline stores in the country. n
Tecno Camon I

Alcatel 3C
P
rior to announcing new smartphones at MWC 2018 in 
february, alcatel has unveiled a new budget smartphone, 
known as the alcatel 3C in Italy.
The uSP of the device is the massive 6-inch HD+ IPS 
display with an aspect ratio standing at 18:9, coming with 
minimal bezels. The smartphone supports a screen resolution 
rated at 1,440 x 720 pixels.
The alcatel 3C is powered by a quad-core MediaTek 
MT8321 processor clocked at 1.3GHz and comes with 1Gb 
of raM. The device is equipped with 8Gb of inbuilt storage 
which can be further expanded with the help of a memory 
card. 
On the camera front, the smartphone consists of an 
8-megapixel rear snapper while on the front there is a 
5-megapixel shooter for selfies and video calling.
The alcatel 3C sources its power from a 3000mah battery 
and runs android 7.0 Nougat out-of-the-box. The device 
supports dual-SIM card slots and is accompanied by a 
fingerprint sensor present at the back. 
The smartphone comes in Metallic black, Metallic blue, 
and Metallic Gold colour options.
The alcatel 3C comes with a price tag of euros 129.99 
(around rs 10,120). There is no word on its availability in 
India yet. n
justin
International
february 2018 | 35
www.mymobileindia.com

MYMOBILE
HTC U11 EYEs
f
ollowing several leaks and speculations, HTC has finally 
announced the u11 eyes smartphone in China and Taiwan. 
The HTC u11 eyes comes with a 6-inch full HD+ display with an 
aspect ratio rated at 18:9, featuring minimal bezels.
another highlight is the camera department, which consists of 
a dual-camera setup at the front, each camera sensor rated at 
5-megapixel. The front cameras support HDr, bokeh mode for 
both videos and images, and various beauty modes. The primary 
shooter stands at 12-megapixel and features OIS, PDaf, ultraPixel 
3 technology, fast HDr, eIS and dual-tone LeD flash.
The HTC u11 eyes is powered by octa-core Qualcomm 
Snapdragon 652 processor clocked at 1.8GHz, coupled with 4Gb 
of raM and 64Gb of internal storage which is expandable up to 
2Tb with the use of a microSD card. 
The smartphone is backed by a 3930mah battery with Quick 
Charge 3.0 tech and power saving mode. The device runs android 
8.0 Oreo out-of-the-box with HTC Sense on top.
The smartphone is topped with various connectivity options 
such as Wi-fi 802.11 a/b/g/n/ac, bluetooth v4.2, uSb Type-C, 
GPS, a-GPS, GLONaSS, and NfC. 
additionally, the HTC u11 eyes is accompanied by a fingerprint 
scanner at the back, facial recognition, HTC usonic active noise 
reduction headphones, HTC edge Sense technology and IP67 
certification. The device comes in Metallic blue, black and red 
colour options.
The HTC u11 eyes comes with a price tag of CNy 3,299 
(around rs 32,660). n
36 | february 2018
justin
International

International
february 2018 | 37
justin
www.mymobileindia.com
LG V30 Raspberry Rose
L
G recently unveiled a new colour variant of the V30 smartphone, 
paying heed to all the romantics on Valentine’s Day.
The new raspberry rose colour of the LG V30, in addition to 
the existing aurora black, Cloud Silver, Moroccan blue and 
Lavender Violet colour options, will be up for grabs post CeS in 
europe and asia.
In terms of the specs, the raspberry rose V30 shares the 
same specs as the original V30. The smartphone sports a 6-inch 
QHD OLeD fullVision display with a pixel density of 538ppi and 
is powered by Qualcomm Snapdragon 835 processor. 
The smartphone is equipped with 4Gb of raM and 64Gb of 
internal storage which can be further expanded up to 2Tb via a 
memory card. The device sources power from a 3300mah battery 
with Quick Charge 3.0 tech and runs android 7.1.2 Nougat.
apart from the bezel-less display, the camera department is 
another highlight of the smartphone. It houses a dual camera 
setup at the back, which includes a 16-megapixel camera sensor 
with f/1.6 aperture and another one rated at 13-megapixel with 
f/1.9 aperture. upfront, there is a 5-megapixel shooter with 90-
degree wide-angle lens. It comes with Cine effect and Point 
Zoom camera features.
additionally, the LG V30 comes with a rear-mounted 
fingerprint scanner, facial recognition, uX 6.0+, 32-bit Hi-fi 
Quad DaC audio by bang & Olufsen, and IP68 certification.  n

MYMOBILE
justin
International
38 | february 2018
Honor 7X Red 
H
uawei’s sub-brand Honor recently unveiled a new limited 
edition red colour variant of the Honor 7X in the uS. The 
special edition smartphone will be up for grabs on Valentine’s 
Day in countries such as the united States, russia, India and 
Western europe (united Kingdom, france, Germany, Italy, and 
Spain).
The new colour variant of the Honor 7X has just 20,000 
units manufactured, and the first 100 customers will get red 
co-branded Honor-Monster aM15 headphones as a special 
gift.
In terms of the specs, the new variant shares the same specs 
as the original Honor 7X. The Honor 7X sports a 5.93-inch full 
HD+ bezel-less display with an aspect ratio rated at 18:9. It is 
powered by the company’s Kirin 659 processor, coupled with 
4Gb of raM. 
The smartphone comes in three internal storage options- 
32Gb, 64Gb and 128Gb, all the three options coming with 
the expandability option of up to 256Gb via a memory card.
In the camera department, there are two camera sensors at 
the back, rated at 16-megapixel and 2-megapixel each, while 
the one at the front is an 8-megapixel one. 
The device is backed by a 3340mah battery with 
SuperCharge fast charging technology and runs android 7.1.1 
Nougat with the company’s eMuI 5.1 on top.
The Honor 7X also comes in existing aurora blue, Midnight 
black, and Platinum Gold colour options. n

International
H
MD Global-owned Nokia’s budget smartphone Nokia 6 has 
got a successor, known as the Nokia 6 (2018), officially 
launched in China.
The main highlight of the smartphone is the incorporation of 
Nokia’s proprietary bothie feature which allows users to use the 
primary and the secondary cameras at the same time. The primary 
shooter is rated at 16-megapixel featuring dual-tone LeD flash and 
Phase Detection autofocus (PDaf), while the secondary snapper 
stands at 8-megapixel with 84-degree wide-angle lens.
In terms of the spec sheet, the Nokia 6 (2018) comes with a 
5.5-inch display with a screen resolution of 1,920 x 1,080 pixels 
and a layer of 2.5D curved glass. 
The smartphone is powered by an octa-core Qualcomm 
Snapdragon 630 processor clocked at 2.2GHz, coupled with 4Gb 
of raM. The device comes with two internal storage options- 32Gb 
and 64Gb, both being expandable up to 256Gb via a memory 
card.
The Nokia 6 (2018) gets its fuel from a 3000mah battery 
(same as the one found in Nokia 6 2017) and runs android 7.1.1 
Nougat, upgradable to android 8.0 Oreo. However, in the 2018 
model of the Nokia 6, the fingerprint scanner is placed at the back 
instead of the home button, and the presence of on-screen buttons 
in place of the capacitive touch buttons. 
The device comes in black and Silver colour options. The Nokia 
6 (2018) comes with a price tag of CNy 1,499 or rs 14,650 
(32Gb) and CNy 1,699 or rs 16,600 (64Gb). n
Nokia 6 
(2018)
february 2018 | 39
justin
www.mymobileindia.com

MYMOBILE
justin
International
40 | february 2018
S
outh Korean brand LG has launched a new smartphone, 
dubbed the LG Tribute Dynasty in the uS. Taking a look at 
the specifications, the LG Tribute Dynasty features a 5-inch HD 
IPS TfT display and is powered by octa-core MediaTek MT6750 
processor ticking at 1.5GHz. 
The device has 2Gb of raM and 16Gb of internal storage 
which can be further expanded up to 32Gb with the use of a 
memory card. 
On the camera front, there is an 8-megapixel primary shooter 
with LeD flash and autofocus, with the front-facing camera 
rated at 5-megapixel featuring screen flash.
The Tribute Dynasty gets its fuel from a 2500mah Lithium-
ion battery with up to 15 hours of talk time and runs android 
7.1.2 Nougat operating system. 
The device comes with several connectivity options such as 
4G LTe, Wi-fi 802.11 b/g/n, bluetooth v4.2, GPS, a-GPS, and 
micro-uSb. The LG Tribute Dynasty is also accompanied by a 
fingerprint scanner at the back.
The LG Tribute Dynasty comes in a single Champagne colour. 
There is no word on its availability in India.
The LG Tribute Dynasty is available via boost Mobile for $60, 
while it is priced at $100 via Sprint. n
LG Tribute 
Dynasty

Lenovo K320t
L
enovo has introduced a new budget smartphone in its K 
series, dubbed the K320t in China. The main highlights of 
the smartphone are the bezel-less display and the dual rear 
cameras.
The Lenovo K320t is the first Lenovo smartphone to come 
with an aspect ratio rated at 18:9, with HD+ display spanning 
5.7-inch. The display is covered with a layer of 2.5D curved 
glass.
In the camera department (which is another highlight of the 
smartphone), there are two cameras at the back, rated at 
8-megapixel and 2-megapixel each with fixed focus, while the 
front-facing shooter is rated at 8-megapixel for selfies and video 
calling.
In terms of other specs, the smartphone is powered by quad-
core Spreadtrum processor clocked at 1.3GHz. The device 
comes equipped with 2Gb of raM and 16Gb of inbuilt storage 
which can be further expanded up to 128Gb with the use of a 
microSD card. 
The Lenovo K320t sources its power from a 3000mah 
battery and runs android 7.1.2 Nougat. The smartphone houses 
dual SIM card slots and is topped with several connectivity 
options such as 4G, Wi-fi, bluetooth, GPS, a-GPS, micro-uSb, 
fM radio, and 3.5mm audio jack. Moreover, it is accompanied 
by a fingerprint sensor at the back.
The Lenovo K320t comes with a price tag of CNy 999 
(around rs 9,770). n
february 2018 | 41
justin
International
team@mymobile.co.in 
www.mymobileindia.com

44 | january 2018
lead story
Limelight
Gartner predicts 80 percent of smartphones shipped will 
have ‘On-Device AI Capabilities’ by 2022
MYMOBILE
           Ways HoW            Will Make 
sMartpHones sMarter!
10
ai

Limelight
lead story
february 2018 | 43
www.mymobileindia.com
A 
new chapter 
in smartphone 
evolution is on the 
horizon. The fusion of aI with 
smartphone has gathered pace and your 
smartphone is all set to become smarter - 
rather intelligent and would have a mind 
of its own – very soon. and endorsing this 
view is Gartner which has forecasted that 
by 2022, 80 percent of smartphones 
shipped will have on-device aI capabilities, 
up from 10 percent in 2017. On-device 
aI is currently limited to premium devices 
and provides better data protection and 
power management than full cloud-based 
aI, since data is processed and stored 
locally.
The respected research body also points 
out that artificial intelligence (aI) features 
will become a critical product differentiator 
for smartphone vendors that will help them 
to acquire new customers while retaining 
current users. “as the smartphone market 
shifts from selling technology products to 
delivering compelling and personalized 
experiences, aI solutions running on the 
smartphone will become an essential part 
of vendor roadmaps over the next two 
years.”
“With smartphones increasingly becoming 
a commodity device, vendors are looking 
for ways to differentiate their products,” 
says C K Lu, research Director at 
Gartner. “future aI capabilities will allow 
smartphones to learn, 
plan and solve problems for 
users. This isn’t just about making 
the smartphone smarter, but augmenting 
people by reducing their cognitive load. 
However, aI capabilities on smartphones 
are still in very early stages.”
“Over the next two years, most use cases 
will still exploit a single aI capability and 
technology,” points out roberta Cozza, 
research Director at Gartner. “Going 
forward, smartphones will combine two 
or more aI capabilities and technologies 
to provide more advanced user 
experiences.”
So here are 10 ways AI will empower 
smartphones according to Gartner:
1: “Digital Me” Sitting on the 
Device
Smartphones will be an extension of the 
user, capable of recognizing them and 
predicting their next move. They will 
understand who you are, what you want, 
when you want it, how you want it done 
and execute tasks upon your authority.
“your smartphone will track you throughout 
the day to learn, plan and solve problems 
for you,” says angie Wang, Principle 
research analyst at Gartner. “It will 
“Future AI capabilities 
will allow smartphones 
to learn, plan and solve 
problems for users. 
This isn’t just about 
making the smartphone 
smarter, but augmenting 
people by reducing their 
cognitive load”
 – C K Lu, 
research Director at 
Gartner
“Smartphones will be 
an extension of the user, 
capable of recognizing 
them and predicting their 
next move. They will 
understand who you are, 
what you want, when you 
want it, how you want it 
done and execute tasks 
upon your authority”

Limelight
lead story
MYMOBILE
leverage its sensors, cameras and data 
to accomplish these tasks automatically. 
for example, in the connected home, it 
could order a vacuum bot to clean when 
the house is empty, or turn a rice cooker 
on 20 minutes before you arrive.”
2: User Authentication
Password-based, simple authentication is 
becoming too complex and less effective, 
resulting in weak security, poor user 
experience, and a high cost of ownership. 
Security technology combined with 
machine learning, biometrics and user 
behavior will improve usability and 
self-service capabilities. for example, 
smartphones can capture and learn a 
user’s behavior, such as patterns when 
they walk, swipe, apply pressure to the 
phone, scroll and type, without the need 
for passwords or active authentications.
3: Emotion Recognition
emotion sensing systems and affective 
computing allow smartphones to 
detect, analyze, process and respond to 
people’s emotional states and moods. 
The proliferation of virtual personal 
assistants and other aI-based technology 
for conversational systems is driving the 
need to add emotional intelligence for 
better context and an enhanced service 
experience. Car manufacturers, for 
example, can use a smartphone’s front 
camera to understand a driver’s physical 
condition or gauge fatigue levels to 
increase safety.
4: Natural-Language 
Understanding
Continuous training and deep learning 
on smartphones will improve the 
accuracy of speech recognition, while 
better understanding the user’s specific 
intentions. for instance, when a user 
says “the weather is cold,” depending 
on the context, his or her real intention 
could be “please order a jacket online” or 
“please turn up the heat.” as an example, 
natural-language understanding could be 
used as a near real-time voice translator 
on smartphones when traveling abroad.
5: Augmented Reality (AR) 
and AI Vision
With the release of iOS 11, apple 
included an arKit feature that provides 
new tools to developers to make adding 
ar to apps easier. Similarly, Google 
announced its arCore ar developer 
tool for android and plans to enable ar 
on about 100 million android devices 
by the end of next year. Google expects 
almost every new android phone will be 
ar-ready out of the box next year. One 
example of how ar can be used is in 
apps that help to collect user data and 
detect illnesses such as skin cancer or 
pancreatic cancer.
6: Device Management
Machine learning will improve device 
performance and standby time. 
for example, with many sensors, 
smartphones can better understand and 
learn user’s behavior, such as when to use 
which app. The smartphone will be able 
to keep frequently used apps running in 
the background for quick re-launch, or to 
shut down unused apps to save memory 
and battery.
7: Personal Profiling
Smartphones are able to collect data for 

Limelight
lead story
february 2018 | 45
www.mymobileindia.com
behavioral and personal profiling. users 
can receive protection and assistance 
dynamically, depending on the activity that 
is being carried out and the environments 
they are in (e.g., home, vehicle, office, or 
leisure activities). Service providers such 
as insurance companies can now focus on 
users, rather than the assets. for example, 
they will be able to adjust the car insurance 
rate based on driving behavior.
8: Content Censorship/
Detection
restricted content can be automatically 
detected. Objectionable images, videos  
or text can be flagged and various 
notification alarms can be enabled. 
Computer recognition software can detect 
any content that violates any laws or 
policies. for example, taking photos in high 
security facilities or storing highly classified 
data on company-paid smartphones will 
notify IT.
9: Personal Photographing
Personal photographing includes 
smartphones that are able to automatically 
produce beautified photos based on a 
user’s individual aesthetic preferences. 
for example, there are different aesthetic 
preferences between the east and West 
— most Chinese people prefer a pale 
complexion, whereas consumers in the 
West tend to prefer tan skin tones.
10: Audio Analytic
The smartphone’s microphone is able to 
continuously listen to real-world sounds. 
aI capability on device is able to tell 
those sounds, and instruct users or trigger 
events. for example, a smartphone hears 
a user snoring, then triggers the user’s 
wristband to encourage a change in 
sleeping positions. n
team@mymobile.co.in
“Smartphones will be an extension of the user, capable 
of recognizing them and predicting their next move. They 
will understand who you are, what you want, when you 
want it, how you want it done and execute tasks upon your 
authority. Your smartphone will track you throughout the 
day to learn, plan and solve problems for you” 

46 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
Chief speak
Exclusive
“We are partnering with leading mobile brands 
to enable better access to the latest mobile 
technologies to consumers across the globe”
How would you rate and analyze the overall 
performance of Spreadtrum in the Indian market? 
Could you talk about some important developments/
achievements in the last few months? 2017 has been 
an incredible year for Spreadtrum. The year started 
on a high note with the launch of our dual camera 
chipsets, SC9853 and SC9850 which are game 
changers in dual selfie camera domain. Various 
mobile phones brands are launching affordable 
dual camera phones based on these chipsets and 
are taking high-end technology to mainstream.
The advent of 4G brought a paradigm shift 
in 2017 in the telecom domain. We would like 
to proudly call ourselves as the 4G enabler for 
Indian mobile brands and consumers. Spreadtrum 
launched several 4G-enabled chipsets in India at 
extremely competitive prices to achieve this aim 
and are driving the adoption of 4G-led services in 
the country. The launch of reliance Jio Phone,  
the 4G feature phone powered by Spreadtrum  
SoC marked as an important development in  
Shanghai headquartered Spreadtrum Communications 
is now a leading supplier of mobile chips in the 
Indian market and has witnessed impressive growth 
in terms of volume and reputation here in the last 
couple of years. Leading the charge from the front in 
India has been Neeraj Sharma, Country Head 
(India), Spreadtrum Communications who has 
scripted impressive success for the company in a 
highly competitive market. Under him, Spreadtrum has 
gone beyond as a supplier of chipsets to becoming 
a facilitator and collaborator of OEMs in designing 
and developing new gen mobile handsets. In an 
interaction with Shelley Vishwajeet, Mr Sharma 
dwells deep into Spreadtrum’s offerings, strategy and 
future road map.

february 2018 | 47
www.mymobileindia.com
Exclusive
the year gone by.
another milestone worth mentioning 
is Micormax bharat 2. The smartphone 
based on Spreadtrum chipset, SC9832 
successfully sold more than half a million 
units in just 50 days of its launch. Samsung 
J2 and J3 series, based on Spreadtrum 
chipsets were named as among the top 5 
smartphones in 2017. 
Spreadtrum’s global footage and reputation 
as a competent chip-maker has been growing 
but it remains largely preferred for feature 
phones. Against this backdrop what are your 
plans to capture more of smartphone market?  
Spreadtrum already has a diverse product 
catalogue which not only caters to entry-
level smartphones and feature phones, but 
also provides turnkey solutions to high-end 
devices and has cutting-edge technological 
capabilities extending to quad-core 
smartphones. 
The recently launched LeaGOO T5c 
based on Spreadtrum SC9853I is targeted 
to gen next smartphone audience and comes 
with a strong core and enhanced camera 
processing capabilities. Lenovo K320t 
with Spreadtrum SC9850 is one of the 
most affordable dual camera smartphone 
and is integrated with interesting features 
like fingerprint scanner, light sensor and 
proximity sensor.
To diversify our product portfolio further, 
we are integrating advanced features like 
eMbMS, VoWifi, Carrier aggregation 
and Dual Camera in our chipsets. We are 
additionally partnering with leading mobile 
brands to enable better access to the latest 
mobile technologies to consumers across 
the globe. 
We have also set up one of a kind 
hardware lab and are providing end-to-end 
support from creating a reference design to 
development, to testing, and debugging – to 
our partners and thus helping them with a 
faster go-to-market time.
How has been the response to Spreadtrum’s 
much talked about SC98530 and SC9853i 
chipset? both SC98530 and SC9853I 
chipsets have received an incredible 
response from brands across the globe. 
built on Intel’s 14nm foundry platform, 
Spreadtrum SC9853I is targeting the global 
mid and high-level smartphone market. It 
features 1.8GHz Octa-core 64-bit Intel 
airmont architecture based processor, 
which enables SC9853I to offer a high-
performance mobile computing ability 
coupled with ultra-low power. LeaGOO T5c 
is the first phone to be launched globally 
based on SC9853I. 
Designed for overall entry and mid-level 
markets globally, SC9850 - the powerful 
Quad-core arM Cortex-a7 application 
processor is being used by a lot of global 
brands who intend to offer superior quality 
as low price point. 
Intex newly launched phone, elyt Dual, 
the most affordable dual camera smartphone 
is based on SC98530 and comes with a 
lot of promising features. also we would 
be seeing a number of brands launching 
their phone models based on SC9850 and 
SC9853I in Q2 and Q3 of 2018. 
Apart from providing chipsets for mobile, 
are there other devices you are looking 
at to open up new sales avenues? Mobile 
chipsets have always been Spreadtrum’s 
forte. In addition to mobile chipsets, 
we also have SoC’s catering to IoT, 
digital payments, security, automotive, 
wearables, etc. Our aim is to facilitate the 
creation of a more interconnected world by 
promoting the ease of communication. 
In fact, we have recently launched the 
world’s first Shared Wi-fi Translator in 
collaboration with baidu. Spreadtrum also 
has its technology in a lot of innovative 
products, including 360 rider GPS Locator, 
automatic Vending Machine, In Vehicle 
Infotainment, a.I. Children Smart Watch, 
bike Sharing Platform, to name a few.
Do you also collaborate or assist a mobile 
manufacturer in helping them overall design 
better offerings? Or you only confine yourself to 
only providing chip solutions? at Spreadtrum, 
we provide turnkey solutions which means 
collaborating with mobile brands at every 
step and not only just only providing chip 
solutions. 
for the same reason, we have set up 
a one-of-its-kind hardware lab with an 
OTa chamber at Spreadtrum’s research 
& Development Center in Noida. This is 
the very first in India and offers turnkey 
solutions to Indian mobile brands to help 
them design, develop, test and debug with 
a reduced time to market.In fact, we have 
been working with lot of mobile brands, 
including Samsung on various r&D and 
manufacturing projects, providing end-to-
end solutions. n
Chief speak
shelley@mymobile.co.in 
“In addition to mobile chipsets, we also have SoC’s catering to IoT, digital payments, 
security, automotive, wearables, etc. Our aim is to facilitate the creation of a more 
interconnected world by promoting the ease of communication”

Xiaomi has been rated as the top mobile shipper 
in the country last year. What are the key aspects 
of the Xiaomi smartphones which make them a 
suitable choice for the buyers in the country? 
At Xiaomi, our core belief is innovation 
for everyone. With this in mind, we create 
premium smartphones and sell them near 
cost. This means Mi fans get the best value 
for their money and our smartphones, like the 
Redmi Note 4 or Redmi 5A, stand out in their 
price range.
At the same time we also love exploring new 
possibilities with smartphones, like the Mi MIX, 
our first full screen display smartphone, or the 
Mi Max 2 which is a sequel to our first large-
screen smartphone which has no competition 
in its price range. Our products are also very 
proudly made in India, and have India-specific 
features such as the IRCTC SMS view, OTP 
Copy, and more. We believe the amalgamation 
of our commitment to India, innovative 
face to face
Xiaomi, the top smartphone seller in the online space, has emerged as the hot favourite 
smartphone brand among the buyers across the country, which reflects in its market 
share of almost 24 percent during July-September quarter last year. The wide range of 
smartphones it has, starting 
from Rs 4,999 to Rs 35,999, 
Xiaomi has innovations for 
everyone. Jai Mani, Lead 
Product Manager at Xiaomi 
India, shared his expertise with 
Haider Ali Khan on how 
things have shaped for Xiaomi 
in India and what he expects 
of 2018 when the company is 
planning an IPO.
“We will continue to challenge 
limits with faster chips”
48 | febRuARy 2018
Exclusive

febRuARy 2018 | 49
Exclusive
face to face
products, our efficient team and the love 
of our Mi fans is what helped Xiaomi build 
a strong equity within India.
The strength of Xiaomi lies within the sub-10K 
segment. Is it the segment which contributes 
the maximum into the overall sales and 
shipment of the Xiaomi smartphones? At 
Xiaomi our core focus lies in providing 
innovative technology to the masses, 
and we believe that even in the sub-
10K category, there’s a lot of potential to 
provide an amazing experience. Just look 
at the Redmi Note 4. At Rs 9,999, you get 
features usually only seen in Rs 20,000 
phones. It’s no wonder so many of our users 
go for this price range, it’s simply because 
we have an incredible product at that price. 
Of course, we cater to different sections of 
the population, and have phones ranging 
from INR 4,999(Redmi 5A) to INR 35,999 
(Mi MIX 2).
How has been the response to your Android 
One smartphone Mi A1? Do you also plan 
to bring out few more devices in the same 
lineage? We’ve been overjoyed by the 
enthusiastic response we’ve gotten to the 
Mi A1. Xiaomi believes in giving our users 
choice, which is what led to the creation of 
the Mi A1 with Android One. We are always 
open to trying new things but have nothing 
to announce right now.
Recently, Google announced Android Go for 
the budget category devices. Will that help 
you to penetrate even deeper into the rural 
markets of India? Mi A1 was our first Android 
One device, which got an encouraging 
response. Android Go is a great initiative 
by Google, and hopefully a lot of people 
who’ve never been able to take advantage 
of technology will come on board. We don’t 
have any Android Go plans to announce at 
the moment.
Online has been a major source of traction for 
Xiaomi smartphones last year. Would it be the 
same in 2018? How has the Mi Stores helped 
you to get more eyeballs? Xiaomi is the 
number 1 smartphone player in the online 
market with 50.8% market share as per IDC 
Q3 2017 reports. Xiaomi started building 
its offline business in January 2017 and as 
of today, offline contributes to more than 
20% of our overall sales. We have a three 
pronged approach to our offline presence 
“Our products are very proudly ‘Made 
in India’, and have India-specific 
features such as the IRCTC SMS view, 
OTP Copy, and more. We believe the 
amalgamation of our commitment 
to India, innovative products, our 
efficient team and the love of our Mi 
Fans is what helped Xiaomi  
build a strong equity  
within India”

50 | febRuARy 2018
MYMOBILE
face to face
which is based on an Internet+ New Retail 
model. The three spokes are Mi Preferred 
Partner shops, Large format retail partners 
and Mi Home stores. Mi Home stores are 
Xiaomi’s exclusive offline retail stores that 
allow Mi fans to experience and purchase 
Xiaomi’s latest products under one roof. 
These stores represent Xiaomi’s “Internet+” 
and “new retail” approach — combining 
the internet efficiency of e-commerce with 
the service and user experience of offline 
retail. Mi Home stores will allow Xiaomi in 
India to extend the success of its online 
Mi.com store to offline retail.
We have more than 1500 Mi PP stores 
across 15+ cities and 17 Mi Home stores 
and hope to reach 100 stores by May 
2019.
What are the key specifications in a 
smartphone on which you are focusing to 
ease the pain points of the buyers? We are 
always listening for feedback from our 
Mi fans. Thanks to this feedback, we’ve 
focused on releasing devices with great 
battery life, solid build quality, as well as 
great performance in the price range.
Do we expect some more flagships from 
Xiaomi in 2018 like Mi MIX 2? We are very 
proud of how we pushed boundaries to 
create the Mi MIX 2, our second full screen 
display smartphone. Safe to say, we have 
exciting things coming up this year!
How big is the network of service centres you 
have in the country? We have more than 750 
authorized service centres in India spread 
across more than 350 cities. More than 
100 of these service centres are exclusive 
to Xiaomi. We have a repair rate of 95% for 
one day repairs and 86% repair rate for 4 
hour repairs across all our service centres. 
As per IMRb, we are the best in class in 
terms of service delivery.
The competition in the market is huge. Do you 
go by it or the consumers? Would you also like 
to partner service providers to sell bundled 
smartphones? We are driven by our Mi fans, 
who constantly give us feedback and help 
us make better decisions.
What would be the dominating trends in 2018 
in smartphone market? Could we expect some 
interesting and industry first technologies 
from Xiaomi? for 2018, we are excited 
to enable more users to get their first 
smartphone and get on the internet. At the 
same time we are also committed to our 
innovation for everyone motto, and create 
more ecosystem products outside of just 
smartphones.
It was evident when we launched Mi 
MIX that Xiaomi is doing a lot of things 
that others haven’t, whether it’s the use 
of materials like ceramic, or pushing 
boundaries in reducing bezel size and 
changing conventions like screen aspect 
ratio. We will continue to challenge limits 
with faster chips, including a new flagship 
this year that features Snapdragon 845. 
Our continuing research into AI will also 
be a big thing for us this year. n
“At Xiaomi our core focus 
lies in providing innovative 
technology to the masses, 
and we believe that even 
in the sub-10K category, 
there’s a lot of potential 
to provide an amazing 
experience”
haider@mymobile.co.in
Exclusive

How big is the market of accessories in 
India? Accessories market in India is more 
than Rs.6000 crore. India mobile phone 
accessories market has grown significantly 
in recent years with immense opportunities 
owing to substantial growth in the worldwide 
adoption of smartphones and tablets. 
Decreasing prices of mobile phones is 
increasing smartphone penetration, which 
in turn is surging the growth of the India 
mobile phone accessories market. Increasing 
disposable income has transformed 
consumer buying and spending trends 
mainly in urban areas. Adoption of mobile 
devices amongst the youth across the globe 
has provided a robust stimulus for the 
growth of the market. Moreover, increasing 
internet penetration has uplifted the trend 
of online retailing in the India mobile phone 
accessories market due to convenience of 
cash on delivery payment option and various 
price discounts along with a wide variety 
of products offered by e-retailers. This is 
anticipated to catalyze the growth of the 
India mobile phone accessories market.
What are the core strengths, business 
philosophy of the company? East Sun is 
committed towards delivering quality, 
reliability, efficiency and value to its 
customers. We practice KAIZEN, the 
philosophy of “Continuous Improvement” 
at all levels of organisation. The price you 
pay constitutes only real value added to 
our product. You will never pay for any 
inefficiency on our part.
What is the current strength of your facility 
in Pune in terms of manpower and output on 
monthly basis? Our total strength of manpower 
is around 200 peoples working in single shift. 
We can produce 3 million chargers per month 
but at present we are manufacturing around 
1 million chargers per month. However by 
the end of this year we are targeting to utilize 
our maximum capacity.
Please tell us about some of the prominent 
handset OEMs market for whom East  
Sun manufactures/supplies products? At 
present we are manufacturing for Intex 
technologies, Swipe mobiles, ivoomi 
mobiles, Clout mobiles. We are also in talks 
with many big conglomerates of mobile 
industry and many of them are expected to 
join our customer list soon.
Are you mulling options to start a second 
manufacturing facility elsewhere in the 
country? As we have huge capacity in our 
current unit so as of now we don’t have any 
such plan. However in coming time if we get 
big orders with respect to our current facility 
than we can think to start another unit.
Could we expect East Sun exploring export 
market in near future? As our Indian unit is a 
joint venture so East Sun is already present 
in Shenzhen (China). This year we will start 
exporting to some countries from our India 
plant and if customers are satisfied with our 
quality than definitely East Sun will have a 
unit abroad.
Are you exploring other options of the 
accessories business like Bluetooth, headsets, 
powerbanks etc.? Mobile phone charger 
market itself is very huge so initially we are 
focusing on the same. We are trying to add 
some more products as per market trend 
in our product list. Let me tell you we have 
launched double port chargers in 2.1A 
& 3.1A with smart IC last month and we 
have some more products in queue like Car 
charger and QC chargers n 
team@mymobile.co.in 
fEbRuARY 2018 | 51
www.mymobileindia.com
In  Conversation
“We practice KAIZEN, the philosophy of ‘Continuous 
Improvement’ at all levels of organization”
face to face
“East Sun is committed 
towards delivering 
quality, reliability, 
efficiency and value to 
its customers”
East Sun Electronics has emerged as a leading and reputed 
manufacturer of high quality chargers. The Company has 
a state-of-the-art manufacturing unit in Chakan, Pune with 
production capacity of 30 million chargers per year. The 
Company has more than 120 employees and is led by a 
professional team of Indian and Chinese directors with vast 
experience in electronics manufacturing & telecom industry. 
My Mobile interacted with Prashant Bora, CEO, East 
Sun Electronics India to talk about the company’s strategic 
plans.

60 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
International
market insight
They still have a long way to go before they can dream of margins enjoyed 
by Apple and Samsung
C
hinese brand mobile handsets’ 
profit crossed uS$1.5 billion 
for the first time in a single 
quarter i.e in Q3 2017 but 
the margins enjoyed by them continue to 
be miniscule as compared to apple and 
Samsung. The global smartphone profits 
too grew impressively in the third quarter. 
according to the latest research from 
Counterpoint’s Market Monitor program for 
Q3 2017 (July-September), global mobile 
handset profits grew 13% yoy in Q3 2017 
due to strong performance of Samsung and 
Chinese brands.
Counterpoint associate Director Tarun 
Pathak highlighted, “This is the first time 
ever when the cumulative profits of Chinese 
brands crossed uSD 1.5 billion for the first 
in a single quarter. usually all the profits 
have been shared by just two brands 
Samsung and apple, however, Chinese 
brands have made inroads here as well.”
Mr Pathak further added, “The growth 
of Chinese brands can be attributed to the 
diligent efforts in streamlining the supply 
chain with rising mix of mid to high end 
smartphones in their portfolio. even in the 
premium segment, players like Huawei 
are positioning their flagship models just 
below the premium offerings from apple 
and Samsung. This strategy is designed 
to penetrate premium market while 
Chinese mobile brands’ 
profit soars but…
“The growth of Chinese 
brands can be attributed 
to the diligent efforts 
in streamlining the 
supply chain with 
rising mix of mid to 
high end smartphones 
in their portfolio……. 
This strategy is 
designed to penetrate 
premium market while 
maximizing revenue and 
profit” 
 – Tarun Pathak, 
associate Director, 
Counterpoint

february 2018 | 53
www.mymobileindia.com
market insight 
International
maximizing revenue and profit.”
Counterpoint’s research Director, 
Neil Shah, added, “apple continued to 
command lion share of mobile handset 
industry profits capturing almost 60% 
share. However, this is down from 
86% share in the same quarter last 
year when Samsung had to gulp 
up a loss due to the Galaxy Note 7 
debacle. The Korean vendor though 
with relatively stronger demand for Note 
8 and mid-tier high-scale J series have 
been able to capture almost a fourth of the 
global mobile handset industry profits.”
Mr Shah added, “apple still generates 
more than uSD150 profit per iPhone sold 
and this will continue to grow into the 
holiday season quarter buoyed by the high 
price iPhone X series. Our recent channel 
checks across key apple markets showed, 
the demand for the 256Gb version of 
iPhone X is higher which will boost apple’s 
profits even higher.”
Market Summary
• Apple captured nearly 60% of the total 
profits generated in mobile handset 
segment followed by Samsung
• Apple’s profit share declined by 30% YoY 
mainly due to increased mix of previous 
generation iPhones. The average selling 
price of iPhone remained flat yoy while 
the shipments increased 3% yoy. 
• In Q4 2017, we estimate that the total 
profits of apple will improve driven by its 
iPhone X sales.apple exited the quarter 
with some iPhone 8 inventory due to 
softer than expected demand compared 
to the iPhone 7 series.
• Samsung made a strong come back in 
the third quarter with its Note 8 series 
while S8 series continue to perform on 
par. The profit share reached 26% as 
compared to its loss during Q3 2016 
due to Note 7 debacle.
• Huawei witnessed highest profit growth 
of 67% yoy in Q3 2017 due to its 
portfolio expansion across price bands. 
Huawei’s smartphone aSP grew by 6% 
yoy driven by its Mate and P series.
• Oppo &Vivo captured fourth and fifth 
spot in Global Handset profit share 
mainly driven by their performance in 
China.
• While Xiaomi has made a strong 
comeback with handset profit growth of 
41% YoY, it is still behind the market 
leaders. for Xiaomi, offline distribution 
is the key to reaching OPPO or Huawei’s 
scale, but most of Xiaomi’s sales are 
still skewed towards lower-end models. 
Xiaomi needs premium flagship like Mi 
Mix 2 or Mi 6 series to scale and drive 
higher profits also to offset the offline 
expansion costs. Xiaomi is rumored 
to be in pre-IPO phase and instilling 
investors confidence that it can scale 
and make more money will be key next 
year.
• Expansion of Chinese players outside 
china will have an impact on the profit 
margins of Chinese players which they 
would like to mitigate by increasing the 
mix of mid segment devices in markets 
outside China. n
85.9%
2016 Q3                  2017 Q3
59.9%
25.9%
3.3%
4.2%
4.0%
3.7%
3.1%
4.9%
0.0%
APPLE
SAMSUNG
HUAWEI
OPPO
VIVO
Global Handset Profit Share by Brands: Q3 2017
Source : Counterpoint Technology Market Research
“Huawei  
witnessed highest profit  
growth of 67% YoY in Q3  
2017 due to its portfolio 
expansion across price bands. 
Huawei’s smartphone ASP  
grew by 6% YoY driven by  
its Mate and  
P series”
8 Apple’s per unit profit is five times higher 
than Samsung and approximately 
14 times higher than the average per 
unit profit of Chinese brands. Apple’s 
per unit profit stood at USD151 in Q3 
2017.
8 Samsung with its global presence has 
one of the highest number of models 
across price bands. Its profit per unit 
was USD31 in Q3 2017
8 Chinese brands like Huawei, Oppo and 
Vivo are all performing similar in terms 
of profits per unit, each having an 
average per unit profit of USD 15, 
14 & 13 respectively.
8 As compared to other Chinese 
brands, Xiaomi’s per unit profit is 
lower (USD2) as it plays on very 
thin margins.
Profits per unit sold
team@mymobile.co.in

Trendz
Consumer insight
54 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
Despite disruptions, app sessions continue to rise albeit at a slower pace 
while online shopping and entertainment garner most time spend!
T
ime spend on app sessions 
continued to rise unabated 
in 2017 though at a slower 
pace as compared to 2016 
when average time spend had crossed a 
whopping five hours. according to latest 
flurry analytics’ “flurry State of the Mobile 
2017 report” which tacked one million 
applications across 2.6 billion users, the 
year 2017 saw session app activity growing 
by 6% yoy.
flurry observes that for an industry that’s 
seen staggering growth and disruption 
since the launch of the first smartphone, 
2017 was the year that mobile app 
innovation and growth was disrupted. 
Stalwart industry players held and gained 
market position, while years-old disruptors 
struggled to find their footing. Compared to 
2016, flurry measured overall session app 
activity growth of just 6%. While growth 
may have stagnated, users continue to 
diversify their behavior while using mobile 
applications.
Over the last year, flurry’s app footprint 
grew to track more than one million 
applications, across 2.6 billion devices 
globally. In this context, flurry defines 
app usage as a user opening an app and 
recording what it calls a “session.”
Mobile Session Growth 
Stagnates in 2017
This past year’s 6% growth is down from 
11% in 2016. as we reported last year, 
users now spend more than five hours a 
day on their smartphones, and shift their 
daily time spent between new and old app 
experiences, versus giving more of their 
overall daily time.
The Shopping category grew by 54% as 
consumers continue to shift their spending 
App is still the way to go!

Consumer insight 
Trendz
february 2018 | 55
www.mymobileindia.com
into e-commerce via mobile shopping 
apps. users are increasingly comfortable 
making physical purchases on their phones 
with now ingrained in-app digital purchase 
habits. additionally, digital wallet services 
such as apple Pay and Samsung Pay 
allow seamless access to stored payment 
information for mobile purchases. Music, 
Media, and entertainment came in a close 
second with 43% year-over-year growth, 
reaffirming users’ shift to mobile devices 
to consume media.  
Lifestyle saw the steepest decline in 
growth with -40% in 2017. The decline 
in Lifestyle, a catchall category for both 
the Google Play and apple app stores, 
highlights an app’s need to build daily 
usage habits in order to retain or increase 
year-over-year growth. While Gaming saw 
another year of decline in sessions with 
-15% in 2017, flurry has previously 
reported that gamers are spending more 
time and money in mobile games than ever 
before.  
Phablets Continue to Steal 
Medium Phone Market Share
understanding form factor adoption 
is critical for both app developers and 
marketers, as we know that usage differs 
between devices. 2017 proved that there 
is no end in sight for phablet growth – 
they represent a staggering 55% of active 
devices. as medium phone users trade in 
their devices, it is clear that they’re opting 
for phablet devices, as 9% of the phablet 
growth came from medium phone adoption 
decline.
Android Dominates OS, While 
Apple holds Manufacturer 
Market Share
although android manufacturers make up 
two thirds of all active devices in 2017, 
apple dominates individual market share 
with 34% of all active devices. Samsung 
maintained their share between 2016 and 
2017 with 28% and will look to return to 
growth in 2018 with the launch of the S9. 
Chinese manufacturers Huawei, Xiaomi, 
and OPPO round out the top five and are 
slowly seeing growth by driving adoption in 
asia Pacific and european markets. 
Developers Have Users’ 
Attention, It’s Time to Innovate
although session growth may have 
stalled, it has never been more apparent 
that mobile apps and smartphones have 
cemented their roles in users’ lives. While 
users, marketers and the tech industry 
drive towards what’s next, developers 
have an incredibly captive audience and a 
platform to engage them. and flurry will be 
there to help drive the mobile app market 
forward. Here’s to 2018!  n 
team@mymobile.co.in
Mobile App Usage Grows 6% 
Year-Over-Year
Sessions
54%
43%
33%
20%
20%
-16%
-8%
-8%
-8%
-40%
Shopping
Sports
Music, 
Media & 
Entertainment
Photography
Business & 
Finance
Personalization
Utilities & 
Productivity
Games
News & 
Magazine
Lifestyle
Average 6%
Source : Flurry Analytics, 2016-2017
From Factor Distribution
End of Year Device Distribution
2016
2017
Source : Flurry Analytics, 2016-2017
n Full-size Tablets      n Small Tablets      n Phablets       n Medium Phones      n Small Phones
6%
8%
4%
6%
55%
41%
35%
44%
1%

102 | february 2018
In  Conversation
face to face
MYMOBILE
What is the role of Samsung Enterprises 
Business and how Knox has been a catalyst 
for the same? In the enterprise business 
space Samsung has been doing lot of 
innovations in three to four years, not 
only in terms of providing services and 
solutions but also developing its own 
platform to enable the enterprises of small 
and medium businesses and support their 
digital journey. 
We are probably the only OeM who 
has a dedicated enterprises team which 
is responsible for driving solutions and 
services across business spectrum from 
small to large organizations. We have 
set up technical solution team as an 
organization because we believe that a 
lot of these organizations need solutions. 
We have 5 r&D facilities in India. We are 
working with software developers or end 
IT team of the particular organization to 
help them get their applications working 
on devices as best.
We have SeaP program for the software 
developers to get their applications best on 
Samsung devices. We have best in-class 
service network which put together was 
where we were able to offer the best service 
and solutions to the enterprises.
How is Samsung Knox different from 
Blockchain? The biggest issue for an IT 
department is security. That’s where Knox 
brings in probably the best-in-class 
security environment. Samsung Knox 
gives you security at hardware level, 
middleware level and at an OS 
level as well. Knox is the only 
security software which works 
at a chipset level. all others 
primarily work at an OS 
level. Knox as a platform 
is accepted by 29 countries worldwide.
because Knox is our own program we 
have integrated it at chipset level and have 
a trusted boot zone or trust zone. When the 
device is booting up that’s when security 
integrity checks happen, which is the first 
level of security that has happened and 
no one else does today. at the middleware 
level, we have something called Trust 
Zone, where it’s constantly keep checking 
for any violation that may have happened. 
The third check is at OS level, where we 
have the Knox containers set. Most of the 
MDM works at that level.blockchain is 
more on the finTech side.
What are the concerns organization have 
and how Samsung Knox manages things for 
them? There are two main concerns of any 
organization; security and management, 
and we do take care of it completely. We 
provide tools to manage their applications 
across platforms and user and help them 
manage the entire thing, if we take care 
of these things they would be happier. 
These two can be the limiting factor of 
an organization in its digital journey. We 
enable them with our tools in their digital 
journey.
The kind of plug and play services 
we provide through Knox help smaller 
and medium organization to save huge 
Samsung Knox, an enterprise solution platform, has been the core of most of the 
Samsung smartphones, tablets and wearables providing chipset level security integration 
thus making them more secure and reliable. The same Knox platform is being used by 
various governments and their agencies to secure and manage their policies. Sukesh 
Jain, Vice-president, IT & Mobile Enterprises Business at Samsung India, 
highlighted various use cases of Knox with Haider Ali Khan as how it can help 
enterprises to build a more secure way to manage their businesses. Excerpts...
“Samsung Knox as a security platform is 
being used by 29 countries worldwide”

In  Conversation
chief speak
february 2018 | 57
www.mymobileindia.com
amount of investment on IT side and they 
can use these tools very fast without too 
much of integration required for their 
business enablement. We bring in ease 
of deployment, flexibility and above all 
security.
What kind of customization Knox has to offer 
for Enterprises? at the product level we are 
doing a lot of feature enablement from 
a business use case perspective. We’ve 
something called Knox Manage which is 
the eMM kind of a product wherein you 
can put in a lot of policies of what you want 
to drive as far as mobile is concerned. for 
example if you want the policy in terms of 
switching off the camera or switching on 
the GPS, etc.
We’ve another product called Know 
Customization, is like a sales force 
automation tool. for example, it can 
ensure that the GPS is always onor from a  
certain fixed time of a sales guy in order 
to locate his/her presence. We are not 
coming into personal domain;it’s only for 
business use cases. It can help blacklist or 
vice-versa any app which an organization 
wants as part of its policies using Knox 
Customization.
The third customization is we do 
two to three times more aPIs than any 
other normal aPIs. We call it CSDK or 
Customized SDK. This is at an application 
level so if you’re a software developer and 
you want to integrate your application far 
deeper into Samsung devices then we will 
open up SDKs and integrates your device 
into it. for example, we have an Iris tablet. 
One of the premium airlines uses our tablet 
with our level of customization and many 
banks also do the same with our Iris tablet 
of eKyC aND eSign.
Where Samsung Knox does comes into 
play for a common manas compared to an 
organization? for a common person as end 
user the Knox container comes into play 
wherein they can keep their applications 
that they want for higher level of security 
in the container, for example, banking 
application.
It has far deeper application 
from business perspective. business 
organizations want to drive very specific 
policies for its employees, it does not 
want you to use it anything from an official 
email. It does not want you to download 
anything from your device. Organizations 
can drive far stronger policies using Knox 
platform. We do not store any data. all we 
do is constantly checking whether any 
breach is happening on this or not.
Are you lending this technology to others 
OEMs? The products features are proprietary 
of Samsung because they open up the 
aPIs of our device. I cannot open the aPI of 
other OeMs but the Knox security platform 
can also manage iOS and android devices. 
The security available on Samsung devices 
is far higher than other devices but Knox 
can manage other OS and OeMs as well. 
The chipset level security is only available 
with Knox.
What could be the newer domains for Knox? 
It’s pervasive across all verticals. The 
financial sector has been the first and 
foremost adapter because security for 
them is paramount. Cab companies and 
lot of service industry is using our Knox 
platform. Various government departments 
are already using our Knox platform. even 
the Gartner identifies Knox as one of the 
top most secure platform available in the 
market. n 
haider@mymobile.co.in

International
market insight
58 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
IoT connected devices to cross the billion mark by 2020 while China Mobile 
and Vodafone lead the charge!
A
ccording to the latest research 
from Counterpoint’s IoT 
(Internet of Things) service, the 
stage is all set for exponential 
growth of IoT connected devices with global 
cellular majors ramping up their services 
to provide the necessary infrastructure for 
fuelling and facilitating the boom. and 
leading the march are cellular operators 
such as China Mobiles and Vodafone.
Counterpoint’s study reveals that  
the global IoT cellular connections grew 
41% annually to the end of 3Q 2017, 
having already crossed the half billion 
mark earlier in 2017 while predicting that 
the next half a billion will come as soon as 
2020.
at the end of 3Q 2017, Chinese 
operators dominated the market holding 
more than 46% of IoT cellular connections. 
China Mobile was the world’s leading 
operator in terms of IoT connections. 
However, outside China, Vodafone leads in 
IoT cellular connectivity globally.
Commenting on the latest research on 
IoT connectivity, Counterpoint’s research 
analyst Satyajit Sinha noted, “Cellular 
Springboard Gets Ready 
For IoT’s Big Leap

market insight 
Trendz
february 2018 | 59
www.mymobileindia.com
IoT acts as the backbone in driving secure 
connectivity for different devices to the 
internet and across different verticals. 
The type of access used will depend on 
the nature of the application. 3GPP WaN 
technologies like GSM (2G), WCDMa (3G), 
4G LTe and upcoming 5G technologies, 
operate in licensed spectrum and have 
primarily targeted high-quality mobile voice 
and data services. However, they are being 
complemented with new functionality and 
the new radio access standards like eC-
GSM, LTe-M and narrowband IoT (Nb-
IoT), specifically tailored to be an attractive 
solution for emerging low power wide area 
(LPWa) applications that will be the key IoT 
connectivity drivers alongside 5G in coming 
years.”
Mr Sinha further added, “as at the end 
“Today, 4G LTE supports 
IoT with legacy 4G and 
LTE-Cat1 connections. 
The main application 
areas are for Energy 
Utilities and Remote 
Asset Monitoring. 
However, going 
forward most of these 
applications will be 
supported by cellular 
LPWA technologies 
like EC-GSM, LTE-M and 
NB-IoT, especially for 
low-power, low-data, 
battery-powered use-
cases”
 – Satyajit Sinha, 
research analyst, 
Counterpoint
Exhibit 1: Global IoT Connections Share by Cellular Access Technology 
n LTE-M/NB-IoT
n 4G LTE  
 
Connection
n 3G Connection
n 2G Connection
3Q2015
3Q2016
3Q2017
26.2%
34.3%
39.5%
28.9%
28.7%
42.4%
55.3%
21.2%
23.1%
Source : Counterpoint
Exhibit 2: Global Cellular IoT Connections Share by Operator in 3Q 2017
n China Mobile
n Vodafone
n China Unicom
n AT&T
n China Telecom
n Others
36%
32%
5%
6%
9%
11%
Source : Q3 2017 IoT Connections Tracker

60 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
Trendz
market insight
8 China Mobile grew 21% QoQ and leads the market with 
32% share of connections. China Mobile has leapfrogged 
global operators, exercising enormous domestic scale, 
quickly transitioning to 4G LTE IoT connections and now 
aggressively rolling out NB-IoT connections to further 
exploit the IoT opportunities. China Mobile was a bit late 
starting its NB-IoT service but is now aggressively pursuing 
the service rollout. In August 2017, China Mobile issued 
RFPs (Requests for Proposals) for two projects, worth a 
combined total of CYN 39.6 billion (US$ 6 billion) to 
achieve nation-wide NB-IoT commercialization by early 
2018. 
8 Vodafone grew 37% YoY and holds the second position 
with 10.9% market share. As of 3Q2017, Vodafone 
had launched NB-IoT in four countries including, The 
Netherlands, Ireland, Czech Republic and Spain. Vodafone 
added commercial NB-IoT networks in Turkey and Australia 
in early 4Q 2017. 
8 China Unicom grew 39% YoY and holds third position 
with 9.4 % market share. China Unicom announced pre-
commercialization of NB-IoT in May. Shanghai became 
the first trial city for its pre-commercial network. China 
Unicom is still in the pre-commercial stage with no officially 
announced tariff plan. It will have pre-commercialization in 
10 domestic cities by the end of 2018.
8 AT&T grew 23% YoY and holds fourth spot with 6.4 % 
market share. AT&T’s LPWA IoT strategy currently is 
focusing on LTE-M, which the operator began rolling out 
in 2Q 2017 with initial applications being asset tracking 
(pallet tracking) and smart meters.
8 China Telecom grew 17% YoY and holds fifth place with 
5% market share. In terms of NB-IoT, it was the fastest 
developing company for NB-IoT connection among 
Chinese operators. It completed network coverage of 800 
million people under NB-IoT by the end of June 2017, 
and announced commercialization of NB-IoT in July. In 
so doing it became the first operator in China to officially 
kick-off the commercialization of an NB-IoT service.
8 Asia grew 64.2% YoY and dominates cellular IoT connections 
with a 57.2% share. China is the major contributor with 
81% of Asian connections and grew 75% YoY.
8 Japan And South Korea grew 15 % and 25 % YoY 
respectively. Japan holds 5% share and South Korea holds 
2% share within Asia.
8 In terms of LPWA development, South Korea is ahead of 
Japan. S.K.Telecom, LG U+ and KT Corp commercialised 
their NB-IoT services in 3Q 2017. KT Corp also 
commercialised LTE-M in 2Q2017. South Korean Operators 
are looking forward to driving their LPWA connections 
in 2018 with specific focus areas being agriculture and 
energy utilities.
8 Americas grew 20% YoY and holds second position with a 
19.6% share. The USA’s four operators account for 68% of 
the connections in the Americas region. The US grew 17% 
YoY.
8 AT&T and Verizon are the only US operators that have so far 
commercialised LTE-M networks - both in 2Q2017. Within 
the US, these two operators hold 72.5% of IoT cellular 
connections.
IoT Study Highlights:

market insight 
Trendz
february 2018 | 61
www.mymobileindia.com
of 3Q 2017, 4G LTe connections were 
leading, accounting for more than half the 
cellular IoT connections and registering 
84% yoy growth. Today, 4G LTe supports 
IoT with legacy 4G and LTe-Cat1 
connections. The main application areas 
are for energy utilities and remote asset 
Monitoring. However, going forward most 
of these applications will be supported by 
cellular LPWa technologies like eC-GSM, 
LTe-M and Nb-IoT, especially for low-
power, low-data, battery-powered use-
cases. These cellular LPWa connections 
are in the early deployment or trial phase 
and amount to less than 1% of the total 
cellular IoT connections”.
Providing additional color on the latest 
trends in IoT connectivity strategies, 
research Director Peter richardson  
noted, “IoT cellular connectivity has been 
modest so far, but we expect the next 
half billion IoT cellular connections to 
be added by 2020. The upcoming dual-
mode modules supporting both LTe-M and  
Nb-IoT will further drive LPWa 
connections, and we will see a decline 
in legacy connections, as most of the  
earlier M2M type applications will 
migrate to LPWa networks. Players such 
as Vodafone will be able to accelerate the 
Nb-IoT roll-outs across multiple countries, 
leveraging global scale to accelerate the 
cellular LPWa adoption internationally. 
China serves as a model, where Chinese 
operators such as China Mobile and China 
Telecom are ramping up the roll-out and 
deployments at a rapid pace. This is also 
having a knock-on impact of lowering the 
overall module (see here), device and 
service costs”.
Highlighting the cellular IoT connectivity 
opportunity and value, research Director 
Neil Shah notes, “Cellular IoT operators 
are well-positioned to become a single 
and preferred source for IoT solutions by 
bundling IoT devices, secure connectivity, 
platform and data management. While 
some operators might lead in offering 
end-to-end IoT solutions for specific 
verticals e.g. connected cars or asset 
tracking, for some verticals operators  
will still depend on system integrators  
and other solution providers to help 
customers deploy the complete solution. 
Having said that, operators are better 
positioned to capture maximum value  
in IoT, unlike in the smartphone space 
where much of the business opportunity 
was captured by OTT players. We should 
see a more integrated play by leading 
operators in the IoT space in mid- to  
long-term, at least is some application 
areas.” n 
team@mymobile.co.in 
“IoT cellular connectivity 
has been modest so far, 
but we expect the next 
half billion IoT cellular 
connections to be added 
by 2020. The upcoming 
dual-mode modules 
supporting both LTE-M 
and NB-IoT will further 
drive LPWA connections, 
and we will see a decline 
in legacy connections”
 – Peter Richardson, 
research Director, 
Counterpoint

MYMOBILE
74 | FEBRUARY 2018
burntest
GooGle Pixel 2 xl 
Lightens Each Moment!
Tried & Tested
G
oogle ended the 
year 2017 with 
two premium 
flagship devices; 
Google Pixel 2 and Google 
Pixel 2 XL, carrying forward its 
legacy of much appreciated 
Pixel smartphones. The ever-
established fact in the markets 
has been,the Google Pixel has 
a great camera performance 
and guess what, they didn’t 
disappoint this time either. 
Both these smartphones have 
similar optical setup and give 
some brilliant shots throughout 
the conditions. Last we did 
review Google Pixel 2 and 
this time around we’ve the XL 
variant of the same. Most of 
the specifications remain the 
same except the bigger screen 
size and few adjustments at 
the back.
Design
The looks of the Google Pixel 
2 XL comprises of matte 
finish providing you more 
comfortable grip of the  
phone. The phone is 
undoubtedly light in weight 
and it is a treat to your hands 
because it does not exert any 
stress to the muscles of your 
fingers because of its size 
which fits perfectly in your 
hand. At the rear side of the 
phone there is 12.2 MP rear 
lens which is accompanied 
by LED flash. The rear side is 
also sporting the fingerprint 
sensor which is placed at the 
perfect position which comes 
in contact with your finger the 
moment you lift the phone. 
The front side of the device 
comprisesan 8 MP camera 
at the left corner alongside 
screen flash. The bottom of 
the device has USB Type-C 
port which has dual function 
of charging and acting has 
headphone jack because 
the Google Pixel 2 XL has 
removed the 3.5mm jack.  
The pavement for sound to 
come out is through the four 
grilles which are located at 
the top and bottom edges of 
the smartphone. The SIM 
slot is at the left side of the 
phone whereas the placement 
of power button and volume 
rockers is towards the right 
side of the phone.
Display
The Google Pixel 2 XL has 
an impressive display size as 
well which is 6 inches QHD 
pOLED display. The display 
has resolution of 2880 x1440 
pixels and 18:9 aspect ratio. 
The display of the Pixel 2 
XL provides amazing HD 
experience and has various 
display features like night light 
to adjust the phone brightness 
according to the light 
condition. The 6 inch display 
size provides every detail of 
any portrayal on it in full HD 
quality. Gaming experience 
is also very good because of 
the size of the display which 

burntest
Tried & Tested
is offering extra space.  The 
screen is protected by Corning 
Gorilla Glass 5 which makes 
sure that the screen remains 
unharmed from any damage. 
The Pixel 2 XL is water and 
dust resistant certified by 
IP67.
Platform
The Google Pixel 2 XL has 64 
bit octa-core Snapdragon 835 
processor which is one of the 
most powerful processor of the 
present time.  The powerful 
processor is fused with 4GB 
RAM and can take on any task 
without any issue. There is 
no issue in multitasking, all 
the processes works smoothly 
and fluently. The phone can 
support any game with no 
issues, games like Asphalt8, 
NFS etc works smoothly. The 
Pixel 2XL has ROM size of 
64 GB and cannot be further 
expanded, but on my personal 
account the internal storage is 
sufficient for storing any media 
or games. The Pixel 2 XL runs 
on Android 8.0 Oreo out-of-
the-box operating system. The 
phone runs like a beast without 
any thought of hesitation. At 
times, it becomes irresponsive 
as well but I will hope that 
Google will fix it with further 
updates rolling.
Cameras
The Google Pixel 2 XL has 
similarity with Pixel 2 in terms 
of camera. The Pixel 2 XL 
has 12.2 MP rear lens. The 
rear camera has an upgraded 
f/1.8 aperture with optical 
stabilisation. The rear camera 
also has laser and dual pixel 
autofocus. The shots taken 
by the rear camera are very 
sharp and clear no matter 
whether it is day or night. The 
front camera is of 8 megapixel 
and the selfies taken by it are 
very clear. If you like taking 
selfies then the Pixel 2 XL is 
your phone and all the filters 
of Snapchat designed for 
iPhone works fine in Pixel 2 
XL which is not usually found 
in Android OS smartphones. 
The camera of the Pixel 2 XL 
can outlast any dual camera 
smartphones. The Pixel 2 XL 
can record 4K video at 30fps 
or 1080p at up to 120fps. 
Meanwhile, the front-facing 
camera can do 1080p at 
30fps video. You cannot even 
think of complaining here as it 
has produced some stunningly 
beautiful shots which were 
properly exposed. The best 
of XL cameras remains the 
Portrait mode shots. Simply 
unbelievable! It can easily 
compete with any DSLR 
around.
Battery
The new Pixel 2 XL has 
powerful battery support as 
well. The battery power of Pixel 
2 XL is of 3,520mAh. The 
battery lasts at least for 30 
to 36 hours of normal usage 
once it gets fully charged but, 
it takes at least 3 hours to get 
charged completely.This will 
certainly irk the users who 
don’t have much time.The 
rapid charging seems to be not 
working properly.
Conclusion
The Google Pixel 2 XL 
performs like a beast, shots 
like a professional camera and 
runs as an athlete with very 
lesser battery drain. The design 
of Pixel 2 XL more or less 
remains the same as it was 
before with few adjustments. 
It will have to compete with 
Samsung S8, Note 8 and 
iPhone X as it’s being sold 
at around Rs 64,999 across 
online portals for the 64GB 
variant. n
verdict
10 /10
10 /10
09 /10
09 /10
10 /10
OVERALL         96%
(For detailed specifications, 
please refer to My Guide)
PROS
Cameras, 
Processor
COnS
No Radio 
and 3.5mm 
Audio jack
Looks
Distinctively Pixel 
Cameras
Best In Class
Performance 
Fluidly Smooth
Battery
Drains Less
Value For Money 
Worth it
FEBRUARY 2018 | 63
haider@mymobile.co.in
www.mymobileindia.com

64 | FEBRUARY 2018
burntest
Honor View 10 
Best AI-driven handset under 30K at 
the moment!
Tried & Tested
H
onor, the sub-brand 
of one of the world’s 
leading technology 
giant Huawei, has 
tasted much of success into the 
Indian smartphone market with 
series of launchessuch as Honor 6X, 
Honor 9i, Honor Holly 4, Honor 7X, 
Honor 8 Pro and now the company 
has come up with its latest innovation 
called Honor View 10. The China-
based company is touting it as their 
first Artificial Intelligence (AI) driven 
smartphone for the consumers. With 
this new smartphone, Huawei might 
aim to drive the smartphone market 
dominated by selfie-centric mobile 
phones. We’ve got the Navy Blue 
version of Honor View 10 for you. 
So let’s check this out that how it 
responds to our commands.
Design
The new Honor View 10 is an eye 
catching smartphone because of its 
sleek body and attractive colour. It 
has bezel less design which makes 
the device operative with one hand 
despite its big display size. The 
phone is available in two colour 
variants Navy Blue and Midnight 
Black. The device is undoubtedly 
light and there is no issue in carrying 
it or operating it. The bezel-less View 
10 has unibody design with both 
volume rocker and power botton on 
the right of the device. The module 
of rear cameras bulges out of the 
back panel which makes it uneven 
while placing it on a flat surface. 
The fingerprint sensor is embedded 
on the front, right below the display, 
which also serves as home icon. It 
works really fast and accurate on 
most occasions. It has Type C port  
for charging at the lower panel. 
Overall, the design is an attraction 
of the View 10 and it’s not slippery 
either.
MYMOBILE

burntest
Tried & Tested
Display
Honor View 10 has impressive 
display size of 5.99 inch which 
provides a vast view of anything 
being displayed on the screen 
either you are playing any 
media or you are reviewing your 
shots captured by the camera. 
The phone with such a huge 
display gives the complete 
satisfaction of playing any 
game. It has a resolution of 
1080x2160 pixels and aspect 
ratio of 18:9 which provides 
a complete thrilling display of 
anything being displayed on 
the phone. The display of the 
View 10 is quite bright and 
immersive to go with the huge 
size.
Platform
Honor View 10 is the first AI 
processor phone from Huawei. 
It has Huawei own Kirin 970 
chipset which delivers stronger, 
faster and exciting smartphone 
experience. It possess built in 
Neural Processing Unit (NPU) 
which enables deep learning 
based on user behaviour. The 
Honor View 10 has EMUI 8.0 
which works together with the 
AI technology to understand 
how you use your smartphone 
and allocates resources by 
anticipating your behaviour. 
The AI processor enables the 
device to run smoothly even 
after continuous use of the 
device. The new Honor View 
10 has an impressive RAM to 
match the AI processor. The 
phone is carrying 6 GB RAM 
which can handle any multi 
task without even raising the 
phone temperature. Together 
with the AI processor the 
RAM guarantees you to have 
undisturbed experience while 
performing any task. The RAM 
supports all the games no 
matter what size they possess. 
The phone is packed with 
internal storage of 128 GB 
which is more than enough to 
store anything on the device 
and further it can be expanded 
with the help of microSD card.
Performance
The Honor View 10 has 
something new to offer for the 
game addicted individual who 
doesn’t like any disturbance 
while being indulged in 
gaming. The phone has 
game suite with intelligent 
optimization which enables 
smooth, seamless, speedy 
gaming experience. The 
phone’s uninterrupted gaming 
function doesn’t allows any 
unnecessary calls or messages 
to get in between when you are 
playing any game.
Cameras
Honor View 10 allows you 
to capture images similar to 
that captured in a DSLR. The 
phone has combination of 
dual lensesrear camera 20MP 
+ 16 MP and faster focusing 
technology. The rear camera 
delivers sharp and clear images 
in every condition and the LED 
flash at the rear side helps 
you to capture clear images 
even at night. It has dual f/1.8 
aperture and intelligent scene 
recognition which delivers 
incredible image quality even 
when you are shooting from 
far. The phone possesses 
intelligent photography 
algorithms and identifies 13 
different types of scenes and 
objects. The Honor View 10 
has 13 megapixel AI selfie 
camera to deliver beautiful 
selfies at any occasion, place or 
lighting condition.  The phone 
also has motion detection and 
smart camera configuration.
Battery
Honor View 10 carries battery 
of 3,750mAh which is far 
beyond enough to let you fully 
utilise your device without 
the concern of charging it at 
regular occasion. It has 5/4.A 
Honor supercharge and to 
add to this it has smart power 
management to increase the 
efficiency of the battery.It has 
4G VoLTE, Bluetooth 4.2, 
Wi-Fi, Hotspot and GPS. Other 
features include Facial Unlock, 
AI accelerated translator, 
Smart Tips, Easy Talk, and 
Intelligent Notifications lock, 
Intelligent Display Rotation 
etc.
Conclusion
Clearly, the Honor View 10 is a 
disruptor in the 30K segment 
which has been largely 
dominated by OnePlus. The 
AI-driven beautiful smartphone 
is being complimented with 
its powerful processor coupled 
with NPU, dual rear lens setup 
and bezel-less display to name 
a few. Priced at Rs 29,990, 
Honor View 10 is a serious 
competitor for OnePlus 5T and 
Samsung Galaxy A8+. n
Verdict
10 /10
10 /10
09 /10
08 /10
10 /10
OVERALL         94%
(For detailed specifications, 
please refer to My Guide)
PROS
Camera, 
Processor
COnS
Lacks Radio 
and Water 
resistance
Looks
Premium Finish 
Cameras
Brilliant results
Performance 
Very Immersive
Battery
Compliments it
Value For Money 
Has it all you 
need
FEBRUARY 2018 | 65
haider@mymobile.co.in
www.mymobileindia.com

66 | FEBRUARY 2018
burntest
SamSung galaxy a8+ (2018) 
A Good Way to Begin 2018!
Tried & Tested
F
ollowing the 
success of the 
year 2017 with 
path breaking 
smartphones such as Galaxy 
S8 and Note 8, awell-known 
smartphone manufacturer, 
Samsung, has started the 
year 2018 with a its latest 
smartphone Galaxy A8+ 
(2018). The company is  
not just focusing on the h 
igh pricedsmartphones but it 
also takes into consideration 
mid and low price ranged 
smartphones with products 
like Samsung OnMax. So in 
this review we will see whether 
the company is able to carry  
its legacy or not with Galaxy 
A8+ (2018).
Design
The new A8+ (2018) is 
undoubtedly a beauty with 
curved body shape and a 
big display size of 6 inches. 
Despite having such body 
it’s very comfortable to hold 
and carry out any action. The 
fingerprint sensor in the new 
A8+ has got a new renovated 
look which is the circle 
fingerprint sensor is more now 
oval and located just below 
the rear camera.  The rear side 
of the device is also sporting 
LED flash and the company’s 
logo in the centre at the rear 
side. The front of the device is 
sporting the dual selfie camera 
and also the notification 
indicator at the top of the front 
side and towards the bottom 
of the front side of the phone 
lies the capacitive keys. The 
phone has interestingly two 
SIM  trays one being located 
at the left side of the phone 
carrying just one SIM and 
the other SIM tray is a hybrid 
SIM slot with a capability of 
carrying the second SIM and 
the microSD card which is 
a new feature upgraded in 
the new Samsung A8+. The 
placement of the physical 
buttons like the volume 
rockers and the power button 
has been separated. The left 
side of the phone is sporting 
the volume rockers and on the 
side which is right side of the 
phone is carrying the power 
button. It sometimes gets 
awkward or it could be said 
that it takes time to adjust to 
the placement of the buttons 
at the opposite sides.  On 
the other hand looking at 
the bright side of this new 
buttons placement is that it 
avoids any mistake of pressing 
the buttons altogether. The 
bottom of the device is 
sporting the USB Type-C port 
and the 3.5mm headphone 
jack. To some extent the 
phone is water and dust proof 
as well.
Display
The display size of new 
Samsung A8+ is of impressive 
6 inch which is similar to the 
2017 model C9 pro which 
also sported the same display 
size. The big display size 
MYMOBILE

burntest
provides a wide angle and 
more open space for you to 
perform any task. To match 
the big display size A8+ it has 
screen resolution of 1080 x 
2220 pixels and an aspect 
ratio of 18:5:9. This display 
size and its resolution in other 
terms is called as the Infinity 
Display.
Processor
In the new A8+ the company 
has loaded the phone with 
new octa-core Samsung 
Exynos 7885 SoC processor 
with two cores clocked at 2.2 
GHz and six cores clocked at 
1.6 GHz. The new processor 
works smoothly and can 
handle multi-tasking without 
breaking any sweat. While 
testing it was found on some 
occasions the some processes 
like the opened apps do not 
load up when you try to open 
them from the multi task bar. 
On some occasions the apps 
gets hanged up and all blank 
with complete white screen 
but it was just 2-3 times 
which was later not noticed. 
The new processor Exynos 
7885 is the latest mid-range 
processor from Samsung. The 
processor is paired up with a 
powerful RAM of 4GB which 
keeps the functioning of the 
device in a well maintained 
situation reducing the risk 
of overheating when multi-
tasking or even playing any big 
games like Need For Speed 
2017, Asphalt, Pokemon 
Go etc. The internal storage 
is of 64 GB which is more 
than enough storage to store 
any media or application 
on your phone. To add to 
the advantage of the device 
the company has dedicated 
different microSD card slot 
which helps in expanding of 
your internal storage or the 
ROM. The Operating system 
on the phone has Samsung 
Experience 8.5 based on 
top of Android 7.1.1 Nougat 
that delivers a customised 
experience.
Cameras
Another luring feature of 
the new Samsung A8+ is 
the presence of dual selfie 
cameras with the two sensors 
being of 16 and 8 Megapixel 
respectively. There is no 
dedicated LED flash in the 
phone which is quite odd to 
find out but the screen flash is 
present which works perfectly 
just like the LED flash and 
does not disappoint you with 
the selfies taken in dark or in 
dim lighting condition.  The 
front camera possess features 
like Bibxy Vision, Live focus, 
Stickers, Beautification modes 
etc to enhance your selfies 
further. The rear camera has a 
16 megapixel sensor with an 
aperture if f/1.7. The images 
captured were extremely clear 
and well defined. The rear 
camera captures every detail 
that has been in the frame of 
the camera and in the reach 
of the lens. The images taken 
by the camera of A8+ are 
admirable and proficient and 
if you like to have the feel 
of real life coloured images 
then the camera of A8+ will 
not disappoint you at all. The 
videos recorded from the 
camera are well and in HD 
quality and in the presence 
of good network coverage and 
speed the video calls are clear 
without any image break.
Battery
The new Samsung Galaxy 
A8+ has a non-removable 
battery of 3,500mAh which 
is long lasting and can stand 
throughout the day with just 
being charged once in a day. 
When tested the battery of the 
phone performed just as what 
we expected form it lasting 
throughout even after playing 
games for hours, watching 
movies and using many 
applications. 
Conclusion
The new Samsung Galaxy A8+ 
(2018) set a good tempo for 
the company this very New 
Yearin the starting premium 
segment. The dual selfie 
lenses, huge display and IP 
resistance makes it a good 
choice for the buyers at Rs 
32,990. It will have to face the 
heat of OnePlus 5T and Honor 
View 10 in the market.A8+ 
is bit on the heavier side as 
compared to its predecessors 
and competitors in the fray. n
verdict
09 /10
09 /10
09 /10
09 /10
09 /10
OVERALL         90%
(For detailed specifications, 
please refer to My Guide)
PROS
Selfie Lenses, 
Display, IP68 
Resistance
COnS
Heavy
Looks
Huge 
Cameras
Front Magic
Performance 
No complaint
Battery
Lasts a day
Value For Money 
Justified
FEBRUARY 2018 | 67
haider@mymobile.co.in
www.mymobileindia.com
Tried & Tested

68 | FEBRUARY 2018
burntest
10. or D 
A Worthy Smartphone at Entry Level!
Tried & Tested
T
he latest 
smartphone brand 
which has entered 
into the Indian 
smartphone market is Amazon-
backed 10.or which has come 
up with its latest launch of the 
budget smartphone 10.or D. 
The company has previously 
launched 10.or E and 10.or 
G models. The strong point of 
the Chinese company Huaqin 
Technology is that it is offering 
great deal of features in low 
price range smartphones 
which is attracting the users. 
The new entrant knows for sure 
what does the smartphone 
lovers seek in a smartphone. 
The first launch of the New 
Year 2018 from the Tenor 
(10.or) is the 10.or D. We will 
be looking at various aspects 
which the smartphone as what 
it has to offer for the buyers.
Design
The new 10.or D body has 
plastic all over with back panel 
sporting a metallic finish. The 
body is light in weight as well 
and fits your hand comfortably 
allowing comfortable usage 
of the device. The volume 
rockers and the power knob 
is located at the right side of 
the phone. At the left side of 
the phone lies the SIM tray 
which has dual SIM carrying 
capacity and a dedicated 
slot for microSD card giving 
the device an extra leverage 
of being preferred by the 
users. The front of the phone 
has selfie camera towards 
left corner and the earpiece 
in the centre of front side. 
The rear side of the phone 
is sporting the rear camera 
with LED flash. The rear side 
also has fingerprint sensor 
which is usually not found in 
smartphones of the price tag 
which the 10.or D is having. 
The bottom of the device is 
sporting the USB port and the 
mic. At the top of the phone 
lies the 3.5mm headphone 
jack.
Display
The new 10.or D is sporting 
neither too big nor too small 
full HD display of 5.2 inch.  
MYMOBILE

The screen resolution of the 
device is of 720x1280 pixels.
The display will give you 
complete satisfaction without 
making you feel or developing 
the feeling of the screen 
being small. The display is big 
enough to allow you to have a 
wide viewing angle of anything 
which is being portrayed on 
the screen. The display has 
saturated colours embedded 
emitting sharp colours. The 
screen is protected by the 
Gorilla glass to prevent any 
harm to the screen. The 
display size also allows you to 
have good gaming experience 
as well.
Platform
The new 10.or D is powered 
by Snapdragon 425 cloaked at 
1.4GHz quad-core processor 
which is meant to deal with 
the running applications and 
other tasks of the phone with 
ease by reducing the workload. 
The device carries a 3 GB RAM 
which is capable of dealing 
with any process reducing 
the pressure amount on the 
processor and as well as on the 
battery life of the device. The 
3 GB of RAM when fused with 
the processor is good enough 
to let you have a good gaming 
experience as well.  The 
RAM and the processor is the 
attracting feature of the 10.or 
D because it is offering 3 GB 
RAM which is not easily found 
in the smartphones of the 
price range which the 10.or 
D is having  and this feature 
for sure to attract the users 
who likes to do multitasking.
The new 10.or D has 32 GB of 
ROM which is quite enough to 
store large files and videos and 
that’s not all, the storage can 
further be expanded to 128GB 
with the help of microSD 
card giving you enough space 
to store anything you wish 
for. The device is running on 
the Android 7.1.2 operating 
system. The RAM can support 
medium sized games which 
does not require high RAM 
size which 
allow you to have 
uninterrupted gaming 
experience without getting 
hanged while you are playing.
Cameras
After the RAM there is another 
attracting aspect of new 
10.or D is the camera of the 
phone. The phone is featuring 
13MP rear camera along with 
flash which enables you and 
gives you benefit of clicking 
images in every condition, no 
matter whether it is dusky or 
dark conditions. The images 
taken from the rear camera 
are satisfactory and well 
clear. There are other features 
attributed with the rear camera 
like portrait mode, landscape 
mode and many others. The 
selfie camera is of 5 Megapixel 
with no selfie flash which 
restricts the usage of front 
camera only in well lighted 
conditions.
Battery
The new 10.or D is sporting 
a powerful battery to last 
for long hours. The phone is 
carrying the battery power of 
3,500mAH. The 3,500mAh 
battery lasts throughout the 
day even after the constant 
use of the phone. Other 
connectivity options include 
4G VoLTE, Bluetooth 4.2, 
Wi-Fi, USB OTG, and FM. 
The sensors on the phone are 
compass sensor, proximity 
sensor, accelerometer and 
gyroscope.
Conclusion
The new 10.or D seems to 
be a good beginner for the 
people who want to upgrade to 
a smartphone. The processor 
along with 3 GB of RAM (it 
has 2GB variant also) proves 
appropriate for it while it 
also has good camera setup 
and decent battery life at Rs 
5,999. There are Redmi 5A, 
InFocus Vision 3 and Moto 
C as its competitors in the 
market. Being marketed by 
Amazon India 10.or D might 
have an advantage over the 
offline players. n
verDicT
08 /10
08 /10
06 /10
08 /10
09 /10
OVERALL         78%
(For detailed specifications, 
please refer to My Guide)
PROS
Processor, 
Rear Lens
COnS
Competition
Looks
Simple 
Cameras
Pleasant Shots
Performance 
Smooth 
companion
Battery
Suffices a day
Value For Money 
Truly Justified
FEBRUARY 2018 | 69
haider@mymobile.co.in
www.mymobileindia.com
burntest
Tried & Tested

70 | FEBRUARY 2018
burntest
MicroMax canvas 
infinity Pro 
A Pro-selfie smartphone!
Tried & Tested
o
ne of the most 
prominent and 
established 
Indian 
smartphone company 
Micromax has now reached 
upto Infinity models of 
smartphones as in the past 
it had done reasonably well.
It was one of the first budget 
smartphone makers available 
in the Indian smartphone 
market fulfilling the needs 
of smartphone lovers at that 
time.  Micromax is well  
known for its budget 
smartphones and mid ranged 
smartphones which were 
aimed at delivering greater 
performance and power.  
Last year we talked about 
Micromax Canvas Infinity 
which attracted the users 
with its 18:9 display aspect 
ratio, cameras and the 
powerful processor. Though 
the Micromax Canvas Infinity 
lacked the metal body but 
still it did a good business. 
But,in this review we have the 
upgraded form of the previous 
model which is Micromax 
Canvas Infinity Pro which is 
luring the users with its new 
and interesting features such 
as 5.7 inch HD IPS screen, 
dual selfie camera, powerful 
RAM and ROM etc. So we 
will be looking in detail about 
the features of the Micromax 
Canvas Infinity Pro in this 
review.
Design
The new Micromax Canvas 
Infinity Pro is a classic looking 
smartphone with aluminium 
body which is compared to its 
previous model Canvas Infinity 
is new because the previous 
model had plastic body which 
might somewhere added to 
the minus point but it is now 
overcame with the aluminium 
body to provide rigidity to the 
device. At the rear side of the 
phone there lies the primary 
camera in the centre at the 
top of the rear side and further 
accompanied by LED flash 
and just some centimetre 
below lies the fingerprint 
sensor for easy access.  
The rear side is also sporting 
the logo of the device towards 
the lower side. The front  
side of the device is sporting 
the powerful dual camera  
with the LED flash and 
capacitive keys towards the 
bottom of the display. At the 
left side of the device you will 
find the dualSIM tray with 
dedicated slot for microSD 
card which is another plus 
point of the new Micromax 
Canvas Infinity Pro. The 
volume rockers and the 
power knob are at the right 
side of the device. At the 
bottom of the device lies 
the USB port and a single 
speaker grille. The top of the 
phone is sporting the 3.5mm 
headphone socket. The device 
might feel heavy because of its 
metal body when compared to 
its previous model Micromax 
Canvas Infinity.
Display
The new Micromax Canvas 
Infinity Pro has the display 
size as similar to Micromax 
Canvas Infinity.  The phone 
has 5.7 inch full vision 
display with a resolution of 
720x1440 pixels and also 
has impressive aspect ratio 
of 18:9. The display size is 
such that it improves your 
visual experience without 
any increase in the size of 
the phone and also produces 
saturated colours to let you 
enjoy a thrilling experience 
of performing any task on 
the display. The screen has 
protection of 2.5D curved 
glass.
Platform
The new Micromax Canvas 
Infinity Pro has quad-core 
Qualcomm Snapdragon 
430 SoC processor which is 
in a budget smartphone is 
verdict
07 /10
09 /10
08 /10
07 /10
07 /10
OVERALL         76%
(For detailed specifications, 
please refer to My Guide)
PROS
Front 
Camera
COnS
Competition
Looks
Sleek Design 
Cameras
Best part of it
Performance 
Very basic
Battery
Survives a day
Value For Money 
Could be a choice
MYMOBILE

Tried & Tested
burntest
powerful enough to handle 
majority tasks. The processor 
is paired with 4GB RAM which 
in the previous Canvas Infinity 
was 3 GB, so the Pro now has 
upgraded RAM as well. The 
fusion of processor and RAM 
keeps the functioning of the 
device at stable state. The 
processor handles games, 
though there might be some 
noticeable heating but that 
is sorted by the device so 
you can easily enjoy gaming 
without any hindrance. The 
phone offers 64 GB internal 
storage which allows you to 
store your desirable media, 
games etc. and further it can 
be expanded further all thanks 
to the dedicated microSD 
card slot in the SIM tray.
Micromax Canvas Infinity Pro 
has Android Version 7.1.2 
operating system.
Cameras
The main attractive feature 
which may drive the attention 
of the users is the 20 
megapixel dual front camera of 
Micromax Canvas Infinity Pro. 
The 20 MP camera is assisted 
by the LED flash which 
works in coordination with 
the camera at the dim light 
conditions delivering clear 
selfies 24x7. The selfie camera 
has other various interesting 
features as well like face 
beauty and many more which 
you will find interesting and 
helpful in case you want to opt 
for editing or putting effects in 
your selfies. The rear camera is 
also impressive as well with 16 
megapixel and LED flash. The 
new Micromax Canvas Infinty 
Pro possess powerful camera 
which is delivering great 
images from both the primary 
and secondary camera.
Battery
The new Micromax Canvas 
Infinity has 3,000mAh non 
removable battery which 
is able to last long a day. It 
could have been more as the 
category in which Infinity Pro 
falls prefer bigger battery life.
Conclusion
The Micromax Canvas Infinity 
Pro takes the experience of 
Infinity to a more refined 
platform where we get dual 
selfie lenses and metallic 
body. Canvas Infinity is 
priced at Rs 13,999 and 
it performed well on 
various aspects.There are 
minor improvements in 
processor and RAM of 
Infinity Pro as compared 
to Canvas Infinity.
But, it has to battle it 
out with the likes of 
Xiaomi Mi Max 2, 
Honor 7X and Moto 
G5s Plus. n
FEBRUARY 2018 | 71
haider@mymobile.co.in
www.mymobileindia.com

burntest
Xiaomi 
Redmi 5a 
Makes A Mark In The 
Entry Segment!
Tried & Tested
T
he Indian 
smartphone 
market is flooded 
with varieties 
of smartphones of various 
ranges. The most successful 
smartphone brand which made 
a great amount of selling deals 
in the year 2017 is Xiaomi 
Redmi. The reason for the 
success of the Xiaomi Redmi 
smartphones are that theyhave 
to offer something new and 
extra in a lesser price 
when compared to other 
smartphone companies. 
In the year 2017 we 
witnessedsmartphones from 
the company like Redmi Note 
4, Redmi A1, Redmi Mix2, 
Redmi Y1 etc. In our last review 
we talked about the Redmi Y1 
which was a budget smartphone 
and today in this review we will 
be talking about another latest 
entry segment smartphone 
launch from the company which 
is Redmi 5A. The new Xiaomi 
Redmi 5A is considered to be 
the upgraded version of the 
previous Xiaomi Redmi 4A.
Design
The new Redmi 5A is an 
average looking smartphone 
with the metal finishing at the 
rear side of the phone body.
The body of the Redmi Y1 is of 
metal and have curved edges 
all around.The rear side has 
the secondary camera along 
with LED flash. The front side 
of the phone has the selfie 
camera above the display but 
there is no selfie flash which is 
adding to minus point of the 
device. Below the display there 
are the capacitive keys with 
the home key in between. At 
the left side of the phone 
there are two trays on 
is for the single nano 
SIM and other for the 
microSD card. To 
the right side of 
the phone there 
are the volume 
rockers and 
MYMOBILE
72 | FEBRUARY 2018

Tried & Tested
burntest
the power button. The phone’s 
speaker grille runs along the 
entire lower back. There’s a 
Micro-USB port on the bottom 
and a 3.5mm audio socket 
on the top. One interesting 
touch is the presence of an IR 
emitter on the top, which you 
can use to control household 
appliances. The phone is light 
weighted and imposes no 
burden while carrying it around 
as it easily fits your palm and 
also easily fits in your pocket.
Display
The new Redmi 5A features 
fully laminated 5 inch 
compact HD display which in 
its price ranges an acceptable 
smartphone. The screen 
resolution of Redmi 5A is of 
720 x1280 pixels. The display 
is also featuring Reading mode 
which protects your vision and 
reduce eye fatigue by filtering 
out the blue light. The display 
size and the resolution lets 
you enjoy every detail of any 
sort of video or work doing in 
a clear HD quality. The screen 
is protected by Corning Gorilla 
Glass which protects the 
screen from scratches and any 
breakage.
Platform
Redmi 5A is powered by octa-
core Qualcomm Snapdragon 
425 processor with four cores 
clocked at 1.4GHz which 
will take your app load with 
ease resulting in smooth 
performance of the device. 
The processor easily handles 
multi-tasking and let you enjoy 
various apps at the same time. 
The phone is carrying 2 GB 
ROM which is mostly seen in 
low priced range smartphones. 
The RAM together in sync with 
the processor works flawlessly 
and helps reducing the heating 
of battery. One can enjoy 
decent amount of gaming 
as well as the RAM supports 
various games and let you 
play them without producing 
any hindrance. The ROM 
capacity of device is of 16 GB 
which lets you carry decent 
amount of files in your phone 
whether be its any media, 
games or applications. The 
Redmi 5A comes pre-loaded 
with MIUI 9 and operating 
system of Android 7.1.2. 
MIUI 9 is loaded with system 
level customizations and 
optimisations for performance 
and battery life.
Cameras
The new Redmi 5A has a 
rear camera of 13 Megapixel 
with PDAF. The rear camera 
has rear LED flash to assist 
the camera in taking pictures 
even at dark and dim lighting 
conditions. The images taken 
by rear camera are decent and 
clear with the addition of crisp 
in them. The phone is sporting 
selfie camera of 5 Megapixel 
which gives decent images 
in daylight and well lighted 
condition but in dim and dark 
light conditions the usage 
of selfie camera is limited 
because of the lack of selfie 
flash. The front camera has 
f/2.0 large aperture.
Battery
The battery power of Redmi 
5A is 0f 3,000 mAh which can 
last throughout the day with 
a single charge. The powerful 
battery of the Redmi 5A can 
let you have non-stop hours 
of entertainment and fun. 
There is little heating of the 
device noted while charging 
it but it gets cooled down 
shortly.Other connectivity 
options include Bluetooth 
4.1, Wi-Fi, 4GVoLTE. The 
sensors included infrared, 
accelerometer, proximity 
sensor and ambient light 
sensor.
Conclusion
The Redmi 5A makes an 
impact in the entry segment 
market with good overall 
specifications such as rear 
camera, crisp display and  
nice processor. The 
smartphone is available at  
Rs 4,999 which makes it an 
ideal option to shift to next 
level, i.e, to a smartphone 
from feature phone. The things 
which might go against the 
Redmi 5A are the mediocre 
battery life and noisy front 
camera. n
veRdicT
08 /10
07 /10
08 /10
07 /10
09 /10
OVERALL         78%
(For detailed specifications, 
please refer to My Guide)
PROS
Display, 
Processor
COnS
Plastic 
Body
Looks
Feels Nice 
Cameras
Rear Outshines
Performance 
Goes in sync
Battery
Sustains a day
Value For Money 
A good beginner
FEBRUARY 2018 | 73
haider@mymobile.co.in
www.mymobileindia.com

74 | FEBRUARY 2018
burntest
InFocus VIsIon 3 
Focussed on Camera and Battery!
Tried & Tested
T
he smartphone 
sector of India 
is witnessing a 
wide range of 
smartphone launches in every 
price range be it low to mid to 
high priced smartphones.   
The Indian smartphone  
market is mainly dominated 
by Asian smartphone 
manufacturing firms but in  
this review we will be talking 
about the new launch of 
smartphone whose main 
functioning unit is located  
in the state of Oregon U.S. The 
company has launched a new 
smartphone in the  
budget range section of 
smartphones by analysing 
the majority of the Indian 
population and the market 
dynamics in whichInFocus 
Vision 3 plays. InFocus is 
being backed by Foxconn 
in India. The company 
wants to add the portfolio of 
budget friendly smartphones 
where there has been huge 
traction as compared to other 
segments.
Design
The new InFocus Vision 
3 has plastic body which 
gives the smartphone a 
light and attractive look 
and also at the same time 
providing portability. The rear 
side of the phone has the 
fingerprint sensor for easing 
the accessibility and also the 
primary camera is located 
at the back side assisted by 
the LED flash. The device is 
comfortable to hold because 
of its compact size but on 
constant use might feel little 
heavier. The front side of the 
phone has the selfie camera 
and towards the end of display 
lies the capacitive keys. The 
bottom of the device has the 
USB port and at the top of 
the phone lies the 3.5mm 
headphone socket. One can 
find the volume rockers and 
the volume button at the right 
side of the device and towards 
the left lies the SIM tray.
Display
InFocus Vision 3 has 5.7 inch 
HD+ On-Cell Display and has 
18:9 aspect ratio which is 
one of the attractive feature 
of the InFocus Vision 3. You 
can enjoy HD experience 
MYMOBILE

burntest
without missing any detail as 
the display size lets you have 
big viewing frame.  The display 
size provides good gaming 
experience as well allowing you 
to make full use of display size 
.The display possess saturated 
colours providing clear image 
and good brightness.  The 
screen protection is provided 
by 2.5D curved glass which 
keeps the device safe from any 
minor injuries due to sudden 
fall or scratches.
Platform
The new InFocus Vision 3 has 
octa-core MediaTek processor. 
The processor can handle 
various tasks at once but fails 
to give multitasking. The use 
of big apps might sometimes 
cause the phone to get heated 
up. InFocus vision 3 has 2GB 
RAM which is usually found 
in budget smartphones and 
together with the processor. 
The phone has 16 GB of ROM 
which provides decent amount 
of storage capacity to store 
apps and various media files. 
Further it can be expanded 
with the help of microSD card. 
The gaming experience is 
satisfactory as well as it allows 
you to enjoy the games which 
requires the RAM size of 2GB 
which is being offered by the 
phone. InFocus vision 3 has 
Android 7.0 Nougat (InLife 
UI 2.0) operating system. The 
processor didn’t perform well 
as a whole which is a kind of 
disappointment for me.
Cameras
The new InFocus Vision 3 is 
offering dual rear camera of 
13MP + 5MP with the phone 
to capture every minute details 
and the LED flash is providing 
the users with an advantage of 
capturing images at dark and 
dim light conditions.  The rear 
camera also has various effects 
and filters to let you capture 
images in whatever shades 
you choose to prefer.The selfie 
camera is of 8 megapixel with 
no selfie flash which means 
that the users are restricted 
using the selfie camera in 
dim and dark light conditions. 
The camera performance is 
good and has all those aspects 
which a smartphone of budget 
range should possess but the 
lack of front LED flash might 
let the users to be in double 
mind before approaching the 
phone.
Battery
The battery power is the main 
attractive feature of InFocus 
Vision 3 which is for sure 
to last long. The phone has 
4,000mAh battery power 
which will undoubtedly last for 
more longer period allowing 
you to have unlimited fun 
whether its playing games, 
watching or playing any 
media or surfing the internet.  
Overheating while charging 
is being noticed which is the 
issue with the phone but it is 
resolved as well by the phone 
but it takes a little longer time 
to make the phone to reach the 
equilibrium state.
The connectivity features 
include 4G, Bluetooth 4.0, 
Wi-Fi 802.11 b/g/n, GPS, 
microUSB 2.0. The 4G 
availability lets you enjoy all 
the offers from various network 
providers.The phone also 
has various sensors as well 
like Accelerometer sensor, 
Proximity Sensor, Ambient 
Light sensor, Compass sensor 
and Fingerprint sensor.
Conclusion
Overall, the new InFocus Vision 
3 is a decent smartphone in 
the budget ranged smartphone 
with powerful battery and dual 
rear camera. The negative 
points include lack of selfie 
flash, sluggish processorand 
it also has the heating issue. 
Priced at Rs 6,999, Vision 3 
has potential of being a good 
choice in the budget segment 
with bezel-less display. n
VerdIcT
07 /10
08 /10
08 /10
09 /10
08 /10
OVERALL         80%
(For detailed specifications, 
please refer to My Guide)
PROS
Battery, 
Rear Lenses
COnS
Plastic 
Body
Looks
Neat and Big 
Cameras
Justified Results
Performance 
Works Fine
Battery
Very good
Value For Money 
A worthy purchase
FEBRUARY 2018 | 75
haider@mymobile.co.in
www.mymobileindia.com
Tried & Tested

76 | FEBRUARY 2018
burntest
Smartron t-phone p 
A Worthy Option in the Budget Segment!
Tried & Tested
S
martron, an IoT-
backed company, 
is the new addition 
to the smartphone 
race in the Indian smartphone 
market offering wide range 
of smartphones such as 
srt-phone and t-phone.  The 
company is of Indian origin 
and clearly understands what 
are all those features people 
wants to have in a smartphone 
which can be easily affordable 
and durable in the course of 
long run. The latest model 
of smartphone which the 
company has launched is 
Smartron t-phonePwhich is 
considered into the section 
of budget smartphones and 
tagged at a price of Rs 7,999. 
We’ve reviewed the device for 
you. Here it goes.
Design
The new Smartron t-phoneP is 
beautiful looking smartphone 
with all metal body and curvy 
streamlined shape which is 
making the device to look 
good and at the same time 
the curvy edges allowing 
comfortable grip while holding 
the phone.  The device is 
not heavy to hold despite of 
being made of all metal. The 
physical attributes of the 
phone includes a fingerprint 
sensor at the rear side of the 
phone which is like a bonus in 
a budget smartphone because 
it is not easily available in 
budget smartphones. The 
rear side of the phone also 
has the rear camera which 
is accompanied by the LED 
flash. The front side of the 
phone is sporting front camera 
towards the left side having 
proximity light sensor lying 
next to it and then there is 
selfie flash /front flash. The 
capacitive keys are below 
the display screen. The 
right side of the phone is 
having the volume rockers 
above and the power knob 
below the volume rockers. 
The hybrid SIM tray is 
located at the left side of 
MYMOBILE

burntest
Tried & Tested
the phone. The bottom of the 
phone is having two speaker 
grilles and the USB port. At 
the top of the phone lies the 
3.5mm headphone jack.
Display
Smartron t-phone P has a 
display of 5.2 inch in full HD 
with the screen resolution 720 
x 1280 pixels. The display 
offers saturated colours and 
gives clear view of anything 
you are watching or performing 
on screen whether being 
it watching your images 
or videos. The experience 
of playing any game is 
satisfactory as well because 
of 5.2 inch compact sized 
screen. The screen is protected 
by Gorilla Glass which acts as a 
protective layer for the screen.
Platform
Smartron t-phoneP is powered 
by an octa-core Qualcomm 
Snapdragon 435 SoC with four 
processing cores at 1.4GHz 
and other four cores at 1.1 
GHz. The processor is meant 
to deal with action without 
getting any hindrance from any 
app which when used at the 
time of multi-tasking or at a 
time of playing any game.The 
8 processing cores of Smartron 
t-phoneP is coupled with 3 
GB RAM. The RAM size is the 
attractive feature of this phone 
because mostly the budget 
smartphones do not offer such 
RAM. The 3 GB RAM with 
the processor reduces the 
workload of the device helping 
in better performance of the 
device without causing any 
heating issue while using big 
apps. The RAM hardly allows 
the phone to hang in between 
any task. The ROM size offered 
by Smartron in t-phoneP is 32 
GB which is quite a decent 
amount of storage to allow you 
to store various apps and files 
on your phone. The storage is 
further expandable up to 128 
GB with the help of microSD 
card.
Cameras
Smartron t-phonePhas a rear 
camera of 13 Megapixel with 
f/2.2 aperture which delivers 
clear shots. The images 
captured during day time are 
sharp and well detailed. The 
rear camera has night mode 
embedded to allow you to take 
clear images even at night. The 
selfie camera is of 5 Megapixel 
with a bonus of selfie flash 
which is very rare in budget 
smartphones. The selfies taken 
during day time are well clear 
and crisp but at night with the 
flash coming in play the quality 
of the image degrades a bit. 
There are preloaded features 
as well like Beautify, HDR, 
Panorama, Time Lapse etc. 
overall, both the lenses showed 
satisfactory results and can 
be within the demands of the 
target audience it’s aimed at.
Battery
The phone has non removable 
battery of 5,000mAh which 
is the main attractive feature 
of the phone and will drive 
the attention of users towards 
the phone. To charge such 
powerful battery the company 
has provided a charger which 
takes the input of 100-240V 
and output of 5.0V which 
quickens the charging of the 
phone. This will certainly add 
more value to the device as the 
needs of having bigger battery 
is going up with time as data 
consumptions are becoming 
cheaper and convenient. 
Conclusion
The new Smartron t-phoneP 
has all the potential of being 
a good budget segment 
smartphone with features such 
as bigger battery, 13MP rear 
camera, capable processor 
and sufficient amount of 
inbuilt as well as expandable 
storage options. Available at 
Rs 7,999, t-phoneP will be a 
key differentiator in the budget 
segment.There are Redmi 4, 
InFocus Vision 3 and Moto 
C Plus as the other options 
available near around t-phone 
P, if you prefer different  
taste.  n
verdict
08 /10
07 /10
08 /10
10 /10
08 /10
OVERALL         82%
(For detailed specifications, 
please refer to My Guide)
PROS
Battery
COnS
Front camera
Looks
Solid built 
Cameras
Rear outshines
Performance 
Nothing to 
complain
Battery
Can’t ask for more
Value For Money 
A good buy
FEBRUARY 2018 | 77
haider@mymobile.co.in
www.mymobileindia.com

78 | FEBRUARY 2018
burntest
Comio C2 
A Big Battery Budget Buy!
Tried & Tested
C
omio is the new 
smartphone brand 
which we recently 
saw in the Indian 
smartphone market catering 
in the low to mid ranged 
smartphones with interesting 
feature to lure users from the 
variant socio economic Indian 
population. The company 
has the lineage of devices 
such as P1 and S1. Keeping 
in mind the need of people 
who can’t afford high priced 
smartphones the company 
has tried to compress all the 
desirable traits which one 
smartphone should possess in 
its latest launch C2 and we will 
be reviewing all the features 
of the phone for you.In this 
review the phone which we 
have been provided is of black 
colour and the rim, power 
knob, and volume rocker has 
golden colour on them.
Design
The new Comio C2 is a 
beautiful compact sized 
smartphone which fits in 
your hand comfortably. The 
device is somewhat heavier 
but it is felt only when you are 
prolonging the time of usage. 
The device is easy to carry 
around as well. The body of 
Comio C2 is made up of tough 
plastic fibre with black and 
gold detailing at the back. The 
lining of rear camera is also 
surrounded by rim of golden 
colour. The rear side of the 
phone has the rear camera 
with LED flash and in centre 
you will see the logo of the 
company. Opening the rear 
panel beneath lies the SIM 
slots and a different slot for 
the microSD card. At the right 
side of 
the phone you will find 
power knob and the volume 
rockers. The front side has 
the selfie camera and also the 
capacitive keys towards the 
lower part of the display. The 
bottom of the device has the 
3.5mm headphone socket 
along with the USB port.
Display
The display size of the phone 
MYMOBILE

burntest
Tried & Tested
is of 5 inch HD IPS. The 
resolution of Comio C2 display 
os of 720x1280 pixels and 
294 PPI. The display size 
provides enough viewing size 
so that one can easily enjoy 
watching any video or playing 
games. The display size won’t 
disappoint you and no details 
will be missed. The screen is 
protected by the 2.5D glass 
which prevents the display 
from scratches and provides 
resistivity while the device falls 
by chance.
Platform
The new Comio C2 is powered 
by 1.3GHz quad-core 
processor and carries a 2 
GB RAM which is capable of 
handling normal day to day 
usage. It’s not meant for the 
game enthusiasts. The 2 GB of 
RAM is quite good enough to 
let you have satisfying gaming 
experience as well but the 
big sized games won’t work 
effectively and might cause 
device to freeze on many 
occasions. The Comio C2 has 
16 GB of ROM which is quite 
enough to store files and videos 
and that’s not all, the storage 
can further be expanded with 
the help of microSD card 
giving you enough space to 
store anything you wish for. 
There are various applications 
as well which cleans up the 
junk from the phone and 
helps in smooth working of 
the phone. The Comio C2 
has the Android 7.0 Nougat 
allowing the users to get the 
benefits of latest update of 
the android operating system. 
The processor of the device 
mightadd to the disadvantage 
because the 2GB of RAM 
somewhere restricts you from 
using certain big applications 
like Snapchat and many other 
big sized applications or any 
big sized games.
Cameras
The Comio C2 offers 
impressive cameras and  
both the rear and selfie 
cameras are of 8 Megapixel. 
The rear camera is of 8 
Megapixel with LED flash 
which lets you click clear 
images even in the dark 
conditions. The images taken 
in daylight are quite clear 
and crispy delivering all the 
details of the image clicked. 
The selfie camera is of 8.0 
megapixel which performs 
well in the daylight but it 
lacks the selfie flash which 
adds to the disadvantage of 
the phone. The selfies taken 
are quite clear and beautiful 
in well lighting conditions. 
The camera app features a 
face beauty mode and you 
can adjust the exposure, 
white balance, anti flicker, 
anti shake. The overall 
performance of the Comio 
C2 camera is quite good and 
stands upto the expectations 
but it has one disadvantage 
which is the missing of selfie 
flash which binds your limits to 
daylight selfies.
Battery
The Comio C2 has a powerful 
battery of 4,000 mAh which is 
adding to the plus point  
of the phone. The battery is 
sure to last for long providing 
long hours of non-stop fun  
and entertainment. The  
phone do heat up while  
playing games which 
might make you feel little 
uncomfortable and heating 
is also observed a bit during 
charging which is not the 
matter of concern. The 
phone also has Wi-Fi, GPS, 
Bluetooth, 4G VoLTE.
Conclusion
The Comio C2 fits easily  
into a budget pocket with 
huge battery life, nice camera 
experience and attractive 
design. The consumers in  
this particular segment  
would not be surprised if C2 
does not perform well on the 
gaming front because they  
do not expect it to be. Being 
sold at Rs 6,899, Comio C2 
can be good option to begin 
your smartphone experience 
but, it also has to face the  
likes of Redmi in the  
market. n
FEBRUARY 2018 | 79
haider@mymobile.co.in
www.mymobileindia.com
verdiCt
07 /10
07 /10
08 /10
09 /10
07 /10
OVERALL         76%
(For detailed specifications, 
please refer to My Guide)
PROS
Battery
COnS
No Fingerprint 
sensor
Looks
Attractive back 
Cameras
Perform well in 
daylight
Performance 
Decent
Battery
Stands out
Value For Money 
A nice pick

burntest
MicroMax Bharat 5 
Battery is the only saving grace!
Tried & Tested
M
icromax 
launched a 
new series of 
smartphone 
called ‘Bharat’ series which 
is somewhat on the lines of 
‘Make in India’ concept.  The 
company has named the new 
series smartphones because 
they are mainly aimed at 
reaching to those who are 
witnessing a shift from feature 
phones to smartphones. 
In our last review of Bharat 
series smartphone we talked 
about Bharat 1, the feature 
phone which in fusion with 
Telecom Company BSNL 
offered 4G features giving 
competition to RelainceJio 
feature phone.In this review 
we will shade light on the new 
launch of the company which 
is Micromax Bharat 5. The 
Micromax Bharat 5 is powerful 
smartphone with interesting 
features compiled in it within 
low price, making it an 
approachable smartphone in 
the budget price segment.
Design
The new Micromax Bharat 5 
is not very catchy in terms of 
looks but that does not mean 
that it is not good to look at. 
The device has average looks 
but it does not matter as the 
device size is very compact 
and fits your hand nicely. The 
device is easy to carry around 
as well. The body of the phone 
is made up of polycarbonate 
plastic. The front of the device 
is sporting the selfie camera 
which is accompanied by the 
LED flash. The rear side of 
the device has the primary 
camera with the LED flash 
and the logo of the company 
could be seen at the rear side 
as well. The right side of the 
device is sporting the volume 
rockers and the power button 
and to the left there lies the 
hybrid SIM slot which could 
support two micro SIM cards 
at a time or one SIM card and 
one microSD card. At the top 
of the phone lies the 3.5mm 
headphone socket and at the 
bottom of the device lies the 
MYMOBILE
80 | FEBRUARY 2018

burntest
USB port and the two speaker 
grilles which delivers a great 
quality of sound even at low 
price range which the Bharat 5 
is offering.
Display
The new Micromax Bharat 5 
has 5.2 inch HD IPS display 
with a screen resolution of 
1280x720 pixels and it has 
pixel density of 282 PPI. The 
phone also has aspect ratio of 
16:9. The display also offers 
features like VR ready. The 
display screen is protected 
by 2.5D curved glass which 
protects the device from 
scratches and breakages due 
to sudden fall. The display 
gives you saturated colours 
and you can enjoy any video 
in HD quality. The display 
size is reasonable as well, 
as it provides enough space 
to engage in any task like 
reading, watching etc.
Platform
The new Micromax Bharat 5  is 
powered by 1.3GHz  quad-core 
MediaTek MT6737 processor  
clocked at ARM Cortex A53 
which is meant to deal with 
the running applications and 
other tasks of the phone with 
ease by reducing the workload. 
The device has a RAM of 1GB 
which is not powerful enough 
to allow you to engage in 
multi-tasking. One can do but 
increasing the workload might 
let the device to get slow down. 
The RAM size could have 
been improved which is the 
minus point of the device. The 
ROM of the device is of 16GB 
and can be further expanded 
upto 64GB with the help of 
microSD card.
Cameras
The new Micromax Bharat 5 
has something new to offer 
which is mostly not found in 
the low range smartphones 
which is a powerful selfie 
camera of 5 megapixel and 
to make the camera more 
efficient and functional in 
every lighting conditions it is 
accompanied by LED flash. 
The front camera has video 
resolution of 640x480 pixels. 
The selfie camera has 83.3 
degree wide lens as well. 
The rear camera is also of 5 
Megapixel with f/2.2 aperture. 
The rear camera is also 
accompanied by LED flash 
to enable you to click images 
even at night and in dark 
conditions. The rear camera 
also has interesting features 
like autofocus, continuous 
shooting, digital zoom, geo 
tagging, panorama, HDR, 
touch focus, face detection, 
white balance settings, ISO 
settings and many other 
features. The camera of 
Micromax Bharat 5 for sure 
is the plus point of the device 
which will work in the success 
of this smartphone in the 
Indian market.
Battery
The main attracting aspect 
of the Micromax Bharat 5 
is the battery power. The 
phone is packed with a 
powerful 5,000mAh battery 
and it can last for almost two 
days continuously with the 
battery being charged fully. 
The current demand of long 
lasting battery is kept well in 
mind by the company. Other 
connectivity options include 
USB-OTG, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth 
4.0, 4G VoLTE.
Conclusion
Micromax Bharat 5 fits easily 
in the budget segment buyers’ 
pocket, complimented by huge 
battery life, decent cameras 
and display size. Currently, 
the Bharat 5 is available at 
around Rs 5,555, which isn’t 
a bad option to begin your 
smartphone experience. It has 
to compete with Redmi 5A and 
Moto C, where both look better 
option than Bharat 5. But, 
you can go with it if you prefer 
bigger battery. n
FEBRUARY 2018 | 81
haider@mymobile.co.in
www.mymobileindia.com
verdict
05 /10
06 /10
06 /10
10 /10
06 /10
OVERALL         66%
(For detailed specifications, 
please refer to My Guide)
COns
No Fingerprint 
Sensor
Looks
Very Basic 
Cameras
Manageable
Performance 
Average
Battery
King sized
Value For Money 
If you love 
Micromax
PROs
Battery
Tried & Tested

MYMOBILE
82 | FEBRUARY 2018
burntest
iVOOMi i1 
A Very Competent Budget Smartphone!
Tried & Tested
D
ual cameras 
everywhere, 
which is the 
new smartphone 
sporting the pair? And, 
in the growing number of 
smartphones with dual 
cameras, we have a new 
entrant- the iVOOMi i1. Among 
the budget smartphones 
being launched by the 
Chinese company, the recently 
launched ones are the iVOOMi 
i1 and the iVOOMi i1s. We got 
the i1 for review and here is 
the result of our burn test.
Design
The iVOOMi i1 gave me all 
the high-end, premium feels 
when I first saw it. Resembling 
the Samsung Galaxy S8 with 
its pseudo curved edges; the 
smartphone is comfortable 
to hold. Starting with the 
aesthetics, the smartphone, 
made up of polycarbonate, 
has a dual-camera module 
at the back with LED flash, 
followed by a pleasant 
presence of a fingerprint 
sensor (iVOOMi’s another first) 
and the ‘iVOOMi’ logo in the 
middle. Upfront, there is a 
selfie shooter on the top with 
assortment of regular sensors. 
The left-hand side houses the 
volume rocker and the power 
on/off button, the bottom end 
has speaker grille, and the top 
end sports a micro-USB port 
and a 3.5mm audio jack.
Overall, the smartphone, 
for the price it comes with, 
is visually appealing and 
comfortable at the same time.
Display
The smartphone spans 5.45-
inch and comes with an HD 
resolution. While the company 
claims the device to be the 
company’s first to hop on the 
bezel-less bandwagon, the 
smartphone still has wide 
enough bezels on the top and 
the bottom (illusionary in the 
Jade Black colour variant 
given for review). The screen 
produces averagely bright 
colours and the icons pop 
out well, making the usage 
convenient and easy on  
the eyes.
Cameras: Two at Your disposal
Apart from the touted Full 
Screen display, the iVOOMi i1 
has another highlight which 
is housed comfortably at the 
back; the dual cameras, with 
one rated at 13-megapixel 
and the other one standing 
at 2-megapixel, featuring 
autofocus and LED flash. The 
dual cameras are also capable 
of creating the Bokeh, going 
by the same name in the 
camera app.
The primary shooter was 
able to capture good pictures, 
be it in broad daylight, indoors 
or in low-light. However, 
with a closer look, the 
details were not highlighted 
adequately and the images 

burntest
seemed slightly processed. 
On opting for Bokeh, the 
smartphone did create the 
effect, however, seemed  more 
like an amateur in the arena. 
The Bokeh created looked 
way too processed, losing the 
naturalness of the subject.
The one at the front is 
rated at 8-megapixel actually 
impressed me. The output was 
good; not too exposed, not too 
processed and was clear.
Overall, the camera 
performance has been fine for 
the price the smartphone has, 
however, the dual cameras 
could have performed better.
Spec Sheet and 
Performance
The iVOOMi i1 is powered 
by a quad-core MediaTek 
MT6737 processor and 
comes equipped with 2GB of 
RAM and 16GB of ROM. The 
internal storage comes with 
the option to expand up to 
128GB via a memory card. For 
your knowledge, the iVOOMi 
i1 and the i1s has only one 
difference, the RAM/ROM 
configuration, which in the 
latter’s case is an increased 
3GB of RAM/32GB of ROM.
Talking about the 
performance, the smartphone 
worked fine while carrying 
out various tasks an average 
user would do. The social 
media browsing on apps such 
as Facebook, Instagram, 
WhatsApp, and many more 
was convenient, however, 
with various apps in the 
background, the smartphone 
did stutter. Numerous 
background apps led to the 
slow launch of the smartphone 
as well. For playing around 
with games such as the 
Asphalt 8 or any of the pre-
equipped ones (Cupcake 
Dreamland or Temple Paradise 
Dash), the smartphone played 
averagely, with the visuals 
appearing fine.
Battery
The i1 gets its energy from 
a 3,000mAh battery which 
ensured that the smartphones 
lives a day without getting 
charged. The battery did not 
get use too quick, however, it 
took a lot of time to recharge 
the battery, especially when 
connected to a PC or a 
laptop. Therefore, my say on 
the battery is average. The 
smartphone runs Android 
7.0 Nougat and the UI was 
user-friendly, however, the 
presence of bloatware remains. 
Furthermore, the audio quality 
was fine too.
Among many, the pleasing 
factor the smartphone features 
is the rear-mounted fingerprint 
scanner (which the company 
was initially reluctant to 
add). The fingerprint scanner 
unlocked the device in 
less than 60 seconds, thus 
becoming a quick one.
Conclusion
The iVOOMi i1 for a price of 
Rs 5,999, with dual cameras, 
a fingerprint scanner and a 
premium design, proves to be 
steal. However, with the pros 
comes the cons, and  
the smartphone still lacks  
the power of the dual  
cameras it houses. The 
smartphone stands against 
the likes of the Xiaomi Redmi 
4A which comes with a better 
processor, bigger battery  
and a 13-megapixel front 
camera.
While the iVOOMi i1 has a 
share of misses, it still proves 
to be a daily driver and can still 
make it to the nominations for 
the ‘best smartphone under Rs 
6,000’ title. n
FEBRUARY 2018 | 83
www.mymobileindia.com
Tried & Tested
VerDict
08 /10
07 /10
08 /10
07 /10
08 /10
OVERALL         76%
(For detailed specifications, 
please refer to My Guide)
PROS
Dual Rear 
Lenses
COnS
Could be 
the Battery
Looks
Premium Feel
Cameras
Impressive
Performance 
Fine Tuned
Battery
Lives a Day
Value For Money 
A worthy purchase
vanshika@mymobile.co.in

102 | february 2018
Can you please elaborate the business 
model of PAYBACK in India? PaybaCK, the 
coalition loyalty program in europe entered 
the Indian market in 2010. being a multi-
brand loyalty program, PaybaCK offers 
its members a multitude of benefits over 
traditional, stand-alone customer loyalty 
schemes. It has over 50 partners including 
affiliate brands participating in the PaybaCK 
Network across categories in-store, online, 
and mobile apps namely ICICI bank, big 
bazaar, american express, bookMyShow, 
brand factory, Central, ezone, Home 
Town, HPCL, Tripadvisor, food bazaar, 
ebay, amazon, flipkart and many more. 
With such a varied portfolio of partners, 
PaybaCK Members can earn points 
on everyday shopping and redeem 
them for attractive rewards, at 
their preference. Other benefits 
include discounts on purchases 
through points earned or through 
coupons and special offers.
PaybaCK is the first 
to launch the Mobile 
Identifier as the unique 
customer identifier. The 
company reaches to 
its audiences across 
platforms and various 
customer interfaces by combining engaging 
communication that is contextual, 
personalized and real-time. Thereby, 
building a robust engagement strategy 
between brand, partners, and the customer. 
The mechanism behind PaybaCK loyalty 
program and points is simple and if utilized 
properly, one can avail multitude of benefits 
across several leading brands. The brand 
has received an overwhelming response in 
the country with over 100 million customers 
already associated with the platform and the 
number is expected to grow further in coming 
years.
Recently, you have partnered with IBM; in this 
context can you please elucidate the reason 
behind the partnership? PaybaCK India has 
partnered with tech giant IbM to deploy 
the latter’s Watson Customer engagement 
solution. The idea behind this partnership is 
to provide more personal, content-rich and 
enhanced experience to customers. These 
solutions are aimed at providing customers 
and partners with a more personalized and 
real-time experience and will help PaybaCK 
analyze customer behaviour and spend 
patterns and transform their experiences by 
using data-driven insights to create customized 
experiences. With this partnership, PaybaCK 
MYMOBILE
face to face
“We embrace technology to create a state-of-the-art 
rewarding experience for our customers”
In  Conversation
PAYBACK is India’s largest multi-brand loyalty program with over 110 million members. 
The company recently entered into partnership with IBM to upgrade its customer 
engagement offerings. PAYBACK also has its own mobile app where users can earn scores 
of loyalty points. It is also the first loyalty program firm to launch the Mobile Identifier as the 
Unique Customer Identifier. Nijhum Rudra spoke to Ramakant Khandelwal, Chief 
Marketing Officer, PAYBACK India about the niche it is aspiring to carve in India and 
other markets. Mr Khandelwal has been associated with PAYBCK since 2010 and was 
elevated to the role of CMO in September 2017 with brief of strategising and leading the 
next phase of company’s growth.

february 2018 | 85
www.mymobileindia.com
In  Conversation
will provide its 
c u s t o m e r s 
and partners 
with a more 
personalized, 
conceptualized 
and real-time 
experience to give 
them an enhanced 
shopping experience. It 
aims to transform their customer 
engagement from mass marketing to 
behaviour-based cross-channel marketing. 
With real-time data flowing in, PaybaCK 
will look at significantly reducing the 
complexity of managing multiple vendors 
and technologies, thereby helping them 
reach out to both customers and partners 
at the right time, and at the right place.
Who are your partners and what are the biggest 
differentiating aspects of PAYBACK that can 
thwart your rivals in the market? PaybaCK 
has over 50 partners including affiliate 
brands participating in the PaybaCK 
Network across categories in-store as well 
as online namely american express, ICICI 
bank, HPCL, Tripadvisor, big bazaar, food 
bazaar, food Hall, Central, ezone, Home 
Town, brand factory, bookmyshow.com, 
ebay, amazon, flipkart and many more.
It offers the consumers a truly unique 
shopping experience and drives customer 
retention through on-going engagement. 
Customers, today have 24X7 access to the 
brands they love through social media and 
mobile devices. So, loyalty program like 
PaybaCK which is aligned with social media 
and mobile commerce increasingly impact 
the brand experience and the stickiness 
of the consumer. With the advent of a 
large digital population and e-commerce 
industry, along with increased penetration 
of smartphones, 
PaybaCK is 
poised to grow at 
an exponential 
pace with new 
partner additions 
and new consumer 
acquisitions in the 
network.
What are your current business 
strategies in India? at PaybaCK, we believe 
in embracing technology to constantly 
create a more rewarding experience for 
our customers. We continue to benchmark 
ourselves against our own potential and 
targets. The decision to invest in upgrading 
our digital capabilities with the help of 
IbM is to ensure we keep pace with the 
changing retail landscape, technology 
and evolving needs of our customer base. 
We are also looking to invest in our new 
businesses of performance marketing and 
affiliate marketing and create an ecosystem 
for brands to create more customised and 
relevant experiences for their customers. In 
addition, our focus will be on new partner 
acquisition and increasing our penetration 
in more consumer spend categories so 
that we offer consumers a single platform 
which rewards them for their loyalty and 
stickiness to brands.
We are currently devising market 
strategies to improve the overall customer 
experience and add delight at every step of 
their shopping journey. Our new strategies 
will enable us to empower our customers 
and give them an advantage.
How do you aim to transform your customer 
engagement from mass marketing to 
behaviour-based cross-channel marketing?
a cross-channel engagement strategy is the 
need of the hour, and today our customers 
are always looking for reasons to interact 
directly with brands of their choice. Hence, 
the new IbM Watson Customer engagement 
solution will help us achieve this objective 
by enabling us to capture relevant insights 
about consumer spend patterns and 
behaviour, thus creating an ecosystem 
which can deliver more personalised, real 
time information to customers which is 
relevant and behaviour based.
What is your roadmap for the coming years? 
Our focus will be mainly on scaling up the 
ecosystem by bringing cross -industries 
partners on board based on customer’s 
interest and market relevance that can 
drive better customer experiences. We  
will also be largely focusing on driving 
digital transformation by adding solutions 
like digital enrolment through aadhar, 
machine learning to create custom offers 
and more. In all, we will be focusing on 
ubiquity to give our customers more choice 
and freedom.
We are also looking to focus more on 
the performance marketing platform. We 
believe in real time and targeted marketing, 
giving the customer an experience like 
no other in terms of the right offer at the 
right time through the right channel. Our 
web portal, mobile app, mobile identifier 
platform is a step towards enhancing 
consumer shopping experience. n
“PAYBACK-IBM  
partnership is aimed at  
providing customers and 
partners with a more 
personalized, conceptualized 
and real-time experience  
to give them an  
enhanced shopping  
experience”
nijhum@mymobile.co.in

MYMOBILE
102 | february 2018
face to face
The U.S-based company Ookla, or we commonly know it through Speedtest which is  
used to check performance and analysis of mobile and fixed broadband, has been at the 
forefront in providing information to individual as well as multi-national companies such  
as Microsoft, Vodafone and CISCO to name a few, in order to get a proper troubleshooting. 
Doug Suttles, Co-founder and General Manager at Ookla, shared the latest findings 
of the company with Haider Ali Khan on how India fared on their parameters and what 
needs to be done. Excerpts:
“Over 10 million unique tests are taken 
with Ookla’s Speedtest every day and over 
17 billion have taken to date”
In  Conversation
In your November 2017 report of the Speedtest 
Global Index, India ranked at 109 out of 122 
countries. Where are we lacking and how can 
we improve the existing scenario? We would 
frame it more in terms of what opportunities 
for advancement are available. an ever 
evolving focus on sophisticated network 
infrastructure will always be important. 
India is one of the geographically largest 
and most populated countries in the world, 
meaning a well laid out network that is 
able to handle high volumes of usage are 
key to support the internet needs of the 
Indian market. additionally, being open 
to emerging technologies and ways of 
boosting network performance will also be 
helpful.
beyond the physical network and the 

february 2018 | 87
www.mymobileindia.com
In  Conversation
face to face
technology behind it is the competition 
that drives growth in a market. Operators 
offering new products, plans and services 
will also help drive the market forward. 
 
In the broadband space, however, things are 
bit better with India ranking at 76 out of 133 
countries. What is the outlook for India in 
2018? Many of the same general principles 
apply in the broadband and mobile space. 
Solid infrastructure, emerging technologies 
and competition are all valuable to the 
advancement of broadband as well. from 
trends Ookla observed in 2017, Indian 
broadband has been steadily increasing 
over the past year. Given this trend, it 
is reasonable to assume that unless 
something markedly changes that we will 
continue to see growth in 2018.  
 
Do you at Ookla believe that the India has 
the basic infrastructure lagging and is it 
related to the regulatory frameworks? Our 
role is to measure the speed and 
performance of networks and not 
necessarily how they are set up 
and who may be responsible. 
The Speedtest Global Index, a 
monthly updated ranking of 
internet speeds by country, 
is a good way to track trends 
in India’s internet speeds.
 
What is the current MAU Ookla 
has and the revenue generated 
out of it in 2017? What would be 
the next target for you in 2018? Over 
10 million unique tests are taken 
with Speedtest every day and over 
17 billion have taken to date. Our goal for 
2018 is to continue releasing new native 
apps and features that extend the number 
of devices you can take a Speedtest on and 
deepen understanding of more elements of 
what impacts internet experience. 
 
What are your thoughts on the 2G verdict and 
how it had impacted the telecom growth and 
investment perspective in India? Situations 
like this are a good reminder of the 
value that a tool like Speedtest provides 
consumers in measuring and verifying the 
speeds they are receiving. On any operator 
in any country, the ability to check what is 
being delivered by a neutral third party like 
Ookla not only empowers consumers but 
also generates data that helps the industry 
better understand their networks. 
 
How do you see the adoption of 5G will 
help a huge country like India? Whenever 
technology advances anywhere in  
the world it tends to open up new avenues 
for consuming and sharing content. 
following this logic, 5G will provide 
faster internet that will make it easier 
for people to access and use the 
internet. 
 
What does Ookla thinks of Net 
Neutrality? We are supporters of a 
fast and open internet. It remains to 
be seen what changes may come from 
recent regulation shifts - we’re always 
working on measuring people’s internet 
speeds and the experience they have. 
 
What kind of customization Ookla has to offer 
for Indian users? One of the things that sets 
Speedtest apart is the ability to test to a 
local server from anywhere in the world, 
which ensures the most accurate test result 
possible. In India, we have 439 servers for 
testing so that you can easily determine 
the speed of the internet where you are 
located.  n
haider@mymobile.co.in
“A tool like  
Speedtest provides  
consumers in measuring and  
verifying the speeds they are 
receiving… One of the things  
that sets Speedtest apart is the ability 
to test to a local server from anywhere 
in the world, which ensures  
the most accurate test result  
possible”

88 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
International
market insight
But experts dub the lead as flash in the pan even as worldwide 
semiconductor revenue grew impressively in 2017, though slowdown 
predicted for 2018
A 
major shake-up in global 
semiconductor pecking order 
has taken place and Samsung 
has done what was once 
considered an almost impossible task – 
displacing Intel as the undisputed leader 
of the global semiconductor business - the 
first time Intel has been toppled since 
1992. but experts doubt the lead to last 
long terming it as ‘flash in the pan’ fuelled 
by transitory but sharp surge in the price 
of memory silicon. Memory accounted for 
more than two-thirds of all semiconductor 
revenue growth in 2017, and became the 
largest semiconductor category.
In the meanwhile, it’s a been a good 
year for semiconductor industry. according 
to a preliminary result by Gartner Inc, 
worldwide semiconductor revenue totalled 
uSD419.7 billion in 2017, a 22.2 percent 
increase from 2016. undersupply helped 
drive 64 percent revenue growth in the 
memory market, which accounted for 31 
percent of total semiconductor revenue in 
2017.
“The largest memory supplier, Samsung 
electronics, gained the most market share 
Samsung pole-vaults Intel 
as the new leader of global 
semiconductor business

industry insight 
Disruptor
february 2018 | 89
www.mymobileindia.com
2017 
2016 
Vendor 
2017 
2017 Market 
2016 
2016-2017
Rank 
Rank 
 
Revenue 
Share (%) 
Revenue 
Growth (%)
1 
2 
Samsung Electronics 
61,215 
14.6 
40,104 
52.6
2 
1 
Intel 
57,712 
13.8 
54,091 
6.7
3 
4 
SK Hynix 
26,309 
6.3 
14,700 
79.0
4 
6 
Micron Technology 
23,062 
5.5 
12,950 
78.1
5 
3 
Qualcomm 
17,063 
4.1 
15,415 
10.7
6 
5 
Broadcom 
15,490 
3.7 
13,223 
17.1
7 
7 
Texas Instruments 
13,806 
3.3 
11,901 
16.0
8 
8 
Toshiba 
12,813 
3.1 
9,918 
29.2
9 
17 
Western Digital 
9,181 
2.2 
4,170 
120.2
10 
9 
NXP 
8,651 
2.1 
9,306 
-7.0
 
 
Others 
174,418 
41.6 
157,736 
10.6
 
 
Total Market 
419,720 
100.0 
343,514 
22.2
Source : Gartner (January 2018)
Top 10 Semiconductor Vendors by Revenue, Worldwide, 2017 
(Millions of US Dollars)
“Samsung’s lead is 
literally built on sand, 
in the form of memory 
silicon. Memory pricing 
will weaken in 2018, 
initially for NAND flash 
and then DRAM in 2019 
as China increases its 
memory production 
capacity. We then expect Samsung to lose a lot of the 
revenue gains it has made”
 – Andrew Norwood, 
research Vice President at Gartner
and took the No. 1 position from Intel - 
the first time Intel has been toppled since 
1992,” said andrew Norwood, research 
Vice President at Gartner. 
The key driver behind the booming 
memory revenue was higher prices due 
to a supply shortage. NaND flash prices 
increased year over year for the first time 
ever, up 17 percent, while DraM prices 
rose 44 percent.
equipment companies could not 
absorb these price increases so passed 
them onto consumers, making everything 
from PCs to smartphones more expensive 
in 2017. 
Other major memory vendors, including 
SK Hynix and Micron Technology, also 
performed strongly in 2017 and rose in 
the rankings (see Table 1).
Second-placed Intel grew its revenue 
6.7 percent in 2017, driven by 6 
percent growth in data center processor 
revenue due to demand from cloud 
and communications service providers. 
Intel’s PC processor revenue grew more 
slowly at 1.9 percent, but average PC 
prices are on the rise again after years of 
decline following the market’s shift from 
traditional desktops toward two-in-one and 
ultramobile devices.
The current rankings may not last long, 
however, “Samsung’s lead is literally built 
on sand, in the form of memory silicon,” 
said Mr Norwood. “Memory pricing will 
weaken in 2018, initially for NaND 

90 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
Disruptor
industry insight
flash and then DraM in 2019 as China 
increases its memory production capacity. 
We then expect Samsung to lose a lot of the 
revenue gains it has made.”
2017 was a relatively quiet year for 
mergers and acquisitions. Qualcomm’s 
acquisition of NXP was one big deal that 
was expected to close in 2017, but did 
not. Qualcomm still plans to complete 
the deal in 2018, but this has now been 
complicated by broadcom’s attempted 
takeover of Qualcomm.
“The combined revenues of broadcom, 
Qualcomm and NXP were $41.2 
billion in 2017 — a total beaten 
only by Samsung and Intel,” said 
Mr Norwood. “If broadcom can 
finalize this double acquisition 
and Samsung’s memory revenue 
falls as forecast, then Samsung 
could slip to third place during the next 
memory downturn in 2019.”
Forecast 2018
Worldwide semiconductor revenue is 
forecasted to total uSD451 billion in 2018, 
an increase of 7.5 percent from uSD419 
billion in 2017, according to Gartner, Inc. 
This represents a near doubling of Gartner’s 
previous estimate of 4 percent growth for 
2018.
“favorable market conditions for 
memory sectors that gained momentum 
in the second half of 2016 prevailed 
through 2017 and look set to continue 
in 2018, providing a significant boost to 
semiconductor revenue,” said ben Lee, 
Principal research analyst at Gartner. 
“Gartner has increased the outlook for 
2018 by uSD23.6 billion compared with 
the previous forecast, of which the memory 
market accounts for uSD19.5 billion. 
Price increases for both DraM and NaND 
flash memory are raising the outlook for the 
overall semiconductor market.”
However, these price increases will put 
pressure on margins for system vendors 
of key semiconductor demand drivers, 
including smartphones, PCs and 
servers. Gartner predicts that component 
shortages, a rising bill of materials 
“Worldwide semiconductor revenue totalled USD419.7 billion in 2017, a 22.2 percent 
increase from 2016. Undersupply helped drive 64 percent revenue growth in the memory 
market, which accounted for 31 percent of total semiconductor revenue in 2017” 
“Field- 
programmable  
gate array (FPGA), 
optoelectronics, application-
specific integrated circuits 
(ASICs) and nonoptical sensors 
will lead the semiconductor 
device categories  
in 2018”

february 2018 | 91
www.mymobileindia.com
industry insight 
Disruptor
“Despite the upward revision for 2018, the quarterly growth profile for 2018 is 
expected to fall back to a more normal pattern with a mid-single-digit sequential 
decline in the first quarter of the year, followed by a recovery and buildup in both the 
second and third quarters of 2018”
(bOM) and the resulting prospect of having 
to raise average selling prices (aSPs) will 
create a volatile market through 2018.
Despite the upward revision for 2018, 
the quarterly growth profile for 2018 is 
expected to fall back to a more normal 
pattern with a mid-single-digit sequential 
decline in the first quarter of the year, 
followed by a recovery and buildup in both 
the second and third quarters of 2018, and 
a slight decline in the fourth quarter.
On January 3, a security vulnerability 
that spans all microprocessor vendors 
was revealed, impacting nearly all types 
of personal and data center computing 
devices. While this is an obscure security 
vulnerability that is difficult to achieve, the 
potential of a high-impact security issue 
cannot be ignored and must be mitigated.
“The current mitigation solution is via 
firmware and software updates, and has a 
potential processor performance impact. 
This may result in an increased demand for 
high-performance data center processors 
in the short term, but Gartner expects 
that in the longer term, microprocessor 
architectures will be redesigned, reducing 
the performance impact of the software 
mitigations and limiting the long-term 
forecast impact,” said alan Priestley, 
research Director at Gartner.
Taking the memory sectors out of the 
equation, the semiconductor market 
is forecast to grow 4.6 percent in 2018 
(compared with 9.4 percent in 2017) with 
field-programmable gate array (fPGa), 
optoelectronics, application-specific 
integrated circuits (aSICs) and nonoptical 
sensors leading the semiconductor device 
categories.
The other significant device category 
driving the 2018 forecast higher is 
application-specific standard products 
(aSSPs). The predicted growth in aSSPs 
was influenced by an improved outlook for 
graphics cards used in gaming PCs and 
high-performance computing applications, 
a broad increase in automotive content 
and a stronger wired communications 
forecast.
The mixed fortunes of semiconductor 
vendors in recent years serves as a reminder 
of the fickleness of the memory market,” 
said Mr Lee. “after growing by 22.2 percent 
in 2017, worldwide semiconductor revenue 
will revert back to single-figure growth in 
2018 before a correction in the memory 
market results in revenue declining slightly 
in 2019.” n 
team@mymobile.co.in

MYMOBILE
92 | february 2018
Pipeline
Special feature 
By Vanshika Malhotra
I
t’s this time of the year 
again! The time, our 
eyes (with gleam) wait 
for the tech tradeshows 
to begin. With the end of 
the very recent Consumer 
Electronics Show (CES 
2018), our expectations 
now lay on the upcoming 
Mobile World Congress 
2018, hoping for some new 
wonders to happen.
But first, for uninitiated, 
Mobile World Congress 
o r  M WC  i s  a m o n g s t 
the most awaited and 
most prestigious annual 
mobile and electronics 
t r a d e s h o w s  h e l d  i n 
Barcelona in February, 
starting 26 until March 1, 
where majors launch their 
latest offerings wooing 
audience around the 
globe.
While all of us are trying 
our shots in the dark, 
hoping to hit the bull’s eye, 
we present you expected 
tech pieces we might get 
to see at the Barcelona 
t r a d e s h o w ,  
b a s i s 
cumulated speculations 
and leaks:
f
ollowing its trend of giving the mobile world a 
flagship each year, Samsung, after unveiling 
the Galaxy S8, the Galaxy S8+ and the Galaxy 
Note 8 in 2017 is most likely to bring about the 
2018 flagships- the Galaxy S9 and the Galaxy 
S9+. and, as a usual ritual, we have tons of 
rumours flying in, fueling further anticipation. 
both the new flagships are likely to remain the 
same as the predecessors on the design front; the 
Galaxy S9 and the Galaxy S9+ could sport the 
same Infinity display with an aspect ratio rated at 
18:9 as the Galaxy S8 and the Galaxy S8+. 
However, adhering to rumours, we might see a change in the rear panel design.
In terms of specifications, the smartphones are likely to feature the latest Qualcomm 
Snapdragon 845 processor, could come in three raM/rOM configurations each, and run 
android 8.0 Oreo. While the purported Galaxy S9 is expected to house a single-camera 
module (much like the Galaxy S8), the elder sibling might get a dual-camera setup. 
additionally, the 3.5mm audio jack is here to stay in Samsung’s case and there is a possible 
change in address of the fingerprint scanner.
Nevertheless, we still lack concrete details and look forward to the unveiling with all the 
excitement! n
Samsung Galaxy S9 
and S9+
So what would be the genies out of the hat this year?
ExpEctations 
MWC 2018!

february 2018 | 93
Specialfeature
Applause
www.mymobileindia.com
a
nd well, Lenovo-owned Motorola won’t stay behind 
when it comes to getting new products to stage. 
rumours have it that the company is expected to showcase 
new smartphones in its G, Z and X series, with almost 
bezel-less display as highlights. The G series could include 
the alleged Moto G6, the Moto G6 Plus and the Moto G6 
Play are expected to share the same design ethos as the 
Moto X4 with body made of glass. The Moto G6 and the 
Moto G6 Plus could feature 5.7-inch fHD displays, while 
the Moto G6 Play could come with a 5.93-inch one. The 
smartphones could come with upgraded processors, 
batteries and dual rear cameras.
for the Z series, Motorola could unveil the Moto Z3, 
the Moto Z3 Play and a new 5G Moto Mod, to go with the 
new smartphones. The Moto Z3 and the Moto Z3 Play are 
also expected to come with an aspect ratio rated at 18:9 
and could be powered by Qualcomm Snapdragon 845 
chipsets. Other details still remain scarce.
Last but not the least is the Moto X5 in the X series, 
going the apple way. The purported Moto X5 could feature 
a notch, much like the recent iPhone X, which can be 
seen as a possible entry of facial recognition or under-the-
display fingerprint sensor in the Motorola lineup. Other 
major features include four cameras and Moto XP or the 
Smart aI which could Motorola’s own virtual assistant or 
use of aI in the camera department.
W
hile the HMD Global-owned Nokia remained out of sight at the 
recently concluded Consumer electronics Show, the company has 
confirmed to unveil ‘awesomeness’ at the event. While there is no word 
on what Nokia plans to introduce to us, we expect a bunch of smartphones, 
much like last year. However, our mind is on the flagship Nokia 9. The 
successor to the 2017’s Nokia 8 is speculated to come with a Qualcomm 
Snapdragon 845 mobile platform, four cameras; two at the back and two 
at the front, and the inclusion of Nokia’s proprietary bothie camera 
feature.
apart from the flagship, Nokia could also introduce someone to the 
low-end bracket, maybe with android Oreo Go edition, or could also 
launch revamped versions of its feature phones- the way it did with the 
iconic Nokia 3310. 
additionally, there could be 
upgraded versions of the 
existing Nokia models at the 
tradeshow. Till then, let’s keep 
our fingers crossed and wait 
for the awesomeness to pop 
up. n
a
mong various tech companies, Chinese company 
Xiaomi is also expected to be a part of the much-
awaited tradeshow, likely to launch its flagship Mi 7. 
even though we lack information about Xiaomi, the 
successor to last year’s Mi 6 might embrace the bezel-
less display concept, much like the Mi Mix 
series, and could sport a 6-inch aMOLeD 
one. This one too, could also be powered 
by Qualcomm’s latest Snapdragon 745 
SoC, and come with 3D facial recognition 
which might lead to the death of a fingerprint 
scanner. additionally, the alleged Mi 7 could be 
backed by a 3,000mah battery with support for Qi 
wireless charging tech and run android 8.0 Oreo with 
MIuI 9.0 on top.
Xiaomi is also likely to launch a third member in 
the Mi Mix series, purported called the Mi Mix 2s. 
While details are not enough, the smartphone could 
feature the iPhone X-like notch and could come with 
facial recognition, really thin bezels, and Qualcomm 
Snapdragon 845 processor. n
S
ony, as part of its annual cycle could unveil a new smartphone, dubbed the Xperia 
XZ Pro, in addition to the recently unveiled Xperia Xa2, the Xperia Xa2 ultra and the 
Xperia L2 at CeS 2018. The smartphone too is likely to be powered by Qualcomm 
Snapdragon 845 processor, sport a 4K OLeD display and come with dual cameras at the 
back.
Just to clear the mist, the aforementioned details are pure speculations, and can’t be 
deemed true. at this moment, all we can do is stay, speculate, and get surprised! n
Motorola G, Z and X lineup
Nokia 9
Xiaomi Mi 7
Sony Xperia XZ Pro
vanshika@mymobile.co.in
*Pictures are for representation only

94 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
Guest Column
by InvItatIon
C
hatbots started out as a fairly niche concept in technology, but in 2017 have become a de facto prerequisite for every growing 
enterprise. With the advent of the Messengers: Whatsapp, facebook, Telegram, Kik and more, communication through text 
has become a way of life for most people these days. If a 60-year-old grandmother of three can happily be a group admin 
for three Whatsapp groups, there’s very little standing in the way of chat becoming the new task completion platform. and 
chatbots simply help businesses ride this wave. for the uninitiated, a chatbot is a conversational interface (voice or text) that enables 
people to interact with a human aided robot to get something done. 
Here are a few ways that we have seen chatbots redefine customer-business interactions:  
Here is how chatbots 
are redefining  
human/business 
interactions
Aakrit Vaish takes you through the World 
of Conversational AI
a 
chatbot is an excellent tool to reach out to customers at a personal 
level to help build a brand’s story and image. Due to the conversational 
nature of bots - queries, concerns and rumours can all be dealt with 
individually.
The customer’s perception is a brand’s reality and no one knows this better 
than fMCG brands which run purely on the strength of their media presence. 
With health consciousness and socio-environmental impact becoming 
a crucial focus for most modern 
brands and customers, global brands 
need a way to allay their customers’ 
concerns and directly address 
rumours and queries. We found the 
Coca-Cola chatbot on facebook 
interesting where the bot allows 
the company to directly address 
rumours and concerns, evangelise 
about the brand’s community and 
CSr initiatives, and engage at a 
more personal level as opposed to 
traditional broadcast media - all 
through facebook Messenger!  n
a
The modern customer 
is inundated with 
a million ads and 
promotional material from 
every angle and has learnt 
to block most of these by 
now. Chatbots offer a more 
conversational, natural way 
of introducing brands to 
customers. Chatbots can 
be used to help identify 
the needs of the customer 
and generate valuable leads 
for the brand in question. 
Here are two examples of 
chatbots being used for 
quality Lead Generation: 
Brand PercePtion
Lead  
Generation

www.mymobileindia.com
by InvItatIon
Guest Column
a 
chatbot helps solve this principal 
pain point by conversing with the 
user to quickly understand their 
needs and provide services that they ask 
for, quickly collect necessary details and 
send the service their way.
The way you present your product 
decides whether a deal falls through. 
There are three key matrices that will help 
you close a deal: Presentation, Speed and 
Quality. 
a chatbot is especially great to automate 
simple tasks like service bookings and 
provide instant replies, reduce manpower 
costs, and streamline the entire customer 
experience flow. Here’s an example: 
Housejoy has completely automated 
their entire catalogue of offerings and 
now allows users to find, book and pay for 
services directly within the bot - all in a 
matter of minutes! n
I
dentifying a pain point for the customer before presenting the 
product is an excellent approach, especially for sectors like 
Insurance which see very little traction from traditional media.
In this chatbot aimed to drive customer interest for life 
insurance,every user was first prompted to answer a few questions 
about their personal finances in order to ‘Secure your future’. 
financial awareness being a universally relatable topic meant 
that people were curious and excited to know their results. after 
answering a few questions, the user was given a score out of ten. 
This was followed by a prompt asking if the user would like to 
improve his/her score by getting in touch with an expert. 
Since the bot solved the customer’s genuine pain point, the 
quality of leads generated was extremely high as opposed to those 
generated through traditional web-based forms. Customization 
is the new king! n
a 
chatbot radically increases the chance of a user 
actually picking a product from a multitude of 
options and reduces the overhead expenses and time 
needed to pick an offering which is crucial to any bfSI 
company.
This chatbot for ICICI Credit Cards illustrates this 
well. financial management is intimidating to most 
young customers and the long forms, unresponsive 
systems and simply add to the problem. by designing a 
bot that first understood the customer’s income range, 
spending habits and preferences, every single customer 
interest generated stood a high chance of translating 
into actual business! On top of that, the bot went a step 
ahead to even book the appointment for documents pick 
up to further process the credit card application. n
Service deLivery
1: identifyinG Pain PointS
2: imProvinG Product       
         
SuGGeStionS

96 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
by InvItatIon
P
roactively offering users some services 
that align with the core business 
is an excellent way to improve the 
value proposition of a company. a chatbot 
is especially conducive to this since 
every business has a need for an open 
communication pipeline in one way or the 
other.
every brand has something to offer. before you ask 
your customers what they can give you, tell them what 
they will get. This is a fairly well-known caveat but one 
that is rarely executed.
In this example,the Ziman app offers security as 
a service and the 24/7 built-in chatbot feature helps 
facilitate the communication between the user and 
the company, thereby keeping the conversation alive 
and providing a valuable service in the process. This 
perpetually available security bot is the perfect extension 
of the Zicom’s offerings and is such a nifty tool to have 
in your pocket! n
vaLue  
ProPoSition
C
hatbots are excellent for projects that require 
immediate and efficient responses. 
Quickly answering questions, providing helpful 
resources and being available 24/7 to any user around the 
world are no longer expensive, resource-heavy endeavours. 
These situations have always been the best use cases for 
deploying bots and have seen some great results. 
Social initiatives are a major focus for quite a few 
companies these days but dedicating valuable manpower 
and resources to these initiatives are impediments.
‘akancha against Harassment’ is an online resource 
for victims of cyber harassment. The chatbot can help 
victims in real-time, transfer sensitive cases to the right 
authorities, provide phone numbers, workshops and other 
resources. 
Chatbots are the future. according 
to Gartner, 80 percent of businesses 
want to use chatbots by 2020. 
There are quite a few non-traditional 
businesses and organisations who 
are a part of the chatbot wave with 
use cases ranging from therapy bots 
to crypto-currency bots to fashion 
bots. bots are rapidly getting smarter, 
more efficient and more pervasive. 
The aforementioned Gartner report 
even states that by 2020, the average 
person will have more conversations with bots than with 
their spouse. That’s a lot of chatbots in a lot of places. and 
the market is only growing. There is a need throughout the 
industry for more aI experts, bot builders, engineers and 
creative thinkers to build the next wave of chatbots. It’s 
the perfect time to climb aboard the chatbot bandwagon 
if you aren’t on already! n
SociaL initiativeS
The author is Co-founder and CEO of Haptik, one of the 
world’s largest chatbot platforms.  He holds a Bachelor of 
Science in Industrial Engineering from the University of 
Illinois, Urbana Champaign, USA. He was one of the first 
employees of Flurry (now Yahoo Flurry) and was a lead 
investor in ‘Flatchat’, a rental flatmate-finding application, 
which was later acquired by Commonfloor.
Guest Column


International
market insight
98 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
Global IT spending forecasted to reach USD3.7 trillion in 2018 while 
digital business, blockchain, IoT and AI to drive growth
W
orldwide IT spending 
is projected to total 
uSD3.7 trillion in 
2018, an increase of 
4.5 percent from 2017, according to the 
latest forecast by Gartner, Inc.
“Global IT spending growth began to 
turn around in 2017, with continued growth 
expected over the next few years. However, 
uncertainty looms as organizations 
consider the potential impacts of brexit, 
currency fluctuations, and a possible global 
recession,” says John-David Lovelock, 
research Vice President at Gartner.
“Despite this uncertainty, businesses 
will continue to invest in IT as they 
anticipate revenue growth, but their 
spending patterns will shift. Projects in 
digital business, blockchain, Internet of 
Things (IoT), and progression from big 
data to algorithms to machine learning to 
artificial intelligence (aI) will continue to 
be main drivers of growth,” points out Mr 
Lovelock.
enterprise software continues to exhibit 
strong growth, with worldwide software 
spending projected to grow 9.5 percent in 
2018, and it will grow another 8.4 percent 
in 2019 to total $421 billion (see Table 
1). Organizations are expected to increase 
spending on enterprise application 
software in 2018, with more of the budget 
shifting to software as a service (SaaS). 
The growing availability of SaaS-based 
solutions is encouraging new adoption and 
spending across many subcategories, such 
as financial management systems (fMS), 
human capital management (HCM) and 
analytic applications.
The devices segment is expected to grow 
5.6 percent in 2018. In 2017, the devices 
segment experienced growth for the first 
time in two years with an increase of 5.7 
percent. end-user spending on mobile 
phones is expected to increase marginally 
as average selling prices continue to creep 
upward even as unit sales are forecast to 
be lower. PC growth is expected to be flat 
in 2018 even as continued Windows 10 
migration is expected to drive positive 
growth in the business market in China, 
Latin america and eastern europe. The 
impact of the iPhone 8 and iPhone X was 
minimal in 2017, as expected. However, 
Investments in Emerging Technologies 
to Drive IT Spend

industry insight 
International
february 2018 | 99
www.mymobileindia.com
iOS shipments are expected to grow 9.1 
percent in 2018.
“Looking at some of the key areas 
driving spending over the next few years, 
Gartner forecasts uSD2.9 trillion in new 
business value opportunities attributable to 
aI by 2021, as well as the ability to recover 
6.2 billion hours of worker productivity,” 
says Mr Lovelock. “That business value 
is attributable to using aI to, for example, 
drive efficiency gains, create insights that 
personalize the customer experience, 
entice engagement and commerce, and 
aid in expanding revenue-generating 
opportunities as part of new business 
models driven by the insights from data.”
“Capturing the potential business value 
will require spending, especially when 
seeking the more near-term cost savings. 
Spending on aI for customer experience 
and revenue generation will likely benefit 
from aI being a force multiplier — the 
cost to implement will be exceeded by 
the positive network effects and resulting 
increase in revenue,” says Mr Lovelock. n 
team@mymobile.co.in
“Spending patterns will 
shift. Projects in digital 
business, blockchain, IoT 
and progression from 
big data to algorithms 
to machine learning to 
artificial intelligence 
will continue to be main 
drivers of growth”
 – John-David Lovelock, 
research Vice 
President at Gartner
 
2017 
2017  
2018 
2018 
2019 
2019
 
Spending 
Growth (%) 
Spending 
Growth (%) 
Spending 
Growth (%)
Data Center Systems 
178 
4.4 
179 
0.6 
179 
-0.2
Enterprise Software 
355 
8.9 
389 
9.5 
421 
8.4
Devices 
667 
5.7 
704 
5.6 
710 
0.9
IT Services 
933 
4.3 
985 
5.5 
1,030 
4.6
Communications Services 
1,393 
1.3 
1,427 
2.4 
1,443 
1.1
Overall IT 
3,527 
3.8 
3,683 
4.5 
3,784 
2.7
Worldwide IT Spending Forecast (Billions of U.S. Dollars)
Source : Gartner (January 2018)

100 | february 2018
Overview
Showbiz
C
hinese handset maker Vivo showed off a new fingerprint sensor which will 
be integrated on the display of upcoming Vivo smartphones. Vivo showcased 
a 6-inch smartphone with the on-screen optical fingerprint sensor developed 
by uS based touchscreen company Synaptics. The sensor works only with 
OLeD screens and will be placed under the smartphone’s screen. Though Vivo 
didn’t say anything about the new handset, it is likely to be shown up first on 
premium smartphones as OLeD panels are costly. n
Vivo’s touchscreen 
fingerprint sensor
CES 2018
INNOVATIONS SHOWCASED
CES 2018, the mega technology event held recently (Jan. 9-12) in Las 
Vegas was quite special from the mobility point of view. While it brought 
disruptive technologies (from health and entertainment to security and 
food) closer to our lives, the biggest annual tech show on the Earth 
also showcased how the mobile phones were going to redefine our 
lifestyle like never before. Artificial Intelligence (AI), Internet of Things 
(IoT), Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR) and Robotics were 
other technologies that drew prominent attention from across the world. 
Among the interesting developments in the mobile segment, Vivo showed-
off an optical finger sensor which will be integrated within the screen, 
Sony announced its next lineup of mid-range smartphones, Samsung 
unveiled its latest chipsets and Alcatel joined the bezel-less bandwagon. 
Here is a sneak peek of some of the innovations of what to expect in 
2018:
MYMOBILE

february 2018 | 101
Showbiz
Overview
www.mymobileindia.com
T
aiwanese tech major asus announced the 
budget-friendly Zenfone Max Plus at 
CeS, which includes a face-unlock feature. 
So far, facial recognition has largely been 
relegated to flagship smartphones like the 
iPhone X, the Galaxy Note 8, and the LG V30. In 
addition to its security features, the Zenfone Max 
Plus includes a massive battery and a 120-degree wide-
angle feature on its camera. The device will sell in the uS for 
$229 unlocked.n
a
lcatel Mobile showcased three new 
smartphone at the tech show, 
dropping hints about the price bracket 
they will be launched at, but kept the spec 
details under wraps. The alcatel 5 
smartphone will be targeted at budget 
segment buyers. It will have a big screen 
with thin bezels and a 3000mah battery. 
alcatel 3 will be a mind-range smartphone 
with a bezel-less display, and face 
unlocking system, uSb Type-C. The 
alcatel 1 will be their budget offering for 
entry level buyers. More details are likely 
to be announced at Mobile World Congress 
to be held soon in barcelona. n
Asus mid-range smartphone 
with high-end features
Alcatel joins the bezel-less trend
S
ony unveiled its next line-up of mid-range and budget smartphones 
at the tech show. The mid-range Xperia Xa2 and Xa2 ultra are powered 
by Qualcomm Snapdragon 630 processor, also used in the Moto X4, run 
the latest version of android (Oreo) and are the first Sony smartphones in 
the price segment to include finger print sensors. The Xa2 ultra has a 
6-inch screen, while the Xa2 
has a 5.2-inch screen. Targeted 
at budget segment, the Xperia 
L2 runs android 7.1, has a 
5.5-inch screen with 
resolution of 1,280x720p 
and is powered by a 
MediaTek’s 1.5GHz quad-
core processor. n
Sony Xperia 2018 lineup

S
outh Korean tech giant Samsung unveiled its next generation 
exynos 9810 chipset which will power the upcoming Galaxy 
9 and Note 9 smartphones. Samsung claims, it is 40 per cent 
faster than its predecessor, exynos 8895. It is an octa-core 
processor with four performance cores clocking at a whopping 
2.9GHz. It also supports hybrid face detection which means the 
new smartphone face unlocking tech will be able to carry out 
3D mapping of user’s face, just like apple’s face ID tech, and 
will be harder to bypass. n
a
nother first at CeS is Lenovo’s Mirage Solo standalone Daydream 
Vr headset. The fully-equipped headset powered by the 
Snapdragon 835 has 4Gb of raM, microSD expansion, a Daydream 
controller, seven hours of battery life, and “six degrees of freedom” 
— all without cables or a smartphone. by placing more of the weight 
on your forehead, with the goggle section just resting against your 
face via a hinge above the head strap, the Mirage Solo already feels 
more comfortable than many smaller Vr headsets. Lenovo is 
tentatively pricing it at “under $400” but we’ll have to wait a little 
longer to see just how affordable truly untethered Vr is going to be. 
It’ll reportedly go on sale in Q2, this year. n
Samsung’s next generation 
Exynos 9810 chispet
Lenovo’s first standalone 
Daydream VR headset
102 | february 2018
Overview
Showbiz
MYMOBILE
b
lackberry announced a bronze coloured variant of the 
KeyOne smartphone at the CeS. It is also a dual SIM 
smartphone, unlike the black edition which had single 
SIM slot. blackberry also announced the availability date 
of its upcoming touch-only smartphone, Motion, at the 
mega event. It will be available in uS at $450 
(approximately rs 28,721). blackberry Motion will be 
manufactured by TCL 
and will run on the same 
Qualcomm Snapdragon 
625 octa-core processor 
used in the KeyOne. n
Blackberry KeyOne 
Bronze edition

G
aming firm razer showcased its 
smartphone and computer combination 
concept called “Project Linda” at the show. 
The concept uses the company’s new razer 
phone to power a laptop. The phone serves as 
a trackpad, speaker system and second screen 
from the setup, while the smartphone’s android 
apps run on the computer’s screen. razer 
expects this kind of setup will be the go-to 
electronics product of the future. n
T
aiwanese company HTC announced a new virtual reality 
headset, called the Vive Pro which is said to be an upgrade 
to the Vive Vr headset and boast of in-built headphones with an 
amplifier and said to feature superior resolution and pixel density. 
The Vive Pro includes dual-OLeD displays of 2880 x 1600 
combined, and a 78% increase in resolution over the current 
Vive HMD. Vive Pro’s new headstrap has enhanced, dual 
microphones with active noise cancellation and dual front-facing 
cameras claimed to empower developer creativity. along with 
this, HTC also launched the Vive Wireless adaptor, which is 
claimed to be the first to device in the market with a ‘truly 
wireless’ Vr headset integration for both Vive and Vive Pro. It 
features Intel’s WiGig technology. The device operates in the 
interference-free 60Ghz band, which means lower latency and 
better performance. n
Razer Phone and 
Project Linda
e
lectronics major LG showcased the world’s first 
65-inch ultra HD rollable OLeD display. When 
not in use, it can be rolled inside a box that’s size 
of a sound bar. Not that you carry your TV around, 
but transporting a rollable TV is incredibly 
convenient. The box conceals all the circuitry and 
speakers to make this TV work. The OLeD 
technology is already known for its impeccable 
colour reproduction and stunning contrast ratio. 
The emissive type panel is considered holy grail of 
display technology due to its ability to render 
perfect blacks. n
LG rollable OLED TV
HTC announces Vive Pro
february 2018 | 103
Showbiz
Overview
www.mymobileindia.com
ramesh@mymobile.co.in      

104 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
Guest Column
by InvItatIon
By Vaibhav Vats
2
017 was a monumental year for businesses waiting to 
get on the digital marketing bandwagon. from online 
shopping to net banking to artificial Intelligence, 
machine learning and chatbots, technology has smartly 
digitalized the ways in which any organization attracts and engages 
audiences. With so many emerging technologies in the market, 
digital marketers are becoming well aware of which platform 
and technology to leverage to get the most out of their marketing 
endeavours. 
In this increasingly technology-driven industry, as we gaze at the 
new year to see how to amplify our marketing strategies and alter 
our game with an eye on the ever-changing digital landscape, here’s 
a look at what will rule this segment in 2018. While the forthcoming 
year is poised to be a truly landmark one for all digital initiatives, 
let’s learn about the biggest trends that are expected to be at the 
forefront of creating traction for brands: 
5 Digital Marketing 
Trends To Watch 
Out For In 2018
a
ren’t many of us already familiar with the concept 
of voice search since apple launched Siri for 
iPhone users?  Well, that concept is now the 
future as digital marketers and brands are now using it 
tremendously to ease the efforts for their audience in 
searching for anything on the internet. Voice search in 
the coming year will transform the way information and 
communication is processed. The rise in voice searches 
will enable digital marketers in creating SeO optimized 
high quality content for promoting their businesses. n
Foreseeing the future in voice search

www.mymobileindia.com
by InvItatIon
Guest Column
february 2018 | 105
The author is Co-Founder, Digiperform, a leading 
digital marketing training platform. With over 7 
years of industry experience, Mr Vats has trained 
more than 2000 professionals and consulted over 
30 corporate clients in the past 5 years in areas of 
online media planning, conversion optimization, 
content marketing strategies and much more.
I
t’s probably a gross understatement to say that 
the days of PCs and laptops are long gone. 
Consumer marketing in 2018 must focus on 
millennials as a valuable audience. unlike other 
generations of consumers, this lot has grown up with 
the internet and smartphones. Speedy purchase of 
products and prompt customer service are often the 
only determiners of brand success when it comes to 
engaging a millennial audience. The snapchatters 
and instagrammers of the world are obsessed with 
their mobiles and yearn for authentic experiences 
on the devices they are forever connected to. Thus, 
businesses are required to focus on a millennial-first 
marketing strategy by optimizing the smartphone 
experience they offer. While mobile was already a 
hit this year and it will continue to grow, businesses 
optimizing their websites for mobile will be able to 
attract higher traffic, as well as unlock better sales 
and engagement opportunities in 2018. n
L
ive videos were already a rage in 2017with everyone from 
brands to individual users leveraging them to reach out 
to their target audiences and viewers. It’s not a surprise 
then that this trend is growing remarkably as everyone wants 
to watch a live facebook or Instagram video rather than read 
a post or an online ad. This clearly indicates that live video 
content is the future. The real-time engagement that live 
videos enable make them essential for a brand to realise their 
power and focus on this increasingly popular medium in 2018 
to engage with their target audience. n
L
eading social media platforms such as facebook and 
Instagram are ruling the digital media marketing 
game already. Nearly 800 million people are using 
Instagramevery month. Thanks to its recently introduced 
option of Instagram stories, its popularity has risen further 
giving Snapchat a solid run for its money.facebook too has 
strengthened its ad functionality, beating platforms like 
Twitter. as a result, brands are foreseeing better engagement 
on these platforms through social media influencers to 
connect with their prospects.Given the performance that 
such targeted ads deliver, it is a good idea for businesses 
and brands to explore advertising on these platformsin 2018 
as well. n
O
ur mobile devices today have become 
extremely potent and all social media apps 
are getting integrated with ar with great 
felicity. for instance, by tracking a user’s location, 
brands can trigger sponsored ar content that can 
be accessed by them only in that specific region 
and time. Pokémon Go was the one to introduce 
this concept it’s not long before and Instagram and 
facebook integrate this tech onto their platforms. 
Given all these advancements, 2018 will be 
the year of the 3as for ar, as this innovative 
technology becomes more acceptable, adaptable, 
and affordable for mass marketing. n
Get the traffic on 
smartphones
Live videos to be the content 
king
Tapping social channels like 
Facebook & Instagram for ads
Augmented reality 
incorporated through 
social media

mobilesensex
MYMOBILE
106 | february 2018
Great Deals
Google Pixel XL 
(Quite Black)
The Google Pixel XL comes with a 5.5-inch QHD 
aMOLeD display and is powered by Qualcomm 
Snapdragon 821 processor. It comes equipped with 
4Gb of raM and has two internal storage variants- 
32Gb and 128Gb. The smartphone houses a 12.3-
megapixel primary shooter with dual-tone LeD flash, 
with the front-facing snapper rated at 8-megapixel. 
It gets its fuel from a 3450mah battery with Quick 
Charge tech and runs android 7.1 Nougat. Still 
tagged as one of the most bankable devices, the Pixel 
XL come with a single-SIM slot and is accompanied 
by a fingerprint scanner at the back. n
bazaar bargain
Vivo V7
The uSP of the Vivo V7 is its selfie camera. The 
smartphone comes with a 24MP selfie camera 
with f/2.0 aperture and Moonlight Glow feature. 
The rear of the device houses a 16MP camera with 
f/2.0 aperture and LeD flash. The smartphone 
runs android 7.1 Nougat operating system out-of-
the-box and sports a 5.7-inch HD+ display with 
18:9 aspect ratio. It is powered by an octa-core 
Qualcomm Snapdragon 450 processor paired with 
4Gb of raM. It offers 32Gb internal storage which 
can be expanded up to 256Gb. The Vivo V7 comes 
equipped with a rear mounted fingerprint sensor and 
is backed by a 3000mah battery.  n
Launched at: rs 18,990 
Current Price: rs 16,990
Launched at: rs 76,000
Current Price: rs 39,990

www.mymobileindia.com
mobilesensex
february 2018 | 107
Asus ZenFone 3 Max 
5.5 (ZC553KL)
Apple iPhone 8 
(64GB)
The smartphone features a 5.5 inch full HD 
(1920 x 1080 pixels) 2.5D curved glass 
display. The Hybrid dual SIM phone runs 
android 6.0 Marshmallow with Zen uI 3.0 
on the top. It sports a metal body and a 
fingerprint sensor on its back. It is powered 
by an octa-core Qualcomm Snapdragon 430 
64-bit processor clocked at 1.4 GHz with 
adreno 505 GPu. It packs 3Gb LPDDr3 raM 
and 32Gb internal storage, expandable up 
to 128Gb. It features a 16MP rear camera 
with dual-tone LeD flash, f/2.0 aperture. at 
the front, it sports an 8MP camera with f/2.2 
aperture and 84-degree field of view. n
The iPhone 8 (launched alongside the iPhone 8 Plus 
and the iPhone X) comes with a 4.7-inch retina 
HD LCD display and has the a11 bionic chipset. 
On the camera front, there is a 12-megapixel rear 
shooter with Quad-LeD True-tone flash, OIS, digital 
zoom up to 5x, while the front-facing snapper is 
rated at 7-megapixel with retina flash. The iPhone 
8 is backed by a 1980mah battery, supporting 
wireless charging and runs iOS 11. It comes with a 
fingerprint scanner embedded in the home button 
and is accompanied by dust and water resistance. 
The iPhone 8 comes in Silver, Gold and Space Grey 
colour options. n
team@mymobile.co.in 
(Note: Prices are those available at prominent 
dealers, online and/or offline. They may not  
reflect official price reductions)
Great Deals
Launched at: rs 64,000
Current Price: rs 54,999
Launched at: rs 17,999
Current Price: rs 9,999

Term  No of Coverprice   Option      You pay (Rs)
Cash Benefit/Gift
SUBSCRIPTION ORDER FORM
Mobile India’s Flagship Magazine
2,340
Save Rs. 1,260 i.e 35% discount on cover price
Cata Brew Baron/Timex Gents Watch worth Rs. 2,700
Terms and Conditions: The offer is valid in India only. Gift will be deliverd within a month after clearing of the cheque.Please allow 4 - 6 weeks for 
processing your subscription. Any request for cancellation of subscription will not be entertained. Copies will be sent by ordinary post. The actual model of
Subscription gift may vary from the model shown above. This subscription offer is valid till stocks lasts. All disputes subject to competent courts of Delhi only.
PAYMENT METHOD
By Cheque/Cash
No:___________________Amount:__________________________________Bank:_________________Branch:________________
Name_____________________________________________________________ Age________________ Sex____________________
JobTitle___________________________________________________________ Company Name______________________________
Address Office/Residence_______________________________________________________________________________________
Mobile__________________________Phone_____________________________ e-mail_____________________________________
Cheque No.________________________________________________________ for Rs.____________________________________
PLEASE *Draw the DD/Cheque in favour of Spring Convergence Services Pvt. Ltd. *Write your name and address on the reverse of the DD/Cheque.      
Address - # 25, 1st Floor, Shankar Market, Connaught Place, New Delhi - 110001. 
Phone: 011-46206161, 41081012/13, Fax: 011-41520637
Yes, I would like to subscribe to My Mobile magazine for______ years with option_____ 
3
36
3,600
2
24
2,400
1
12
1,200
3,600
1,560
Save Rs. 840 i.e 35% discount on cover price
Arise Electric Kettle/Timex Ladies watch worth Rs. 1,800
2,400
780
Save Rs. 420 i.e 35% discount on cover price
US Polo T-Shirt/Allen Solly Tie worth Rs. 999
1,200
3
YEARS
Subscription
Offer
A
B
A
B
A
B
(year) issue
(Rs.)
2
YEARS
Subscription
Offer
35%
WINTER
Subscribe This Month 
Get
Off
OFFER
1
YEAR
Subscription
Offer

Devices featured in the My
Guide have been segregated
into different categories based
on price and colour-coded as: 
Disclaimer: 
The prices quoted in My Guide are
the Best Buy prices quoted by the
respective companies, ex-Delhi.
The prices may vary on account  of
promotional schemes or dealer 
discretion.





Spreadtrum—ST
Intel Atom—IA
Qualcomm Snapdragon—QS
MediaTek—MT
MediaTek Helio—MTH
 Up to Rs. 2,499
 Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999
 Rs. 6,000 – Rs. 9,999
 Rs.10,000 – Rs. 14,999
 Rs.15,000 – Rs. 19,999
 Rs. 20,000 – Rs. 29,999
 RS. 30,000 and above.
 Tablets
While My Mobile tries to ensure
accuracy in the pricing and 
features any discrepancies that
may emerge are beyond our 
control. Please check with the
retailer about features of the
phone before buying. Feel free to
update us. 
(Last updated on January 22, 2018)
MY GUIDE
FEBRUARY 2018 I 109

110 I FEBRUARY 2018
MYMOBILE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
103 
1.8
112x46.5x13.5
60
Speadtrum 6531da
NA
32+32MB
0.8/NA
1,000
Yes/No/No
Yes 
Yes
Launched
650
NEW
K1
1.8
112x46.5x13.9
64
312MHz /32MB
NA
32MB / 32GB
Digital Camera
1000
Yes/No/No
YES
YES
August, 2016
674
K5
2.4
112x46.5x13.9
64
312MHz /32MB
NA
32MB / 32GB
0.3 MP
1450
Yes/No/No
YES
YES
NA
950
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
204 Flip 
2.4
100x50x15
70
Speadtrum 6531da
NA
32+32MB
0.8/NA
580
Yes/No/No
Yes 
Yes
Launched
1,190
NEW
Pride 350
2.8
131 x 58 x 10.2
82
Nucleus
32+32MB
1.3 MP/NA
1,800
Yes/No/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
Launched
1,549
Smart Selfie it5231
2.4/ 240 x 320
124.5 x 54 x 11.4
-
360MHz/64Mb
-
64MB/32GB
0.08MP/0.3MP
1900
Yes/No/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
May, 2016
1,335
102 Cute 
1.8
112x46.5x13.5
60
Speadtrum6533
NA
32+32MB
0.8/NA
850
Yes/No/No
Yes 
Yes
Launched
684
NEW
HITECH
I-SMART
ITEL
LEPHONE
UP TO RS. 2,499
UP TO RS. 2,499
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
K7
2.4
100 x 42 x 13.4 
62
312MHz /32MB
NA
32MB / 32GB
0.1 MP
2,500
Yes/No/No
YES
YES
NA
999
Air A8
5.0/ 540 x 960 
140.2 x 72.4 x 8.8
152
ST 7731/1GB
5.2 Lollipop
8GB/32GB
8MP/2MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
-
4,999
Bingo 10 (M415)
4.5/ 480 x 854 
135.65 x 67.38 x 10.43
140
MT 6580A/1GB
Android OS, 6.0
8GB/32GB
5MP/5MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/No
April, 2016
4,399
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Honor Bee
4.5/ 854  x 480 
134.3 x 66.7 X 10
170
ST SC 7732/1GB
Android OS, v4.4
8GB/32GB
8MP/2MP
1,730
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
May, 2015
4,999
L1
2
123x51.8x14.9
102
312MHz /32MB
NA
32MB / 32GB
2,500
Yes/No/No
YES
YES
October, 2016
999
Amaze S9
5
140 x 66.88 x 9.65
150
ST 7731/512MB
5.1 Lollipop
4GB/32GB
5MP/2MP
1,400
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
-
2,999
Sleek 9
2.4
100 x 42 x 13.4 
62
312MHz /32MB
NA
32MB / 32GB
0.1 MP
800
Yes/No/No
YES
YES
NA
1,325
LEPHONE
HONOR
HITECH
IN-FOCUS
UP TO RS. 2,499
Spreadtrum
6531DA/NA
Digital Camera/
Digital Camera
UP TO RS. 2,499
Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999
Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999

www.mymobileindia.com
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Aqua Fish
5/720x1280
142.4x72x9.6
150
Quad core/2GB
Sailfish 2.0
16GB/32GB
8MP/2MP
2500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes/Yes
February,2016
5,499
is-59 
5/854x480
143.5x73.6x9.5
120
Android 6.0
8GB/32GB
5MP/2MP
2,200
Yes/Yes/No
Yes 
Yes
Launched
2,999
NEW
i1-Mini 
4.5/854x480
135.2x66x10.8
109
Android 6.2
4GB/32GB
5MP/2MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes
Launched
3,199
NEW
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Cloud String HD
5/ 720 x 1280
144.5 x 72.5 x 8.7
150
SC 9832A/ 1GB
Android 5.1
8GB/ 32GB
8MP/2MP
2,200
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
May,  2016
5,599
Bingo 21 (M 430)
4.5/ 854 x 480 
136.8 x 67 x 10.95
152
ST Shark/2GB
Android 5.1
8GB/32GB
8MP/5MP
2,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
March, 2016
5,499
Aqua Classic 2
5/480/854
145.2x72.6x10.9
qcta-core/1GB
Android 6.0
8GB/32GB
5MP/2MP
2200
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
4,600
Cloud Glory 4G
4.5/ 480 x 854
134.2 x 68 x 9
120
MT 6735M/ 1GB
Android 6.0
8GB/ 32GB
5MP/2MP
1,800
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2016
3,999
IN-FOCUS
INTEX
I-SMART
Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999
Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999
Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Canvas Juice 3 Q393
5.0/720 x 1280
NA
NA
MT6580/2GB
Android 5.1
8GB/32GB
8MP/2MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
4,171
TURBO 4G 
5 FWVGA TN
146.6x73.6x11.5
142
1.3GHz Quad Core
Android Nougat
1GB/8GB/64GB
0.3MP/5MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August, 2017
4,699
TEZ 4G 
5 FWVGA IPS
144x72.5x8.8
171
1.3GHz Quad Core
Android Nougat
1GB/8GB/64GB
2MP/5MP
2,400
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August, 2017
4,799
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Canvas Bolt Selfie
4.5/854x480
-
-
MTK6735/1GB
Android 5.1
8GB/32GB
5MP/5MP
1,750
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
May, 2016
4,849
Power Pro it1410
4/ 800 x 480
124x64.7x12.2
-
Android4.4
8GB/32GB
2.0MP/0.3MP
2,800
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
May, 2016
3,339
EROS PLUS 
5 FWVGA TN
144.9x73.3x9.5
142
1.3GHz Quad Core
Android Nougat
1GB/8GB/64GB
0.3MP/5MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November, 2017
4,299
Canvas Spark 3
5.5/720x1280
-
-
quad-core/1GB
Android 5.1
8GB/32GB
8MP/5MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
March, 2016
4,848
ITEL
M-TECH
MICROMAX
Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999
Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999
Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999
1.3Ghz quad-
core/512MB
1.2GHz, quad-core/1GB
Dual core, 1.3
GHz/512MB
FEBRUARY 2018 I 111

112 I FEBRUARY 2018
MYMOBILE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Delite11
5/1280x720
146.66X74.3X10.52
151
Quad-core/1GB
Android 6.0
8GB/32GB
5MP/2MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
5,840
Zi-34
3.5 inch
116.2X61.4X11.3
108
2xCortex-A7,32bit
Android 4.4.2
256 MB/512 MB
0.3MP/ 0.3MP
1,200
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes
Launched
2,993
Astra Prism
5 inch
134.4X67X10.1
119
1.2 GHz Quadcore
Android 6.0
512 MB/4GB
0.3MP/2MP
1,700
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes
Launched
3,813
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Astra Colors 4G
5/720X1280
142.9X71.65X11
182
Spreadtrum
Android 6.0
1GB/8GB
5MP/5MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes
Launched
6,499
EROS 4G 
5 FWVGA IPS
72.4x142.7x9.3
136
1.3GHz Quad Core
Android Nougat
1GB/8GB/64GB
0.3MP/5MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
October, 2017
4,999
Astra NXT+
4 inch
125.4X64.2X13
130
512MB+4GB(DDR2)
Android 6.0
1GB/8GB
2MP/0.3MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes
Launched
3,703
Astra Metal 4G
5/480X854
143.8X73.3X10.4
171
Android 6.0
1GB/8GB
5MP/2MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes
Launched
5,553
M-TECH
VIDEOCON
ZIOX
Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999
Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Astra NXT Pro  
4 inch
123.5x64.2x10.5
111
Quad-core A7MP
Android 7
1GB/8GB
2MP/0.3MP
1,900
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
Launched
3,899
Q550
5.0/720 x 1280
145.6 x 71.8 x 8 
149
Broadcom/2GB
Android Kitkat 4.4.2
16GB/32GB
8MP/2MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
2,014
7,499
L3 
5 HD IPS
141x70.5x8.6
143
1.3GHz Quad Core
Android Nougat
2GB/16GB/256GB
13MP/5MP
3,050
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
January, 2018
6,749
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
5.5/720 x 1280
152.5 x 77.2 x 3.9
170
QS 410/2GB
Android 5.0
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
August, 2015
9,299
Astra Zing
4 inch
124X64X10.1
105
1.2 GHz Quadcore
Android 6.0
512MB/4GB
0.3MP/2MP
1,400
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes
Launched
3,653
Zenfone Max
5.5/ 720 x 1280
156 x 77.5 x 10.55
202
QS 615/ 2GB, 3GB
Android 6.0
16GB/32GB, 64GB
13MP/5MP
5,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
May, 2016
9,325/ 12,999
Astra Blaze 
4.5/480x854
135x68x10.2
130
1.3GHz Quad-Core
Android 7
1GB/8GB
0.3MP/2MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
Launched
4,499
ZIOX
ASUS
CELKON
CENTRIC
Zenfone 2 Laser
ZE550KL
1.5Ghz  Quad-
core ARM
Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
Rs. 2,500 – Rs. 5,999

www.mymobileindia.com
FEBRUARY 2018 I 113
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
C2 
5 HD IPS
144X71.6X9.9
165
1.3GHz Quad Core
Android Nougat
2GB/16GB
8MP/8MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
September, 2017
7,199
Note 3s
5.5/1920x1080
154.5x77x8.6
167
octa-core/3GB
Android6.0
32GB/32GB
13MP/5MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November,2016
9,999
Note 5 Lite
5/1280X970
145.3X72.3X8.7
148
MT6735/3GB
Android6.0
16GB
13MP/8MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
March, 2017
8,199
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
P1 
5.5 HD IPS
152.85X76.14X9.2
178
1.3GHz Quad Core
Android Nougat
3GB/32GB
13MP/8MP
5,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August, 2017
9,999
C1 
5 HD IPS
143.5X71.3X9.35
175
1.3GHz Quad Core
Android Nougat
1GB/32GB
8MP/5MP
2,200
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August, 2017
5,999
Note 3
5.5/720 x 1280
152 x 77 x 9
150
MT6753/3GB
Android 5.1
16GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
October, 2015
8,999
S1 
5.2 HD IPS
149X72.6X7.9
159
1.3GHz Quad Core
Android Nougat
2GB/32GB
13MP/8MP
2,700
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August, 2017
8,999
COMIO
COOLPAD
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Honor Holly 3
5.5/1920x1080
NA
NA
Kirin 620/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
13MP/8MP
3,100
Yes/Yes/Yes
NA
NA
October, 2016
9,999
M680
5.5/720x1280 
156 x 76.8 x 7.25
158
MT 6753/2GB
Android 5.1
16GB/32GB
13MP/13MP
2,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
December, 2015
8,999
M810
5.5/1080x1920
153.70 x 76.20 x 6.99
155
QS 801/ 2GB
Android 5.0
16GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
2,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
July, 2015
9,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Air A9
5.0-inch, 720 x 1280 
140.2 x 72.4 x 8.8
152
MT 3735M/2GB
Android 5.1
16GB/32GB
13MP/8MP
3,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
-
6,999
P 7
5.0/720x1280
NA
NA
Quad-core/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB
8MP/5MP
2,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
December,2016
9,999
M 350 (16GB)
5.0/720 x 1280
151 x 71.5 x 10.6
146
MT6732/2GB
Android 4.4.2
16GB/64GB
8MP/8MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2015
6,999
Honor Holly 2 Plus
4.8/720 x 1280 
143.1 x 71.8 x 9.7 
160
MT6735P /2GB
Android 5.1.1
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
February, 2016
8,499
GIONEE
HONOR
HITECH
IN-FOCUS
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS.. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999

114 I FEBRUARY 2018
MYMOBILE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Aqua Secure
4.5/ 480 x 854
133.5 x 66.5 x 9.4
130
MTK6735M/ 1GB
Android 5.1
8GB/ 32GB
5MP/ 2MP
1,900
Yes/ Yes/ Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
May, 2016
6,499
Ultra 50
148.24X72.56X11.44
186
1.3GHz Quad Core
Marshmallow 6.0
3GB/32GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes/Yes
Yes
Launched
9,990
Wish it1512
5/FWVGA/TN
143x72x8.65
-
Quad core/1GB
Android 6.0
8GB/32GB
5.0MP/2.0MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2016
6,000
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
IS-57i
5.0-inch/480 x 854 
146.72 x 72.85 x 8.73
155
Quad Core/1 GB
Android 4.4.2 
8GB/64GB
8.0MP/3.2MP
2,100
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
September, 2016
6,499
Aqua S7
5/720x1280
142.5x72.5x8.7
150
Quad core/3GB
Android 6.0
16GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
3,200
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes
September, 2016
9,499
IS-56i HD Mercury V6
5.0-inch/720 x 1280 
143.54 x 71.55 x 8.52
170
Quad Core/1 GB
Android 4.4.2 
8GB/64GB
8.0MP/3.2MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
September, 2015
6,999
Aqua View
5/ 720 x 1280
124 x 64 x 10.3
146
MTK6735P/ 1GB
Android 5.1
16GB/ 32GB
8MP/5MP
2,200
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2016
8,999
INTEX
I-SMART
ITEL
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Mega 1
5.5, Full HD
152.4x77.1x9.5
184
1.2 GHz,Quad Core
Marshmallow 6.0
3GB/32GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes/Yes
Yes
June, 2017
7,950
Pixel V2
5.0/ 720 x 1280
141.6 x 70.8 x 7.6
128
Quad Core/ 2GB
Android 5.1
16GB/32GB
13MP/8MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
September, 2015
8,499
X50+
5.5/1280x720
155x71.8x8.85
155
quad-core/2GB
Android 6.0
32GB/32GB
8MP/5MP
2,800
Yes/Yes/yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
9,199
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Mega 2
5.0-inch, HD IPS, 
152.4X77.1X9.5
184
Android 6.0
2GB/16GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes
152.4X77.1X9.5
Yes
Launched
6,500
X10
5.0/ 720 x 1280
142 x 70.8 x 7.9
133
Quad core /3GB
Android 5.1
16GB/32GB
13MP/5MP
2,900
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November, 2015
9,999
Mega 4
5.0-inch, HD IPS, 
152.4X77.1X9.5
184
Android 6.0
1GB/16GB
8MP/2MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes
Launched
4,500
ITEL
KARA
LAVA
5/HD IPS, MiraVision,
cast screen
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
Power Pro it1553
5.5)
138.5x69.5x9.8
-
Quad core/1GB
Android 5.1
16GB/32GB
8.0MP/2.0MP
5,050
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2016
7,290
1.3GHz Quad
Core(64bit)
1.3GHz Quad
Core(64bit)

W7+
5/1280X720 IPS
143.6x72.5x9.1
151
1.3GHz Quad Core
1 GB/8 GB
5MP/5MP
1,800
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes   
Yes
Launched
5,999
W7
5/854X480
143.6x72.5x10
177
1.3GHz Quad Core
1GB/8GB/32GB
5MP/2MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes   
Yes
Launched
4,999
www.mymobileindia.com
FEBRUARY 2018 I 115
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
W21 
5.5/1280X720
152.8x76.9x8.6
164
1.3GHz Quad-Core
Android 6.0
2GB/16GB/32GB
8MP/5MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
"Yes  "
Yes/Yes 
Launched
6,799
W11
5 inch/1280X720
144X72.4X9.5
161
1.3GHz Quad Core
Android 6.0
1GB/16GB/32GB
8MP/2MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes   
Yes
Launched
6,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
W12
5 inch/1280X720
145.2X72.4X10
148
1.3GHz Quad Core
Android 6.0
1GB/16GB/32GB
8MP/2MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
"Yes  "
Yes
Launched
6,399
W2
4.5/854X480
134.5X68X10.2
126
1.3GHz Quad Core
1GB/8GB/32GB
2MP/VGA
1,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes   
Yes
Launched
4,499
W15  
5/1280X720
144.2x72x8.8
142
1.3GHz Quad-Core
Android 6.0
2GB/16GB/32GB
8MP/5MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
"Yes  "
Yes/Yes 
Launched
6,499
LEPHONE
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Wind 5
5/ 720 x 1280
144.6 x 72.8 x 8.45
137
MT6735P/ 1GB
Android 5.1
8GB/ 32GB
8MP/ 5MP
2,000
Yes/ Yes/ Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2016
6,599
Canvas XP 4G
5.0/720 x 1280
NA
NA
MT6735P/3GB
Android 5.1
16GB/32GB
8MP/2MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
May, 2016
7,499
Canvas 5
5.2/1080 x 1920
NA
NA
MT6753/3GB
Android 5.1 
16GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
2,900
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November, 2015
9,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Canvas Unite 4
5.0/ 1280 x 720
NA
NA
MTK 6735P/1GB
Android 6.0
8GB/64GB
8MP/5MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2016
6,999
K6 Power
5/1920x1080
141.9x70.3x9.3
145
QS 430/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/128GB
13MP/8MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes/Yes
November,2016
9,999
Canvas Amaze 2
5/ 720 x 1280
NA
NA
QS415/ 2GB
Android 5.0.2
8GB/ 32GB
13MP/ 5MP
2,500
Yes/ Yes/ Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2016
7,499
K7
5/ 480 x 854
143.6 x 72.5 x 8.95
Android 5.0
8GB/32GB
5MP/5MP
2,125
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
January, 2016
8,690
LENOVO
LYF
LG
MICROMAX 
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
1.1GHz Quad Core/
1.5GB
Android 6.0,
Marshmallow
Android 6.0,
Marshmallow
Android 6.0,
Marshmallow

116 I FEBRUARY 2018
MYMOBILE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Canvas Sliver 5
4.8/720 x 1280 
5.1mm thick
97
QS 410 /2GB
Android 5.0.2
16GB/No
8MP/5MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
2,015
8,387
Q626 
5/1280 x 720
141.2x70.3x7.3
148
1.3GHz Quad Core
Android 6.0
2GB/32GB/64GB
8MP/5MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes/Yes
August, 2017
9,625
P55 Max
5.5/1280x720
152 x 72.6 x 8.7
180
MTK6737
Android 7.0
3GB/16GB
13MP/5MP
5,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August, 2017
7,499
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Moto E4/Plus
5/5.5/1280x720
150,/181
MTK6737
Android 7.1.1
2/16/3/32GB
8MP/5MP/13MP/5MP
28,00/5,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August, 2017
8,450 onwards
Canvas Unite 4 Pro
5.0/ 1280 x 720
NA
NA
Quad core/ 2GB
Android  5.1
16GB/32GB
8MP/5MP
3,900
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2016
7,499
Nokia 3
5/1280X720
143.4x71.4x8.4
NA
MT 6737
Android 7.0 
16GB/128GB
8MP/8MP
2,650
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
July, 2017
8,635
Moto G4 Play
5/720x1280
144.4x72x9.9
137
QS 410/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
8MP/5MP
2,800
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes/No
September, 2016
8,999
MICROMAX 
MOTOROLA
NOKIA
NUU
PANASONIC
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Galaxy On 5 Pro
5.0/ 1280 x 720
142.3 x 72.1 x 8.5
149
Quad core/ 2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
8MP/5MP
2,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
July, 2016
6,490
TCL 562
5.5/1920x1080
152x77x8
150
MT6755M/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
2,960
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes/Yes 
July,2016
9,999
Redmi 2 Prime
4.7/720 x 1280
134.00 x 67.20 x 9.4
133
QS 410/2GB
Android 4.4
16GB/32GB
8MP/2MP
2,200
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August, 2015
6,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Galaxy J2 Pro (2016)
5/720x1280
142.4x71.1x8
138
Quad core/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
8MP/5MP
2,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes/Yes 
July,2016
9,090
Eluga Ray 500/700
163/182
MT6737/MT6753
Android 7.0
3GB/32GB
5/13/13/13
4,000/5,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
September, 2017
8,999/9,999
TCL 560
5.5/ 1280x720
NA
156
QS 210/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/32GB
8MP/5MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
July, 2016
6,999
Galaxy J2 (2016)
5.0/ 1280 x 720
142.4 x 71.1 x 8.0
138
Quad core/ 1.5GB
Android 6.0
8GB/128GB
8MP/5MP
2,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
July, 2016
6,990
PANASONIC
SAMSUNG
TCL 
XIAOMI
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
144.5x72x9.3/
155x77.5x9.55
5/5.5/720 x 1280/
1080 x 1920
144.3 x 71.3 x 9.2/
153.8 x 75.4 x 8.9

www.mymobileindia.com
FEBRUARY 2018 I 117
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Redmi Note Prime
5.5/720 x 1280
154 x 78.7 x 9.45
185
QS 410/2GB
Android 4.4
16GB/32GB
13MP/5MP
3,100
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
December, 2015
7,999
Graphite2
4.5/1280x720
137.55X70.28X10
129
Quad-core/1GB
Android 6.0
8GB/64GB
5MP/2MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
6,299
Graphite1
4.5/1280x720
136.76X69X10
127
Quad-core/1GB
Android 6.0
8GB/64GB
5MP/2MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
6,499
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Redmi 3s Plus
5/1280x720
139.3x69.6x8.5
144
QS 430/2GB
Android 6.0
32GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
4000/4100
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
October,2016
9,499
Redmi 3S/ 3s Prime
5/ 1280X720
139.4 X 69.7 X 8.5
144
QS 430/ 2GB, 3GB
Android 6.0
16GB, 32GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
4,100
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August, 2016
6,999/ 8,999
Redmi Note 4
5.5/1080X1920
151X76X8.3
165
QS625/2GB,3GB,4GB
Android 6.0
32GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
4,100
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes (Hybrid)
Yes/Yees
January, 2017
9,999
Redmi Note 3
5.5/1080 x 1920
150 x 76 x 8.65
164
QS 650/2GB,3GB
Android 5.0.2
16GB,32GB/32GB
16MP/5MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
March, 2016
9,999/ 11,999
XIAOMI
VIDEOCON
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Krypton3
5/1280x720
144.5X73.14X9.74
153
Quad-core/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/32GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
7,999
Yuphoria
5.0/720x1280
142.4 x 73 x 8.2-9.35
143
Quad core / 2GB
Android 5.1.1
16GB/32GB
8MP/5MP
2,230
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
May, 2015
6,499
Cinemax 3
5.5/720x1280
August,2016
Quad core/2GB
Android 5.1
16GB/32GB
5MP/3.2MP
2,900
Yes/Yes/No
Yes 
Yes/Yes
August, 2016
6,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Ultra50
5/1920X1080
148.24X72.56X11.44
186
Quad-core/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
9,990
Delite21
5/1280x720
146.66X74.3X10.52
151
Quad-core/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/32GB
8MP/2MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
7,200
Yunique
4.7/720x1280
134.5 x 67.5 x 8.3
128
QS 410 / 1GB
Android 5.1.
8GB/32GB
8MP/2MP
2,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
September, 2015
6,300
Ultra30
5/1920X1080
144.31X73X10
153
Quad-core/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
9,990
VIDEOCON
YU
ZEN
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999

118 I FEBRUARY 2018
MYMOBILE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Astra Curve 4G
5/480x854
146.5x73.1x10.3
160
1.3GHz Quad-Core
Android 7.0
2GB/16GB
5MP/2MP
2,200
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes/Yes 
Launched
7,299
5.5/ 1080 x 1920
152.5 x 77.2 x 10.9 
170
IA Z3560 /2GB
Android 5.0
16GB,32GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
March, 2015
13,999, 18,999
Zenfone Selfie
5.5/1080 x 1920
156.5 x 77.2 x 10.8
170
QS615 /2GB,3GB
Android 5.0
16GB,32GB/128GB
13MP/13MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
August, 2015
10,999/ 16,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
ZP331
4.5/ 854 x 480 
133 x 65.7 x 8.5
113
Quad core/1GB
Android 5.1 
8 GB/64 GB
5 MP/2 MP
1,700
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
-
7,500
Astra Star 
5/480x854
145.6x72.7x10.2
150
1.3GHz Quad-Core
Android 7.0
1GB/16GB
5MP/2MP
2,350
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes/Yes 
Launched
5,899
Blade V6
5/ 1280 x 720 
142X69.5X6.8
122
MTK 6735/2GB
Android 5.1 
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
July, 2016
9,999
Duopix F1 
5/1280x720
145.2x71.7x9.1
148
1.3GHz Quad-Core
Android 7.0
2GB/16GB
8MP/8MP+2MP
2,400
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes/Yes 
Launched
7,499
ZIOX
ZOPO
ZTE
ASUS
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
RS. 6,000 – RS. 9,999
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
5.2/1280x720
149x73.7x8.55
148
Quad-core/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/32GB
13MP/5MP
4,100
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
November,2016
12,999
F 103 Pro
5.0/ 1280 x 720
145.3 x 70.5 x 8.5
142
Quad core/ 3GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
2,400
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
July, 2016
11,999
Marathon M5 Lite
5.0/720 x 1280
143 x 69.9 x 8.5 
182
Quad Core/3GB
Android 5.1
32GB/128GB
8MP/5MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
December, 2015
13,000
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Coolpad Note 5
5.5/1920x1080
NA
NA
QS 617/4GB
Android 6.0
32GB/64GB
13MP/8MP
4,010
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
October, 2016
10,999
Zenfone 3 lazer
5.5/1920x1080
149x76x7.9
QS 430.4GB
Android 6.0
32GB/128GB
13MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes/Yes
October,2016
18,999
Cool 1
5.50/1080x1920 
152.00 x 74.80 x 8.20
173
1.4GHz octa-core
Android 6.0
32GB
13MP/8MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
January, 2017
13,999
A1 
5.5/1920x1080
152 x 76 x 7.8
160
QS 430
Android 7.1.1
3GB/32GB/256GB
13MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes/Yes
November, 2017
10,999
ASUS
CENTRIC
COOLPAD
GIONEE
Zenfone 3
Max(ZC520TL)
ZenFone 2
(2GB/4GB)
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999

www.mymobileindia.com
FEBRUARY 2018 I 119
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Honor 5X
5.5/ 1080 x 1920 
151.3 x 76.3 x 8.15
158
QS 616 /2GB
Android 5.1.1 
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
January, 2016
12,999
Snap 4  
5.2/720x1280
147.1 x 73.8 x 8.3
162
Octa-core/4GB
Android 7.0
64GB/128GB
13MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
September, 2017
11,590
V5
5.5/720x1280 
151.9 x 94.7 x 8.3
153
Quad core/3GB
Android 5.1
16GB/32GB
13MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes/Yes
Yes
January, 2016
11,299
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Desire 630
5.0/ 1280 x 720
146.9 x 70.9 x 8.3
140
QS 400/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/2TB
13MP/5MP
2,200
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
February, 2016
10,890
Honor 5C
5.2/ 1920 x  1080
147.1 x 73.8 x 8.3
156
Kirin 650/ 2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
13MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
June, 2016
10,999
Epic 1
5.5/1920x1080
153x76x8.4
Decca-core/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/128GB
16MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November,2016
12,999
Honor 6X
5.5/1080X1920
150.9X76.2X8.2
162
Kirin 655
Android 6.0
32GB/64GB
12 and 2MP/8MP
3,340
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
Jnauray 2017
11,999
HONOR
HTC
INFOCUS
LAVA
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Vibe K4 Note
5.5/1080x1920
153.67 X 76.45 X 9.14
158
MT 6753/3GB
Android 5.1.
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes/Yes
Yes
January, 2016
11,999
Phab 2 Plus
6.4/1920x1080
174x88x5.5
218
MT/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/128GB
13MP,13MP/8MP
4,050
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November,2016
14,999
K8 Note
5.5/1080 x 1920
154.5 x 75.9 x 8.5
180
Android 7.1.1
32GB/64GB/256GB
13+5MP/13MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes
August, 2017
12,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Phab Plus
6.8/1080 x 1920
186.6 x 96.6 x 7.6
229
QS 615 /2GB
Android 5.0
32GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
3,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
October, 2015
14,999
Phab 2
6.4/1920x1080
175x89.5x6.89
225
MTK8735/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
4,050
Yes/Yes/yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
December,2016
11,999
Vibe K5 Note
5.5/1920x1080
152x75.7x8.49
165
Helio P10/4GB
Android 6.0
32GB/128GB
13MP.8MP
3,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
Jaunuary,2016
13,499
Vibe S1
5.0/1080x1920
143.3 x 70.8 x 7.8
132
MT6752/3GB
Android 5.0
32GB/128GB
13MP/8 MP + 2 MP
2,420
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November, 2015
12,999
LENOVO
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
MT Deca-
core/3GB/4GB

120 I FEBRUARY 2018
MYMOBILE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
K 10
5.3/ 1280 x 720
146.6x74.8x8.8
140
QS 410/2GB
Android 5.0
16GB/32GB
13MP/5MP
2,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
January, 2016
12,999
Canvas 6 Pro
5.5/1920 x 1080
-
-
Helio x10/4GB
Android 5.1
Yes/Yes
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
May, 2016
10,999
Moto G Turbo Edition
5.0/720 x 1280
142.1 x 72.4 x 11.6
155
QS 615 /2GB
Android 5.1.1
16GB/32GB
13MP/5MP
2,470
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
2,015
10,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
G4 Stylus
5.7/ 720 x 1280
154.4 x 79.2 x 9.4
163
QS 400 /1GB
Android 5.0
16GB/32GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
May, 2015
13,869
F1 
5.5/1920x1080
155.5x77.6x7.9
153
QS 617/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/128GB
16MP/8MP
3,200
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
October,2016
13,099
Canvas 6
5.5/1920 x 1080
-
-
MT6753/3GB
Android 5.1
32GB/128GB
13MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
May, 2016
10,999
X Screen
4.93/ 1280x720
142.6 x 71.8 x 7.1
120
QS 410/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
13MP/8MP
2,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
July, 2016
12,990
LYF
LG
MICROMAX
MOTOROLA
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Moto G4 Plus
5.5/ 1920X1080
153X76.6X9.8
155
QS 617/2GB,3GB
Android 6.1
16GB, 32GB/128GB
16MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes
May,2016
13,499/ 14,999
Z11 Mini
5/1920x1080
141.4x70x8
138
QS/3GB
Android 5.1
32GB/200GB
16MP/8MP
2,800
Yes/Yes/yes
yes 
Yes/Yes
October,2016
12,999
N1
5.5/1920x1080
150.9x79x8.9
190
MTK P10/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/128GB
13MP/13MP
5,000
Yes/Yes/yes
yes 
Yes/Yes
December,2016
11,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Nokia 5
5.2/ 720x1280
149.7 x 72.5 x 8.05
NA
QS 430 
Android 7.1.1
2GB/16GB
13MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes
July, 2017
12,499
Moto G4 
5.5/ 1920 x  1080
153 x 76.6 x 7.9
155
QS 617/2GB
Android 6.0.1
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
May, 2016
10,499
Nokia 6
5.5/1920X1080
154 x 75.8 x 7.85 
NA
QS 430 
Android 7.1.1
3BG/32GB
8MP/16MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes
July, 2017
14,299
G5 Plus
5.2/1980X1080
153X76X9.6
155
QS 625 Octa-core
Android 7.0
16GB/32GB
12MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes
March, 2017
12,999
MOTOROLA
NOKIA
NUBIA
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999

www.mymobileindia.com
FEBRUARY 2018 I 121
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Eluga Note
5.5/ 1920 x  1080
146.00x74.50x8.10
142
Octa Core/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/32GB
16MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
July, 2016
10,290
Galaxy On7
5.5/1280 x 720
77.5x151.8x8.2 
171
Quad-core/1.5GB
Android 5.1
8GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
October, 2015
10,990
Galaxy J5
5.0/1280 x 720
142.1 x 71.8 x 7.9 
146
Quad-core/1.5GB
Android 5.1
8GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
2,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2015
10,390
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Eluga Pulse X
5.5/1280X720
139 x 67 x 8.10
152
Quad-core/3GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes
March, 2017
10,990
X5 
5.5/1920 x 1080
153x76.5x7.8
170
1.5GHz Octa Core
Android 7.0
3GB/32GB/128 GB
13MP/5MP
2,950
Yes/Yes/yes
yes 
Yes/Yes
August,2017
12,100
Eluga A3/A3 Pro
5.2/720 x 1280
148.7 x 72.4 x 9.1
161
Quad-core/3GB
Android 7.0
16GB/32GB/128GB
13MP/8MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes
August, 2017
11,290/12,790
Eluga Arc
4.7/720x1280
139 x 67 x 8.10
130
QS 410/2GB
Android 5.1
16GB/32GB
8MP/5MP
1,800
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
April,2016
10,190
NUU
PANASONIC
SAMSUNG
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Galaxy J5 (2016)
5.2/1280x720
145.7 x 72.3 x 8.1
158
QS 410/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,100
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
May, 2016
13,990
Mi 4i
5.0/1080 x 1920
138.1 x 69.6 x 7.8
130
QS 615/2GB
Android 5.0
16GB,32GB/No
13MP/5MP
3,120
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
April, 2015
11,999/ 14,999
Galaxy On7 Pro
5.5/1280 x 720
151.8 x 77.5 x 8.2
171
Quad core/ 2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
8MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
July, 2016
10,900
Mi Max
6.44/1920x1080
173.1x88.3x7.5
203
QS 650,652/3GB,4GB
Android 6.0
32GB,128GB/128GB
16MP/5MP
4,850
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes/Yes 
June,2016
10,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
J5 Prime
5/1080x720
142.8x69.5x8.1
143
Quad-core/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/256GB
13MP/5MP
2,400
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
September,2016
12,990
Galaxy J Max
7.0/ 1280 x 800
186.9 x 108.8 x 8.7
NA
Quad core/1.5GB
Android  5.1
8GB/200GB
8MP/2MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
July, 2016
11,400
Galaxy J7
5.5/720 x 1280 
152.2 x 78.6 x 7.5
171
Octa Core/1.5GB
Android 5.1
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
2,015
11,890
SAMSUNG
XIAOMI
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999

122 I FEBRUARY 2018
MYMOBILE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Y51L
5.0/ 540x960
143.80 x 71.70 x 7.52
157
QS 410/2GB
Android 5.0.2
16GB/128GB
8MP/5MP
2,350
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
January, 2016
10,700
Yunicorn
5.5/(1080X1920)
153.3X75.4X8.5
172
MT Helio P10/4GB
Androis 5.1.1
32GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
4,000
yes/yes/yes
yes
yes
May,2016
12,999
Yureka Note
6.0/1080 x 1920
-
-
MTK6753T/3GB
Android 5.1.1
16GB/Yes
13MP/8MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
April, 2016
13,499
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Y55S
5.2/1280x720
147.9x72.9x7.5
142
QS 425/3GB
Android 6.0
16GB/256GB
13MP/5MP
2,730
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes
March, 2017
12,490
Cube3
5/1280x720
144.5X73.14X9.74
152.5
Quad-core/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
3000
Yes/Yes/yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
10,490
5.5/1080x1920 
155 x 78 x 9
154
QS 615/2GB
Android 4.4.4
16GB/32GB
13MP/5MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
July, 2015
8,999
Y55L
5.2/1280x720
147.9x72.9x7.5
142
QS 430/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
8MP/5MP
2,650
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/yes
October,2016
11,980
VIDEOCON
VIVO
YU
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
ZP370
5.5/ 1280 x 720 
153.8 x 77.1 x 9
167
Ouad-core/1GB
Android 5.1
8GB/64GB
8.0MP/2.0MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
11,000
5.5/1920x1080
151.4x76.24x8.3
175
QS 430/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/128GB
16MP/8MP
4,100
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
November,2016
17,999
Mark 1
5.5/ 1440x2560
155.4 x 76.1 x 8.7 
190
Helio X10 /3GB
Android 5.1.1
32GB/-
21MP/8MP
3,100
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
April,2016
19,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Z1
5.5/1920 x 1080
155.7 x 77.3 x 8.9
175
QS 801/3GB
Android 5.1.1
64GB/No
13MP/8MP
4,100
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
May, 2016
13,499
ZP350
5.0 / 1280 x 720 
145.9 x 71.4 x 8.5
137
Quad-core/1GB
Android 5.1 
8GB/64GB
8.0MP/2.0MP
2,100
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
10,000
6.0/ 1080 x 1920
164.6 x 84 x 10.6
190
QS 616/3GB
Android 5.0
32GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
December, 2015
16,499
Hero 1
5.0/1280 x 720 
146.1 x 70.6 x 8.65
136
Quad-core/2GB
Android 5.1 
16 GB/64 GB
13.2 MP/5.0MP
2,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
14,500
ZOPO
ASUS
CREO
ZENFONE 3
MAX(ZC553KL)
Zenfone 2 Laser
ZE601KL
Yureka Plus
(YU5510A,YU5510 )
RS. 10,000 – RS. 14,999
RS. 15,000 – RS. 19,999

www.mymobileindia.com
FEBRUARY 2018 I 123
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
S6
5.5/ 720 x 1280
151.9 x 74.6 x 6.9
147
MT6753T  /3GB
Android 5.1.1
32GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,150
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November, 2015
19,999
Desire 825
5.5/ 1280 x 720
156.9 x 76.9 x 7.4
155
QS 400/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/2TB
13MP/5MP
2,700
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
February, 2016
12,550
HTC 10 Lifestyle
5.5/1920x1080
156.9x76.9x7.7
155
QS 400/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/2TB
13MP/5MP
2,700
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
September,2016
15,990
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Desire 728 LTE
5.5/ 720 x 1280
157.9 x 77.8 x 7.8
153
MT6753/2GB
Android 5.1.1
16GB/200GB
13MP/5MP
2,800
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November, 2015
12,999
Marathon M5 
5.5/ 720 x 1280
152 x 76 x 8.6
211
MT6735/3GB
Android 5.1
32GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
6,020
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November,2015
17,500
Desire 828
5.5/720 x 1280
157.9 x 77.8 x 7.89 
148
MT6753/1.5GB
Android 5.1
16GB/2TB
13MP/5MP
2,800
Yes/Yes/No
Yes
Yes/Yes
November, 2015
15,300
S6s
5.5/1920x1080
154.5x75.6x8.15
166
Android 6.0
32gb/128gb
13MP/8MP
3,159
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August,2016
17, 999
GIONEE
HTC
RS. 15,000 – RS. 19,999
RS. 15,000 – RS. 19,999
RS. 15,000 – RS. 19,999
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Vibe Shot
5.0/1080 x 1920
142.7 x 70 x 7.6
145
QS 615/3GB
Android 5.1
32GB/128GB
16MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2015
18,500
Earth 2
5/1920x1080
142x76x7.9
140
QS 615/3GB
Android 5.1
32GB/64GB
13MP/13MP
2500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
19,999
Moto X Play
5.5/1080 x 1920
148 x 75 x 10.9 
169
QS615 /2GB
Android 5.1.1
16GB,32GB/128GB
21MP/5MP
3,630
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
Sept, 2015
15,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Z2 Plus
5/1920x1080
140.2x60x6.2
150
QS 820/3GB,4GB
Android 6.0
32GB,64GB/128GB
13MP/8MP
3,500
Yes/Yes/yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
September,2016
19,999
Vibe P1
5.5/1080x1920
152.9 x 75.6 x 9.9 
187
QS615 /2GB
Android 5.1
32GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
5,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
October, 2015
15,499
Earth 1
5.5/1080x1920
154 x 76.6 x 7.25
162.5. 
QS 615/3GB
Android 5.1.1
32GB/32GB
13MP + 2MP/5MP
3,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
January, 2016
19,499
Vibe X3
5.5/1080x1920
154 x 76.5 x 9.3
175
QS 808 /3GB
Android 5.1
32GB/128GB
21MP/8MP
3,500
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
December, 2015
19,999
LENOVO
LYF 
MOTOROLA
1.3GHZ OCTA
CORE/3GB
RS. 15,000 – RS. 19,999
RS. 15,000 – RS. 19,999
RS. 15,000 – RS. 19,999

124 I FEBRUARY 2018
MYMOBILE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
F1 S
5.5/1280x720
154 x 76 x 7.38
160
MTK 6750/3GB
Android 5.1.1
32GB/128GB
13MP/16MP
3,075
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
August, 2016
16,444
J7 Prime
5.5/1920x1080
151.7x75x8
167
Octa-core/3GB
Android 6.0
16MP/256GB
13MP/8MP
3,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
September,2016
14,900
J7 Max
5.7/1920x1080
151.7x75x8.1
167
Android 7.0
4GB/32GB
13MP/13MP
3,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
July, 2017
17,290
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Galaxy On8
5.5/1920x1080
151.7x76x7.8
169
Octa-core/3GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,300
Yes/yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/yes
September,2016
12,090
Robin
5.2/ 1080 x 1920
149 x 72 x 7
NA
QS 808/3GB
Android 6.0
13MP/5MP
2,680
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
May, 2016
19,999
On Nxt
5.5/1920x1080
151.7x75x8
167
Octa-core/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/256GB
13MP/8MP
3,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
October,2016
14,900
Galaxy J7 (2016)
5.5/1280x720
76 x 151 x 7.8
169
Exynos 7870/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
May, 2016
14,900
NEXTBIT
OPPO
SAMSUNG
RS. 15,000 – RS. 19,999
RS. 15,000 – RS. 19,999
RS. 15,000 – RS. 19,999
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
V5
5.5/1280x720
153.8x75.5x7.55
154
octa-core/4GB
Android 6.0
32GB/128GB
13MP/20MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November,2016
16,990
Zenfone 3
5.2,5.5/(1920x1080)
146.87 x 73.98 x 7.69
144
QS 625/3GB,4GB
Android 6.0
32GB,64GB/2TB
16MP/8MP
1
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes
August,2016
21,999/ 27,999
Zenfone 3 Ultra
6.8/(1920x1080)
186.4 x 93.9 x 6.8
233
QS 652/4GB
Android 6.0
64GB/128GB
23MP/8MP
4,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes
August, 2016
29,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
ZOPO SPEED 7 PLUS
5.5/ 1920 x 1080 
153.6 x 76.5 x 8.8
164
Octa-core /3GB
Android 5.1 
16 GB/64 GB
13 MP/5.0MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
NA
17,500
V3
5.0/1280×720
143.6 x 71 x 7.5
138
QS 616/3GB
Android 5.1
32GB/128GB
13MP/8MP
2,550
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
May, 2016
15,250
iPhone 5S
4.0/640 x 1136 
123.8 x 58.6 x 7.6
112
Dual-core/1GB
iOS 9.2.1
16GB,32GB,64GB/No
8MP/1.2MP
1,560
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
September, 2013
19,280 onwards
MIMax 2
6.44/1080 x 1920
174.1 x 88.7 x 7.6
211
QS 625/4GB
Android 7.1.1
64/128GB
12/5MP
5,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August, 2017
16,999
VIVO
XIAOMI
ZOPO
APPLE
ASUS
OCTA-CORE
MEDIATEK
32GB/ 100GB
(ONLINE)
RS. 15,000 – RS. 19,999
RS. 15,000 – RS. 19,999
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999

www.mymobileindia.com
FEBRUARY 2018 I 125
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Max
5.5/1920x1080
152x75.5x7.6
170
QS 617/4GB
Android 5.1
64GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
2,800
yes/yes/yes
yes
yes
May, 2016
24,999
X9
5.5/ 1080 x 1920
153.9 x 75.9 x 7.99
170
MT H X10/ 3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/2TB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
May, 2016
25,990
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
S6 Pro
5.5/1920x1080
153x75.3x7.6
170
octa-core/4GB
Android 6.0
64GB/256GB
13MP/8MP
3,130
Yes/Yes/yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
October,2016
21,130
DTEK 50
5.2/1920x1080
147x72.5x7.4
135
QS 617/3GB
Android 6.0
16GB/2TB
13MP/8MP
3000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
November,2016
21,000
Honor 8
5.2/1920x1080
145.5x71x7.45
153
Kirin 950/4GB
Android 6.0
32GB/128GB
12MP,12MP/8MP
2,900
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
October, 2016
29,000
Honor 7
5.2/1080 x 1920
143.2 x 71.9 x 8.5
157
HS Kirin 935/3GB
Android 5.0
16GB/128GB
20MP/8MP
3,100
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
July, 2015
22,999
M5 Plus
6.0/1920 x 1080
-
210.8g
Octa Core/3GB
Android 5.1
64GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
5,020
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
May, 2016
27,000
BLACKBERRY
COOLPAD
HONOR
HTC
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Stylus 2
5.7/1280X720
155 x 79.6 x 7.4
145
Quad Core /2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/2TB
13MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes
May,2016
20,500
X4  
5.2/1080x1920
148.4x73.4x8
163
QS630/3GB
Android 7.1
32GB/64GB/256GB
12+8MP/16MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
October, 2017
20,990
Z 2 Play
5.5/1920X1080
156.2X76.2X5.99
145
QS 626/4GB
Android 7.1.1
64GB/2TB
12MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
July, 2017
24,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Nexus 5X
5.2/ 1080 x 1920 
147 x 72.6 x 7.9
136
QS 808/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB,32GB/No
12.3MP/5MP
2,700
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
October, 2015
24,490/30,645
Desire 10 Pro
5.5/1920x1080
156.5x76x7.86
165
Helio P10/4GB
Android 6.0
64GB/2TB
20MP/13MP
3000
Yes/Yes/yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November,2016
26,490
Moto Z Play
5.5/1920x1080
156.4x76.4x6.99
165
QS 625/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/2TB
16MP/5MP
3,510
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
October,2016
20,490
Stylus 2 Plus
5.7/ 1920 x 1080
155 X 79.6 X 7.4
146
Octa Core/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/2TB
16MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
July, 2016
24,000
HTC
LG
MOTOROLA
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
GIONEE

126 I FEBRUARY 2018
MYMOBILE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Z11 
5.5/1920z1080
151.8x72.3x7.5
162
QS 820/6GB
Android 6.0
64GB/2TB
16MP/8MP
3000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
December,2016
29,999
5T 
6.01/1080x2160
156.1x75x7.3
162
QS835/6GB
Android 7.1.1
64GB/128GB
16+20MP/16MP
3300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes/No
November, 2017
32,999
Galaxy A7
5.5/1080 x 1920
151 x 76.2 x 6.3 
141
Octa Core/2GB
Android 5.0.2
16GB/64GB
13MP/5MP
2,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
February, 2015
22,900
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
3T
5.5/1920x1080
152.7x74.5x7.35
158
QS 821/6GB
Android 6.0
64GB
16MP/16MP
3400
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
December.2016
22,000
Moto X Style
5.7/ 1440 x 2560
153.9 x 76.2 x 11.06
179
QS 808/3GB
Android 6.0
16GB,32GB/128GB
21MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
September, 2015
26,999/ 28,999
OnePlus 5
5.5/1080 x 1920
154.2 x 74.1 x 7.3
153
QS 835/8GB
Android 7.1.1
64GB
16MP/16MP
3,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes/Yes
June, 2017
32,999
2
5.5/1080p
151.8x74.9x9.85
175
QS 810/3GB&4GB
Android 5.1
64GB
13MP/5MP
3,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
July, 2015
22,999
MOTOROLA
NUBIA
ONEPLUS
SAMSUNG
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Galaxy A7 (2016)
5.5/ 1080 x 1920
151.5 x 74.1 x 7.3
169
Octa Core/3GB
Android 5.1.1
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
3,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
December, 2015
25,900
Xperia C4
5.5/1080 x 1920
150.3 x 77.4 x 7.9
147
MT6752/2GB
Android 5.0
16GB/200GB
13MP/5MP
2,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2015
20,800
Xperia XA
5.0/1280 x 720
143.6 x 66.8 x 7.9
137
MTK H P10/2GB
Android 6.0
16GB/200GB
13MP/5MP
2,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
May, 2016
20,990
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
J7 Pro
5.5/1920X1080
150.3 x 77.4 x 7.8
157
Android 7.0
64GB
13MP/13MP
3,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
July, 2017
20,900
Galaxy A5 (2016)
5.2/1080 x 1920
144.8 x 71 x 7.3
153
Octa Core/2GB
Android 5.1.1
16GB/128GB
13MP/5MP
2,900
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
April, 2016
21,900
t phone
5.5/1920x1080
158.2x78.2x6.98
149
QS 810/4GB
Android 6.0
64GB/128GB
13MP/4MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes/yYes
July,2016
22,999
Galaxy A5/A7 (2017)
5.2/5.5/1080X1920
157/I86
Android 6.0
32GB/256GB
3000/3600
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
March, 2017
28,990/33,490
SAMSUNG
SMARTRON
SONY
16MP/16MP/16MP/
16MP
Octa Core/2GB/3GB
144.8 x 71 x 7.3/
151.5X74.1X7.3
Octa core
Exynos/3GB
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999

www.mymobileindia.com
FEBRUARY 2018 I 127
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Xperia C5 Ultra Dual
6.0/1080 x 1920
164.2 x 79.6 x 8.2
187
MTK6752/2GB
Android 5.1
16GB/200GB
13MP/13MP
2,930
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August, 2015
27,799
VIVO V5 Plus
5.5/1080X1920
152.6 x 74 x 7.3
159
QS 652/4GB
Android 6.0
64GB
3,160
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes 
42,736
22,990
V7 Plus 
5.99/720x1440
155.9x75.8x7.7
160
QS450/4GB
Android 7.1.2
64GB/256GB
16MP/24MP
3,225
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
September, 2017
21,990
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
X5 Pro
5.2/ 1080 x 1920
147.9 x 73.5 x 6.4
151
QS 615/2GB
Android 5.0
16GB/128GB
13MP/8MP
2,450
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
June, 2015
21,400
Xperia Z3+
5.2/ 1080 x 1920
146.3 x 71.9 x 6.9
144
QS 810 /3GB
Android 5.0 
32GB/128GB
20.7MP/5MP
2,930
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
June, 2015
26,990
V3 Max
5.5/1080 x 1920
153.9x77.1x7.58
168
QS 652/4GB
Android 5.1
32GB/128GB
13MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
April, 2016
23,980
Mi 5
5.15/1080 x 1920
144.5 x 69.2 x 7.25
129
QS 820/3GB
Android 6.0 
32GB/No
16MP/4MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
April, 2016
24,999
SONY
XIAOMI
VIVO
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
iPhone 6Plus
5.5/1080 x 1920
158.1 x 77.8 x 7.1
172
A8,M8/1GB
iOS 9
16GB,64GB/No
8MP/1.2MP
2,915
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
September,2014
24,999 onwards
iPhone 7
4.7/1334x750
138.3x67.1x7.1
138
iOS 10
32GB/128GB/256GB
12MP/7MP
1,960
Yes/yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
October,2016
45,775 omwards
iPhone 7 Plus
5.5/1920x1080
158.2x77.9x7.3
188
iOS 10
32GB/128GB/256GB
12MP,12MP/7MP
2,900
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
0ctober,2016
59,999 onwards
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
iPhone 6S
4.7/750 x 1334 
138.3 x 67.1 x 7.1
143
A9,M9/2GB
iOS 9
16GB,64GB,128GB/ No
12MP/5MP
1,715
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
September,2015
39,990 onwards
iPhone 6
4.7/750 x 1334
138.1 x 67 x 6.9 
129
A8,M8/1GB
iOS 9
16GB,64GB/No
8MP/1.2MP
1,810
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
September,2014
23,999
iPhone 6S Plus
5.5/1080 x 1920 
158.2 x 77.9 x 7.3
192
A9,M9/2GB
iOS 9
16GB,64GB,128GB/ No
12MP/5MP
2,750
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
September,2015
48,998 onwards
iPhone SE
4.0/640 x 1136 
123.8 x 58.6 x 7.6
113
A9,M9/2GB
iOS 9.3
16GB,64GB/No
12MP/1.2MP
1,614
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
March, 2016
24,000 onwards
APPLE
12MP and 8MP/
16 MP
A10 Fusion,
M10/2GB
A10Fusion,
M10/3GB
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999
RS. 20,000 – RS. 29,999

Zenfone 3 Deluxe
5.7/(1920x1080)
156.4x74.4x7.5
172
QS 820,821/6GB
Android 6.0
256GB/128GB
23MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes
September,2016
25,999
128 I FEBRUARY 2018
MYMOBILE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
8 Plus 
5.5/1080x1920
158.4 x 78.1 x 7.5
200
A11 Bionic
iOS 11
3GB/64GB/256GB 
12MP/12MP/7MP
2,691
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
September, 2017
70,800
DTEK 60
5.5/2560x1440
153.9x75.4x7
165
QS 820/4GB
Android 6.0
32GB/2TB
21MP/8MP
2,610
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
November,2016
29,999
KEYone
4.5/1080 x 1620
149.1 x 72.4 x 9.4
180
QS625/3GB/4GB
Android 7.1
32GB/64GB/256GB
12MP/8MP
3,505
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
August, 2017
39,990
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
8 
4.7/750 x 1334
138.4 x 67.3 x 7.3
148
A11 Bionic
iOS 11
2GB/64GB/256GB 
12MP/7MP
1,821
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
September, 2017
61,990
ZenFone AR
5.7/1440x2560
158.7 x 77.7 x 9
170
QS 821/8GB
Android 7.0
64/256GB
23MP/8MP
3,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes 
Yes
August, 2017
49,990
Zenfone Zoom
5.5/1080 x 1920
158.9 x 78.8 x 11.95
185
IA Z3590/4GB
Android 5.0
128GB/ 128GB
13MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
January, 2016
26,999
APPLE
ASUS
BLACKBERRY
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
10
5.2/ 2560X1440
145.9 x 71.9x 9.0
161
QS 820/4GB
android 6.0
32GB/2TB
12MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
May,2016
34,999
HTC  U Play/Ultra
162.41X79.79X7.99
145/175
MediaTek/QS821
Android 6/Android 7
2500/3000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
February, 2017
29,999/53,999
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
P9
5.2/1920x1080
145x70.9x6.95
144
Kirin 955/3GB,4GB
Android 6.0
32GB,64GB,/128GB
12MP,12MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
August,2016
39,999
Pixel 2
5/1920x1080
145.7x69.7x7.8
143
QS835/4GB
Android 8.0
64GB/128GB
12.2MP/8MP
2,700
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
October, 2017
61,000
One A9
5.0/1080 x 1920 
145.75 x 70.8 x 7.26
143
QS 617/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/2TB
13MP/4MP
2,150
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
December, 2015
25,990
Nexus 6P
5.7/1440 x 2560
159.3 x 77.8 x 7.3
178
QS810 /3GB
Android 6.0
32GB,64GB/No
12.3MP/8MP
3,450
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
October, 2015
34,999/ 39,999
GOOGLE
HUAWEI
HTC
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
Pixel 2 XL
6/1440X2880
157.9x76.7x7.9
175
QS835/4GB
Android 8.0
64GB/128GB
12.2MP/8MP
2,700
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
October, 2017
81,000
16MP/16MP/16MP/
12MP
32GB/256GB/64GB/
2TB
5.2/1080X1920/
5.7/2560X1440

www.mymobileindia.com
FEBRUARY 2018 I 129
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Galaxy S6 Edge
5.1/ 1440 x 2560
142.1 x 70.1 x 7
132
Octa core /3GB
Android 5.0.2
32GB/No
16MP/5MP
2,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
April, 2015
34,900
Galaxy S7 Edge
5.5/2560 X 1440
72.6 x 150.9 x 7.7
157
Exynos 8890/4GB
Android 6.0
32GB/200GB
12MP/5MP
3,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
March, 2016
38,900
Galaxy S8/Plus
5.8/6.2/2960X1440
155/173
Exynos 8896
Android 7.0
64/256GB
12MP/8MP
3000/3500
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes
April, 2017
53,00/58,900
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
5.7/1440 x 2560
153.2 x 76.1 x 7.6
171
Quad core /4GB
Android 5.1.1 
32GB/No
16MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
August, 2015
40,900/43,900
Galaxy S6
5.1/ 1440 x 2560
143.4 x 70.5 x 6.8
138
Octa core /3GB
Android 5.0.2
32GB,/No
16MP/5MP
2,550
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
March, 2015
26,990
Galaxy S7
5.1/2560 X 1440
69.6x142.4x7.9
152
Exynos 8890/4GB
Android 6.0
32GB/200GB
12MP/5MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
March, 2016
32,900
Galaxy A9 Pro
6/1920x1080
161.7x80.9x7.9
210
octa-core/4GB
Android 6.0
32GB/256GB
16MP/8MP
5,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
September,2016
32,490
SAMSUNG
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
G4 Dual SIM
5.5/1440 x 2560
148.9 x 76.1 x 8.9
155
QS 808 /3GB
Android 5.1
32GB/2TB
16MP/8MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
May, 2015
34,800
Moto Z
5.5/2560x1440
153.3x75.3x5.19
136
QS 820/4GB
Android 6.0
64GB/2TB
13MP/5MP
2,600
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
October,2016
39,999
3T
5.5/1920x1080
152.7x74.5x7.35
158
QS 821/6GB
Android 6.0
128GB
16MP/16MP
3,400
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
December.2016
25,990
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
V20
5.7/2560x1440
159.5x77.9x7.6
174
QS 820/4GB
Android 7.0
64GB/2TB
16MP,8MP/5MP
3,200
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
December,2016
54,999
HTC U11
5.5/2560X1440
153.9 x 75.9 x 7.9
169
QS 835
Android 7.0
64GB/128GB
16MO/12MP
3,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
July, 2017
47,999
Moto X Force
5.4/1440 x 2560 
149.8 x 78 x 9.2
169
QS 810 /3GB
Android 5.1.1
32GB,64GB/2TB
21MP/5MP
3,760
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/Yes
November, 2015
25,990
G5
5.3/ 2560x1440
149.4x73.9x7.3
159
QS 820/4GB
Android 6.0
32GB/100GB
16MP/8MP
2,800
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
April,2016
25,999 onwards
HTC
LG
MOTOROLA
ONEPLUS
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
Galaxy Note 5
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
148.9 x 68.1 x
8.0/159.5 x 73.4 x 8.1

130 I FEBRUARY 2018
MYMOBILE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
Xperia Z5 Dual
5.2/1080 x 1920
146 x 72 x 7.3 
156.5g
QS 810/3GB
Android 5.1
32GB/200GB
23MP/5MP
2,900
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
November, 2015
37,000
iPad Mini 2
7.9/1536 x 2048
200 x 134.7 x 7.5
331
A7,M7/1GB
iOS 8
16,32GB/No
5MP/1.2MP
23.8w
Yes/Yes/No
No
Yes/No
November, 2015
28,460 onwards
iPad Mini 4
7.9/1536 x 2048
203.2 x 134.8 x 6.1
298.8/304
A8,M8/2GB
iOS 9
16GB,64GB,128GB/No
8MP/1.2MP
19.1W
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
Spetember, 2015
44,500
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
Note 8 
6.3/1440 x 2960
162.5 x 74.8 x 8.6
195
Exynos 8895/6GB
Android 7.1.1
64GB/128GB/256GB
12MP/12MP/8MP
3,300
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/No
September, 2017
67,900
Xperia XZ
5.2/1920x1080
146x72x8.1
161
QS 820/3GB
Android 6.0
64GB/256GB
23MP/13MP
2,900
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
October,2016
49,990
SAMSUNG
SONY
APPLE
MYGUIDE
Model
Display (inches/res)
Dimension (mm)
Weight (grams)
Processor/RAM
Operating system
Storage/Expandable
Rear/Front Camera
Battery (mAh)
2G/3G/4G
Dual SIM
Music Player/FM
Launch
Price Rs.
9.7/1536 x 2048
240 x 169.5 x 6.1
1
A9X,M9/2GB
iOS 9.3
12MP/5MP
27.9 W
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
March, 2016
Galaxy Tab S3 9.7
9.7/ 1536 x 2048
237.3 x 169 x 6
429
QS 820/3GB
Android 7.0
32GB/256GB
13MP/5MP
6,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
June, 2017
47,990
Tab A 
8/800 x 1280
212.1 x 124.1 x 8.9
364
QS425/2GB
Android 7.1
16GB/256GB
8MP/5MP
5,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
October, 2017
17,990
M O D E L S
PARAMETERS
ZenPad 8
8.0/1280 x 800
209 x 123 x 8.5
350
QS MSM8929/2GB
Android 5.0
16GB/-
8MP/2MP
4,000
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
July, 2015
12,496
iPad Air 2 with Wi-Fi
9.7/2048x1536
240 x 169.5 x 6.1
437
A8X,M8/1GB
iOS 9
16GB, 64GB/No
8MP/1.2MP
27.3W
-
No
Yes/No
October, 2014
38,000
LapTab
10.1/1280X800
259.2 x 175.4 x 9.2
1.1kg
Intel 4 Gen/2GB
Windows 10
32GB/64GB
2MP/2MP
7,700
Yes/Yes/Yes
No
Yes/No
2,015
10,999
12.9/2732 x 2048
305.7 x 220.6 x 6.9
713/ 723
"A9X,M9 /4GB"
iOS 9
32GB/No
8MP/1.2MP
38.5W
-
No
Yes/No
November, 2015
APPLE
ASUS
MICROMAX 
SAMSUNG
TABLETS
TABLETS
TABLETS
iPad Pro 9.7-inch
WiFi/ Wi-Fi + Cellular
iPad Pro 12.9-inch
WiFi/ WiFi + Cellular
Xperia X
5/1920x1080
143 x 69 x 7.7
152
QS 650/ 3GB
Android 6.0
64GB/ 200GB
23MP/13MP
2,620
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/-
July, 2016
38,990
Xperia Z5 Premium
5.5/ 2160 x 3840
154.4 x 76 x 7.8 
181
QS 810/3GB
Android 6.0
32GB/200GB
23MP/5MP
3,430
Yes/Yes/Yes
Yes
Yes/Yes
November, 2015
47,990
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
RS. 30,000 AND ABOVE
32GB,128GB,256GB/
No
49,900 Onwards/
61,900 onwards
65,900 nwards/
85,900 onwards
TABLETS

Specialfeature
Worthy Picks
www.mymobileindia.com
         Best Smartphones 
Under       K!
T
he year 2017 witnessed a massive revolution in the global smartphone market, which displayed 
tons of smartphones with sophisticated features in various price segments. Smartphones under Rs 
10,000 are mostly in demand as they cater to the requirements of budget-centric customers. With 
a huge number of handsets being launched in this price segment, it often leaves the people confused in 
choosing a better device. My Mobile’s exclusive selection of budget smartphones will help you choose the 
better with reasonable certainty!
L
aunched in the second half of 2017, the smartphone is 
backed by a Qualcomm Snapdragon 630It SoC coupled 
with a 4GB RAM. Along with a resolution of 1080 pixels by 
1920 pixels, the handset features a 5.50-inch display and is 
equipped with a 64GB ROM that can be expanded upto 
200GB. For photography, the phone sports an 8MP selfie 
shooter and a dual 12 MP primary camera (f/1.8, 25mm, 
1/2.55”, 1.4 µm, OIS, Dual Pixel PDAF). n
T
he phone was unleashed in India in September 
2017. It appears with a 5.20-inch display 
coupled with a resolution of 720 pixels by 1280 
pixels. iVoomi Me 3s is backed by a  quad-core 
MediaTek MT6737 chipset. Packed with a 3GB 
RAM, the phone features a 32GB inbuilt storage 
that can be increased upto 128GB through 
external microSD card. It sports an 8MP selfie 
shooter and 13MP primary camera.  n
ASUS Zenfone 4
iVoomi Me 3s
Price: INR 9,999
Price: INR 7,800
10
10
By Nijhum Rudra
FeBRuARy 2018 | 131

132 | FeBRuARy 2018
Worthy Picks
Special feature 
T
he Lenovo K6 Power sports a 13MP primary camera and an 
8MP selfie sensor for impeccable photography. Along with a 
3GB RAM, the phone is backed by 1.4GHz octa-core Qualcomm 
Snapdragon 430 chipset. The device is powered by a 4000mAh 
battery and operates on Android 6.0.1. The dual SIM (GSM and 
GSM) smartphone sports an 8MP selfie sensor and a 13MP 
primary sensor.  n
T
he Moto C operates on Android 7.0 and is backed by a 
2350mAh removable battery. The phone features a 5.00-
inch display and is powered by a 1.1GHz quad-core MediaTek 
MT6737M chipset. It sports a 2MP selfie shooter and a 5MP 
rear camera. Along with a 1GB RAM phone is equipped with 
a 16GB ROM that can be increased till 32GB.  n
L
aunched in August 2017, the phone is powered by a 1.4GHz 
quad-core Qualcomm Snapdragon 425 chipset and comes 
with a 3GB RAM. It sports a 16MP selfie shooter and a 13MP 
rear camera for photography. The phone is powered by a 2900mAh 
battery and operates on Android 7.1.2 OS. The 32GB inbuilt 
storage phone can be increased upto 128GB through external 
memory card.  n
F
or optics, the phone sports a 5MP selfie shooter and a 13MP 
rear camera. It is powered by a large 5000mAh battery and is 
backed by a 1.3GHz quad-core MediaTek MTK6737M chipset. 
Coupled with a 3GB RAM the device has an inbuilt storage of 32GB 
that can be expanded upto 128GB. It operates on Android 7.1.1 
OS and features a a 5.50-inch touchscreen display.  n
Lenovo K6 Power
Motorola C
Micromax Canvas Infinity
Motorola E4 Plus
Price: INR 8,949 (32GB)
Price: INR 5,099 (16GB)
Price: INR 9,999 (32GB)
Price: INR 9,048 (32GB)

FeBRuARy 2018 | 133
Specialfeature
Worthy Picks
www.mymobileindia.com
P
owered by a large 4100mAh battery the phone is also 
backed by a 1.4GHz octa-core Qualcomm Snapdragon 435 
chipset. It appears in three variants of RAM 2GB/3GB/4GB. The 
phone sports a 5MP selfie shooter coupled with f/2.2 aperture 
and a 13MP primary camera with f/2.0 aperture, PDAF, and 
LeD flash.  n
T
his Samsung budget smartphone features 5.7” (14.48 cm) 
display coupled with a resolution of Full HD (1080 x 1920 
pixels). For optics, the phone sports a 13MP primary camera and 
a 5MP front shooter for selfies. It is powered by a 3000mAh 
removable battery and backed by 1.2GHz quad-core processor 
along with a 2GB RAM. The smartphone operates on  Android 
6.0 OS and the connectivity options include Wi-Fi, GPS, 
Bluetooth, FM, 3G and 4G (with support for Band 40 used by 
some LTe networks in India).   n
T
he smartphone 
features a 5-inch HD 
(720x1280 pixels) display 
with a pixel density of 296ppi. 
It is backed by a Snapdragon 
425 processor that is clocked at 
up to 1.4GHz, along with with 2GB 
or 3GB of RAM. For optics, the phone 
boosts a 13MP primary camera and a 
5MP selfie sensor with an f/2.0 aperture. The uSP of the 
phone is its ‘8-day battery life’ that is powered by 3000mAh 
battery with 5V/1A charging. n
C
oupled with a 4GB RAM the phone is backed by a 1.4GHz 
octa-core Qualcomm Snapdragon 430 chipset. It sports an 
8MP selfie shooter and a 13MP primary camera. The 32GB inbuilt 
storage phone can be expanded upto 64GB. It appears with a 
5.00-inch display coupled with a resolution of 1080 pixels by 
1920 pixels.    n
Xiaomi Redmi 4
Samsung Galaxy On7 Pro
Xiaomi 
Redmi 5A
Yu Yureka Black
nijhum@mymobile.co.in 
Price: INR 7,490
Price: INR 4,999
Price: INR 6,999 (16GB)
Price: INR 8,999 (32GB)

134 | february 2018
MYMOBILE
Games
Special feature
J
etSynthesys, a leading digital entertainment and gaming 
company, has unveiled “Where’s my Kitty Cat?” -  a mobile 
game for iOS users, especially for those  who are cat lovers 
and puzzle enthusiasts. This exciting and quirky game 
promises to fulfill the players’ fun quotient as they try to find KITTy, 
the naughtiest cat ever! Kitty could be anywhere, hiding under cars, 
over the dining table, in the bath tub, on the neighbour’s porch, 
in the fish market; the world is her playground. The player needs 
to use the hints given and logic to solve the different puzzles and 
find Kitty.
In “Where’s my Kitty Cat?”, the player will have his/her own cat 
who needs to be found through various adventures and collect toys 
for her to play with along the way. This intellectually challenging 
yet fun game is now available on iOS. 
On the occasion of this launch roopak Nair, Vice-President, 
Product and Marketing, JetSynthesyssaid, “after the successful 
run of our sports and bollywood games, we now tap into a more 
casual gaming audience with the launch of our newest game, 
“Where’s my Kitty Cat?”. We are confident that this new game will 
resonate with avid gamers looking for a fun experience, inspiring 
us to continue experimenting and developing vibrant and exciting 
games for everyone.”
This sweet little cat has the power to steal everybody’s heart and 
she will definitely become the player’s favourite friend.
Key Features:
• 160+ levels 
• Explore unique locations 
• Enjoy unpredictable moments
few words must be said about JetSynthesys, a company which 
had carved a niche for itself in the arena digital entertainment 
and gaming. In India, the company has innovated and pioneered 
celebrity gaming successfully with a catalogue of over 300 exciting 
games across HTML, Java, android and iOS platforms featuring 
eminent stars like Salman Khan, Sachin Tendulkar and others. 
Headquartered in Pune and with offices in europe, uK, uS and 
India, JetSynthesys is equipped with the best in class technical 
and creative talent, striving to create and connect worlds. Through 
its diversified business divisions across gaming, music, digital 
& social entertainment, celebrity video blogging, aI & machine 
learning technologies, the company aims to digitally connect 
celebrities, brands and consumers and drive user engagement 
and monetization through personalization. n
Where’s my Kitty Cat?
The latest mobile game from the stable of JetSynthesys promises good fun especially 
for cat lovers and puzzle enthusiasts!
team@mymobile.co.in 

february 2018 | 135
face to face
www.mymobileindia.com
How will the concept of smart video change the 
way consumers are influenced? Consumers 
do not have much choice when it comes to 
video content. The control lies on the supply 
end. The content is viewed the same way the 
vertical content provider wants the viewer to 
watch it. Hence, VideoTap is a highly useful 
for the viewers to have a total control over 
the content to be viewed. Suppose, if you 
are watching a movie for the first time, it 
is better you watch it linearly. However, the 
consumption is high for the non original 
viewing such as compilations, trivia and 
other types of videos for which VideoTap is 
highly relevant.
What will be the biggest differentiating aspect of 
VideoTap? VideoTap’s biggest differentiating 
aspects are that it is dynamic and personal. 
also, we have a unique cloud based video 
tagging, curating and authoring software, 
Design room, which will help producers to 
curate their uploaded video content, create 
‘smart videos’ and publish them. With 
Design room a Publisher is able to convert 
an existing video into an ‘interactive smart 
video’.
What all smart video has to offer for the 
advertising industry? In the advertising 
industry, smart video has such a great 
impact that the viewers see it without 
realizing. Normally, for advertising, viewers 
have eight features on video platforms and 
since there are only 30 seconds, the ad 
agency needs to decide one aspect to focus 
on when that message gets delivered into 
30 seconds.
for a sophisticated product like a luxury 
car, different features appeal different 
people but there is restriction in terms of 
content. In case of VideoTap, it adapts 
itself based on the interactive inputs from 
the user and there is much greater impact 
as the right audience receives the relevant 
message. Hence, it is beneficial for the 
customer as well as for the advertiser. for a 
bMW product manager, real time feedback 
can be generated in terms of which content 
is relevant for which kind of audience. for 
anyone who is interested in bMW 7 series, 
a 30 sec ad is available for the view and 
the same ad is shown to someone who isn’t 
interested.
On VideoTap, ad takes you deeper into 
the categorization. Therefore, it can expand 
to occupy the attention for a longer time 
span and do not restrict the viewer to the 
30 sec ad so if you keep on clicking the ad 
will go on for more than 30 secs. Hence, in 
effect, what we do is instead of serving a 
video as an ad we are serving a website as 
an advertisement.
Could you please reflect upon some of the 
big changes that would be ushered by smart 
video in marketing and advertising industry? 
firstly, there will be huge amount of 
analytics available for the advertisers as 
they can get important data about the kind 
of audiences watching certain categories 
of the content. When advertisers map that 
portion of the video content to the whole 
content of the video, then it is much easier 
to understand which portion of the video 
is working with the target audience. When 
mapped messaging against the content, 
advertisers will understand which portion of 
the messaging is effective and which type 
of triggers work with their target audience. 
With the feedback questions feature, 
available on VideoTap, advertising is now, 
a two way communication.
What are your service roll-out plans? In next 
few months, we will enter in India as our first 
market as a consumer viewership platform 
and in further few months, we plan to enter 
the uS market.
What will be your marketing strategies? as 
VideoTap is a b2b as well as a b2C brand 
we are considering targeted advertising and 
we are also going to use Public relations 
as a tool for building the brand and taking 
in consideration the government initiatives, 
such as Make in India, Digital India and 
Start up India. We think we are a global 
company, so we will be expanding very soon 
to the other parts of the globe. n            
nijhum@mymobile.co.in
“We want to build a booming ‘Interactive Smart 
Video’ Ecosystem platform in India”
VideoTap is an ‘Interactive Smart Video’ ecosystem which is built to deliver the smart video 
experience seamlessly across connected devices and at scale. Nijhum Rudra spoke to Dilip 
Venkatraman, Founder and CEO, VideoTap, as to how personalized video concept will 
change the way consumers are influenced these days.
In  Conversation

add-ons
136 | february 2018
Gadget Corner
HGD 2A Charger   
Known for its lower 
energy consumption and 
high efficiency
T
his 2a charger is a benchmark product of HGD 
India which has passed through 6-layer quality 
checks. each and every component incorporated is of 
well tested standards, with bIS & ISO certification. 
because of this quality standards and high durability, 
it’s the first preference of some of the biggest players 
of market like Lava, Xolo, Celkon, Intex, Infocus, 
blapunkt, itel, Swipe, Lemon etc. This charger is 
well known for its lower energy consumption and high 
efficiency, a complete value for money product. The 
charger promises to keep your device always boosted 
with power. It is very light weight and smaller in size, 
and has passed through different tests such as, long-
time charging test, input overvoltage test, temperature/
humidity test, salt spray test, drop test, vibration 
measurement, high temperature test, insertion force 
test, interface insert force & output test and ageing 
test. When it comes to performance, you can trust this 
product without any second thought. Moreover, this 
product is also environment friendly. n
W
orking-out or enjoying a sport but struggling to 
find the right pair of earphones? PTron, a fast-
emerging audio brand creating waves among millennials, 
has come up with ergonomically designed earphones that 
snugly fit into your ears. The high-quality output of dual 
drivers would make you want to keep the earphones on, 
all day long.
PTron has launched the boom 4D sports earphones to 
enhance listening experience of millennials and Gen Z with 
exceptional sound quality. The in-ear stereo earphones 
incorporate a host of other engineering refinements too. 
The earplugs are ergonomically designed to fit into the 
ear and keep the users comfortable even as they enjoy 
music for extended durations of time. 
Latest as they are with technology, the PTron boom 
4D earphones are high on fashion as well. With three 
vibrant colour combinations – red/black, gold/black & 
silver/white – consumers can pick one that suits their 
style statement.
Launched on LatestOne.com, the PTron boom 4D 
sports earphones can also be ordered on e-commerce 
platforms such as flipkart and amazon alongside 
LatestOne.com. n
Price: INR 699
PTron Boom Dual Driver Earphones   
Experience the magic of sound like never before

www.mymobileindia.com
add-ons
february 2018 | 137
Acer Predator Galea 500 Gaming Headset & 
Cestus 500 Gaming Mouse   
Built to appeal hardcore gamers
S
etting new standards in the gaming feat, acer, one 
of the world’s leading gaming PC makers, recently 
unveiled Predator Galea 500 Gaming Headset and Cestus 
500 Gaming Mouse in India. engineered to make every 
minute of gaming real, the Galea 500 headset comes 
with acer TrueHarmony 3D Soundscape technology which 
offers an unparalleled surround sound experience, while 
the customizable design of Cestus 500 mouse is built 
to appeal hardcore gamers by giving precise control with 
host of customizable controls and ergonomic feel for long 
fatigue free gaming.
Predator Galea 500: The gaming headset puts you right 
inside the game, giving you the ability to hear every detail 
in surround sound within the game. acer TrueHarmony 
3D Soundscape technology recreates the acoustic space 
based on the orientation of the player’s head, giving the 
gamer a truly immersive feel. featuring a driver diaphragm 
made from bio-cellulose with rubber surround, the Predator 
Galea 500 headset delivers clear highs with resounding 
lows, and responds quickly to precisely reproduce vocals 
and mid-high range notes, while a unique acoustic cavity 
helps deliver punchy rhythmic bass. The headset offers 
customization, letting users select from three modes 
including eQ Music, Movie and Sport.
Predator Cestus 500: The gaming mouse features a 
unique dual switch design, which allows gamers to adjust 
the click resistance according to the game type they are 
playing, such as a lighter resistance for fPS games that 
demand a more nimble reaction, or a heavier resistance 
for fine maneuvers in rTS games. It features 16.8 million 
rGb Lighting with 8 lighting patterns, 5 on-board profile 
settings, 8 programmable buttons, and a gold-plated uSb 
connector with precision control to take gaming to the 
next level. Together with customizable side panels, an 
ambidextrous design, the Cestus 500 is one of the most 
customizable options for the gamers in India. n
Price: INR 12,999 (Predator Galea 500 
headset); INR 4,599 (Cestus 500 mouse)
Gadget Corner

Digitek Platinum Smartphone Cable Series  
Eco-friendly cables compatible for various devices
D
igitek, a market leader in photographic and 
smartphone accessories, has come up with its 
platinum smartphone cable series in India. The series 
includes HD lightning cable (DPC 1M LTC), Micro uSb 
HD cable (DPC IM Mu), Type C data cable (DPC IM C) 
& 3.5 mm auX cable (DPC 1.5M au). all the cables are 
eco-friendly as they meet eu environmental Protection 
Standard rOHS.
The tangle-free HD lightning (DPC 1M LTC), Micro uSb 
HD (DPC IM Mu) & Type C data (DPC IM C) cables are 
equipped with enhanced uSb 2.0 metallic connectors 
that allow a steady power supply & high-speed data 
transmission. The cables have been extensively tested and 
provide best in class performance to match the needs of the 
discerning users. These 1 meter long cables are compatible 
for various devices such as iPhones, android phones and 
Macbooks respectively.
The new DPC 1.5M au auX cable with standard plating 
3.5mm jack is composed from TPe and aluminum alloy 
shell, enabling the cable to be durable and wear resistant 
for a long-term use. The cable has a premium copper core 
for excellent audio signal transmission and offers wide 
compatibility with smartphones, tablets, mp3 players, car 
stereos, portable speaker, etc.
The HD lightning (DPC 1M LTC) & Type C data (DPC IM 
C) & Micro uSb HD (DPC IM Mu) cable are all available 
in black and Grey colours while auX cable (DPC 1.5M 
au) are available in White colour. These products can be 
purchased online from the various e-commerce platforms 
such as amazon, flipkart and Snapdeal. n
Price: INR 995 (DPC 1M LTC); 
INR 595 DPC IM C; 
INR 595 (DPC IM MU); 
INR 395 (DPC 1.5M AU)
138 | february 2018
MYMOBILE

Gadget Corner
www.mymobileindia.com
february 2018 | 139
add-ons
ViewSonic Frameless Design Monitor 
Enjoy a truly immersive visual entertainment experience
V
iewSonic Corp., a leading global provider of 
visual solution products, recently introduced 
theVX3276-2K-mhd, a 32” WQHD IPS Monitor 
with a stylish ultra-slim frameless design. users can 
now enjoy a truly immersive visual entertainment 
experience with the VX3276-2K-mhd. With this 
product, ViewSonic delivers a visually appealing 
design combined with efficiency and performance. 
The product features include a sizeable 32” 
frameless bezel, minimalist design, SuperClear 
IPS panel technology, flexible connectivity, low 
energy consumption and WQHD (2560 x 1440) 
resolution.
The VX3276-2K-mhd monitor has an 
architectural inspired design aesthetic combined 
with modern form factors such as an ultra-slim 
profile, modern frameless bezel, and unique 
triangle stand. Consumers can enjoy vivid, rich 
colour and consistent brightness with SuperClear 
IPS panel technology and WQHD (2560 x 1440) 
resolution. Guaranteeing detailed image quality 
no matter the vantage point. by utilizing 10-bit 
colour, theVX3276-2K-mhd is able to produce a 
colour palette of over one billion colours, resulting 
in richer, more vivid colour reproduction, smoother 
gradients, and a more natural transition between 
hues. also, with dual integrated the monitor stereo 
speakers give a powerful sound quality.
Moreover, users can use the View Mode feature 
that includes optimized Game, Movie, Web, 
Text, Mono, and Mac presets. each preset offers 
specialized enhancements to deliver optimal 
viewing experience for different applications. 
additionally, the monitor features flicker-free 
technology and a blue Light filter help to eliminate 
eye strain.  n
Price: INR 49,999

MYMOBILE
Gadget Corner
add-ons
140 | february 2018
Samsung Level In ANC Earphone    
Enjoy immersive music experience on-the-go
S
amsung recently introduced Level In aNC earphone 
in India, which features powerful active Noise 
Cancellation (aNC). The stylish and compact earphone 
comes with metal finish and provides an immersive 
music experience for consumers. With its powerful 
aNC technology and two-way speakers, the Level In 
aNC provides immersive music experience. rather 
than just drowning out ambient sounds around you, the 
Level In aNC actually picks up those external noises 
with two external microphones, analyzes them, and 
creates inverted sound waves to cancel out those noises, 
reducing the noise going into your ears. The active 
noise cancellation of Level In aNC is up to 90 per cent 
effective, reducing outside sounds by up to 20 db. 
The Level In aNC comes with ‘Talk in Mode’ 
functionality, enabling consumers to be cautious about 
the surrounding sounds. The ‘Talk in Mode’ allows 
certain ambient sounds to enter into the earphones 
without diluting the sound quality. It offers to be the 
ultimate choice for consumers, who regularly travel 
through noisy surroundings like airports, metro or other 
public spaces. With this, consumers will no longer have 
to stop listening to music, while jogging amid traffic or 
while riding in a metro. 
The Level In aNC’s sleek and sophisticated design 
comes paired with a slim remote control that lets you 
answer calls, adjust the volume, and pause/play and 
skips audio tracks easily, without having to constantly 
reach for your smartphone. It provides for a minimum 
of 10 hour stellar performance with active aNC. It 
resonates brilliantly with the audio requirements and 
style quotient of millennials, crafting an uninterrupted 
audio experience. It is available in retail stores across 
India in white and black colours. n
Price: INR 3,799

february 2018 | 135
www.mymobileindia.com
add-ons
Corsair Wireless Gaming 
Peripherals   
It’s time to Unplug and Play
C
orsair, a world leader in enthusiast memory, PC 
components and high-performance gaming hardware, 
recently announced a complete range of new performance 
wireless gaming peripherals. Powered by Corsair unplug 
and Play wireless technology, the K63 Wireless Mechanical 
Keyboard, K63 Wireless Gaming Lapboard, Dark Core rGb 
Wireless Gaming Mouse, and MM1000 Qi Wireless Charging 
Mouse Pad allow PC enthusiasts and gamers to experience 
wire-free gaming without compromise.
The new K63 Wireless mechanical gaming keyboard, a 
CeS 2018 Innovation award honoree, brings the quality, 
performance and reliability of Cherry MX red mechanical 
keyswitches to the wireless desktop. Connecting via a choice 
of ultra-fast 1ms 2.4GHz gaming-optimized wireless, low 
latency bluetooth wireless, or a wired uSb connection, the 
K63 Wireless instantly registers keystrokes and commands 
whatever you connect. With up to 75 hours of rechargeable 
battery life, the K63 Wireless has the stamina to outlast the 
longest gaming session. 
The new Corsair Dark Core rGb wireless gaming 
mouse offers the same flexible three-mode connectivity 
as K63 Wireless, bringing its 16,000 DPI optical sensor 
precision to your PC via ultra-fast 1ms 2.4GHz, low-latency 
bluetooth wireless or wired uSb connection. a contoured 
shape that’s supremely comfortable makes Dark Core rGb 
instantly at home in your hand, and can be customized 
using two interchangeable magnetic side grips to provide a 
tailored fit for almost 
any gamer. 
The Dark Core rGb Se adds 
Qi wireless charging support, pairing 
perfectly with the all-new Corsair MM1000 Qi 
wireless charging mousepad for a truly wireless gaming 
mouse that never needs to be plugged in to charge. 
Combining a micro-textured hard surface mouse pad with a 
dedicated Qi wireless charging spot, the MM1000 ensures 
wireless power is always on hand, charging almost any Qi 
compatible device, from the Dark Core rGb Se to the latest 
smartphones. even if your devices don’t have Qi charging 
built-in, the MM1000 includes uSb Micro-b, Type-C, and 
Lightning Qi charging adapters, letting you easily add Qi 
wireless charging. 
Together, the K63 Wireless Mechanical Keyboard, K63 
Wireless Gaming Lapboard, Dark Core rGb and MM1000 
create the ultimate wireless gaming setups for desktop or 
living room.
for up-to-date pricing on all new Corsair products 
announced at CeS 2018, please refer to the Corsair website 
or contact your local Corsair sales or Pr representative. n
Gadget Corner

Gadget Corner
add-ons
MYMOBILE
BenQ W1700 DLP &  
W11000H Projectors   
Enjoy the theatre-like experience at home
B
enQ, the world’s renowned and globally No. 1 DLP 
projector brand, has brought its two new models 
in the 4K uHD HDr Projector model, the CineHome 
Series W1700 4K HDr home cinema projector and the 
CinePro Series W11000H, the ultimate digital home 
cinema flagship featuring projector-optimized HDr to 
India market.
CineHome W1700 DLP projector W1700 comes in 
a compact size, fully equipped with a 4K uHD true 
cinema experience, true 8.3 million megapixels, and 
projection-optimized HDr for stunning true-to-life 
image quality. 
W11000H is equipped with true 8.3 million pixel 
4K uHD performance. The CineHome projector is 
distinguished by prestigious THX Certification and 
guarantees the precise experience of attending a 
commercial digital cinema. The move comes in 
its ongoing project to release an entire lineup to 
revolutionize and popularize the 4K Home Cinema 
projectors as an integral part of everyone’s home 
cinema viewing experience. 
benQ’s projectors have earned the distinct 
position of being consistent top performers with it 
occupying the top slot in DLP Projectors for eight 
years running. The feat can be further appreciated 
if we take into account that DLP has a dominant 
presence in all IMaX theatres around the world. 
benQ DLP projectors featuring CinematicColor 
Technology, a sophisticated colour engine that 
meets the film industry’s highest standards of 
cinematic colour accuracy, to bring the same level 
of sophistication with its true 4K uHD resolution 
and enhanced HDr performance that gives you 
a cinema like experience in the comfort of your 
home. n
Price: Starting INR 2.25 lakhs 
142 | february 2018

www.mymobileindia.com
Gadget Corner
add-ons
Fitbit Ionic, Flyer & Aria 2   
Get in shape with these fitness-
centric accessories
L
eading wearable brand fitbit recently expanded 
its portfolio in India with the launch of the Ionic, 
flyer and aria 2. The fitbit Ionic is the brand’s premium 
smartwatch that flaunts a SpO2 sensor. The fitbit flyer 
is the brand’s first wireless headphone, which features a 
durable, sweatproof design and a customisable fit. The 
fitbit aria 2 is a smart Wi-fi scale, which syncs tracked 
data with the fitbit app on your smartphone.
Fitbit Ionic: The smartwatch features a heart rate sensor 
and is water resistant up to 50 meters. The included SpO2 
sensor can estimate your blood oxygen levels. The device’s 
swim tracking feature can monitor real-time laps, exercise 
duration and calories burned while swimming. There’s 
also a PurePulse heart rate tracking feature, which offers 
better accuracy during exercises like cycling and running. 
The smartwatch offers around four days of battery life with 
normal use, and up to 10 hours when GPS is in use.
The fitbit Ionic comes with a 1.42-inch touch-enabled 
colour LCD display with a resolution of 348 x 250 pixels. 
The connectivity options on board include an integrated 
antenna for GPS, Wi-fi, bluetooth 4.0 and NfC for 
payments. The wearable is compatible with both iOS and 
android devices. There’s also built-in storage to let you 
store 300 songs on the smartwatch.
Fitbit Flyer: The wearable has a durable design with a 
hydrophobic nano-coating and interchangeable ear tips. 
The accessory features Waves Maxxaudio technology, 
and can also connect to the fitbit Ionic smartwatch. 
The other specs include bluetooth 4.2 with the ability to 
connect to two devices simultaneously, up to six hours of 
audio playback and two MeMS microphones.
Fitbit Aria 2: The device can be set up via your 
smartphone’s bluetooth connection. It helps you track 
and understand your body composition 
including weight, body fat percentage, 
lean mass and bMI. The device syncs 
the data to the fitbit app on your 
smartphone, which lets you see all 
of your stats in one place, making 
it easier to track your progress 
and get results. The device also 
recognises eight different users, so 
multiple family members can use it. n
february 2018 | 143
Price: INR 22,990 (Fitbit Ionic); INR 9,990 
(Fitbit Flyer); INR 9,990 (Fitbit Aria 2)

Mahindra Electric Virtual Reality 
Drive Experience  
Set to revolutionize the test drive experience
M
ahindra electric, a part of the diversified uSD 
19 billion Mahindra Group and a pioneer in the 
development and production of electric vehicles (eVs) in 
India, recently launched a Virtual reality (Vr) based drive 
experience for its smart and connected all electric vehicle, 
the e2oPlus. 
The experience, enabled through Vr headsets, highlights 
the technical features and focuses on the key attributes of 
the e2oPlus. One of the main objectives of this initiative 
is to innovatively communicate all the technologically 
advanced features packed into the e2oPlus through an 
immersive experience of the vehicle, at select Mahindra 
dealerships. The campaign aims to expand the base of 
people who can experience electric mobility first hand, 
as well as delivering an advanced test drive experience to 
enable the faster adoption of eVs.
The Virtual reality based 
drive experience for the 
e2oPlus is currently available 
at select Mahindra dealerships. 
The same is also delivered to 
customers before a door step 
test drive, which can be booked 
on the Mahindra e2oPlus. The 
2D, 360 degree version of the 
experience is also available 
on youTube. However the best 
way to experience the drive is 
through Vr headsets and it can 
be enabled via apps available 
on android and iOS. n
MYMOBILE
add-ons
Innovation
144 | february 2018


Exclusive
MYMOBILE
Vantage Point
So it’s a comeback! Why had you 
exited? Certainly yes, it’s a kind 
of comeback for us. We started in 
2008 and till 2012 we were among 
top five brands in the country in 
feature phones. After that we faced 
lots of difficulties because of the 
taxation policy at that time. There 
were huge VAT differentials among 
the various Indian states ranging 
from 22 percent to 18 percent,like 
in Haryana it was 7 percent and in 
Delhi it was 5 percent. We did not 
vanish from the market but were 
actually making devices for other 
like an ODM does.
Has the GST provided a level playing 
field? Yes, both the GST and ‘Make 
in India’ initiative has provided a 
level playing field for a brand 
like G’Five and not only that it has also 
encouraged other foreign brands to 
invest in India. 
What are your plans in the second inning? 
We will start manufacturing mobile 
phones for ourselves under ‘Make in 
India’ scheme and 
at the same time 
stop making for other brands. The company 
is planning to invest 1,000 crore in India 
by 2020. Meanwhile we will be finalizing 
land and marketing till then.
What would be your product and pricing 
strategy? We will be making 
both feature and smartphones 
for the customers in India. 
Initially, we’re only starting with 
feature phones from Rs 700 to 
Rs 1,500. These feature phones 
will focus on dual selfie camera, 
auto call recording, speaker, 
vibrator, music player, Bluetooth 
and heavy duty batteries ranging 
from 1,200mAh to 4,000mAh. 
We will also start smartphone 
business from the second  
quarter of 2018. And then 
gradually move to smart 
accessories such as smart bands 
and watches for kids. We are also 
giving 111 days replacement 
warranty on our products. Our 
smartphones will be 4G-enabled 
starting at around Rs3,500.We 
are a mass brand and want everyone 
to become an afford mobile phone 
brand.
What is the state of service networks 
you have? Currently, we have 700 plus 
service centers across India.
Which is the best suited channel for G’Five 
in India- online or offline? G’Five has the 
target audience which does not have 
much access to smartphone, internet and 
credit cards. Offline is considered to the 
best channel for promotions for us. We’ve 
a very strong distribution network and will 
leverage that only.  n            
haider@mymobile.co.in
“G’Five will invest INR 1,000 crore by 2020”
G’Five, a yesteryear mobile brand has made its comeback into Indian mobile ecosystem with 
the launch of six feature phones ranging between INR 700 to 1,500 for the masses. The Hong 
Kong-based technology company is being marketed by Sat Saheb International Corporation 
(SSIC) in India. Aashish Kumar, Director SSIC spoke with Haider Ali Khan on his 
comeback plan and shared the future strategy for G’Five in India. Excerpts…
“We will be making  
both feature and smartphones  
for the customers in India. Initially,  
we’re only starting with feature phones 
from Rs 700 to Rs 1,500. These feature 
phones will focus on dual selfie camera, 
auto call recording, speaker, vibrator, 
music player, Bluetooth and heavy  
duty batteries ranging from  
1,200mAh to 4,000mAh”


REDEFINE THE PERFORMANCE GAME 
SC9832E 
64-Bit
Quad Core
13MP 
Camera
18:9 
Display
Mali T820 
GPU
www.spreadtrum.com                                                                                          marketing.india@spreadtrum.com           
HD+
RNI REG NO. DELENG/2005/15033  
DL (ND) - 11/6100/2018-19-20 
(Posting Date 26-27 of every month)
Publishing Date- 22-01-18

