Course Guidebook
Professor Sean Carroll
California Institute of Technology
Mysteries of Modern Physics: 
Time
Physics
Subtopic
Science  
& Mathematics
Topic

PUBLISHED BY:
THE GREAT COURSES
Corporate Headquarters
4840 Westﬁ elds Boulevard, Suite 500
Chantilly, Virginia 20151-2299
Phone: 1-800-832-2412
Fax: 703-378-3819
www.thegreatcourses.com
Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2012
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form, or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), 
without the prior written permission of
The Teaching Company.

i
Sean Carroll, Ph.D.
Senior Research Associate in Physics
California Institute of Technology
P
rofessor Sean Carroll is a Senior Research 
Associate in Physics at the California 
Institute 
of 
Technology. 
He 
did 
his 
undergraduate work at Villanova University and 
received his Ph.D. in Astrophysics from Harvard 
in 1993. His research involves theoretical physics 
and astrophysics, with a focus on issues in cosmology, ﬁ eld theory, 
and gravitation.
Prior to arriving at Caltech, Professor Carroll taught and did research at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; the Kavli Institute for Theoretical 
Physics at the University of California, Santa Barbara; and the University 
of Chicago. His major contributions have included models of interactions 
among dark matter, dark energy, and ordinary matter; alternative theories 
of gravity; and violations of fundamental symmetries. His current research 
involves the foundations of quantum mechanics, the physics of inﬂ ationary 
cosmology, and the origin of time asymmetry.
While at MIT, Professor Carroll won the Graduate Student Council Teaching 
Award for his course on general relativity, the lecture notes of which were 
expanded into the textbook Spacetime and Geometry: An Introduction to 
General Relativity, published in 2003. In 2006, he received the College of 
Liberal Arts and Sciences Alumni Medallion from Villanova University, and 
in 2010, he was elected a Fellow of the American Physical Society.
Professor Carroll is the author of From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the 
Ultimate Theory of Time, a popular book on cosmology and time. His next 
book is The Particle at the End of the Universe, about the Higgs boson and 
the Large Hadron Collider. He is active in education and outreach, having 
taught more than 200 scientiﬁ c seminars and colloquia and given more than 
50 educational and popular talks. Professor Carroll has written for Scientiﬁ c 

ii
American, New Scientist, The Wall Street Journal, and Discover magazine. 
His blog, Cosmic Variance, is hosted by Discover. He has been featured on 
such television shows as The Colbert Report, PBS’s NOVA, and Through 
the Wormhole with Morgan Freeman and has acted as an informal science 
consultant for such movies as Thor and TRON: Legacy. 
The ﬁ rst of Professor Carroll’s Great Courses was Dark Matter, Dark 
Energy: The Dark Side of the Universe. ■

iii
Table of Contents
LECTURE GUIDES
INTRODUCTION
Professor Biography ............................................................................i
Course Scope .....................................................................................1
LECTURE 1
Why Time Is a Mystery .......................................................................3
LECTURE 2
What Is Time?...................................................................................10
LECTURE 3
Keeping Time....................................................................................17
LECTURE 4
Time’s Arrow .....................................................................................24
LECTURE 5
The Second Law of Thermodynamics ..............................................31
LECTURE 6
Reversibility and the Laws of Physics ..............................................38
LECTURE 7
Time Reversal in Particle Physics ....................................................45
LECTURE 8
Time in Quantum Mechanics  ...........................................................52
LECTURE 9
Entropy and Counting .......................................................................58
LECTURE 10
Playing with Entropy .........................................................................65

Table of Contents
iv
LECTURE 11
The Past Hypothesis ........................................................................73
LECTURE 12
Memory, Causality, and Action .........................................................80
LECTURE 13
Boltzmann Brains .............................................................................86
LECTURE 14
Complexity and Life ..........................................................................93
LECTURE 15
The Perception of Time ....................................................................99
LECTURE 16
Memory and Consciousness ..........................................................105
LECTURE 17
Time and Relativity ......................................................................... 111
LECTURE 18
Curved Spacetime and Black Holes ...............................................119
LECTURE 19
Time Travel .....................................................................................126
LECTURE 20
Black Hole Entropy  ........................................................................133
LECTURE 21
Evolution of the Universe................................................................140
LECTURE 22
The Big Bang ..................................................................................148
LECTURE 23
The Multiverse ................................................................................156

Table of Contents
v
LECTURE 24
Approaches to the Arrow of Time ...................................................163
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Bibliography ....................................................................................170

vi

1
Mysteries of Modern Physics: Time
Scope:
T
his course addresses one of the most profound questions of modern 
physics: Why does time work the way it does? Time is as mysterious 
as it is familiar, and over the course of these lectures, we will explore 
where those mysteries come from and how they are addressed by physics, 
philosophy, biology, neuroscience, and cosmology.
We will start by exploring how time works at a basic level: what time is and 
how we measure it using clocks and calendars. But we will quickly come up 
against a central mystery: Why does time have a direction? The difference 
between past and future will be a primary concern throughout the course.
We will see that the fundamental laws, ever since Isaac Newton, have a 
profound feature: They do not distinguish between past and future. They 
are reversible; if we make a movie of the motion of a planet around the 
Sun or the back-and-forth rocking of a pendulum, we can play it backward 
and it seems perfectly sensible. But for systems with many moving pieces, 
there is a pronounced directionality to time. Many familiar processes are 
irreversible: scent dispersing into a room, cream mixing into coffee, the act 
of scrambling an egg. In the real world, these happen in one direction in 
time, never backward. That difference is the arrow of time.
Explaining why time has an arrow is a primary concern of modern physics. 
We will see that it does not arise from quantum mechanics or particle 
physics. Rather, it is due to the increase of entropy—a way of measuring how 
messy or disorderly a system is—as time passes. The increase of entropy is 
responsible for many deeply ingrained features of time, such as our ability to 
remember the past or make decisions that affect the future.
The question then becomes: Why does entropy increase? The increase of 
entropy toward the future is known as the second law of thermodynamics 
and was explained in modern terms by Ludwig Boltzmann in the 19th
century. Boltzmann’s insight is that entropy increases because there are more 

Scope
2
ways for a system to have high entropy than low entropy; thus, high entropy 
is a natural condition.
This raises a new question: Why was entropy lower in the past? That turns 
out to be a much harder problem, one that traces back to the very beginning 
of time. The low entropy of the past is ultimately due to the fact that our 
universe had low entropy 13.7 billion years ago, at the time of the Big Bang.
Cosmology would like to explain why the Big Bang had low entropy, but 
our best current models aren’t up to the task. It’s possible that the ultimate 
explanation might lie beyond our observable cosmos, in a larger multiverse. 
Even without knowing what that explanation will be, we can marvel at the 
deep connections between time in our everyday lives and the larger universe 
in which we live. ■

3
Why Time Is a Mystery
Lecture 1
T
ime is something we’re all familiar with, but what’s less clear is what 
science has to say about time. You probably know that the idea of 
time is important to physics; it’s also important to biology, medicine, 
neuroscience, psychology, and the human sciences, such as history, politics, 
and economics. Time is absolutely central to every endeavor of humankind, 
and physics is a kind of bedrock for time. If we come to understand how 
time works from the point of view of physics, we can better understand how 
it works elsewhere in science and in our everyday lives.
Penetrating the Mysteries of Time

Although we think about and use it every day, time has a reputation 
for being mysterious. As Saint Augustine wrote, “What is time? If 
no one asks me, I know. But if I wish to explain it to someone who 
asks, I know not.”

The difference between our everyday dealings with time and 
the attempt to understand time on a deeper level is similar to the 
difference between operating a microwave oven and understanding 
how one works. As with the microwave oven, even though time may 
appear to be mysterious and incomprehensible, it can be understood.

Our goals in this course will be to understand time as physicists 
and then to connect that physical understanding to other ways that 
time manifests itself in science and in our everyday lives. Along 
the way, we’ll discover that time has a manifestation both in our 
everyday lives and in a more cosmic perception and that there is a 
direct connection between how time works in the two realms.
o The reason that time works the way it does in our everyday 
lives is ultimately because of how the universe works.

4
Lecture 1: Why Time Is a Mystery
o Once we penetrate the mysteries of time, we’ll ﬁ nd that the 
secret to those mysteries isn’t in our everyday experience but 
in the creation of the universe itself.
Telling Time

We have time-measuring devices—clocks—in almost everything 
around us—our phones, our computers, and so on. At a basic 
level, a clock is something that repeats itself in a predictable 
way. Both elements of that deﬁ nition are important: repeatability 
and predictability.

The classic idea of a clock is the Sun moving across the sky, rising 
in the east in the morning and setting in the west in the evening. 
That’s the simplest possible timekeeper we have. Other clocks are 
based on that same basic principle: doing the same thing over and 
over again in a repeatable, predictable way. 

As we’ll learn in this course, it’s not easy to make a clock, and even 
though clocks are all around us, they’re not very accurate. There is 
a great deal of challenge in building a clock that’s as accurate as the 
modern world demands.
Time within Ourselves

A clock measures the passage of time, but we also feel time within 
ourselves, at least partly because clocks—mechanisms that repeat 
themselves in predictable ways—exist within us, such as our 
breathing and the beating of our hearts.

There are also things about us that don’t repeat themselves but 
that progress as time passes: We age; we think; we make choices; 
we plan for the future; we remember the past. These different 
aspects of time are crucial to what it means to live our lives, to be 
human beings.

Perhaps the most important aspect of the passage of time for our 
lives as human beings is the accumulation of experiences. 

5
o It’s not just that we experience something today, and then 
tomorrow, and then the next day, but we experience something 
today and we remember it tomorrow. As time passes, we have 
more life experience to draw on. There’s a gradual buildup of 
our life spans through time. 
o The past that we have experienced is important to who we are 
today. Even in the process of watching these 24 lectures, you’ll 
Both individual frames and the whole series of frames deﬁ ne what we think of as 
the universe; it’s a four-dimensional thing—both space and time.
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

6
Lecture 1: Why Time Is a Mystery
learn things, you’ll change, and you’ll come out of this course 
a different person than you were when you came in. That’s a 
central aspect of how time works.
Moving through Time

When we look closely, the idea that time passes or that we move 
through time is not entirely clear. What does it mean to say that 
time passes? 

The notion of time passing has two different aspects: continuity 
and progress.
o The passage of time isn’t a story of complete rearrangement of 
reality; it’s more like an uncut movie reel. We see moments in 
the history of the universe one after another, but the moments 
have the same basic “stuff.” Things evolve, but everything is 
not different at every moment. 
o Time isn’t only a label that we apply to different moments, but 
it’s an ordered list of moments, moving in a direction. Just as 
a movie isn’t a set of frames scattered randomly on the ﬂ oor, 
likewise, the progress of time from past, to present, to future 
is crucial.
o The fact that we all agree on the directions of the past and the 
future is the basis of a concept known as the arrow of time.

How fast are we moving through time? What else could the speed 
of time be other than something like 1 second per second? 
o When we move through space and we have a velocity, what 
we’re talking about is how much space we travel through per 
unit of time, such as how many miles per hour.
o But if we’re talking about the speed of time, that kind of 
measurement doesn’t quite make sense. If there were something 
called the speed of time, it could only be 1 minute per minute, 
1 year per year, and so on. Time moves at the rate time moves, 
or time doesn’t move at all; it simply is. 

7
o Time happens, whether we like it or not. Space is something 
that we can choose to move through, but time is inevitable. 
There is no velocity at which we move through time; we just 
experience time moment after moment. 
The Direction of Time

The fundamental distinction between time and space is the division 
of time into past, present, and future. The progression of time from 
the past, to the present, to the future only happens in one way, and 
as it happens, things occur always in the same sense.
o Memory, for example, is something we have about the past; we 
don’t have a memory of the future. When we age, we always 
are born young, we grow older, and then we die; that’s how 
time works. 
o This is the arrow of time; the arrow points from the past, 
into the present, and toward the future. Time is absolutely, 
fundamentally directed in that way. 

Einstein taught us that time is related to space, but space doesn’t 
have any fundamental directionality; it has a sort of nonfundamental 
directionality.
o If you drop something in a room, it will always go down as 
opposed to up, but the difference between up and down in a 
room doesn’t reﬂ ect any deep feature of reality. If you were in 
Australia instead of the United States, the downward direction 
would be something different; the “arrow of space” depends on 
where you are.
o We don’t even really think about an arrow of space because 
it’s obviously a feature of our environment. There’s an arrow 
of space because we live in the vicinity of an inﬂ uential object 
called Earth.
o The arrow of time, in contrast, seems to be a deep feature of 
reality; it seems to be the same everywhere.

8
Lecture 1: Why Time Is a Mystery

The ultimate explanation for the arrow of time is similar to the 
ultimate explanation for the arrow of space. 
o Just as the arrow of space is explained by the fact that we live 
in the vicinity of an inﬂ uential object—the Earth—the arrow of 
time is explained by the fact that we live in the vicinity of an 
inﬂ uential event—the Big Bang, the beginning of the universe. 
o At a deep level of reality, there is no arrow of time; there’s no 
difference between the past and the future as far as the ultimate 
laws of physics are concerned. 
o The arrow of time has something to do with the macroscopic 
behavior of objects in the world, but it doesn’t appear at the 
level of two particles bumping into each other and scattering 
off; that’s something that treats the past and the future 
absolutely identically. 
o The arrow of time arises only when there are many, many 
particles—when we have a person or a cloud of gas in the solar 
system forming a new planet. 
Entropy

Entropy is a way of talking about the disorderliness of “stuff” in the 
universe. An egg is very orderly, but if we break the egg, it becomes 
disorderly; if we scramble the egg, it becomes even more disorderly. 
A scientist would say that the entropy of the egg is increasing. 

Left to their own devices, objects in the universe experience an 
increase of entropy; they become more disorderly as time passes. 
That, in fact, is the important distinction between the past and 
the future. 

There are many ways in which the arrow of time manifests itself, 
but there’s one underlying feature that explains all those different 
manifestations: In a system left to itself, entropy increases. This is 
so important that it’s literally a law of nature: the second law of 
thermodynamics.

9

In the 19th century, scientists made great strides toward 
understanding how entropy works, why it tends to go up toward 
the future, and how it underlies the arrow of time in all of its 
manifestations. But that understanding left us with one unanswered 
question: Why was entropy lower in the past? 
o This question brings us all the way back to the Big Bang. Our 
universe started 13.7 billion years ago in a condition of very 
low entropy and very high organization. That’s what got time 
started in the way we experience it in our everyday lives. 
o Ever since the Big Bang, we’ve been living out the process by 
which the universe increases in entropy. That’s the inﬂ uential 
event in the aftermath of which we live. 

In this course, we will come to understand what entropy is and why 
it tends to increase. Once we understand how entropy is responsible 
for the arrow of time and all of its forms, we will go back and explain 
why it’s there; that’s a matter of understanding relativity, spacetime, 
cosmology, the Big Bang, and how all these ideas ﬁ t together.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 1.
Falk, In Search of Time.
Frank, About Time.
Greene, Fabric of the Cosmos, part II.
1. How would you deﬁ ne “time”? How do you use it in your everyday 
life? Do you think of yourself as moving through time or time passing 
through you?
2. In what ways is the past different from the future? Do those differences 
seem fundamentally important? How do they relate to each other?
    Questions to Consider
    Suggested Reading

10
Lecture 2: What Is Time?
What Is Time?
Lecture 2
S
cience and philosophy have a longstanding relationship, a sort of 
friendly rivalry. The two disciplines have different aims, but their 
subject matters often overlap, and the study of time is one area where 
the philosophical perspective is extremely helpful, even to physicists. 
Philosophers try to understand the logical inner workings of something, while 
physicists are often happy just to get a theory that works, not necessarily one 
that makes sense. We have an understanding of how time works in a physical 
way in certain well-deﬁ ned circumstances, but philosophical questions 
remain. In this lecture, we’ll look at some of those questions to help us 
understand the scientiﬁ c aspects that we’ll uncover in the rest of the course.
Time and Space in the Universe

When we think of the universe, we generally think of space—not 
just outer space but the space around us, the location of things in 
the world. We also think of the universe as happening over and over 
again. Right from the start, we treat time and space differently.
o Space seems to be somehow more important or relevant to 
what the universe is, whereas time is just a label that tells us 
which moment of the universe we’re talking about.
o In Lecture 1, we discussed the analogy of the universe as a 
movie reel. It’s important to note that both each frame and the 
whole series of frames—the movie—deﬁ ne what we think of 
as the universe; it’s a four-dimensional thing, with both space 
and time.

Unlike space, the universe doesn’t rearrange itself. 
o In space, what happens at one point seems more or less 
completely disconnected from what happens at another point. 
Space doesn’t have any rules about what comes next to 
everything else.

11
o Time, on the other hand, has rules about what comes one 
moment after the other. That’s how the laws of physics work: 
If you know everything that the world is doing at one moment 
in time, the laws of physics will tell you what happens next. 
And from that moment, the laws of physics will tell you what 
happens next, and so on.
o The laws of physics start from a moment—a state of the 
universe at one instance in time—and they tell you, using the 
equations that are the laws of physics, what happens at each 
subsequent moment. 
The Difference between Time and Space

Later in the course, we’ll talk about relativity and the relationship 
between time and space, but for right now, let’s examine the notion 
that time and space are completely different. 

We can choose to go to some other location in space, but we can’t 
choose to go to some other location in time. Time is relentless, 
whereas how we move in space is up to us. 

This fact gives us a certain perspective on reality. We think of 
reality as one moment in time; however, we don’t think of a distant 
location that may be inaccessible to us as not real. 
o Different locations in space are absolutely real, whether or 
not we’re there, but what about the past and the future? Are 
they real? 
o We think of the universe right now as existing, but we think of 
the past as over with; we don’t think of the past as real in the 
same way that the present is, and we certainly don’t think of 
the future as just as real. 
o Why do we treat the past and future so differently? Why are we 
thinking of them in such a different way than we think of the 
different parts of space?

12
Lecture 2: What Is Time?

To answer that question, let’s consider how we go about describing 
space and time. 
o If you propose to meet a friend at a coffee shop at a certain 
time, what you’re really doing is giving your friend coordinates 
in the universe—what a physicist would call an “event.”
o You need to specify space (where you’re going to meet) and 
time (when you’re going to meet). On Earth, to specify location, 
you need to give only two numbers—the street that you’re on 
and the address on that street—but in space, you would need to 
give three numbers, because space is three-dimensional.
o Time is another dimension in the universe; we can marry the 
three dimensions of space to the one dimension of time to get 
four-dimensional spacetime. 
Presentism and Eternalism

Philosophers would call our everyday way of thinking about the 
world “presentism.” This is the idea that what exists and what is 
real is the three-dimensional universe at some moment in time and 
everything in that universe. The past and the future are not real. 

But physics suggests a different point of view: If we know the 
universe exactly right now, we can predict what the future will be 
and can reconstruct what the past was. The laws of physics connect 
the present moment to the future moment and the past moment.

From that perspective, we begin to think that the past, present, 
and future are perhaps all equally real. This point of view is 
called “eternalism.”
o As opposed to presentism—which says that the present is real, 
the past is a memory, and the future is a prediction—eternalism 
says that all the moments in the history of the universe are 
equally real. There’s nothing special about the present moment 
except that you’re experiencing it right now. 

13
o Eternalism is sometimes called the “block universe 
perspective” because it’s like stepping outside the universe and 
seeing all four dimensions as one block of both space and time. 
Another term for it is the “view from nowhen,” the view not 
from any one moment in time but outside the whole thing. 

The current laws of physics suggest that eternalism—this idea of 
treating the past, present, and future on an equal footing—is the 
correct view of the universe.
The Arrow of Time

As we said, presentism views the present moment as real, but not 
the past or the future. A slight twist on presentism treats the present 
and the past as real, but not the future. The past is ﬁ xed—we might 
not be living there, but it happened—whereas the future is unsettled. 
This way of thinking seems natural to us as human beings, but it 
has no reﬂ ection in the laws of physics. 

A better way to understand the reason we treat the past and the 
future so differently is the arrow of time. It’s not time itself that 
treats the past, present, and future differently; it’s the arrow of time, 
which is ultimately dependent on the “stuff” in the universe, our 
macroscopic matter and the conﬁ gurations that it is in.

The arrow of time gives us the impression that time passes, that 
we progress through different moments. From that perspective, we 
understand that it’s not that the past is more real than the future; it’s 
that we know more about the past. We have different access to it 
than we have to the future.
Clocks

One way of thinking about time is that it is what clocks measure. 
With a clock, we can say not only that time has passed but that a 
certain amount of time has passed. As we said earlier, a clock is a 
device that does the same thing over and over in a repeatable way. 

14
Lecture 2: What Is Time?
o Are we dealing in circular deﬁ nitions here? We seem to be 
deﬁ ning time as what clocks measure and deﬁ ning clocks 
as devices that do the same thing over and over again as 
time passes. 
o In fact, this is not a circular deﬁ nition; there is some substance 
to the claim that time is what clocks measure. Further, the 
The “good clocks” in our universe include the rotation and revolution of the 
Earth, the rocking of a pendulum, and the vibration of a quartz crystal.
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

15
existence of things that do the same thing over and over again 
in a predictable way—like clocks—isn’t something we can 
take for granted. We might have lived in a universe where 
everything that repeated itself did so unpredictably.

An important feature of clocks is that there’s more than one clock in 
our universe. Of course, “clocks” here means anything by which we 
can measure the passage of time.
o The Earth rotates around its axis; it also revolves around the 
Sun. These are two different things that the Earth does, and it 
does them in a predictable way. 
o These two things are comparable to each other: Roughly 
speaking, the Earth rotates 365¼ times every time it revolves 
around the Sun. It’s not a different number of days per year; it’s 
the same number year after year. That’s what makes the motion 
of the Earth give us reliable clocks.

The rotation and revolution of the Earth make it an obvious choice 
for a good clock. These days, in wristwatches, the best clocks come 
in the form of quartz crystals, which can be made to vibrate at a 
precise rate. The motion of a pendulum is also a good clock.

In a world in which there were no regularities, there would be no 
good clocks anywhere in the universe. Things would happen over 
and over again, but they would happen at unpredictable rates 
compared to each other. Time would still exist, but we could never 
say how much time had passed from one moment to another.

Clocks give us an operational way of thinking about time; they refer 
to things that really happen, not just to abstract concepts.
o What if time were to simply stop? Or what if time slowed down 
everywhere in the universe?
o Actually, the answer is that it would mean absolutely nothing. 
If time stops everywhere for everything in the universe, there 
would be no way of knowing.

16
Lecture 2: What Is Time?

What would happen if you could stop time for everything in the 
universe that was a distance of about 3 feet from you? 
o Suddenly, you wouldn’t be able to see anything more than 3 
feet away from you because there would be no light coming to 
you from anything in your time-stopping zone.
o If you started to move through the air and the molecules 3 feet 
from you were absolutely stationary, they would be like a brick 
wall to you. 

The idea of stopping time or even that times moves at different 
rates for different people is a very slippery notion. When we talk 
about relativity, we’ll see that there’s a well-deﬁ ned scientiﬁ c 
sense in which different people can measure time moving at 
different speeds, but the only way they can do that is by being in 
different places in the universe or moving through the universe at 
different velocities.
Callender, Introducing Time.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 1.
Klein, Chronos.
1. Do you think the past, present, and future are equally real? How would 
you try to convince someone who didn’t agree with your viewpoint?
2. What processes around you would qualify as “good clocks”?
3. Can you imagine time speeding up, slowing down, or stopping altogether?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

17
Keeping Time
Lecture 3
I
n our last lecture, we got a little philosophical, but in this lecture, we 
want to be practical. If time passes and we experience the passage of 
time, the obvious practical question is: How do we measure the passage 
of time? Clearly, this is a question about building clocks. But as we become 
more technologically advanced—as society moves through the arrow of 
time—the demands for measuring time precisely become greater. We want 
to know: What are the best clocks? To answer that question, we’ll look at 
how the notion of keeping time has developed through history.
Units and Measurement of Time

A solar day is the amount of time it takes the Sun to go from one 
position, such as noon, to the same position the next day. A solar 
year is the amount of time it takes for the Earth to go around the 
Sun. The lunar month is the amount of time it takes the Moon to 
go from one phase—new moon or full moon—back to the same 
phase again.

Our task is to build a device to measure those time periods—the 
day, year, and month—as precisely as possible.
o The simplest such device would be a sundial. We could put a 
stick in the ground and watch the progress of the shadow of the 
stick over time as the Sun moves through the sky.
o Even this, however, is not as simple as it seems. If we put the 
stick exactly vertically, the time of day it measures would be 
different in the spring, summer, fall, and winter. The key is to 
align the stick with the axis of the Earth’s rotation.
o The sundial represents a small version of a bigger problem we 
have: What is the best way to tell time that is not subject to the 
vagaries of astronomical whims? 

18
Lecture 3: Keeping Time

We can tell what time of year it is using an observatory. We know—
and ancient people knew, as well—that the Sun is more northerly 
in summer and more southerly in winter. Stonehenge is a classic 
example of a simple astronomical observatory. The stones at 
Stonehenge are aligned so that at sunrise on the summer solstice—
the longest day of the year—the Sun bisects the design. 
Building a Calendar

Ancient people would have found it useful to know when summer 
begins, but more generally, we would like to build a calendar, a 
system of units that lets us tell, in a uniform way, where we are in 
the year. That means taking a long period of time, such as a year or 
a month, and dividing it into shorter periods of time.

A year, a lunar month, and a day are all speciﬁ c time periods that 
we can compare to each other, but the problem is that they don’t 
match up in easy ways.
Stonehenge performs the most basic function of an astronomical observatory; it 
tells us the time of year.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

19
o A year is 365¼ days, but even that is not precise. At a more 
accurate level, a year is 365.2422 days, a very awkward number.
o Even worse is the lunar month. It is 29.5306 days, another 
completely awkward number, and a year is 12.3683 lunar 
months.
o The universe has given us no relationship between a month, a 
year, and a day. For thousands of years, humans have struggled 
to ﬁ nd clever ways to reconcile these astronomical timekeepers.

This struggle resulted in different notions of a calendar in different 
cultures. The Islamic calendar, for example, based on a lunar month 
(29.5 days), alternates months of 29 days and 30 days. The problem 
is that when we add all the lunar months, we get 354 days, not quite 
a year. 

The desire to reconcile months with years resulted in the clever notion 
of the leap month, which can be traced back to ancient Babylon.
o The Babylonians hit on the curious fact that 19 solar years is 
very close to 235 lunar months. 
o They further realized that if they let 12 months per year be 
the rule for 12 years in a row, and then 13 months per year be 
true for the next 7 years, they would have a 19-year cycle that 
synchronized the lunar calendar with the solar calendar. 
The Gregorian Calendar

The Gregorian calendar that we use today has given up on the 
notion of the lunar month, which is why some months have 30 
days; some, 31; and February, 28 or 29.

The idea of the months having different numbers of days 
unsynchronized with the Moon comes from the Julian calendar. The 
Julian calendar basically had the same months that we have except 
it had a leap year every 4 years. This seems close to our current 

20
Lecture 3: Keeping Time
system, but if we had a leap year every 4 years, we would go out of 
synchrony with the Sun by about 11 minutes per year. 

The system embedded in the Gregorian calendar is as follows: 
Every 4 years, we have a leap year, but then we skip leap year every 
100 years. 
o The last time we had a year divisible by 100 was the year 2000, 
and the ﬁ ne print in the Gregorian calendar says that we do 
have a leap year every 400 years. 
o Thus, 1700, 1800, and 1900 were not leap years; 2000 was; 
2100, 2200, and 2300 will not be leap years; 2400 will be; and 
so on. 

The Gregorian calendar was developed and implemented in 1582, 
based on the realization that the Julian calendar was getting out of 
sync with the solar cycle. 

The Julian calendar was wrong by 11 minutes every year, but the 
Gregorian calendar is accurate to 2.6 seconds per year. In the year 
4000, we might need another leap day to realign the Gregorian 
calendar with the Sun.
The Leap Second

The leap second is completely different conceptually than the leap 
month or the leap year. The leap day and the leap month exist to 
ﬁ x the fact that one cycle—the rotation of the Earth or the orbit of 
the Moon—gets out of sync with another cycle—the Earth going 
around the Sun. Leap seconds exist to ﬁ x the fact that the Earth 
does not rotate at a completely constant rate. 

As we’ve said, the whole point of an accurate clock is to get 
something that repeats itself over and over again in a predictable 
way, but now that we have much more accurate clocks, we realize 
that the rotation of the Earth is not perfect, and it is not perfect in an 
unpredictable way. Things like earthquakes and hurricanes change 
the rate at which the Earth rotates. 

21

Rather than ﬁ xing that unpredictability once and for all, we have 
to wait for the Earth to get out of sync and then add a leap second 
to the calendar. You do not even notice it, but occasionally, New 
Year’s Eve is 1 second longer than it was the day before. This is a 
controversial issue because it presents problems for computers. 
More Accurate Timekeeping

As technology evolves, it is not good enough to look at the sky to 
measure what time it is. In crossing the ocean, for example, it’s 
necessary to know the time to know where you are. You can ﬁ gure 
out your longitude by looking at the stars but only if you know what 
time it is.

This puzzle—how do you know what time it is when you are on a 
boat far away from any land-based clocks—was so important that 
in the 18th century, the British Parliament offered a prize of ₤20,000 
for ﬁ guring out how to measure time accurately, even at sea. The 
motion of the boat meant that a pendulum couldn’t be used, and 
changes in temperature and humidity meant that metal springs 
couldn’t be used.

The problem was ultimately solved in 1761 by a man named John 
Harrison, who invented the marine chronometer.
Personal Timepieces

These days, of course, we live in a world where keeping time is 
something that everyone wants to do, whether or not you are a 
navigator on a ship. 

In the 19th century, what that meant was a pocket watch, but the 
early pocket watches were maybe accurate to 15 minutes a day. 

In World War I, military personnel started wearing wristwatches 
to keep their hands free to carry weapons, and the fad eventually 
spread to people outside the military. Building mechanical 
wristwatches became a major industry, especially in Switzerland.

22
Lecture 3: Keeping Time

In the 1960s, Japanese manufacturers realized that they could 
base a wristwatch on a vibrating quartz crystal. A watch based on 
quartz is much more accurate than any mechanical timepiece and 
much cheaper. 
Atomic Clocks

Today, we use atomic clocks, not quartz crystals, for maximum 
accuracy. A quartz crystal can be very accurate, but we want 
increasingly more accurate clocks because we are putting more and 
more demands on them. 

We can increase accuracy by looking at the transitions of electrons 
in individual atoms. In practice, we use cesium or rubidium, speciﬁ c 
atomic elements that give up very precisely deﬁ ned frequencies. 

The best atomic clocks are more accurate than 1 billionth of a 
second per day. Such accuracy is needed for a global positioning 
system (GPS). 
o By comparing how much time it takes for the signals from 
at least four satellites to reach your GPS, the system can 
determine your exact location on Earth.
o A GPS can tell you exactly where you are to within a few 
feet, but that depends on the fact that the clocks onboard the 
satellites are incredibly accurate.
o If the satellite clock were off by 1 microsecond, your location 
would be off by 1000 feet. Given that the speed of light is so 
fast, to triangulate correctly, it’s necessary to know exactly 
when that signal left the satellite. That’s what a good atomic 
clock can do. 
Clocks and the Arrow of Time

As we’ve said a good, accurate timepiece always does exactly the 
same thing, which means that it doesn’t have an arrow of time in 
the sense that many things in the universe do.

23

If we took the hands off a clock and made a movie of it, it would 
be impossible to know whether the movie was playing backward 
or forward. 

The arrow of time is a feature of things that do not always do 
exactly the same thing. We can turn an egg into scrambled eggs, but 
that process goes only in one direction.

That is the difference between pristine accurate timepieces and the 
universe. Understanding where that difference comes from will be 
our goal for the rest of the course. 
Barnett, Time’s Pendulum.
Falk, In Search of Time.
1. If you didn’t have any clocks or calendars, how would you personally 
keep time? Would you be able to fashion (or at least design) a sundial or 
astronomical calendar?
2. Do you wear a watch? Have your watch-wearing habits changed over 
the years? What kind of clocks do you usually use to tell the time?
3. Do you usually know what time it is?
    Questions to Consider
    Suggested Reading

24
Lecture 4: Time’s Arrow
Time’s Arrow
Lecture 4
I
n the past few lectures, we have talked about the philosophy of time; the 
reality of the past, present, and future; and the down-to-earth aspects of 
how we measure time. Now, we are free to concentrate on the important 
issue that will motivate the rest of the course: why there is an arrow of 
time—why the past is different from the future. In this lecture, we’ll try to 
understand what is meant by the arrow of time and why its existence in our 
world is so startling. 
How Is the Past Different from the Future?

All aspects of memory (meaning any form of historical knowledge) 
refer to things that already happened. Memory is a correlation 
between some artifact here and something that happened in the past.
o There are no memories of the future; there are predictions, 
but they are different than memories. They are not artifacts; 
they are not connected in some recordkeeping way with what 
happens in the future.
o Our difference of “epistemic access”—what we know about 
the past versus what we know about the future—is probably 
the most obvious and the most important difference that the 
arrow of time gives to our everyday lives. 

Another obvious difference between the past and the future is, of 
course, aging. We are all born young and grow older with time. 
Aging applies not only to people and to other animals but to 
physical objects, as well. 

Of course, we all know that art, politics, literature, and music are 
all things that evolve in time. Although cultural changes are not 
as closely tied to the arrow of time as physical changes are, they 
still represent one-way evolutions. There is a past, a present, and a 
future, and all of them are different from each other.

25

The same thing is even true for society, in what we might call social 
progress. Societies change through time in interesting ways. 
o We would like to believe that social changes through time 
represent true progress.
o That statement is arguable from a historical point of view, but 
it is unarguable that there is an evolution in society that points 
in a certain direction. 

Such evolution is also reﬂ ected in the physical universe. The past 
of the universe is very different from what we think the future will 
be like. 
o The universe at early times was hot, dense, and smooth. 
Currently, it is more or less empty, and the matter that is 
present is lumpy. It is very different in one place, where there 
is a galaxy, than in another place, where there is interstellar 
space. In the future, the universe will continue to empty out.
o The universe has a very strong arrow of time, which is reﬂ ected 
in the life cycles of stars and planets. 

That physical change in the universe is reﬂ ected in biological 
change here on Earth. The Earth is only about 4.5 billion years old, 
so it is a substantial fraction of the age of the universe. 
o Life formed fairly quickly after the Earth formed, but there is 
a clear evolution. This is not just a Darwinian evolution, but 
evolution in the sense of change over time in a certain direction. 
o The ﬁ rst life forms were simple single-celled organisms. The 
fact that individual species became more complicated as time 
progressed is not a requirement of evolution. 
o Because there is room for differentiation and change, our 
biosphere supports increasingly complicated systems of species.

Besides physical and biological change, there are some features of 
the arrow of time that seem ingrained or logically necessary. 

26
Lecture 4: Time’s Arrow
o For example, we have the idea that a cause will always precede 
an effect. If the laws of physics do not account for what 
happens ﬁ rst and what happens after, we will clearly have to 
think harder about what causality means.
o We also have to think harder about free will. We do not have 
the ability to make choices about the past. 

All of these different areas—from biology and sociology, to 
the universe and physics, to logical issues of causality and free 
will—reﬂ ect the arrow of time. A universe without the arrow of 
time would not have progress or differentiation from the past to 
the future.
Storytelling

The arrow of time plays a crucial role in storytelling. As you 
know, most novels are chronological narratives, but novels can 
be made more interesting by playing with the conventional way 
time works—incorporating ﬂ ashbacks or reverse narration. The 
idea behind these literary devices is that the information we have 
changes the way we perceive events. 

If we are given a certain scene happening right now, the 
meaningfulness of that scene depends on things that happened 
in the past; those past occurrences may change our perception in 
the future. The notion of information and what it means to us is 
absolutely central to the arrow of time. 

Many attempts to use time in clever ways in storytelling actually 
miss the impact of the arrow of time. It is almost impossible for us 
to imagine two characters talking to each other from two different 
directions of time. One feature of the arrow of time is it must be the 
same arrow for everyone. 

As scientists or philosophers, the imaginative storytelling aspects of 
the arrow of time help us think of different ways that it could work 
and compare them to our world. 

27
The Universe without the Arrow of Time

We have basically two choices for what the universe would look 
like without an arrow of time. One is a world in which nothing 
changes over time. In this world, there would be no arrow of time 
because time would not do anything.

Another possibility is a random world. Things would happen one 
way sometimes and another way at other times. In this world, you 
could not make plans. You would remember tomorrow just as much 
as you remembered yesterday, which means you probably wouldn’t 
remember anything at all. 

The need for an arrow of time is something about being human. We 
cannot imagine a life in which the past and future were truly built 
on symmetric principles. 
Irreversibility

Breaking an egg and scrambling it (increasing its entropy) is an 
example of the arrow of time in action. Other examples include 
putting an ice cube in a glass of water and waiting for it to melt, 
releasing the scent of perfume in a room, or breaking a glass.

The common thread in these examples is irreversibility: Something 
happens in one direction, and it is easy to make it happen, but it 
does not happen in the other direction, or if it does, it is because we 
put effort into it. It does not spontaneously happen. Things go in 
one direction of time. They do not go back all by themselves. 

That difference between going from the past to the future is consistent 
throughout the universe as far as we know. This is clearly not a 
feature of our biology but a feature of the way the universe works.

We actually deﬁ ne the past versus the future using the arrow of 
time. The fact that we remember the past and not the future is so 
obvious to us, so inherent in how we think about the world, that 
we automatically assign an intrinsic difference to the past versus 
the future. 

28
Lecture 4: Time’s Arrow

Time could exist in a universe 
without an arrow, and time 
is not the arrow itself. The 
arrow is a feature of the stuff 
in the universe—the eggs, the 
glasses, the scent of perfume in 
a bottle. It is these things that 
evolve in certain ways always 
in the same direction, from the 
past to the future.

The arrow of time is the arrow 
of stuff evolving in time. Thus, 
it is not time that we need to 
understand but matter. It is the 
motion of particles and objects 
in the universe. 
The Second Law of Thermodynamics

As we have said, the feature 
of matter that changes with 
time is called entropy. The feature of the universe that we are trying 
to understand is that the increase of entropy is associated with the 
passage of time. 

The second law of thermodynamics—entropy of the universe 
increases—underlies all the ways in which the past is different from 
the future. That is a very surprising claim. 
o The claim makes sense when you say that the reason you 
can scramble an egg but not unscramble it is ultimately that 
entropy increases.
o But we’re saying that the fact that entropy increases is the 
reason you remember the past and not the future, the reason 
you are born young and grow older, the reason you can make 
a choice about what to have for dinner tomorrow but not about 
what to have for dinner yesterday. 
The egg is a classic example of 
a physical system in which the 
arrow of time is obvious; we can 
scramble an egg, but we cannot 
unscramble it.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

29

It’s important to note that the second law of thermodynamics 
does not imply that every single object in the universe needs to 
experience increased entropy.
o Here on Earth, the biosphere is more organized now than it used 
to be. The existence of complicated multicellular organisms is 
a low-entropy phenomenon. Through the course of evolution, 
however, the Sun shining on the Earth increased the entropy of 
the universe enormously.
o We usually ﬁ nd that when entropy decreases in one small 
system, it is because the universe was increasing its entropy 
greatly in the wider system.

The more we understand nature at a fundamental level, the more 
mysterious the arrow of time becomes. Deep down, time is just like 
space; it is a label on events in the universe. There is no arrow of 
space—no preferred directionality—but there is an arrow of time.

The same kind of reasoning that tells us why entropy will be greater 
tomorrow would seem to tell us why it should be greater yesterday.
o That is a reﬂ ection of the fact that the fundamental laws of 
physics do not distinguish between the past and the future, and 
if we think we can prove that entropy will be greater tomorrow, 
then we should be able to prove that it was greater yesterday. 
o Nobody believes that the entropy of the universe was greater 
yesterday than it is today, but we cannot prove that using just 
the laws of physics.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 2.
Greene, The Fabric of the Cosmos.
Price, Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point.
    Suggested Reading

30
Lecture 4: Time’s Arrow
1. How many different aspects of the arrow of time can you think of? 
2. What is your favorite story involving ﬂ ashbacks, reverse chronology, or 
time travel? Is the passage of time portrayed realistically?
3. Can you imagine a world in which time existed, but there was no arrow 
to it?
    Questions to Consider

31
The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Lecture 5
T
he central theme of this course is that entropy is the reason for the 
existence of the arrow of time, the fact that the past is different from 
the future. In the past, because of initial conditions near the Big 
Bang, the entropy of the universe was lower. In this lecture, we begin to put 
together the pieces of our picture of time with an exploration of the second 
law of thermodynamics: In an isolated system, entropy either increases or 
stays constant; it never decreases. Things happen in one direction of time—
not the other. 
The Laws of Thermodynamics

There are actually four laws of thermodynamics, but we are 
primarily concerned only with the ﬁ rst and second ones. 
o According to the ﬁ rst law, energy is conserved; according to 
the second, as we know, entropy increases or remains constant 
in isolated systems.
o The second law is crucial to these lectures. It says that there is 
an irreversibility—a direction—of time. Entropy increases in 
one direction and decreases as we go to the past.

Although it is one of the most rock-solid laws of physics, when 
we look at the second law carefully, we realize that the statement 
of it is actually only an approximation. It is not absolutely 
impossible for entropy to decrease spontaneously; it is, however, 
extremely unlikely. 

The reason the second law seems to be immutable is that it is not 
a speciﬁ c model of some fundamental interaction, like Maxwell’s 
theory of electricity and magnetism. The second law is a metalaw; it 
refers to how different kinds of laws of physics can possibly work.

32
Lecture 5: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Development of the Second Law

The second law of thermodynamics was ﬁ rst formulated in 1824 by 
a French military engineer named Sadi Carnot. It was Carnot who 
came up with the idea that entropy increases, although he didn’t 
know about the idea of entropy itself.

Motivated by a desire to catch up to the British in the science 
and technology of steam engines, Carnot set himself the task of 
formulating a concept for the most efﬁ cient possible steam engine. 
In the process, he discovered that there is a maximum efﬁ ciency 
that a steam engine can achieve.
o Carnot further realized that this maximally efﬁ cient steam 
engine had an interesting property, namely, that it could be 
run backward.
o We have already hinted at the idea that reversibility is at the 
heart of the arrow of time. A process that goes forward and 
backward equally well is a reversible process, and it does not 
have a direction of time. 

Most real-world steam engines are very inefﬁ cient and are not 
reversible. Today, we would say that they generate entropy. But 
Carnot’s formulation of the second law is that it’s possible to have 
either a perfectly reversible engine, which means that entropy 
stays constant, or any other engine, which means that entropy 
is increasing.

About 40 years later, a German physicist, Rudolf Clausius, realized 
that Carnot’s idea was a law of nature. Clausius was interested 
in thermodynamics—the science of heat; at the time, heat was 
considered a substance, called caloric. Clausius’s discovery was 
that heat ﬂ ows in only one direction. 
o If we put a box of hot gas next to a box of cold gas, the hot box 
heats up the cold one, and they equilibrate. We go from one hot 
box and one cold box to two warm boxes. Once we have two 
boxes at the same temperature, the heat can no longer travel.

33
o Notice that this is a one-way process; it is an arrow of time. 
We go from a difference in temperature to a sameness 
in temperature. 
o Clausius’s version of the second law can be thought of as the 
statement that heat gradients tend to even themselves out. 
Boxes of gas at different temperatures or other things, solids or 
liquids, tend toward equilibrium. 
o Clausius invented the word “entropy” to quantify exactly what 
was happening, and his formula for the second law says that 
entropy is the change in heat divided by the temperature. The 
result will always be a positive number.
Our Intuition about the Second Law

It might seem that Clausius’s version of the second law is not 
compatible with how we know the world works. It seems to be 
saying that temperature gradients always smooth out, that different 
objects always come to the same temperature, no matter what 
we do.

Such a statement seems to be at odds with our experience that we 
can heat things up. We can start with a room-temperature situation, 
such as a stove and some eggs we want to scramble, and we can 
turn on the stove and heat up the eggs. How is that possible if 
temperatures only even out? How is it possible to cool something 
down from room temperature by putting it in a refrigerator?

The ﬁ rst law of thermodynamics says that energy is conserved, but 
we can change energy between different forms. 
o When you turn on the gas burner of a stove, you are not 
creating new energy. You are taking energy that was stored 
in natural gas, and you are combusting that natural gas to 
release its energy in the form of heat. The energy was always 
there; you are changing its form from unconsumed natural gas 
into heat. 

34
Lecture 5: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
o That is easy to do, and it does not violate the second law. 
Clausius’s version of the second law tells us how heat 
moves around. It doesn’t say that we cannot create heat by 
burning something. 

Decreasing the amount of heat in an object is more difﬁ cult than 
increasing it because the process does not involve just releasing 
energy. If we release energy, we increase heat, so how can we ever 
cool things down?
o Again, the answer can be found in thermodynamics. Instead of 
applying heat to a box of gas, we expand the size of the box. The 
energy inside the box is the same, but because we are moving 
things apart, the molecules slow down and become colder.
o That is the principle behind a refrigerator. We take Freon or 
some other appropriate gas, expand it, and it cools down.
o Both freezers and refrigerators work in this way, but note that 
you cannot cool off your living room by opening the door of 
your refrigerator. Why not? The answer is that you are not 
actually destroying the heat that was in the Freon in your 
refrigerator; you are moving it around.
o When we expand Freon, we cool it off, but at some point, we 
have to recompress it to make it go through the cycle again and 
again. That is why the backside of your refrigerator is hot. 
The Uselessness of Energy

This way of thinking about heat suggests another way of thinking 
about entropy. We said that entropy measures disorderliness, and 
we also said that Clausius gave us a formula for it, the change in 
heat divided by temperature. Yet another way to think about entropy 
is as a measure of the uselessness of a certain amount of energy.

35

Energy is conserved, but it can change forms. If you have energy 
in a low-entropy form, you can do useful work with it. You can lift 
something up, drive a car, or ﬂ y an airplane. If you convert that 
energy into a high-entropy form, it becomes useless.

A low-entropy concentration of energy is called fuel. We have fossil 
fuels sitting in the ground with energy in them in a concentrated 
form. We can extract the energy because the entropy of the fuel is 
low. Once we burn the fuel, we cannot go back. You can heat a 
room in your house by burning wood, but you cannot cool off a 
room in your house by unburning fuel and turning it into wood.
Does Clausius’s Law Always Work?

Clausius’s version of the second law says that if we have two boxes 
at different temperatures and we put them next to each other, the 
temperature smoothes out; the gradient decreases. 
o If the system we are looking at is two ﬁ xed-sized boxes of 
gasses, that is a perfectly good formulation of the second 
law, but it would be a mistake to think that everything always 
smoothes out under all circumstances. 
o Think, for example, of a cloud of gas—not a box. If you went 
out into empty space and released a small amount of gas, 
what would happen? It would ﬂ y out in different directions. 
That is what you might expect according to the second law. It 
would become smoother and smoother, spreading throughout 
the universe.
o Now imagine that you have a giant cloud of gas, an amount 
equivalent to billions of solar masses. Then, gravity kicks in. 
Of course, there is gravity even for a small box of gas, but it is 
not that important because the mass is very tiny. Once you have 
enough gas to make a galaxy, gravity becomes very important. 
The galaxy contracts, stars and planets form, and so on. That’s 
how our galaxy started. 

36
Lecture 5: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
o It’s important to realize that the process of forming a galaxy 
increases the entropy of the universe. The formation of a 
galaxy makes the universe lumpier, not smoother, so increasing 
entropy does not mean increasing smoothness. 

A more widely applicable deﬁ nition of entropy was given to us by 
Ludwig Boltzmann in the 1870s, based on his understanding of the 
existence of atoms. 
o In this deﬁ nition, heat is actually thermal energy—the random 
motions of atoms. This understanding based on atoms led 
from thermodynamics to statistical mechanics, the study of the 
probabilities of atoms being in different arrangements.
o Boltzmann 
realized 
that 
arrangements 
of 
atoms 
are 
macroscopically indistinguishable, and his insight was 
that entropy is simply a way of counting the number of 
arrangements of atoms inside a certain system.
o In other words, the reason entropy increases, according to 
Boltzmann, is simply that there are more ways to be high 
entropy than to be low entropy. That is a rigorous deﬁ nition 
that corresponds to our intuitive feeling that entropy 
measures disorderliness.
o When entropy is low, the macroscopic conﬁ guration is very 
precisely arranged. There are only a few such conﬁ gurations 
that look the same. When entropy is high, the conﬁ guration 
is spread out. There are many different ways to arrange the 
atoms, and all of them look alike. 
o Boltzmann’s deﬁ nition of entropy is the one that makes the 
arrow of time go. Once we understand it, we can ask why 
entropy was so low in the early universe. 

37
Albert, Time and Chance.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 2.
Von Baeyer, Warmth Disperses and Time Passes.
1. How does the second law play out in common household appliances, 
such as an oven or a refrigerator?
2. How does the second law play out in the evolution of the Earth? The 
universe? The biosphere?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

38
Lecture 6: Reversibility and the Laws of Physics
Reversibility and the Laws of Physics
Lecture 6
W
e have seen that the arrow of time is fundamentally connected to 
the notion of irreversibility, but our best understanding of physics 
does not include this notion. For this reason, it’s useful to think 
about the idea of reversibility and where it came from. In this lecture, we’ll 
trace the development of the reversible laws of nature from Aristotle to 
Avincenna and Galileo and to Newton and Laplace. This exploration leads us 
to the question of why reversibility on the microscopic level is not reﬂ ected 
in our macroscopic world.
Newton’s Insight

Isaac Newton put the earlier ideas of Avincenna, Galileo, and others 
into a mathematical framework that allowed for the development of 
physics. His laws of motion and gravity suddenly made the world 
make sense.
o Perhaps Newton’s most famous law is the law of universal 
gravitation: the idea that what makes an apple fall from a tree 
and what explains the motion of the planets in the solar system 
is the same. 
o Newton realized that the force pulling the apple down from the 
tree could be the same force that explained the motion of the 
Moon around the Earth or the planets around the Sun. It was 
the universality of gravity that was new for Newton, and the 
reason that was a breakthrough is that the motion of the planets 
does not look like the fall of an apple.

The motion of the planets is reversible, whereas the motion of 
the falling apple seems irreversible. It required the genius of 
Newton to realize that the laws governing the motion of the apple 
are reversible. 
o If you ﬁ lmed the Moon going around the Earth with a movie 
camera and then you played that movie to an audience, no one 

39
in the audience would be able to tell whether the movie was 
playing backward or forward. 
o A solution to the equations of motion that is played backward 
in time is still a solution. That means that if we know the state 
of a system right now, we can ﬁ gure out what the state was 
in the past. There is a match between where we are today and 
where we were. 

Since Newton’s time, every attempt we have made to understand 
the laws of physics works in that way. In other words, we think that 
there is a state of the system right now, and if we know that state, we 
can evolve it forward or backward in time. It is perfectly reversible. 
How does that accord with the apple falling from the tree?
o The motion of the apple does not look reversible. It starts at the 
top and ends at the bottom, never the other way around. 
o The key is that the initial state—when the apple was tied to 
the tree by its stem—and the ﬁ nal state—when it lands on 
the ground—are irreversible processes because entropy is 
involved. The trajectory of the apple from the tree to the 
ground is one where air resistance is not that important—the 
trajectory is caused by the inﬂ uence of gravity on the apple, 
and that trajectory is perfectly reversible. 
o If you try to throw an apple into the air and catch it using the 
same motion for both actions, you will ﬁ nd that the trajectory 
of the apple is the same played forward and backward. 
o This was part of Newton’s great insight: that the fundamental 
laws of nature do not pick out a direction of time. It is only the 
interaction of the apple with the tree or the ground that gives us 
the impression of irreversibility. 

The same thing is true for many other simple systems in nature. 
Newton applied it to planets and moons. Physicists apply it to 
billiard balls on a frictionless surface. 

40
Lecture 6: Reversibility and the Laws of Physics

The lesson we derive from this is that when we have simple systems, 
the Newtonian laws of physics apply, and the rules are reversible. 
o You may guess that the difference between Newton’s laws of 
physics and the complex, irreversible processes we see around 
us is simply a matter of how many moving parts there are. 
o Note, however, that complicated systems are made out of 
individual simple systems. If the rules of physics govern what 
simple systems do, then complicated systems should obey 
similar rules. The challenge of reconciling those two facts will 
be the challenge of understanding how entropy works in the 
real world.
Determinism

Newtonian physics is self-contained. If we know the state of a 
system at any one moment in time, Newton’s laws of physics let us 
ﬁ gure out what the state of the system will be at any moment in the 
future and what it was at any moment in the past.

We can build up the entire history of the system starting from the 
information at any one moment. The present completely determines 
every other picture of the universe in the past and the future. 

This is a particular way of thinking about physics that is not at all 
obvious. It was not, for example, a property of Aristotelian physics. 
o According to Aristotle, if you see something that is not moving, 
you do not know whether a little while ago it was moving—
someone was pushing it—or whether it had been sitting still 
forever. There would be no way, in Aristotle’s physics, to ﬁ gure 
out the past given the present. 
o Newton said that if an object was not moving, the cause was 
friction; the object was interacting with the environment. If 
we could recover all the information about the object and the 
environment and work backward, we could ﬁ gure out exactly 
the state of the system arbitrarily far into the past. 

41

The French scientist Pierre-Simon Laplace realized that Newton’s 
laws contained within them a feature called determinism. Knowing 
the state of the universe now, we can determine its state with 100% 
accuracy arbitrarily far into the future or the past.
o Laplace further posited a vast intelligence—now called 
Laplace’s demon—that knows everything possible about the 
world at one moment of time, knows all the laws of physics 
to arbitrary accuracy, and has inﬁ nite computational capacity. 
o To this demon, there is no difference between the present, past, 
and future. If the demon knows the state of the universe at one 
moment in time, it knows it at all moments of time.

We can imagine other kinds of laws of physics that are not 
deterministic. In an Aristotelian world, for example, the laws of 
matter and motion are teleological, that is, oriented toward a goal. 
o We can also imagine laws that are past-dependent. In fact, 
we generally think of the laws of nature as past-dependent; 
we think that what will happen to us in the future depends on 
where we are now and where we came from.
o However, if we have complete information, we do not need to 
also remember the past in order to predict the future. The past 
is embedded in the current situation.
Conservation of Information

If we have an object moving in some direction, what do we need 
to know to predict what it will do next? According to Newtonian 
mechanics, what we need to know to ﬁ gure out the future and past 
of a moving object is its position and momentum (velocity). 
o But we need to know the position and velocity of every single 
part of that object.
o With a human being, we would need to know the position and 
velocity of every single atom in the body to be able to predict 
what the human will do next.

42
Lecture 6: Reversibility and the Laws of Physics

One implication of Newton’s laws is that information is conserved, 
meaning that the total amount of knowledge that we could possibly 
have about a system is the same at every different moment of time. 
The position and velocity of every particle in some collection of 
particles is the total amount of information we can possibly have, 
and that amount of information is the same at every moment. 
Information is neither created nor destroyed.
o Of course, particles can be created or destroyed. An electron 
and a positron can come together and be destroyed, but they do 
not disappear into nothingness. They create photons that carry 
off both their energy and their information. 
o Not only energy but information is conserved in the universe. 
That is why we can predict the future and retrodict the past. 
That is why the laws of physics are reversible—because the 
total amount of information does not change. 
o That is also why time has continuity, why the universe does 
not rearrange itself fully from moment to moment in time. The 
information contained in the universe is present at any one 
moment of time and is preserved from one moment to the next. 
The Irreversibility of the Real World

The tiny particles of which the world is made—quarks, electrons, 
neutrinos, and so on—basically obey Newtonian mechanics; their 
motion seems to be reversible. But when we get large collections 
of many, many particles, the real world is not reversible. Why not? 

Another way of stating this is to say that macroscopically, 
information does not seem to be conserved. If you believe that a 
glass of water with an ice cube in it is made of atoms, and those 
atoms have positions and velocities, then you believe that if you 
were Laplace’s demon, you could tell the future and the past of that 
glass of water. 

But you are not Laplace’s demon. You do not know the position 
and velocity of every molecule of water inside the glass. Instead, 

43
you have macroscopic information, and from that, you cannot 
reconstruct the past. In the evolution from the glass of water with or 
without an ice cube to the glass of water in the future, information 
is lost. 

Clearly, there is something going on when we change our 
perspective from the microscopic to the macroscopic laws of 
physics. This is a complex topic, but in the next lecture, we will 
sketch out a few simple assumptions that will enable us to match 
the irreversibility of the real world to the reversibility of Newton’s 
laws of physics.
Consider the apparent loss of information with a glass of water: A glass of 
warm water with an ice cube in it and a glass of cool water can evolve into what 
appears to be the same state—a glass of cool water. 
cool water
warm water
cool water
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

44
Lecture 6: Reversibility and the Laws of Physics
Albert, Time and Chance.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 7.
Price, Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point.
1. Think about everyday events, such as writing, watching TV, or reading. 
How is information conserved? How is it lost at a macroscopic level?
2. What are the implications of Laplace’s demon for human history? Do 
you think we could ever have enough information about human beings 
to accurately predict the future?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

45
Time Reversal in Particle Physics
Lecture 7
T
he reversibility of the fundamental laws of physics raises a puzzle 
for our understanding of the arrow of time: How can it be true that 
the deep laws of physics are perfectly reversible, yet the macroscopic 
laws strongly pick out a direction of time? The fundamental laws of physics 
on which that tension is based came from Newton’s classical mechanics, but 
today, quantum mechanics and particle physics have affected our notion of 
reversibility. In this lecture, we’ll begin to understand exactly why quantum 
mechanics and particle physics are not fully reversible yet still do not help us 
explain the arrow of time.
The Four Forces of Nature

Particle physicists tell us that there are four forces of nature, two 
that are long range and two that are short range. To a particle 
physicist, a force is not like friction or centrifugal force; it is one of 
the fundamental interactions that allows different particles to bump 
into each other and go their own separate ways or pull together.

The long-range forces are the ones we know about in our everyday 
lives: gravity and electromagnetism. Of course, gravity pulls us 
to the Earth and keeps the planets moving around the Sun. Light, 
X-rays, and radio waves are waves in the electromagnetic ﬁ eld.

The short-range forces, or nuclear forces, are known as the strong 
force and the weak force. The strong force is what holds the nuclei 
of atoms together. An atom is an electron or a set of electrons 
orbiting a nucleus. The nucleus is a set of protons and neutrons, 
which are, in turn, made of quarks. That collection of quarks 
that makes up protons and neutrons in the atomic nucleus is held 
together by the strong nuclear force. 

46
Lecture 7: Time Reversal in Particle Physics

The weak nuclear force has almost no effect on our everyday lives. 
What we need to know about it is that weak interactions are not 
invariant under time reversal.
Varying Degrees of the Arrow of Time

We need to recognize that there are different degrees of having 
an arrow of time. There are different ways in which you could be 
different from the past going to the future. 
o The weakest, most trivial kind of arrow of time is represented 
by something in the world that goes one way and not the 
other—a car going one way down a road. In some sense, that’s 
an arrow of time, but it’s not a deep, fundamental insight 
about nature.
o The next level of an arrow of time is represented by 
fundamental processes going one way and another way but 
perhaps at a different rate or in a different way. Note that this is 
not the same as entropy.
o The third level of an arrow of time is that things can only go 
one way. That is true irreversibility, and that is the arrow of 
time that we care about.

Even Newtonian mechanics includes the weak ﬁ rst-level arrow of 
time; things happen in one direction but not the other. 
o For example, the Sun always rises in the east and sets in the 
west. That is, in some sense, an arrow of time. We can tell 
which was morning and which was evening from where the 
Sun is, but it’s clearly an accident of nature. 
o If we made a movie of the Sun and played it backward, an 
audience would be able to tell that we were playing the movie 
backward because the Sun would be setting in the east, but we 
could easily imagine a universe in which the Sun really did set 
in the east still obeying the same laws of nature.

47
o Likewise, the hands of a clock move in the direction we call 
clockwise, but there’s no difﬁ culty in building a clock that 
goes counterclockwise. Even the expansion of the universe is 
something that just happens to be the case in our actual world. 
We can invent hypothetical universes that obey the same laws 
in which the universe is contracting. 
o All these are just accidents of nature in our world. They 
are different from the past to the future, but they are not 
fundamental arrows of time. 

The weak interactions of particle physics are in the second level. 
They are not irreversible, but one way they happen in time is 
different or at a different rate than when they happen another way 
in time.
o In the language of Laplace, if you know the state of the 
universe at one time, you can evolve it forward using the laws 
of physics, including the weak interactions, and from wherever 
it gets to, you can know where you came from. 
o You can unevolve the universe—you can go backward—but 
you need to know that you are going backward in time because 
the weak interactions work differently going in one direction 
than the other direction. 
Weak Interactions

In particle physics, a paradigmatic experiment is to smash two 
particles together and watch what comes out. For a weak interaction, 
we could smash a proton and an electron together, and they could 
interact through the weak nuclear force and turn into a neutron and 
a neutrino.

What about the time reverse of that interaction? Can we smash a 
neutron and a neutrino together and create a proton and an electron? 
The answers is yes; that is allowed by the weak nuclear force, but 
remember the force is weak, so the probability of that happening is 
very small.

48
Lecture 7: Time Reversal in Particle Physics

It makes sense to us that the interaction of two particles can generate 
two different particles, but the phenomenon of particle oscillation 
involves only one particle turning into another kind of particle and 
then turning back.

Particle oscillation illustrates a distinction in the concept of 
reversibility. 
o In previous lectures, we’ve said that reversibility means you can 
play the movie backward or you can recover where you evolved 
from. In the weak interactions, these are not quite the same.
o You can recover where you evolved from, but if you really 
understood the weak interactions and you saw one particle 
oscillating into another one, you could ﬁ gure out whether you 
were playing the movie backward or forward.

A particle called the neutral kaon exhibits particle oscillation. The 
neutral kaon has an antiparticle that has the same mass and is also 
neutral. The fact that the kaon has no charge means that it has no 
conserved quantities. It can oscillate into an antikaon and back into 
a kaon.
Nature gives us a perfect candidate for experiments in particle oscillation: the 
neutral kaon.

	

	
	



	
	
	

© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

49

We know this oscillation occurs because neither the kaon nor the 
antikaon is stable. They both decay into different particles. A kaon 
decays into a negatively charged pion, a positron, and a neutrino. An 
antikaon decays into a positively charged pion, a regular electron, 
and an antineutrino. 

The important point for us is that if time reversal is violated in weak 
interactions—if the weak interactions treat going forward in time 
differently than they treat coming backward in time—then kaons 
and antikaons will decay at slightly different rates.
The CPLEAR Experiment

In 1998, an experiment was conducted at CERN to test whether 
time reversal invariants were a good symmetry of nature.

The researchers started with a 50/50 beam of kaons and antikaons. 
If the weak interactions respected going forward in time and going 
backward in time equally, then an equal amount of decay products 
from kaons and from antikaons would be expected. 

But the results showed more kaons decaying than antikaons. In other 
words, it takes more time for a kaon to turn into an antikaon than 
for an antikaon to go back to a kaon. The time it takes to go in one 
direction is different than the time it takes to go in the other direction.

Time reversal is not a symmetry of the weak interactions. Unlike the 
other forces, the weak force does not respect time reversal invariant. 
o Laplace seems to give us an implication of reversibility, and 
because the world is reversible, there must be something 
symmetric about the past and the future. What is the 
symmetry between past and future that is a reﬂ ection of the 
underlying reversibility?
o The answer is found in a symmetry called CPT; the different 
letters here stand for different hoped-for symmetries of nature 
that are all violated, but the combination of all three yields a 
good symmetry of nature.

50
Lecture 7: Time Reversal in Particle Physics
CPT

The C in CPT stands for charge reversal. Basically, the C operation 
changes a particle for its antiparticle. You might think that if we had 
a collection of particles in a box and we changed all of them for 
antiparticles and did not let the box interact with the outside world, 
it would be the same—it would weigh the same, act the same, and 
so on. It turns out that is not true.

P stands for parity. This literally means that we ﬂ ip the orientation—
we ﬂ ip clockwise for counterclockwise. In other words, we hold the 
experiment up to a mirror. Again, you might think that if we did an 
experiment and then a mirror-image of that experiment, we would 
get the same answer, but that’s not true either. Nature violates parity.

T stands for time reversal. Here, you would expect that if we did 
an experiment forward in time and then did it backward in time, 
we would get the same answer, but we have just seen from the 
CPLEAR experiment that this is violated. 

All of these transformations, C, P, and T, are things that you might 
guess are symmetries, but all three are individually violated by the 
laws of physics.

The violation of parity in weak interactions was a tremendous 
discovery, made in the 1950s by three Chinese-American physicists. 
In 1964, researchers showed that the combination of parity and 
charge conjugation (CP) also violated symmetry. However, CPT 
seems to be a perfectly good symmetry of nature.

The fact that the weak interactions violate time reversal invariance 
still does not explain the arrow of time.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 7.
Greene, The Fabric of the Cosmos.
    Suggested Reading

51
1. How are violation of time-reversal invariance and the arrow of time 
different, as deﬁ ned by the second law?
2. Can you think of other experiments that would test time-reversal 
invariance in particle physics? Can you think of another test of parity 
invariance? What about CPT?
    Questions to Consider

52
Lecture 8: Time in Quantum Mechanics
Time in Quantum Mechanics 
Lecture 8
Q
uantum mechanics is a model of physics that was developed in 
the ﬁ rst half of the 20th century and came to replace the classical 
Newtonian view. It describes the world on both very small and very 
large scales, although on those very large scales, Newtonian mechanics also 
works. When we look at things that are very small, however, the predictions of 
quantum mechanics deviate from the expectations of Newtonian mechanics. 
Quantum mechanics is the correct theory of reality as far as everything we 
know about the universe is concerned, so we need to understand what the 
implications of this theory are for our understanding of the arrow of time.
Folktales about Quantum Mechanics

Quantum mechanics is more complicated that just a theory of 
quanta—discrete packets. Quantum mechanics says that some 
things come in discrete packets, such as individual photons in an 
electromagnetic wave, but other things do not, such as time.

In quantum mechanics, it’s also true that we can predict only the 
probability of outcomes; we cannot predict with 100% certainty 
that any particular outcome will ever attain.
Quantum v. Classical Mechanics

The laws of physics in classical mechanics are deterministic. They 
tell us what will happen and what did happen, and information 
is conserved along the way. Quantum mechanics is a much 
richer theory.

The way quantum mechanics differs from classical mechanics is in 
what can be observed. In classical mechanics, we don’t worry much 
about what we can observe. The state of the system is deﬁ ned by its 
position and velocity. 

53

In quantum mechanics, we don’t deﬁ ne a system by giving positions 
and velocities. In fact, there are no such things as positions and 
velocities. Instead, the world is described by something called a 
wave function. 
o This is basically a set of pieces of information that answers the 
following question: If we were to observe a certain thing, what 
is the probability that we would get a certain answer?
o For example, I know that I have an orange, but I don’t know 
exactly what state the orange is in. The orange has a wave 
function. If I look for where the orange is, the wave function 
can tell me the probability that I see it in one place or that I see 
it in some other place.
o It is not just that quantum mechanics doesn’t let us know where 
the orange is; quantum mechanics says there is no such thing as 
where the orange is. It’s not that our measurements aren’t good 
enough; it’s that quantum mechanics doesn’t let us go from the 
state of the universe to a prediction with a perfect match. There 
are always probabilities that get in the way.

In quantum mechanics, we say that objects exist in superpositions 
of classical properties. In other words, there really is no position 
of the orange. It’s not in one position or the other; it’s in both. The 
wave function tells us how much of the superposition is here and 
how much is there and, therefore, the probability we have of seeing 
it in one position versus the other.

The wave function can be a positive or a negative number. This 
means that we can contribute to the wave function in different ways, 
and they can interfere with each other. A positive contribution can 
cancel a negative contribution. 

There is no connection between this way of thinking and classical 
mechanics. There are no negative numbers for the probability of 
seeing something in classical mechanics. There are no negative 
numbers for probability in quantum mechanics either, but the 

54
Lecture 8: Time in Quantum Mechanics
“machine” we use to make the probability—the wave function—
can be negative.
The Remarkable Consequences of Quantum Mechanics

When we think about reality in this way—that it’s made of 
wave 
functions, 
not 
positions 
and 
velocities—remarkable 
consequences follow. 

Some of those consequences are as simple as the fact that certain 
things are quantized. For example, in an atom, the energy levels 
that an electron can be in come only in discrete, quantized pieces. 
You cannot get any possible energy for the electron around an atom; 
you can get only certain possibilities. 

The major difference between quantum mechanics and classical 
mechanics is in the relationship between what exists and what you 
can see. 
o In classical mechanics, you can see everything there is. If you 
look hard enough, you can measure the position and velocity 
of every particle. Quantum mechanics embodies the wave 
function, but you don’t see the wave function. 
o For example, the orange could have one position or another, 
but it doesn’t have either one until I look at it. The orange has 
a wave function that describes the probability that I will see it. 
o When I look at the orange, that is when reality collapses. 
Before I looked at it, it was really in both positions—that’s 
what the wave function is—but when I look at it, I will only 
ever see the orange in one position.
o This is a bizarre feature of quantum mechanics: that reality 
seems to change when you look at it. But it’s not true that our 
interactions with the world bring reality into existence. The 
laws of physics are still being obeyed, but the laws themselves 
are disturbing to us. They say that the rules by which physical 

55
objects evolve are different when we are looking at them and 
when we are not looking at them.
The Measurement Problem

The rules of quantum mechanics tell us that things evolve in one 
way when we are not looking at them and another way when 
we look at them. This prompts us to ask: What counts as an 
observation? When does it become the case that reality collapses 
into one conﬁ guration?

One of the puzzles here is the fact that wave function collapse 
seems to be irreversible, which means that information seems to be 
lost. If I look at the orange and I see it in one position, I don’t know 
where it came from; I don’t know what the wave function of the 
orange was before I looked. 
o There is a huge number of possible wave functions, all of which 
have some probability that I will see the orange in one position, 
and once I see it, that’s where it is. I cannot reconstruct what 
the wave function was before I did my measurement.
o That sounds like true irreversibility, an arrow of time, and 
this is why when we say that the fundamental laws of physics 
are reversible, we have to add a footnote saying, “except for 
quantum mechanics.” 

In the 1960s, three physicists, Yakir Aharonov, Peter Bergmann, 
and Joel Lebowitz, argued that the reason we think there is time-
asymmetry in wave function collapse is that we’re asking a time-
asymmetric question. 
o If we asked a symmetric question, we would get a symmetric 
answer, even in quantum mechanics. In other words, quantum 
mechanics doesn’t impose time-asymmetry on the world; the 
world imposes time-asymmetry on quantum mechanics.
o The lesson for us is that the arrow of time is not explained by the 
time-asymmetry of quantum mechanics. The time-asymmetry of 
quantum mechanics is explained by the arrow of time.

56
Lecture 8: Time in Quantum Mechanics
Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics

The fact that information doesn’t seem to be conserved in quantum 
mechanics has driven a philosophical ﬁ eld of interpretation. 

The leading interpretation, known as the Copenhagen interpretation, 
was developed by the founders of quantum mechanics in the 1920s 
and 1930s. This interpretation simply says that there are two 
different ways for a quantum mechanical system to evolve: what 
happens when you’re not looking at it and what happens when you 
look at it. 
o According to the Copenhagen interpretation, the collapse of the 
wave function is real and it is irreversible. The collapse occurs 
when a macroscopic classical system, such as a person or a cat, 
interacts with a small-scale quantum mechanical system.
o For a number of physicists, the Copenhagen interpretation 
is basically a stopgap measure; it’s good enough as long as 
we don’t do sufﬁ ciently careful experiments to distinguish 
between what happens on small scales and what happens on 
large scales.

The leading alternative to the Copenhagen interpretation is the 
many-worlds interpretation, according to which there is no separate 
way of evolving when you are looking at a system versus when you 
are not looking at a system. The world evolves in only one way, and 
that is in accordance with the rules of quantum mechanics. 
o The many-worlds interpretation takes seriously the fact that the 
observer is a quantum mechanical system. Not only does an 
orange have multiple positions it could be in, but the observer 
has different possibilities, and they are also described by a 
quantum mechanical superposition.
o When I look at the orange, my wave function interacts with the 
wave function of the orange, and I evolve into a superposition 
myself. There is a version of me that sees the orange in one 
place and another version of me that sees the orange in another 
place, and these two versions exist in separate worlds.

57
o Every time two quantum mechanical systems interact with each 
other, the wave function splits rather than collapsing. It splits 
into alternative versions of reality, all of which are equally real.

According to the many-worlds interpretation, there is one wave 
function for the whole universe, and it evolves according to one 
equation. It is true that that wave function describes many universes, 
but it is still the same amount of information contained in the same 
wave function.

The evolution of the wave function is completely deterministic. In 
fact, Erwin Schrödinger wrote the equation that tells us how the 
wave function evolves. The reason information seems to be lost 
when wave functions collapse is that we don’t know where we are 
in the wave function. 

The application of this story to reality seems outlandish at ﬁ rst, but 
the more we look at it, the more logical it becomes and the better it 
ﬁ ts with other things we think are true about the universe.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 11.
Greene, The Fabric of the Cosmos.
1. What is a quantum state? What are the different ways it can evolve?
2. Why does the process of observing a quantum system seem to pick out a 
direction of time? How does this relate to the second law?
    Questions to Consider
    Suggested Reading

58
Lecture 9: Entropy and Counting
Entropy and Counting
Lecture 9
T
hus far in the course, we have talked about time and measuring time, 
and we’ve said that the real mystery of time is the arrow of time, the 
fact that the past is different from the future. We have also claimed 
that the reason the past is different from the future is that entropy increases. 
In this lecture, we will dive into what entropy really is—give the rigorous 
modern deﬁ nition of it—and explain what we do and do not understand 
about how entropy works. 
Boltzmann’s Introduction of Atoms

Our modern understanding of entropy comes from the Austrian 
physicist Ludwig Boltzmann in the 1870s. What Boltzmann added 
to the previous work of Carnot and Clausius was the idea that 
matter is made of atoms. This is a tremendously powerful idea. It 
means that ice, water, and water vapor are not different things but 
different arrangements of the same fundamental set of things.

Of course, even in a very small collection of macroscopic material, 
there is a large number of atoms. The number that scientists use to 
indicate a macroscopic amount is Avogadro’s number, which is the 
number of carbon atoms in 12 grams of carbon (~6  1023). 

Avogadro’s number is an indication that we can throw away 
information. That is the key to going from the world of atoms to the 
macroscopic world. It’s called “coarse graining.” 
o This is basically the idea that we can’t possibly keep track of 
what every atom is doing in any tiny macroscopic object, so we 
need to keep track of less-than-perfect information. 
o Laplace taught us that if we wanted to know exactly what was 
going to happen, we would have to know the position and 
velocity of every atom, but that is completely impractical in the 

59
real world. Instead, we average; we take typical features of the 
whole collection of atoms in some macroscopic object.
o These typical features include the density of the material 
(the number of atoms in any one volume), the pressure, the 
temperature (the average kinetic energy), and heat (the total 
thermal energy). Boltzmann realized that entropy, like these 
other thermodynamic properties, could be thought of as a 
property of the arrangement of atoms.
Boltzmann’s Formula for Entropy

Consider a box of gas with a partition in the middle of it that has 
a tiny hole. Most of the time, the atoms in the gas bounce around 
inside the box on either the right side or the left, but occasionally, 
an atom will pass from one side to the other through the hole.

If we start with all the atoms on the left and we wait long enough, 
the box of gas will equilibrate, just as heat equilibrates when we 
bring a hot object close to a cold object. Intuitively, it’s clear to us 
that entropy increases during this process.
o Now imagine that we have 2000 particles of gas, all on the left 
side of the box. Every atom has a 1% chance per second of 
going through the hole; it doesn’t matter whether the atom is 
on the left or the right. What happens in this circumstance?
o Obviously, if all the atoms start on the left, they will gradually 
diffuse to the right until they even out. After only about 200 
seconds, we can’t tell the difference between the left and right 
sides of the box. Clearly, entropy has increased, and clearly, 
this is an irreversible process.

Boltzmann tried to describe this process quantitatively. He tried 
to ﬁ gure out how many combinations there would be of atoms in 
one conﬁ guration versus another and show that our intuitive notion 
of high entropy corresponds to many different arrangements of a 
particular conﬁ guration.

60
Lecture 9: Entropy and Counting
Entropy increases over time as the distribution of particles equilibrates.
t = 1
t = 50
t = 200
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

61
o If we try to count the number of arrangements of atoms, we see 
that it quickly becomes astronomical. The maximum number 
of arrangements with 1000 atoms on the right and 1000 on the 
left is greater than 210600.
o The number of arrangements is small when there is an 
imbalance between left and right and large when there is a 
balance. Our intuitive notion is that entropy is higher when 
things are balanced and lower when it is unbalanced. 

Boltzmann developed the idea that entropy is really just counting 
the number of arrangements. In other words, entropy tells us the 
number of microscopic arrangements of a set of atoms that look 
indistinguishable to our macroscopic perception. 

Boltzmann’s formula is that entropy is proportional to the logarithm 
of the number of indistinguishable states. This formula is S = k log 
W, where S is entropy; k is Boltzmann’s constant, a proportionality 
constant; and W is the number of ways we can rearrange things.
Understanding Logarithms

A logarithm is basically the power to which you would raise the 
number 10 to get the number you want. The logarithm of 10 = 1. 
Why? Because in order to get 10, you raise 10 to the power 1, 101 = 
10. The logarithm of 100 is 2 because 102 = 100. The logarithm of 
1000 is 3 because 103 = 1000 and so forth. The logarithm of 1 is 0 
because 100 = 1.

Taking the logarithm of a power of 10 is easy, but we can also 
deﬁ ne the logarithm for every number in between. Basically, the 
logarithm is a function. It’s small when the number you’re taking 
the logarithm of is small, and it’s negative when the number is less 
than 1. 

Notice that the logarithm grows slowly. The logarithm goes from 
0 to 1 to 2 as the number we are taking the logarithm of goes 
from 1 to 10 to 100. The logarithm tells us the number of ways 

62
Lecture 9: Entropy and Counting
we can rearrange something, but it tells us in a more compact and 
manageable form. 

Recall that in our box of gas, the lowest-entropy conﬁ guration 
had 2000 particles on the left and 0 on the right. The number of 
combinations that looked like that was 1 and the logarithm of 1 = 
0, so the entropy of that conﬁ guration is 0. It’s the most orderly 
conﬁ guration we can have.

With 1999 atoms on the left of our box and 1 atom on the right, 
the number of combinations was 2000, and the logarithm of 2000 
is 3.3. With 1998 atoms on the left and 2 on the right, the number 
of combinations was almost 2 million, and the logarithm of that is 
6.3. The highest number of combinations was 2  10600, and the 
logarithm of that is just 600.3.

Remember that before Boltzmann, Clausius had given us a notion 
of entropy that was very speciﬁ c about exchanging heat. Boltzmann 
wanted to give a much more general deﬁ nition, but he still wanted 
his general deﬁ nition to match with Clausius’s speciﬁ c deﬁ nition in 
the same arrangement.
o One of the properties of entropy as it was already understood 
is that if we have two systems, each with a certain entropy, 
and we put them together to make one larger system, the total 
entropy is the sum of the individual entropies. 
o But Boltzmann wanted to deﬁ ne entropy in terms of the number 
of arrangements, and when we connect two systems, we 
open up many more ways to arrange the individual particles. 
The number of arrangements is not the sum of the individual 
arrangements but the product. 
o We take the number of arrangements we had in one system and 
multiply it by the number of arrangements in the other system. 
If we try to deﬁ ne entropy as the total number of ways we could 
arrange the atoms, that would give us an incorrect formula.

63
o The magic of the logarithm is that it ﬁ xes this problem. It 
has this wonderful property that the logarithm of a product is 
the sum of the logarithms. The logarithm of 10  10 is the 
logarithm of 10 + the logarithm of 10, which is 1 + 1, which 
is 2. 
o Boltzmann realized that putting the entropy proportional 
to the logarithm of the number of arrangements preserves 
the property that the entropy of two systems added together 
is the entropy of each system added to the entropy of the 
other system. 
Coarse Graining

The microstate of a system is the exact Laplacian state. It is 
what we need to predict the future and to retrodict the past. If we 
know the microstate, then the evolution of the system would be 
perfectly reversible. 

But if we look at a glass of water with an ice cube in it, we don’t 
see the exact microstate of every atom inside the glass of water. We 
know that it is a glass of water; it has a certain temperature; and 
maybe it has an ice cube. We call that information the macrostate.

In the process of coarse graining, we deﬁ ne ahead of time what it 
is that we can macroscopically observe, and two arrangements of 
atoms that look the same according to our macroscopic observations 
are put into the same macrostate. We take all the possible states we 
could have and chunk them up into microstates that look the same 
macroscopically. The set of all those microstates is the macrostate.

What Boltzmann’s entropy tells us is that the entropy of an 
individual conﬁ guration of particles is the logarithm of the total 
number of other conﬁ gurations in the same macrostate. We coarse 
grain by making some observations; we calculate how many 
particles and how many arrangements look the same, take the 
logarithm, and that’s the entropy. 

64
Lecture 9: Entropy and Counting
Summing Up Boltzmann

Once we have Boltzmann’s program in place, we have an 
understanding of how entropy works at a quantitative level. We 
take all the ways that a state can be—all the microstates of some 
system—and we divide up that space of states into macrostates. We 
calculate in each macrostate how many microstates there are, we 
take a logarithm of that number, and that is the entropy. Given that 
understanding, the fact that entropy increases makes sense. 

With Boltzmann’s deﬁ nition of entropy, high entropy means there 
are more ways to arrange things in a certain way and low entropy 
means there are fewer ways. Given a system that has low entropy, 
if we just let it evolve, it will naturally move to a higher-entropy 
conﬁ guration simply because there are more ways to be high 
entropy than to be low entropy. 
Albert, Time and Chance.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 8.
1. Imagine you have two liquids that tend to unmix themselves when you 
try to mix them together. What can you conclude about the behavior of 
the molecules from which they are made?
2. Can you think of some different ways we could coarse-grain all the 
states of gas molecules in a box? Why do some coarse-grainings seem 
more appropriate than others?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

65
Playing with Entropy
Lecture 10
I
n the last lecture, we learned what entropy really is: The world around us 
is made of atoms that have many different ways of arranging themselves, 
but when we look at things in the universe, we do not see the individual 
atoms. There are many different ways that atoms look the same to us. 
Boltzmann taught us that entropy is just a logarithm of the number of ways 
to arrange the atoms so that they look macroscopically indistinguishable. In 
this lecture, we will compare Boltzmann’s ideas about entropy with those of 
Clausius and Carnot; we’ll then reﬁ ne our deﬁ nition and look at some of its 
philosophical implications.
Boltzmann v. Clausius

Boltzmann’s version of the second law of thermodynamics is that 
entropy increases because there are more ways to be high entropy 
than to be low entropy. We need to make sure that this idea of 
entropy is compatible with the formulations of Carnot and Clausius. 

According to Clausius, if we put together two boxes of gas with 
different temperatures, the temperatures will even out. With 
Boltzmann, we saw that if we opened a small hole between one 
box that was full of atoms and one box that was empty, the density 
of atoms would generally tend to even out. We want to check that 
that is also true for temperature, and we can do so with a fairly easy 
thought experiment.
o Temperature tells us how fast individual atoms are moving. 
With a high-temperature box and a low-temperature box, we 
can think of fast- and slow-moving atoms as different-colored 
grains of sand. 
o In the boxes of gas with different temperatures, there are more 
arrangements with an equal number of hot atoms in the left and 
right boxes and an equal number of cold atoms in the left and 

66
Lecture 10: Playing with Entropy
right boxes; therefore, the highest-entropy state is one in which 
the temperature is the same.

Boltzmann’s reasoning gets us back to Clausius’s version of 
the second law of thermodynamics: Temperatures tend to come 
to equilibrium. Boltzmann has uniﬁ ed the entropy of heat with 
the entropy of mixing. His one formula lets us understand 
both circumstances.
Boltzmann v. Carnot

Carnot’s interest in building the perfect steam engine led him 
to invent a cycle—a way of running a steam engine—that was 
maximally efﬁ cient. He realized that this maximally efﬁ cient steam 
engine requires a reversible process but that most real-world steam 
engines were irreversible. 

We would like to use Boltzmann’s language of entropy to 
distinguish between efﬁ cient and inefﬁ cient steam engines. Another 
way of phrasing the question is: Can we get useful work out of a 
certain arrangement of atoms? A box of gas has energy it. Can we 
use that energy for some purpose?
o For this experiment, we start with a thin piston dividing a large 
cylinder, and we reconstruct our two boxes of gas. If we put 
all the gas on one side of the piston and the other side remains 
empty (a vacuum), we know that the piston will push away 
from the gas. It will move in the direction of the vacuum and 
expand the volume of the region that has the gas in it. 
o In other words, the atoms moving around do useful work; they 
push the piston in one direction. We are extracting energy from 
the gas because as we expand its volume, we are cooling it 
down. We have lowered the temperature of the atoms. 
o This is a low-entropy conﬁ guration, and we can do useful work 
with it. It’s not that energy is created or destroyed; we are just 
taking energy out of the atoms and putting it into the piston.

67

Now imagine the same amount of energy but in a different 
conﬁ guration. Consider the same gas atoms with the same 
temperature and the piston in the middle of the cylinder, but put 
half the atoms on one side of the piston and half on the other side. 
The total energy is the same as we had before, but the distribution 
of atoms is different. 
o With the same amount of gas on either side of the piston, there 
is no net force, and the piston doesn’t move. Even though the 
same amount of energy is in the piston now as before, we 
cannot extract that energy. 
o The reason for this, of course, is that the energy is in a high-
entropy form. High entropy is an even distribution of gas 
atoms on both sides of the piston, and even though the energy 
is present, we cannot take it out.

Boltzmann’s way of looking at entropy, which says that entropy will 
be highest when there is a large number of arrangements, recovers 
Carnot’s insight that low-entropy energy can do useful work and 
high-entropy energy cannot. 
Two conﬁ gurations of gas in a piston: They have the same energy, but one is 
low entropy and the other is high entropy.
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

68
Lecture 10: Playing with Entropy
Reﬁ ning Entropy

We have said that entropy measures the disorderliness of a certain 
conﬁ guration of stuff. However, the true statement of entropy is 
that it is the logarithm of the number of conﬁ gurations that look 
macroscopically the same. 

To get this notion exactly straight, consider again gas in a large box, 
a room-sized box. Imagine that the whole atmosphere in the room 
is squeezed into a tiny cube in the middle, just 1 mm on a side. This 
is not literally a cube but a randomly chosen conﬁ guration of all the 
gas atoms in the room.
o Such a cube is a very low-entropy conﬁ guration. There are 
very few arrangements of the atmosphere in a room that, just 
by chance, have all the atoms squeezed into a 1-mm cube.
o We could also consider a random arrangement of the 
atmosphere in the room squeezed into a 10-cm-tall version 
of the Statue of Liberty. This is also a very low-entropy 
conﬁ guration, but it is a much higher-entropy conﬁ guration 
than the 1-mm cube, simply because it is larger. There are more 
conﬁ gurations that look like a 10-cm-tall Statue of Liberty than 
look like a 1-mm cube.

It’s important that we don’t confuse complexity or simplicity with 
low entropy and high entropy. We also shouldn’t get the idea that 
high entropy means more things are mixed together. What we really 
care about is the number of conﬁ gurations.
Philosophical Implications of Boltzmann’s Entropy

The most important implication of Boltzmann’s way of thinking 
about entropy is that the second law of thermodynamics is not 
really a law; it’s a statistical statement about probabilities.
o The reason entropy increases is that there are more ways to be 
high entropy than to be low entropy. Thus, it’s probable that a 
random conﬁ guration that isn’t already at maximum entropy 
will tend toward maximum entropy.

69
o Although it’s improbable, entropy can decrease. With a box 
of gas in equilibrium—its highest-entropy state—there will 
occasionally be ﬂ uctuations that decrease entropy. However, 
the period of time it would take for a noticeable decrease 
in entropy to occur is probably much longer than the age of 
the universe.

Once we accept the idea that entropy increasing is probable 
but not necessary, we can do experiments that intentionally 
decrease entropy. 
o Imagine we have a box of gas that starts in a low-entropy state, 
such as all the gas in one corner, and we let it evolve so that 
all the gas spreads out—entropy increases. Laplace’s demon, 
which can see the position and momentum of every atom, 
can simply reverse the velocity of every atom from the end 
conﬁ guration to the initial conﬁ guration.
o Because the laws of physics are reversible, the box of gas 
will experience an exactly backward evolution, from high 
entropy to low entropy. This is a gross violation of the 
second law of thermodynamics, but of course, it wouldn’t 
happen spontaneously; we have arranged it to happen as a 
thought experiment. 
o However, any tiny deviation will spoil the experiment. We 
might know the position and velocity of all the atoms of gas in 
the box, but any disturbance of even one atom will change its 
precise velocity and position and spoil the experiment. Entropy 
will not decrease because we would be unable to accurately 
arrange all the velocities and positions of atoms in the box.
o Even if we can imagine an isolated box of gas with decreasing 
entropy, once that box starts interacting with the outside world, 
the velocities and positions of the atoms in the box will be 
disturbed and entropy will no longer decrease.

70
Lecture 10: Playing with Entropy
Maxwell’s Demon

James Clerk Maxwell, known for unifying electricity and 
magnetism, proposed his own thought experiment to investigate the 
statistical nature of the second law in relation to Boltzmann’s ideas 
about entropy.

Consider again our box of gas with a partition in the middle at 
thermal equilibrium. Maxwell’s demon stands on top of this box 
with a switch he can use to allow some atoms to go from right to 
left and others to go from left to right in the box. In particular, he 
allows the high-velocity atoms to go from left to right and the low-
velocity atoms to go from right to left, but not vice versa.
Maxwell’s demon decreases entropy by regulating the ﬂ ow of high- and low-
entropy particles.
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

71

The demon does not disturb the velocity of any of the atoms, 
but because of his work, we end up with a box that has a high 
temperature on the right and a low temperature on the left. 
Again, we have violated Clausius’s formulation of the second 
law. Heat seems to have ﬂ owed from thermal equilibrium out of 
thermal equilibrium.

Obviously, the demon himself somehow creates entropy, but it is 
far from obvious how he does so. Over the years, people showed 
that the demon’s door could operate without increasing entropy and 
that he could observe the atoms without increasing entropy.

In 1960, Rolf Landauer, a physicist at IBM, made a model in 
which he showed that the demon could observe the atoms without 
increasing entropy by simply recording their measurements to make 
the experiment a reversible process. He showed that irreversible 
computations are the ones that generate entropy.

It wasn’t until 1982 that Charles Bennett, a computer scientist at 
IBM, ﬁ nally solved the problem in a satisfactory way. What Bennett 
realized, using Landauer’s ideas, is that Maxwell’s demon can keep 
track of only a ﬁ nite amount of information.
o To convince ourselves that the atoms are going only one 
way and not the other, the demon must constantly update his 
information about where the atoms are. He needs to keep track 
of a potentially inﬁ nite amount of information. 
o That’s possible as long as he can erase the previous entries 
in his notebook, but Bennett saw that erasing information is 
irreversible. Once something has been erased, we don’t know 
where the information went. 
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 8.
Von Baeyer, Warmth Disperses and Time Passes.
    Suggested Reading

72
Lecture 10: Playing with Entropy
1. Imagine you are a screenwriter, and your science ﬁ ction movie script 
includes a character who truly lives backward in time. Can you invent a 
plausible dialogue that character would have with someone experiencing 
the ordinary arrow of time?
2. Can you think of a Maxwell’s demon–like experiment that lets you 
decrease entropy in a box without increasing it anywhere else? (Answer: 
No, but it’s fun to try.)
    Questions to Consider

73
The Past Hypothesis
Lecture 11
Y
ou should be convinced by now that Boltzmann’s understanding 
of entropy is the correct one and that it can be reconciled with our 
previous understandings of the second law of thermodynamics from 
Carnot and Clausius. In this lecture, however, we’ll see that there are some 
loose ends. It’s true that Boltzmann’s explanation gives us the right answer 
under certain assumptions, but these assumptions are not unproblematic. As 
we’ll see, Boltzmann helps us understand why entropy will be higher in the 
future but not why it was lower in the past.
A Space of States

To begin, let’s imagine that we have a set of medium-entropy 
microstates in one macrostate and a larger set of high-entropy 
microstates in a larger macrostate. Keep in mind here that a state 
evolves through time, which means that every state lies on a unique 
trajectory. Given the laws of physics and given the state we are in, 
the complete deﬁ nition of a state is that it is all the information we 
need to predict the future and reconstruct the past. 

Every state is on a trajectory, and trajectories never end. That is a 
consequence of the reversibility of the laws of physics. Trajectories 
do not stop evolving, nor do two trajectories come together or one 
split apart. Every trajectory is unique and will continue to evolve 
uniquely forever.

This space of states that we are thinking about is full of trajectories 
passing through it, with every state on a unique trajectory. We 
know that the entropy now in the universe is not as high as it could 
possibly be or as low as it could possibly be, so we are, in some 
sense, in a medium-entropy state right now. 

Boltzmann points out that if we follow all the medium-entropy 
states, some of them will evolve into other medium-entropy 

74
Lecture 11: The Past Hypothesis
states, some of them will go to higher entropy, and some of them 
will go to lower entropy. Remember, it’s not an absolute law that 
medium entropy must go to higher entropy; it is possible to go to 
low entropy. But if we count, we will ﬁ nd that many more medium-
entropy states will evolve to high entropy than to low entropy 
A Typical Microstate?

This picture raises two puzzles, the ﬁ rst of which relates to 
the statement that if we pick a typical trajectory, the entropy 
will increase. 

We have many trajectories in the medium-entropy macrostate; this 
is basically our current world—all the different arrangements of 
the particles that make us up. Boltzmann says that to predict what 
happens next, we randomly choose a typical microstate within 
this macrostate and ask what typically happens. If many more 
of the microstates increase in entropy, it’s probable that entropy 
will increase. 

But who’s to say what is typical? How do we know that we are on 
one of the trajectories that goes up rather than going down? The 
answer is that we don’t. We have made an assumption that our 
trajectory will take us to higher entropy.

The idea behind this kind of assumption goes back to Laplace and 
his principle of indifference: Every allowed possibility should be 
treated as equally likely. 
o Laplace’s principle tells us that if we want to predict the 
behavior of the universe, it is acceptable to consider what 
happens to a typical microstate; we simply count the 
microstates that do one thing versus another thing and turn that 
counting into a probability. If we don’t know what’s going to 
happen, we assume that every alternative is equally likely. 
o It’s true that if you knew the microstate of the universe, you 
could ﬂ ip a coin and know whether it would come up heads 
or tails. But we don’t know the microstate of the universe; 

75
therefore, we say that it’s 50/50. We assign equal weight to 
undistinguishable alternatives.
o Of course, there is only one universe, and it does have a 
microstate, so the justiﬁ cation for this assumption is a little 
bit shaky. Nevertheless, most people are happy to say that our 
microstate is probably typical within the macrostate we’re in.
Lohschmidt’s Reversibility Objection

A larger problem with our picture of microstates goes back to 
the origins of Boltzmann’s ideas. This problem is known as 
Lohschmidt’s reversibility objection, named for Boltzmann’s 
mentor, the Austrian physicist Josef Lohschmidt.

Lohschmidt’s reversibility objection basically comes down to a 
simple fact about the evolution of microstates within a space of all 
possible states, namely, that the trajectories don’t begin or end. As a 
simple consequence of that fact, there are just as many trajectories 
along which entropy is decreasing as there are trajectories along 
which entropy is increasing. 

Boltzmann’s statement is also true: If we start with medium 
entropy and let it evolve, entropy will usually increase. But how 
can we reconcile this with the statement that there are just as many 
trajectories in which entropy is decreasing as increasing? The 
answer comes down to a matter of which question we are asking. 

Boltzmann phrased his question in a particular way: Start with 
a medium-entropy macrostate and ask what happens to it. But 
that question is already sneaking in some directionality of time. 
Lohschmidt says that we could just as easily ask: Where did the 
medium-entropy state come from? What is a typical past of a state 
that is now in medium entropy? This is exactly the same kind of 
calculation, but with the arrow of time reversed.

Because the laws of physics are reversible, the features of the past 
are the same as the features of the future. Therefore, for all the 

76
Lecture 11: The Past Hypothesis
states that have medium entropy, many more of them came from 
high-entropy states in the past than came from low-entropy states. 
If we are going to take seriously Boltzmann’s claim that most 
medium-entropy states increase in entropy as time goes on, then we 
must take seriously Lohschmidt’s point that most of these medium-
entropy states came from a higher-entropy past.

Boltzmann gave us a convincing argument that starting from our 
medium-entropy conﬁ guration, it is natural for entropy to increase. 
There are more ways to be high entropy than to be low entropy. The 
same argument says that it is natural to come from a higher-entropy 
past because there are more ways to be high entropy than to be low 
entropy in the past, as well.

Ultimately, Lohschmidt’s reversibility objection is valid. If all we 
have to work with are underlying laws of physics that are symmetric 
with respect to past and future and Boltzmann’s statistical ideas 
that we chunk up the space of states into macrostates that look the 
same to our macroscopic observation, we do not derive a different 
behavior for the future than we do for the past. We need to add 
something to Boltzmann’s machinery, an extra assumption that is 
explicitly asymmetric with respect to past and future. 
The Past Hypothesis

This extra piece of machinery, the past hypothesis, is the assumption 
that the entropy of our observable universe was, not long ago, much 
lower than it is today. Further, the universe was the kind of low-
entropy conﬁ guration that, under natural thermodynamic evolution, 
would get us to where we are today. There are many ways to be 
low entropy, but there is a speciﬁ c low-entropy state that naturally 
grows into the universe we see. 

The past hypothesis for the universe talks about what we would 
call conditions near the Big Bang. Obviously, Boltzmann and 
Lohschmidt didn’t know about the Big Bang, but they knew that 
the correct way to justify the second law of thermodynamics within 

77
Boltzmann’s framework was to add this assumption that explicitly 
broke the symmetry of past and future. 

The past hypothesis teaches us that the arrow time—the real 
difference between the past and the future—is not a matter of atomic 
theory, statistical mechanics, or anything like that. It’s not deeply 
engrained in the nature of time; it is a feature of our environment, a 
feature of the universe in which we ﬁ nd ourselves. 

Given this assumption, Laplace’s principle of indifference, and the 
deﬁ nition of entropy as the logarithm of the number of microstates 
in a macrostate, Boltzmann gives us a convincing argument for why 
the entropy of the universe tomorrow should be higher than it was 
today. He doesn’t give us an argument for why it would have been 
lower yesterday.

The past hypothesis tells us that the reason the entropy of the 
universe was lower yesterday than it is today is that it was even 
lower the day before yesterday. The reason it was even lower the 
Just as space gets a direction because we live in the vicinity of an inﬂ uential 
object, the Earth, time gets a direction because we live in the vicinity of an 
inﬂ uential event, the Big Bang.


	









	



		


















		
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

78
Lecture 11: The Past Hypothesis
day before yesterday is that it was even lower the day before that, 
and so on, back 13.7 billion years to the Big Bang.

We can’t derive the history of the universe as we know it on the 
basis of purely dynamical grounds. We have to put in an assumption 
about the boundary condition in the past. There is no matching 
assumption about the boundary condition of the future. We get 
the answers right by assuming that there is nothing special about 
the future; it will be a typical state. This is where the imbalance 
between past and future comes from. We make a past hypothesis, 
but there is no future hypothesis.
A Future Hypothesis?

Craig Callender, a philosopher of physics, has asked us to imagine 
what a future hypothesis would be like. His seemingly bizarre 
thought experiment involving Fabergé eggs collecting in your 
dresser drawer is actually no more bizarre than to imagine that there 
is a past condition in which the universe was in some very speciﬁ c 
low-entropy macrostate among all the possible conﬁ gurations it 
could have been in.

The past hypothesis seems to be necessary and true if we want to 
understand the past, but it doesn’t come from any underlying theory. 
It must come from cosmology. In other words, it’s the conditions 
near the Big Bang—13.7 billion years ago—that are what we refer 
to when we talk about the past hypothesis. 

With that in mind, we understand the statement that the arrow of 
time is like the arrow of space. The arrow of space here on Earth is 
not something intrinsic to the laws of physics; it is a feature of our 
local environment, distorted by the gravitational ﬁ eld of Earth. The 
past hypothesis tells us that the arrow of time is the same. It doesn’t 
come from the laws of physics but from our local environment—
the observable universe—inﬂ uenced by the Big Bang. 

79
Albert, Time and Chance.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 8.
Price, Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point.
1. Can you imagine inventing new laws of physics—not like those in our 
world—that naturally have entropy increasing in one direction of time 
and decreasing in the other?
2. What are some other examples of the principle of indifference that we use 
to calculate probabilities? Do you think this kind of principle is warranted?
3. Following Callender’s thought experiment, can you think of some other 
interesting future boundary conditions and how they would manifest 
themselves without violating the microscopic laws of physics?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

80
Lecture 12: Memory, Causality, and Action
Memory, Causality, and Action
Lecture 12
W
ith Boltzmann’s idea of entropy and the past hypothesis, we now 
understand why there is an arrow of time. But remember that 
there is more than one version of the arrow of time. In addition to 
melting ice cubes in a glass of water, the fact that we can remember yesterday 
but not tomorrow is an example of the arrow of time. We’ve claimed that 
these kinds of examples also reduce to the fact that entropy is increasing. In 
this lecture, we will try to justify that grandiose claim, to connect the human 
aspects of the arrow of time to the physical aspects of increasing entropy.
The Past Hypothesis in Everyday Life

The past hypothesis creates an imbalance between the past and the 
future; it gives us extra information about the past. 
o The past hypothesis modiﬁ es Laplace’s principle of 
indifference in that it doesn’t allow us to assume that we’re 
equally likely to be in 
any of the microstates 
contained within some 
macrostate.
o We happen to be in 
one of the very speciﬁ c 
microstates in which, 
if we evolve them 
into the past, entropy 
would decrease.

This information is deeply 
ingrained in how we think. 
If you’re walking down the 
street and you see a broken 
egg on the sidewalk, you 
can retrodict the past of the 
We don’t look at the macrostate of 
the broken egg and imagine that it is 
from some random microstate that 
we can’t identify; we imagine that the 
microstate of the egg was one that 
came from a lower-entropy past.
© Hemera/Thinkstock.

81
egg much more readily than you can predict its future because of 
the past hypothesis.
o You don’t look at the macrostate of the egg and imagine that it 
has some random microstate that you don’t know. You imagine 
that the microstate of the egg was one that came from a lower-
entropy past. 
o You know that the way the real world creates broken eggs is 
ﬁ rst by making unbroken eggs. That is the likely evolution 
if you want to connect the past hypothesis—the low-entropy 
past of the Big Bang—to the current situation, where there is a 
broken egg lying on the sidewalk. 

This is where our asymmetry of epistemic access comes from. 
We are able to say more about the likely past given our current 
information than about the likely future because we know more 
about the past. We have a boundary condition in the past at the 
Big Bang of very low entropy. There is no boundary condition of 
the future. 

We think that the macroscopic information we have about the egg 
is all we need to talk about the past of the egg and the future of the 
egg, but if that were true, the set of things we could say about the 
egg’s future would be the same as the set of things we could say 
about the egg’s past. 

It is not just the knowledge of the state of the egg that lets us say it 
was unbroken. We pick out the possible trajectory of the history of 
the universe along which the egg was unbroken when we say that 
that’s what we construct the past to be. That selection is based on 
the idea that there is a past hypothesis that ﬁ xes the universe to start 
in a state of very low entropy.

This is why there is a directionality to our knowledge of the 
universe. If we didn’t know about the past hypothesis, we wouldn’t 
be able to remember the past any more than we think we can 
remember the future. 

82
Lecture 12: Memory, Causality, and Action

We tend to think that the past is real and ﬁ xed, but there is a tension 
with that way of thinking and our belief that the underlying laws of 
physics are reversible. 
o At the deep level of our best understanding of the laws of 
nature, there is no more reality or ﬁ xedness to the past than 
there is to the future. The real difference between the past and 
the future is not how real or settled it is but how much we know 
about it. 
o We can infer much more accurately about the past because 
we know not only the current macrostate but also the past 
hypothesis. When it comes to predicting the future, all we have 
is the current macrostate. There is no future hypothesis. 
Memory

Let’s think about an abstract notion of memory, the idea that we 
have something in the present world that tells us something about 
the past world. This is some artifact or record—a photograph, for 
example—that testiﬁ es to something that was really true in the past.

Imagine that you have a photograph of yourself taken with John 
Lennon back in the 1970s. Why is it that this photograph is evidence 
that you actually met John Lennon? What reason do we have to 
say that just because you have a photograph, that event probably 
happened in the past? 
o Let’s talk about the photograph in the same language that 
we talked about the egg on the sidewalk. What will happen 
to the photograph in the future? We cannot predict the exact 
future state of the photograph, but we know that it will 
eventually decay.
o What about the past of the photograph? The reason there is a 
photograph now is that a real event took place and someone 
took a picture of it. But why do we treat the past of the 
photograph differently from the future of the photograph?

83
o The answer is the past hypothesis. Just as the most likely future 
of the photograph is to decay and have its molecules scattered 
throughout the universe, if it weren’t for the past hypothesis, 
the most likely way for that photograph to come into existence 
would be by randomly becoming assembled out of molecules 
throughout the universe.
o Note that the way we justify using the photograph as evidence 
of the event is to say that if the event hadn’t happened, the 
photograph wouldn’t be likely. But we are not asking how likely 
is the photograph given the event or not given the event; instead, 
we’re asking, given the photograph, how likely is the event?
o Given the photograph today—given some information about the 
macrostate of the current world—what can you conclude about 
the past? The answer is that without the past hypothesis, you 
could certainly not conclude that the event actually happened.
o To go from the photograph today to the actual event would 
generally lead you to a sort of random collection of things 
happening unless you could narrow down the trajectory of the 
universe by also including a low-entropy boundary condition 
in the past. It is the past hypothesis that lets us believe our 
memories, that lets us take for granted that what we think is 
documentation of past events is actually reliable.
Cause and Effect

Another aspect of the arrow of time is that causes precede effects. 
But if we believe that the laws of physics are reversible, we can 
explain any moment in the history of the universe in terms of any 
other moment. 

Why is it that, in our phenomenological real-life world, we think 
that causes happen ﬁ rst and events happen second? 
o Given pieces of broken glass on the ﬂ oor, we don’t think 
about every possible way for the molecules of glass to arrange 
themselves in the form of a broken window. 

84
Lecture 12: Memory, Causality, and Action
o We imagine there was a past low-entropy boundary condition 
and given the past hypothesis, then the most likely way to get 
pieces of broken glass from the window on the ﬂ oor is to have 
an unbroken window that something broke.
o What we call the cause of the broken window on the ﬂ oor is 
the event that connects the unbroken window to the broken 
window. It is the past event that is lower entropy that needs to 
be connected to the future event that tells us that the cause must 
have happened before the effect. 
o It is ultimately because we know more about the past (because 
of the past hypothesis) that what we call causes always precede 
what we call effects. 
Free Will

The same logic applies to the human ability to make choices, what 
we call free will. We think we have the ability to decide what to 
have for dinner tomorrow night. We don’t think we have the ability 
to decide what to have had for dinner last night. 

But again, the laws of physics treat the two events the same. There is 
the future, and there is the past, and they are connected by the laws 
of physics to the present. If we knew the microstates, there would 
be no difference between predicting the future and retrodicting the 
past. But we don’t know them. We have less information. 

Of course, the reason we think we have free will about the future 
and not about the past is the past hypothesis. The past hypothesis 
ﬁ xes enough about what happens in the past that we don’t think we 
can affect it because there is no future hypothesis. The set of things 
that are open to us in the future is very large. We conceptualize that 
large set of possibilities in terms of choices, in terms of free will. 

Determinism—the idea of starting with the current state of the 
universe and predicting what will happen in the future—has a bad 

85
reputation because it is confused with fatalism. But the determinism 
of the laws of physics isn’t the same as fatalism. 
o Physics tells us that if we knew the microstate, we could say 
what our fate might be in the future, but we will never know 
the microstate—we can’t. 
o Physics can be determined yet not fatalistic exactly because 
there is no simple future boundary condition. 
The Effects of the Past Hypothesis

The arrow of time is not just a physics problem. Everything about 
how we live our lives relies on the arrow of time in an absolutely 
intimate way. The arrow of time, in turn, relies on the combination 
of the past hypothesis and our incomplete knowledge of the current 
state of the universe.

This is not the usual way we think, but it is the right way of 
matching our best description of reality with the everyday reality 
in which we live. It is a reconciliation of the fundamental laws of 
physics with what we do in everyday life.
Albert, Time and Chance.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 9.
Price, Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point.
1. If entropy were higher in both the past and the future, would it be 
possible to have a reliable record of events in the past?
2. Why do we generally say that causes precede effects?
3. Do you think conservation of information robs us of free will? What 
would be the consequences of that view for how we live our lives?
    Questions to Consider
    Suggested Reading

86
Lecture 13: Boltzmann Brains
Boltzmann Brains
Lecture 13
B
oltzmann’s story of what entropy is and why it tends to increase is 
compelling: Entropy goes up because there are more ways to be high 
entropy than to be low entropy. But to make the past work, we have 
to add this extra ugly ingredient, the past hypothesis. People have argued 
about this ingredient ever since Boltzmann came up with the idea. What does 
the past hypothesis really mean, and where does it come from? Our larger 
goal is to try to ﬁ nd a theory that explains the past hypothesis, and we start in 
this lecture by looking at a particular explanation that didn’t work out.
Poincaré’s Recurrence Theorem and Zermelo’s Objection

The 19th-century mathematician and physicist Henri Poincaré gave 
us the recurrence theorem: If there are particles in some system that 
can take on only a ﬁ nite number of states or can move only within 
a bounded region, then whatever state we ﬁ nd that system in at one 
point in time will repeat itself an inﬁ nite number of times toward 
the future.

This doesn’t sound particularly surprising. If there are a ﬁ nite 
number of things you can do and you have an inﬁ nite amount of 
time to do them, then you will keep doing the same thing over and 
over again. But when you think about the implications of this idea 
for the real world, it becomes disconcerting. 
o If we put an ice cube in a glass of warm water, the ice will 
melt; entropy will increase. But if we leave the glass of water 
on the table for an arbitrarily long period of time, Poincaré’s 
recurrence theorem says that the ice cube will re-form.
o In other words, Poincaré says that if we wait long enough, 
entropy will spontaneously decrease. In fact, his theorem says 
that the lower-entropy conﬁ guration will certainly happen. 
Fundamentally, this is simply a consequence of reversibility. 

87

The recurrence theorem of Poincaré was turned Boltzmann by 
a German mathematician named Ernst Zermelo. According to 
Zermelo, if motion is periodic, anything that goes up will eventually 
go back down and then go up again.
o We can’t prove that entropy will increase if we can prove that 
entropy will eventually decrease and then increase again, going 
on forever. 
o Zermelo’s recurrence objection is stronger than Lohschmidt’s 
reversibility objection: If entropy is increasing now, the 
recurrence theorem says that at some time in the future, it 
will certainly decrease. Thus, it can’t be shown that there is a 
tendency for entropy to go one way or the other. We haven’t 
really established a true arrow of time.
o The simple answer to Zermelo’s objection is that in the visible 
world—the observable part of reality—entropy was, in fact, 
very low in the observable past. There’s a period of time in the 
universe that we have access to—about 13.7 billion years—
but that period of time is much shorter than the timescale 
over which, according to the recurrence theorem, anything 
interesting would recur. 
Boltzmann and the Anthropic Principle

Because Boltzmann worked in a world that was governed by 
Newtonian physics, he thought of space and time as absolute and 
eternal. He saw the universe as an inﬁ nitely big space scattered 
throughout with inﬁ nitely many particles that were in thermal 
equilibrium most of the time.
o In Newtonian physics, time doesn’t begin or end; in an inﬁ nitely 
long time, the particles would come to thermal equilibrium. 
But Boltzmann also knew that thermal equilibrium doesn’t last 
forever; it ﬂ uctuates. 
o If we wait long enough, arbitrarily large ﬂ uctuations to lower-
entropy conﬁ gurations will eventually happen. It may take a 

88
Lecture 13: Boltzmann Brains
very long time, but in this Newtonian eternal universe, we have 
forever to wait. 

Boltzmann then made an argument based on the anthropic principle, 
the idea that we human beings don’t get to see the typical parts of a 
big universe—a universe where there are many different conditions 
in many different places. 
o If typical parts of the universe are inhospitable to the existence 
of life, then we are going to ﬁ nd ourselves only in those regions 
that are hospitable.
o The anthropic principle says that our job is not to construct a 
theory of cosmology in which the entire universe is hospitable 
to us. Our job is to construct a theory in which those regions that 
are hospitable look like the universe in which we actually live.
o Boltzmann’s strategy was to take this eternal Newtonian universe 
with ﬂ uctuating entropy and apply to it the anthropic principle.

Even today, the anthropic principle has a somewhat shady 
reputation. It can seem empty. It’s obviously true that we live where 
In a thermal-equilibrium Newtonian universe, there are times and places 
where a large ﬂ uctuation happens, large enough to form a galaxy; we can live 
in these multiverses.
	
	
!	
!
!!	
!
!"	
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

89
we can live, but that’s irrelevant unless we live in a universe where 
we can live in some places and not others.
o For example, there is a lot more volume in the space in between 
the planets in our solar system than on the surface of any one of 
the planets. Should we be surprised that life arose on the surface 
of the Earth rather than in between the planets? Of course not; 
life would just not survive for long in the interplanetary space 
of the solar system. 
o The anthropic principle may or may not be the right way to 
think about the universe, but it is certainly an important part of 
cosmology. If we live in a universe that is big enough to have 
very different regions, then the anthropic principle tells us why 
we live here rather than somewhere else.

Boltzmann said that most of the places in this large universe—
most of which is in thermal equilibrium—cannot support life. But 
there will be ﬂ uctuations—regions of space in which the molecules 
randomly ﬁ nd themselves in a low-entropy conﬁ guration. If we 
wait long enough, there will be large ﬂ uctuations, and if we wait for 
a very long time, there will be a ﬂ uctuation large enough to form an 
entire galaxy. 

Without knowing about the Big Bang or the existence of other 
galaxies, Boltzmann suggested that there could be random, 
smoothly distributed gas and dust in the universe, and if we wait for 
eternity, it will simply happen that the random motions of that stuff 
will collect into something that looks like our galaxy. Outside that 
region, it will not look like our galaxy, but here, it will.

In Boltzmann’s scenario, entropy does not increase forever. It 
can decrease locally because of some ﬂ uctuation, and then it 
will increase again. The overall evolution of entropy is actually 
symmetric; it goes up and down equally often. Is Boltzmann going 
to predict that entropy increases just as much as it decreases? That’s 
not the right way to think about it.

90
Lecture 13: Boltzmann Brains
o As we argued, the direction of time in which entropy was lower 
is the direction we remember (the past). The region of time in 
which entropy is higher is the direction where we can make 
choices (the future). It doesn’t matter what coordinates you 
use; what matters is that we always deﬁ ne the past to be the 
direction in which entropy was lower.
o If entropy ﬂ uctuates, there are two possible places we can live: 
while it’s going down or while it’s going up. People living in 
either place would deﬁ ne the past as the minimum point of 
entropy. This scenario is potentially compatible with the data. 

Boltzmann’s idea that the random evolution of chaos ultimately 
creates the universe is compelling, but in the end, his hypothesis 
fails. This was pointed out in the 1930s by Sir Arthur Eddington, 
an astrophysicist in England, who noted that small ﬂ uctuations in 
entropy are much, much more likely than large ﬂ uctuations. 
o Boltzmann’s scenario makes a prediction, namely, we make 
whatever we want in this Newtonian universe via the tiniest 
ﬂ uctuation possible. If we want to make a star with some 
planets, we make the star and the planets; we would not make 
billions of other stars or an entire galaxy.
o If we want to make a person, we wouldn’t need to make the 
Earth. We could just ﬂ uctuate random molecules into the shape 
of a person. Of course, that’s very unlikely, but it’s much more 
likely than ﬂ uctuating the entire Earth with many, many people 
on it.
o If we are in an eternal Newtonian universe with random 
ﬂ uctuations, the easiest way to make an apple pie—contrary to 
what Carl Sagan said—is just to ﬂ uctuate the apple pie.
Boltzmann Brains

What does Boltzmann’s scenario say about you and the past 
hypothesis? In this eternal universe where things ﬂ uctuate into 
existence, it’s immensely more probable that you ﬂ uctuated into 

91
existence with your memories randomly out of the surrounding 
chaos than that your memories actually happened.

In fact, you don’t even need you. A thinking person is deﬁ ned by 
his or her brain and central nervous system. If that’s the case, then 
we don’t need to ﬂ uctuate a whole body into existence; we can just 
ﬂ uctuate a brain with whatever memories or thoughts we want it to 
have. This horrible implication of Boltzmann’s scenario is called 
Boltzmann brains.

If we live in chaos—if the universe simply ﬂ uctuates—almost all 
observers in that universe would be disembodied brains. The fact 
that we are not disembodied brains means that we don’t live in that 
universe. But how do we know that we’re not Boltzmann brains?
o The simple and short argument against that statement is this: If 
you believe that you’re in some city and outside of your current 
location, the city exists, Boltzmann’s scenario says that the 
impression of that city is much easier to put into your brain 
by itself than actually creating the city. Thus, once you leave 
where you are, there shouldn’t be any city there.
o The real reason that Boltzmann wasn’t right is something 
called cognitive instability. If you ﬂ uctuate into existence 
randomly, all of your impressions about physics, math, 
logic, and philosophy are most likely to also have ﬂ uctuated 
randomly into your brain. 
o If this scenario is true, you can never have any rational 
justiﬁ cation for believing that the scenario is true. You can 
never have any reason to believe the thoughts you think 
you have if you live in this universe. That’s why it’s called 
cognitive instability. Once you believe it, you realize you have 
no rational reason for believing it. 

92
Lecture 13: Boltzmann Brains
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 10.
1. What kind of collection of matter do you think it takes to make a 
functioning “brain”? Can something that ﬂ uctuates randomly into 
existence be just as alive and conscious as something that evolves and 
ages normally?
2. What is the best argument that we are not Boltzmann brains? What’s 
the best reason to think that the universe as a whole is not a random 
ﬂ uctuation from a higher-entropy state?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

93
Complexity and Life
Lecture 14
I
n the last lecture, we talked about a cosmological scenario that attempted 
to account for the arrow of time just by imagining that the universe was 
inﬁ nitely big and lasted inﬁ nitely long and there were random ﬂ uctuations 
that could give rise to people like us. We found that it didn’t work. If we 
lived in that universe, individual complex creatures could be made through 
random ﬂ uctuations, not through billions of years of evolution. In the next 
few lectures, we’ll return to the real world and see how what we know about 
the actual features of life on Earth—including how human beings think and 
perceive time—matches up with what we think about the arrow of time. 
Deﬁ ning Complexity

In the 1960s, the Soviet mathematician Andrey Kolmogorov 
deﬁ ned the complexity of something as the length of the shortest 
description that captures everything relevant about that thing. 

When we talk about the complexity of some living being or 
nonliving object in the universe, we coarse grain. We don’t list 
the position and momentum of every atom; instead, we describe 
a certain living being as having a certain number of proteins, 
molecules, and so forth. The complexity of an organism is 
Kolmogorov’s complexity applied to that coarse-grain description. 

It’s important to understand 
that low entropy or high 
entropy doesn’t necessarily 
correspond to simple or 
complex. The example of 
milk stirred into coffee 
shows us that complexity 
can arise when entropy is 
in between very low and 
very high.
Neither low entropy nor high entropy 
corresponds to simple or complex; 
complexity can arise when entropy is 
in between very low and very high.
© Sean Carroll.

94
Lecture 14: Complexity and Life

What’s true for the cup of coffee is also true for the universe. 
Basically, the universe began 13.7 billion years ago in a low-
entropy state and a simple state. It was homogeneous. It was smooth 
everywhere, and everything was densely packed. 
o The far, far future of our universe is also very simple. 
Everything will scatter to the winds, and we will have empty 
space once again. 
o The middle universe that has medium entropy is complex. It is 
today that we have galaxies and stars and planets and life on 
those planets.

Complexity depends on entropy; it relies on the fact that entropy is 
increasing. We don’t have to worry about how complexity can arise 
in a universe evolving toward a heat death. The simple fact that 
entropy is increasing is what makes life possible.
Erwin Schrödinger’s Deﬁ nition of Life

A careful construction of the second law of thermodynamics says that 
in a closed system—an isolated system that is not interacting with 
the rest of the world—entropy either always increases or remains 
constant. But a living being is not a closed system; it interacts with its 
environment constantly. The second law does not, however, rule out 
the existence of a living organism. In fact, it allows for life to exist.

One of the best ways of thinking about this was put forward by 
Erwin Schrödinger, the pioneer of quantum mechanics. Schrödinger 
came up with a wonderful deﬁ nition of what life is: It is something 
that goes on doing something much longer than you would expect 
it to. 
o To understand what Schrödinger had in mind, imagine a 
glass of water with an ice cube in it. Over the course of a few 
minutes, the ice cube melts, and the water in the ice cube comes 
to equilibrium with the water around it. Once that equilibrium 
is reached, everything stops. 

95
o Now imagine a glass of water with a goldﬁ sh in it. The goldﬁ sh 
does not come to equilibrium with the water around it. It 
maintains its integrity 
even though, by mass, 
most of the goldﬁ sh 
is also water. If you 
give it food, you’re 
allowing that goldﬁ sh 
to take advantage of 
energy in a low-entropy 
form, and it can last a 
long time. This is what 
Schrödinger 
had 
in 
mind: A living being 
can put off the approach 
to thermal equilibrium 
for a long time. 
o What’s going on here is 
actually very similar to 
the action of Maxwell’s 
demon in maintaining 
a low-entropy situation 
without violating the second law. The demon is making use of 
the fact that he lives in a low-entropy world to keep his box 
of gas in a low-entropy situation. By itself, the box would 
equilibrate; both sides would come to the same temperature. 
The demon increases the entropy of the universe by writing 
things down in his notebook and later erasing them. 
o If the external world were already in equilibrium, the demon 
could not do that. The entropy of a system that is in equilibrium 
cannot be increased. 

This is a general paradigm for thinking about how life persists. 
Schrödinger tells us that the complexity of a living being can last 
Schrödinger tells us that life is 
something that goes on doing 
something much longer than we 
would expect it to.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

96
Lecture 14: Complexity and Life
longer than you would expect it to. It does not come to thermal 
equilibrium because there is plenty of room for entropy to grow. 
Low Entropy in the Biosphere

We typically say that the Sun is the source of energy for living 
beings on Earth. But it’s not the energy we get from the Sun that 
matters; it’s the fact that the energy is in low-entropy form. The 
Sun is a hot spot in an otherwise cold sky. If the whole sky were 
the temperature of the Sun, we would get much more energy than 
we get now, but we would come to equilibrium with the sky very 
quickly, and all life would cease.

Likewise, if the whole day and night sky were the temperature of 
the real night sky—completely dark and cold—the Earth would 
quickly come to the temperature of the night sky, and life would 
cease. The reason we have life is that the whole sky is not at the same 
temperature, and we do not quickly come to thermal equilibrium.

We give back to the universe just as much energy as we get from 
the Sun. But if we don’t get a net gain of energy from the Sun, what 
is it that drives life on Earth? The answer can be found in the fact 
that the energy we get from the Sun is in the form of visible light. 
o For every 1 photon of visible light we get from the Sun, we 
give back 20 photons to the universe, each with about 1/20 
of the energy. We radiate infrared light to the universe, which 
means that we increase entropy by a factor of 20. 
o Our biosphere is far from a closed system. Energy comes in, 
we increase its entropy by a factor of 20, and then we give it 
back to the universe in the form of infrared radiation.

Can we account for the increase of entropy quantitatively when 
we compare the amount that we have increased the entropy of the 
universe through infrared radiation to the amount that we have 
decreased the entropy of the universe by inventing life here on Earth?
o The answer is yes, we can do the necessary calculations, and 
when we do, we ﬁ nd that the Earth has increased the entropy of 

97
the universe over the course of the history of life by 4 billion 
times the amount that the biosphere has decreased the entropy 
of the universe.
o The bottom line here is this: The origin of life on Earth and the 
existence of life on Earth do not violate the second law. 
The Origin of Life

Before we talk about the origin of life, it’s important to note that 
the process of evolution is not working toward the goal of greater 
complexity—or any goal at all. The way evolution works is that 
individual species and the genes and DNA they carry ﬂ ourish 
or don’t in whatever environment they are in, and when they 
ﬂ ourish, they reproduce and create more of themselves. Sometimes 
ﬂ ourishing means being complex, but sometimes it doesn’t.

There are two schools of thought about the ways in which life could 
have started on Earth, one of which is called “replication ﬁ rst.” In 
this view, the most important feature of life is that a living being 
can reproduce itself. Some biologists argue that RNA molecules 
could have come ﬁ rst and reproduced themselves. Later, these 
reproducing molecules formed cells around themselves and became 
the ﬁ rst single-celled organisms. We can think of this as software 
before hardware.

The competing school of thought is called “metabolism ﬁ rst.” This 
school argues that the use of complex chemical reactions to take 
advantage of the low-entropy environment on the early Earth came 
ﬁ rst. This is hardware before software.

From one point of view, it makes sense to have hardware without 
software. The metabolism ﬁ rst school says that the ﬁ rst life was just 
a chemical reaction, something like ﬁ re, taking advantage of the 
fuel around it to get going. 
o The early Earth most likely had an atmosphere that was rich in 
hydrogen and carbon dioxide. The interesting thing about this 
atmosphere is that it was low entropy. To increase entropy—

98
Lecture 14: Complexity and Life
which is what the world wants to do—that hydrogen and 
carbon dioxide would be converted into methane and water.
o The problem is that to go from the original situation of low 
entropy to the situation of higher entropy requires a chain of 
reactions that is very difﬁ cult to get started. The hypothesis 
is that those complicated series of reactions started in very 
speciﬁ c geological formations.
o If this story is true, the reason life started is that it was trying 
to increase the entropy of the primitive atmosphere on Earth. 
There were many ways to rearrange the fundamental structure 
of the things in the Earth’s early atmosphere that would have 
had a higher entropy, but to get there required something 
complicated, like life.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 9.
Gell-Mann, The Quark and the Jaguar.
Schrödinger, What Is Life?
1. What is the best deﬁ nition of “life”? Is a virus alive? A computer 
program? A forest ﬁ re? A galaxy? 
2. What are the different ways in which living organisms increase the 
entropy of the universe around them? Could life as we know it exist in a 
high-entropy (equilibrium) environment?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

99
The Perception of Time
Lecture 15
I
n this lecture, we’ll try to answer a question that many of us have when 
we’re talking about the mysteries of time: Why am I always late? Of 
course, we can’t come up with a speciﬁ c answer, but we can talk about 
how our brains and bodies measure the passage of time and how we perceive 
that passage. The reason we feel the passage of time is that our bodies have 
clocks in them, such as our heartbeats and our breathing. But as we’ll see, 
biological clocks are not very reliable compared to mechanical or electronic 
clocks because our bodies are affected by many things that are outside of 
our control.
Biological Rhythms

One way of thinking about an advanced organism, such as a 
mammal, is as a network that includes the brain and the different 
systems in the body, such as the nervous system, circulatory system, 
and so on. On the basis of network theory, we can make predictions 
of how the rhythms cascade through the body.

Biological networks move faster in smaller animals, and smaller 
animals have faster heartbeats than larger animals. They also 
have shorter life-spans. It’s an interesting feature of our biology 
that somehow a shrew and an elephant have similar “blueprints,” 
although these take reality in different forms—a tiny form for the 
shrew and a larger one for the elephant. This kind of scaling law 
goes all the way down to the cellular level.

Unlike shrews and elephants, human beings are affected by 
another variable, the culture in which we ﬁ nd ourselves. We all 
know that different cultures approach time differently. In fact, 
various studies have been done to try to measure the pace of life in 
different cultures.

100
Lecture 15: The Perception of Time
o Not surprisingly, people 
in higher-population areas 
have been found to walk 
faster than they do in 
smaller-population areas. 
o Researchers comparing the 
pace of life in cities over 
time have found that over 
the last 20 years, the pace 
of life has increased by 10 
percent. In areas that are 
rapidly industrializing, the 
increase in the pace of life 
is even greater.
Perceiving the Passage of Time

We might think that the human 
brain is similar to a computer 
because it clearly computes 
in some sense, but the way 
the brain came together is very different than the way a computer 
program is written. The brain evolved over billions of years by an 
incremental process in which random possibilities were tested. A 
computer program, in contrast, is usually written to address a task 
from the top down.

In the brain, information for any task you might want to do is 
probably shared among many different structures. In particular, 
keeping time is a highly distributed feature in the brain.
o Neuroscientists have discovered that they can remove the 
cerebral cortex (the advanced parts of the brain) in rats, and 
the rats are still able to tell time. This means that whatever we 
are doing when we are measuring duration and time, it’s not 
a matter of our conscious brain; there are unconscious things 
going on.
The areas of the world that are 
developing, industrializing, and 
gaining high technology the most 
quickly also see their pace of life 
increasing the most quickly.
© Goodshoot/Thinkstock.

101
o Another experiment showed that mice with intact brains could 
keep track of at least three different rhythms. 

Inside our brains is more than one timekeeping device. In fact, we 
can sort of roughly categorize the different kinds of timekeeping. 
One part of the brain keeps track of what time of day it is, another 
part keeps track of how much time has passed during certain tasks, 
and yet other parts are more or less like alarm clocks. They keep 
track of time before some relevant future event.

Neuroscientists have been able to isolate at least three different 
things that affect our perception of the passage of time: (1) pulses 
in the brain, (2) sensory input and focus, and (3) the accumulation 
of memories.
Pulses in the Brain

Different neurons in the brain do work via pulses, and together, 
multiple levels of pulses help us perceive the passage of time.

These pulses can be affected by stimulants, such as caffeine, and 
depressants, such as alcohol. When you drink caffeine, your internal 
clock seems to speed up compared to the outside world. Stimulants 
or depressants are believed to affect the neurotransmitters that send 
signals from neurons to other cells in the brain. 

The neurons send these neurotransmitters, such as dopamine, in 
the form of pulses. Caffeine, alcohol, and other drugs can make it 
easier or harder for these neurotransmitters to be sent, and that’s 
what speeds up or slows down our internal clocks.
Sensory Input and Focus

When you are focused on a task, you don’t pay as much attention to 
the outside world, and in some sense, you also don’t pay as much 
attention to your internal clock. Your internal timekeeping device 
seems to slow down while the outside world speeds up.

102
Lecture 15: The Perception of Time

In contrast, if you’re bored or are not focused on any one task, the 
opposite effect happens. Your internal clock seems to go faster 
while the outside world slows down. 
Accumulation of Memories

Often, in high-stress situations, time seems to slow down, by which 
we mean that your internal clock speeds up, but the rest of the world 
seems to slow down.

Researchers have found that conditions that create stress and speed 
up the internal clock do not help us perceive the outside world. 
Still, subjects in high-stress experiments report that time slowed 
down for them in recollecting a stressful event.

One theory explaining this phenomenon is that the more memories 
we accumulate, the more time seems to have passed. When you 
are in a high-stress situation, your brain does its best to record 
absolutely everything. It accumulates a huge amount of data, even 
though it does not perceive things any more quickly than it would 
otherwise. When you think about the situation afterward, you have 
more memories—more data to leaf through—and, therefore, it 
seems as if more time has passed.

This hypothesis gets some support from the fact that time seems to 
pass more quickly as we age. For example, when you were a child, 
summer seemed to last forever, but when you get older, it seems to 
rush by. 
o It may be that when you were young in the summertime, such 
activities as going to the beach were new to you, but when you 
get older, you’ve been to the beach and you don’t take in as 
much new information about the experience as a child would. 
Thus, time seems to pass more quickly for you compared to 
when you were a child.
o Experiments in which 20-year-olds and 60-year-olds are asked 
to estimate the passage of time show that younger subjects are 
much more accurate in their estimations than older ones. For 

103
older people, it takes longer for the same amount of subjective 
time to pass.

Another hypothesis tries to quantify this experience of the passage 
of time by saying that the amount of time we experience grows 
logarithmically with our age. 
o If you’ve ever been on a boring plane ride, it seems to last 
forever while you are experiencing it, but when you recall it 
after the fact, it seems to go by quickly. You might remember 
that you were bored, but you don’t have some elaborate 
memory of every single event because none of the events 
was interesting. 
o Because you were not making new memories, your subjective 
time after the fact seems to make the trip quite short. 
Experiencing the Present Moment

We all think that there is a moment called “now” that we are 
perceiving. But if you think about it, what we call the present 
moment isn’t the present moment. It takes time for the information 
we are gathering to get to us and for our brains to process 
that information.

If you touch your nose and your toes at the same time, you will 
notice that you feel the touch simultaneously, although you 
shouldn’t. The amount of time it takes the nerve signal to travel 
from the nose to the brain is much less than the amount of time for 
the signal to travel from the foot to the brain. The brain takes into 
account that our feet are farther away than our faces.

It turns out that what we consider to be the correct moment right 
now is actually about 80 milliseconds in the past. You can measure 
this by watching a person dribbling a basketball and moving away 
from you. You see and hear the sound at the same time in your 
brain until the person gets so far away that it takes more than 80 
milliseconds for the sound to reach you. At that point, there is a 
mismatch between the sound and the sight.

104
Lecture 15: The Perception of Time
The Stanford Marshmallow Experiment

The Stanford marshmallow experiment shows that our orientation 
toward time is a crucial component of how we live the rest of 
our lives.

In this experiment, children are given one marshmallow and offered 
another one if they can wait a few minutes before eating the ﬁ rst. 
Psychologists claim that the difference between eating the ﬁ rst 
marshmallow immediately and waiting to get two marshmallows 
later shows something about a person’s orientation toward time.

There are some people who, in some sense, dwell in the past; 
what they care about most is what happened in the past. Others 
live in the present; they want that marshmallow right now. Still 
others are future oriented; they will sacriﬁ ce the opportunity to eat 
the marshmallow in front of them to get the marshmallow in the 
future. This ability to take the future just as seriously as we take the 
present is a good predictor for how we approach many situations in 
our lives.
Levine, A Geography of Time.
Zimbardo and Boyd, The Time Paradox.
1. Can you think of reasons why the pace of life is faster in dense, 
developed areas? How would you test these hypotheses?
2. When do you perceive time to be moving faster and slower? How would 
you interpret that perception in terms of your biological rhythms and the 
accumulation of memories?
3. How would you describe your personal orientation toward time?
    Questions to Consider
    Suggested Reading

105
Memory and Consciousness
Lecture 16
B
oth remembering the past and predicting the future are crucial for 
human consciousness, for how we process information and make 
sense of our lives. In this lecture, we’ll return to psychology and 
neuroscience, and we’ll see even more clearly that the human brain is a 
complicated place—much harder to understand than the physical universe. 
The single lesson we will learn over and over again is that the brain does 
things in a very distributed way, which is exactly as we would imagine given 
evolutionary theory about how the brain came to be. 
The Hippocampus and Place Memory

Probably the single most important part of the brain related to 
memory is the hippocampus. The hippocampus is part of the limbic 
system, which is interior to the cerebral cortex. Many speciﬁ c 
kinds of memory functioning are served by the hippocampus, such 
as place memory—the memory we have for different places in 
the world.

To study various functions of the brain, neuroscientists look at the 
ﬁ ring of individual neurons when certain mental procedures are 
taking place. From such research, the hippocampus has been found 
to have place cells that give us place memories. These cells always 
ﬁ re when we are trying to recognize places we are in or places in 
photographs or other depictions. It’s fascinating that memory of 
places is conﬁ ned to a different part of the brain than, say, memory 
of a person or a song.

Of course, it’s not true that the place cells in the hippocampus have 
one cell per location. There is a pattern of cells in the brain that 
lights up when you’re in one place and a different pattern that lights 
up when you are somewhere else. These location memories are 
some of the strongest memories we have.

106
Lecture 16: Memory and Consciousness

In complicated memories, it’s sometimes true that a single neuron 
will always ﬁ re. One researcher discovered that whenever he 
showed any individual patient a picture of Jennifer Aniston or a 
picture of the TV show Friends, the same neuron would light up. 
It is not that the “Jennifer Aniston neuron” contains everything 
you know about Jennifer Aniston, but that the concept of Jennifer 
Aniston gets that neuron to light up. 
Other Brain Regions and Memory

The hippocampus is located inside the medial temporal lobe, and the 
combination of those two structures helps with memory formation, 
with consolidation of memories, and with explicit memories—
facts, events, and the order of different sequences in time. 

The cerebellum, which is in the back of the brain, next to the 
cerebral cortex, helps with motor learning and procedural memory. 
The mammillary bodies are associated with recognition memory 
and unconscious memory. 

The amygdala is the region of the brain that gives rise to emotions. 
It ﬁ res strongly whenever you have a strong emotion; in particular, 
fear is associated with the amygdala. In the phenomenon known 
as memory enhancement, if you are experiencing strong emotions 
and perceiving something for the ﬁ rst time, your memory of that 
experience will be vivid. This phenomenon is not seen when the 
amygdala is damaged. 
Unreliable Memory

People who suffer from anterograde amnesia cannot form new 
memories. This condition can be caused by drugs or brain injuries, 
in particular, damage to the hippocampus. 
o A person who can’t form new memories seems to have lost 
something that is central to what we think of as being a person. 
He or she can’t learn anything new. 

107
o However, those who suffer from this condition inevitably 
score happier on psychological tests than people with fully 
functioning memories. 

Even for people whose brains are fully functioning, we all know that 
memories are not perfectly reliable. Not only do we misremember 
things, but we can have dramatically detailed false memories that 
are as vivid and true to our perception as any real memory is. 

Misperception, misinterpretation, and false similarity between 
different things can cause you to misremember what happened. 
o In one famous experiment, subjects were presented with a 
list of words that had some similarities, such as sugar, candy, 
honey, and so on. 
o When asked to remember the words later, not surprisingly, 
they added related words, such as chocolate, to the list and 
remembered them as being on the list just as vividly as the 
words that were actually on the list.

True memories in our brains can be degraded by interference 
with the process of remembering. Researchers have shown that 
suggesting a false aspect of a scene (a stop sign in place of a yield 
sign) caused subjects to incorrectly remember other things about 
the scene.

Wholly new memories can also be put into the brain. In the “Lost 
in the Mall” study, subjects were told ﬁ ve stories about their 
childhoods, knowing that one of the stories was false. They were 
then asked to ﬁ ll in details about the stories—anything they could 
remember—or say that they didn’t remember the event. About 25% 
of the subjects “remembered” the false story and ﬁ lled in the details 
with no problem. 

In addition to false memories, people can also experience 
false forgetting. Research has shown that the hippocampus has 
suppressed activity and the frontal cortex has increased activity in 

108
Lecture 16: Memory and Consciousness
people who are told to suppress thoughts of certain words. It’s as if 
the conscious brain is beating up on the unconscious brain, trying to 
get it not to remember certain words.
A Theory of Memory

We don’t have a full theory of memory yet, but we do have clues 
about some aspects of memory. One such clue is that remembering 
the past seems to be a similar function in the brain as imagining 
the future.

This clue has yielded a theory that the brain stores data from which 
it can reconstruct or re-create images and details. This helps us 
understand why false memories are just as vivid as true memories. 
If false memories require only a “script” in the brain—not a fully 
detailed set of pictures—it is much easier to imagine how they 
could be introduced and how we could be convinced that they 
are true. 
Researchers use functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study the 
brain while it is thinking.
© Jupiterimages/Creatas/Thinkstock.

109
Consciousness

Imagining the future is perhaps an even more important part of 
being human than remembering the past. Thinking about the future 
is the key to what makes us conscious. Consciousness is not well 
understood, but it has certain key features: symbolic thinking; 
abstract thinking; the ability to contemplate alternatives; and the 
ability to determine what is real, what might be real, and what 
might happen in the future.

Like memory, all these functions are highly distributed in the 
brain and very complex. There are probably many stepping stones 
along the way in evolution to get from a single-celled organism to 
a conscious being, and it’s impossible to say at which step actual 
consciousness arose. It’s likely that different steps contributed to 
consciousness in different ways.

Linguists have argued that a crucial step in the development of 
consciousness was the development of grammar, in particular, the 
ability to use language in the subjunctive mood, to say, if you do 
this, I will do that. The ability to use language in that way enables 
people to make agreements and develop more elaborate societies 
based on thinking about the future. This is a relatively late step in 
the history of consciousness.

An earlier step in the development of consciousness is the ability 
to make decisions. Malcolm MacIver, a biomedical engineer at 
Northwestern University, has an interesting theory in this regard. 
o MacIver pointed out that the visual ﬁ eld of ocean-dwelling 
organisms is limited. Thus, such organisms must react quickly 
to what they see. 
o Once organisms crawled onto land, they could see for much 
longer distances and had more time to consider threats or 
opportunities. Evolution would favor organisms whose brains 
allowed them the ability to contemplate alternatives and 
the future. 

110
Lecture 16: Memory and Consciousness

Still, the actual process by which we consider alternative futures 
and make decisions about them is still mysterious. It seems to be the 
case that human consciousness is more like Congress—operating 
by subcommittee—than like a dictatorship, with one totalitarian 
self giving instructions from the top down. Some researchers have 
shown that the brain may make decisions before we even know 
about it.

Such studies raise numerous questions: How conscious are we 
really? How much free will do we have? If my brain decides to 
do something before I even know about it, who is it that is doing 
the deciding? Science can’t give us deﬁ nitive answers; it can only 
explore how the brain works. It may be best to think of our selves 
as the emerging phenomenon that results from all the different parts 
of the brain coming together to make us who we are.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 9.
Schacter, The Seven Sins of Memory.
1. Do you think your own memory has improved or deteriorated over 
time? What kinds of memory are you best at?
2. Do you think it’s possible that any memories you feel are completely 
true are actually false? Have you ever been confronted with evidence 
that something you remember vividly didn’t actually happen that way?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

111
Time and Relativity
Lecture 17
I
n earlier lectures, we talked about the arrow of time and the problem of 
entropy; in this last part of the course, we turn to the question of why 
the early universe had such low entropy. Cosmologists don’t know the 
answer to this question, but we will look at some plausible explanations. 
This means that we need to understand cosmology and the force that is 
most important for cosmology: gravity. Of course, when we’re talking 
about gravity, we also need to understand relativity, Albert Einstein’s theory 
of space and time. This lecture compares Newton’s and Einstein’s views 
of spacetime and gives us a new way to picture the idea that time is not 
universal but personal.
A Four-Dimensional Viewpoint

A four-dimensional understanding of the universe is optional 
in a Newtonian viewpoint but becomes absolutely necessary 
with relativity.
o In three dimensions, we have particular points in space, but 
in four dimensions—spacetime—instead of points, we have 
events. An event is neither a place nor a time; it is both. It is a 
location in spacetime.
o Spacetime, the four-dimensional reality of our universe, is a 
collection of an inﬁ nite number of events, just as space is a 
collection of an inﬁ nite number of points indexed by the three 
dimensions of space. 

Both the Newtonian view of the universe and the Einsteinian view 
encompass three dimensions of space and one dimension of time; 
the difference is that the two views divide up spacetime into space 
and time in very different ways. 

Newton thought that space and time were separate and absolute. 
If we think of an event as a point in space at a moment in time, in 

112
Lecture 17: Time and Relativity
this view, for any one event, there is something called the present 
moment. This is a three-dimensional slice through reality, and 
that moment is the same time as the event. It is all of space at one 
moment in time. Any one moment has a present; everything before 
it is its past, and everything in front of it is its future.
A Robot Army

Let’s think about how we could use clocks to construct Newtonian 
spacetime, in which any one event has a three-dimensional slice 
associated with it—the whole universe at one moment in time.

Imagine that we have a large robot army, and each robot has a clock 
and a spaceship. We synchronize the clocks on our robots and send 
them throughout the universe to every point in space.
If we send two robots with synchronized clocks into space on different paths, 
their clocks will not be synchronized when they return.







© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

113

We now have a label at every event in spacetime. We know where 
each robot is in space and we know when it is in time. What we 
mean by the universe at one moment is simply the set of events 
where all the robot clocks read the same time. When they all 
say 6:00 p.m. on November 5, that is a moment in the history of 
the universe.

With Einstein’s relativity, there is no such thing as one moment 
of time all throughout the universe that everyone agrees on. To 
Einstein, space and time are combined into spacetime, but space 
by itself and time by itself are not absolute; they are relative. 
What we call space and what we call time are different for 
different observers.

The way we send our robots equipped with clocks throughout 
the universe affects the answer we get in our thought experiment. 
Different observers with different sets of robots that were sent 
throughout the universe using different spaceships would get 
different notions of simultaneity. They would divide the universe 
up into space and time in different ways.

If we send out robots following different paths through the universe 
and bring them back, their clocks will have measured different 
amounts of elapsed time. It’s not that there is anything wrong with 
our robots; it is that the amount of time elapsed on a particular 
trajectory through the universe depends on how the robot moves 
through the universe. If the robot is moving on a curved path at 
high velocity, it will always measure less elapsed time when it 
comes back.
A Muon Clock

There is no such thing as one moment spread throughout the 
universe that everyone can agree on. What time it is at one point 
depends on who does the measuring. One of the most dramatic and 
immediate experimental veriﬁ cations of this fact comes from an 
elementary particle called a muon, a heavier cousin of the electron.

114
Lecture 17: Time and Relativity

Pions decay into muons, which then decay into electrons and other 
particles. Muons decay very quickly, in about 2 microseconds. They 
can be used, in some sense, as a clock. 

Traveling through interstellar space in the form of cosmic rays are 
protons that smash into atoms in Earth’s upper atmosphere. They 
create pions and other elementary particles, and those quickly decay 
into muons. The upper atmosphere where the muons are created is 
about 15–20 km above the Earth, and the muons should decay after 
traveling about 1 km, yet they’re able to reach the ground on Earth.

Why do muons reach us before decaying? The answer is that 
their clocks—their lifetimes—are not ticking in the same way as 
ours. Because muons are moving so fast with respect to us here 
on Earth, they “feel” less elapsed time. To them, it takes less than 
2 microseconds to go from the Earth’s upper atmosphere to the 
Earth itself.
Notions of Time

At a fundamental level, there are different notions of time, which 
sometimes coincide and sometimes do not. 
o We can deﬁ ne one idea of time as the time measured by an 
observer, the time that is elapsed by a clock. 
o Another notion of time that is a bit more abstract is time as a label 
to measure what moment of the universe we’re talking about.
o To Newton, these two notions of time were the same. But 
Einstein says these notions are not the same. Time is personal; 
how much time passes depends on how you move through the 
universe. The time that you feel depends on your trajectory 
through the world.

Consider the universe as a football ﬁ eld. In this universe, one way 
of measuring how much distance the running back has traveled is 
to say what yard line he reaches. That is like the Newtonian idea 
of absolute time. But the actual distance the running back travels 

115
involves running back and forth to avoid tacklers. To get from the 
10 yard line to the 20 yard line, the actual amount of distance the 
running back has to go is usually more than 10 yards. 

In space, this makes sense to us, and Einstein says that the same 
thing is true in time, but the amount of time that has elapsed for us, 
measured by our clocks, depends on how we connect two different 
events in the universe by our motions through spacetime. What 
Einstein is doing is replacing the idea of space at any one moment 
in time with a much more subtle way of thinking about spacetime.
A Light Cone

According to relativity, everyone measures the same speed of light: 
about 300,000 km per second. With that in mind, think about an 
experiment in which you ﬂ ick a light bulb on and off quickly. As 
you do so, photons move away from the light bulb, so there is a 
sphere of space that is the distance reached by all the photons. Let’s 
say you ﬂ ick the light bulb on and off very quickly, so that just one 
small shell of photons will leave it.
Relativity replaces “space at one moment of time” with light cones—the paths 
of all possible light rays in spacetime to and from a ﬁ xed event.
future of x
event x
light leaving x
light approaching x
neither future
nor past of x
past of x
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

116
Lecture 17: Time and Relativity
o In space at any one moment of time, there would then be a 
spherical region that is where the photons from the light bulb 
have traveled given a certain amount of time.
o Now imagine that we took a picture of every three-dimensional 
moment in space to track the expansion of all those photons 
and we stacked those moments on top of each other, like the 
pages of a book. 
o At the moment you ﬂ icked the light bulb on and off, the 
photons were all very close; they were at the point where the 
light bulb is. A second later, all those photons were 300,000 
km away; 2 seconds later, they were 600,000 km away. As 
In a Newtonian point of view, we must march forward in time; with Einstein, we 
must stay inside our light cones.
timelike path
(allowed)
spacelike path
(not allowed)
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

117
we stack up these different pictures of space, we see that the 
photons going from a point out in all directions form a cone in 
spacetime, a light cone. 
o The fact that the speed of light is the same to everybody means 
that different observers construct the same light cones. If 
somebody else moving by you at a speed of some hundreds 
of thousands of km per second in a spaceship also ﬂ icked on 
a light bulb at the same event as you did, those photons would 
do the same thing as yours did; they would form the same light 
cone in spacetime. 
o Einstein tells us that instead of dividing the universe into space 
and time, we need to divide the universe into the light cones 
that we can imagine making. 

The light cones give us a structure on spacetime because we cannot 
travel faster than light. If I ﬂ ick the light bulb on and off very 
quickly right now, I will get a bunch of photons leaving, and I can 
never catch up to them. They will always be receding from me at 
the speed of light.
o If I draw that light cone in spacetime, what I am drawing is my 
personal future. My future is only the points inside that light 
cone. An event outside that light cone is inaccessible to me. I 
can reach a particular point in space outside the light cone but 
not a particular point in spacetime.
o Newton would have divided spacetime into past, present, and 
future. Einstein divides spacetime into the past of my event, 
that is, the interior of the light cone that is approaching me at 
this point in spacetime; the future of my event, the interior of 
the light cone that spreads out from me in spacetime; and the 
unreachable parts of the universe, the parts that I would have to 
travel faster than the speed of light in order to reach.

The lesson is that in special relativity, time is not universal; it 
is personal. We can slice the universe up into equal moments of 

118
Lecture 17: Time and Relativity
time, but there is no one right way to do that. The division of 
spacetime into space and time is not absolute anymore; it’s not a 
Newtonian universe. 
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 4.
Greene, The Fabric of the Cosmos.
Thorne, Black Holes and Time Warps.
1. Why is it that relativity seems so counterintuitive to us? Can you imagine 
a world in which the speed of light was much slower—say, 100 miles an 
hour or just 5 miles an hour—but everything else was unchanged?
2. Can you think of other experiments (feasible or otherwise) that would 
test Einstein’s description of spacetime?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

119
Curved Spacetime and Black Holes
Lecture 18
I
n the last lecture, we talked about special relativity, the theory that 
replaces Newtonian absolute space and absolute time with a single four-
dimensional spacetime. But that spacetime is still rigid and ﬁ xed. In 
this lecture, we’ll talk about general relativity, Einstein’s theory of gravity 
in which spacetime can bend and twist. This is what gives rise to the force 
we call gravity. As we’ll see in a future lecture, the fact that spacetime can 
evolve will be important for our understanding of the past hypothesis and the 
event known as the Big Bang.
The Principle of Equivalence

Special relativity is not a theory of physics but a backdrop, 
a meta-theory. It is a stage on which other theories, such as 
electromagnetism or the strong and weak nuclear force, play out. 
But Einstein was unable to make a theory of gravity that would ﬁ t 
with special relativity.

Einstein realized that gravity is different than all the other forces 
of nature because it is universal. Electromagnetism, for example, 
is not universal; it acts on different particles in different ways. But 
in a gravitational ﬁ eld, those particles will all fall down and will 
all fall at the same rate. The principle of equivalence is Einstein’s 
way of formalizing this idea. The equivalence is between gravity 
and acceleration. 

Imagine that you are in a sealed room, and you decide to do 
some physics experiments, such as dropping different objects and 
measuring the rates at which they fall or measuring the frequency 
of radiation from an atom. 
o In the room, you are in a gravitational ﬁ eld; however, Einstein 
says that if you imagine doing those same experiments in a 
zero-gravitational ﬁ eld, in a rocket ship that is accelerating, 
you will get exactly the same answers. 

120
Lecture 18: Curved Spacetime and Black Holes
o An accelerating rocket ship pushes you in the direction in 
which it’s accelerating; you are pulled to the ground, just as you 
are when there’s a gravitational ﬁ eld beneath you. According to 
Einstein, this is not just a similarity but an equivalence. You can 
do all those experiments in the rocket ship that is accelerating, 
and you will get exactly the same answers as if you did them in 
a gravitational ﬁ eld.
o Gravity is impossible to detect in a local region of spacetime. 
There is no experiment you can do to determine whether or not 
you are in the ﬁ eld of gravity or in a rocket. This is completely 
different than electromagnetism. 
The Geometry of Spacetime

Einstein tells us that if gravity is universal, then perhaps gravity 
isn’t a ﬁ eld on top of spacetime; perhaps it is a feature of spacetime 
itself, in particular, the curvature of spacetime. Matter and energy 
can bend spacetime, and that bending is what we call gravity.

Euclidean geometry is a kind of ﬂ at geometry; it’s the geometry 
of ordinary three-dimensional space. But Einstein thought that 
spacetime might not obey the rules of Euclid. This way of thinking 
about gravity is usually illustrated by the image of a rubber sheet 
with a bowling ball in the middle. The bowling ball distorts the 
shape of the rubber; the effect of this bending of the rubber sheet is 
analogous to the effect of gravity.

In general relativity, just as in special relativity, there are light cones 
at every point, but because spacetime is curved, those light cones 
can bend and twist. Further, the curvature can be great in some 
places and small in others, positive in some places and negative 
in others. The light cones that form the structure of spacetime in 
special relativity still do that in general relativity, but now, they can 
move around.

121

It’s that distortion of light cones in the solar system caused by the 
gravitational ﬁ eld of the Sun that makes the Earth orbit rather than 
moving in a straight line. 
o One way to think about general relativity is to think that 
particles, including the Earth, are doing their best to move in 
straight lines. But because spacetime itself is curved, there are 
no straight lines. That is what gives rise to what we call gravity. 
o This is why the Moon goes around the Earth and the Earth goes 
around the Sun. They’re trying their best to move in straight 
lines, but spacetime itself is curved.
o If the gravitational ﬁ eld becomes very strong, the light cones 
can tilt so much—spacetime can be affected so strongly by 
gravity—that black holes are formed, regions of the universe 
where gravity is so strong that light itself cannot escape. 
Entering a Black Hole

As we said, light cones tell us where light can go and, because we 
cannot travel faster than the speed of light, where we can go. At any 
one point in your lifetime, there is a light cone moving forward into 
spacetime away from you, and according to the rules of relativity, 
you need to stay inside that light cone; that is your future.

It’s also true that gravity can be so strong that spacetime becomes 
curved in such a way that the light cones tilt and form black holes. 
Moving slower than the speed of light, the only thing you can do is 
to move into a black hole, and you can never come out.

Inside the black hole is a place where the curvature of spacetime 
becomes inﬁ nite. This is what we call the singularity. The 
gravitational ﬁ eld is so strong that everything shrinks to an 
inﬁ nite density.

Note that the singularity is not a place but a moment in time. It is in 
the future. 

122
Lecture 18: Curved Spacetime and Black Holes
o When you enter the black hole, you are forced to hit the 
singularity because everything inside your light cone becomes 
focused onto that singularity. 
o In fact, if you’re inside a black hole and you try to ﬁ re your 
rocket engines to move away from the singularity, you will hit 
it even faster because less time will elapse for you as you age 
forward in time. You don’t travel toward the singularity; you 
age into it.
o At the singularity, time comes to an end. Past that, we can’t 
say what happens. In general relativity, all we can say is that 
it is a boundary, known as the event horizon. It is the edge of 
spacetime itself. 

If you were to fall into a black hole, you wouldn’t notice as you 
passed by the event horizon. If it is a big enough black hole, you 
wouldn’t even be aware that you are doomed, that you are going to 
hit the singularity and you can never get out. 
o If the black hole has the same mass as the Sun, the time it takes 
you to go from the event horizon to the singularity is about 1 
millionth of a second. 
A black hole is a region where gravity is so strong that light itself cannot escape.
light cones
y
tir
alu
g
nis
black
hole
region
external
world
t
n
e
v
e
n
o
zir
o
h
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

123
o If you fall into a black hole feet ﬁ rst, your feet will be pulled 
apart from your head by the stronger gravitational ﬁ eld they 
feel. The technical term for this is spaghettiﬁ cation. 
Varieties of Black Holes

Although we can’t see them, we believe that we have strong 
evidence for real black holes in the universe. A black hole affects 
the gravitational ﬁ eld around it so strongly that other forms of 
matter near the black hole react in very noticeable ways. Gas and 
dust fall into the black hole, heat up, and give off x-rays, gamma 
rays, and other forms of radiation. We can detect that radiation and 
infer that a black hole is present.

Black holes seem to come from different places and, therefore, have 
slightly different properties. The most well-known kind of black 
hole comes from the collapse of a massive star. 
o A star is actually held up by the heat energy inside it. At the 
center of the Sun, nuclear fusion is taking place that emits 
radiation. This radiation heats up the gas and plasma around 
it, and the pressure of that plasma is what keeps the Sun in 
its shape. Someday, that fuel will be exhausted, and the Sun 
will collapse.
o A star typically collapses to a white dwarf, but if it’s heavy 
enough, it will become a neutron star. A neutron star that is, 
say, 20 times the mass of the Sun will collapse and make a 
black hole that is about 3 times the mass of the Sun. 

There is a supermassive black hole at the center of our galaxy. 
Cosmologists believe that most galaxies in the universe have giant 
black holes at the center. These black holes may be a million or 
a billion times the mass of the Sun. The black hole in the Milky 
Way has 4.1 million times the mass of the Sun and is spinning 
extremely rapidly.

Middle-weight black holes may be thousands or hundreds of 
thousands of times the mass of the Sun. There are also primordial 

124
Lecture 18: Curved Spacetime and Black Holes
black holes from the very early universe that perhaps weigh only 
grams. Some physicists have speculated that we could even make 
black holes ourselves in the Large Hadron Collider. 
The Expansion of the Universe

A separate consequence of the curvature of space and time is that 
space itself can expand; the size of the universe can change over time.

In trying to model the universe as a uniform distribution of matter 
using general relativity, Einstein discovered that the universe 
must be either expanding or contracting; it could not be static. To 
account for this apparent contradiction with the data, he posited a 
cosmological constant that balanced the force of matter and yielded 
a static solution to cosmology.
Uniform curvature in space may be manifested in different ways.
#
	#	
#
	#	
!$%	
	#	&
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

125

In the 1920s, Edwin Hubble made the prediction that Einstein 
should’ve made: The universe is expanding. Given that fact, we can 
run the movie forward and the universe will get increasingly dilute, 
but we can also run the movie backward. In the past, things were 
closer together and, therefore, the gravitational ﬁ elds were stronger. 
o Winding the movie backward in time is similar to following 
the formation of a black hole forward in time. Inside the black 
hole is a singularity in the future because all the matter collects 
in one place. 
o In the universe, there is a singularity in our past, which is what 
we call the Big Bang.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 5.
Susskind, The Black Hole War.
Thorne, Black Holes and Time Warps.
1. A “white hole” is just a time-reversed black hole. How would you 
describe a white hole without referring to the concept of a black hole?
2. Imagine you’re falling into a black hole, all the way into the singularity. 
What do you see as you look “outward” along your trip?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

126
Lecture 19: Time Travel
Time Travel
Lecture 19
I
n this lecture, we’ll look at the question: Is time travel possible? Like 
many of the other issues we’ve discussed, the answer gives us a kind of 
good news/bad news situation. The good news is that general relativity, 
Einstein’s theory of gravity in which space and time are ﬂ exible, allows us 
to talk about the possibility of time travel in a scientiﬁ c way. The bad news 
is that it’s probably not possible, although interestingly, we can’t say that it’s 
deﬁ nitely not possible. 
Traveling to the Past?

We travel through time every day, but we travel to the future. 
Special relativity allows us to talk about changing the rate at which 
we travel to the future. Because the amount of time that passes 
depends on our trajectory through the world, we can actually get to 
the future faster but not slower. 

The real question most people are interested in, however, is: Can 
we travel to the past? If Newton had been right that space and time 
were absolute, then the answer would be no. The laws according 
to Newton are that there are separate moments in the history of the 
universe, and you march forward through them; you cannot help 
but do that. 

In special relativity, the answer is also no. Special relativity replaces 
the Newtonian division of space and time with spacetime structured 
by light cones. You are forced to move into the interior of your light 
cone—that’s the same as saying that you must move slower than 
light—and the light cones point into the future. They don’t go into 
the past.

In general relativity, the answer is probably not, but at least we can 
wonder whether we could tilt the light cones enough to travel into 
our personal futures and nevertheless end up in the past. In general 

127
relativity, a time machine would be a twisting of light cones, 
focusing them back on themselves so far that we could go into the 
past while still moving forward in time.
A Realistic Time Machine

If time travel were possible, it would not be what we generally 
see in science ﬁ ction movies. It would not involve some kind of 
dematerialization in the present and rematerialization in a different 
time. Real time travel would be a journey through spacetime, and a 
true time machine would be some vehicle that moves you through 
space and time but in a spacetime that allows you to visit your past.

The most realistic version of time travel we can imagine is not 
about building a machine but about building spacetime. Our goal 
as potential time travelers is to warp spacetime so much that we can 
personally move forward in time and nevertheless visit ourselves in 
the past.

To think about spacetime, we need to think locally, in this case, 
about what is happening to you. 
The trick to time travel isn’t to build a machine; it’s to warp spacetime so much 
that we can keep moving forward in time yet come back to where we started, 
that is, bending our light cones so much that we can move in a circle—a closed 
timelike curve.
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

128
Lecture 19: Time Travel
o What’s happening to you is that you’re growing older; you are 
moving locally forward in time. In other words, you are staying 
inside your light cone. 
o As we said, general relativity tells us that light cones can be 
twisted. Thus, we can imagine a light cone twisting so that you 
could locally move forward but visit your past self because the 
light cone had closed in on itself.
o This formation is called a closed timelike curve. A timelike 
curve is simply a path through spacetime that is moving slower 
than the speed of light. We ordinarily move on open timelike 
curves, but a time machine would be a closed timelike curve. 

There are spacetimes that allow closed timelike curves, but is that 
our universe? If we started in a universe that didn’t have closed 
timelike curves, could we create them? Could we warp space 
and time so much that we were able to visit our own past? These 
questions remain open. 
Kurt Gödel’s Version of Spacetime

The most famous example of a kind of spacetime that has the 
possibility of time travel built into it comes from Kurt Gödel, a 
German mathematician. Gödel dabbled in general relativity and was 
curious about Laplacian determinism, just as we are. He wondered 
whether it was possible to start with one moment in time, evolve it 
forward, and then evolve it backward.

Neither quantum mechanics nor special relativity gets in the way of 
doing that, but what about general relativity? 
o In Gödel’s cosmological answer to this question, instead 
of expanding, the universe is rotating. The stuff that sits 
inside Gödel’s hypothetical universe is vacuum energy—the 
cosmological constant energy that is inherent in space itself—
and swirling matter particles. The energy and particles cause 
the curvature of spacetime to be light cones that are tilting 
gradually as we travel through the universe. 

129
o Every event in this universe sits on a closed timelike curve. 
Everywhere you start, you can travel through some trajectory 
in spacetime and eventually visit your past. 

It’s not difﬁ cult to write solutions to Einstein’s equation in general 
relativity that look like time machines, such as an inﬁ nite rotating 
cylinder or cosmic strings, but all these examples in Gödel’s 
universe have the property that they are inﬁ nitely large.
o If we ask whether we can start with a universe that doesn’t 
have time travel built in and create a situation that resembles 
any of these, the answer seems to be no. 
o The naïve solutions require an inﬁ nite amount of energy. If 
we try to make a ﬁ nite cylinder or ﬁ nite cosmic strings or a 
ﬁ nite amount of dust rotating, we don’t seem to get closed 
timelike curves.
o These solutions are curiosities, but they are not realistic ways 
to go about engineering a time machine. 
Wormholes

The most well-known way to construct a time machine in a ﬁ nite 
region of space is to use wormholes. A wormhole is a tube through 
spacetime. It’s as if you enter some sphere locally and you are spit 
out somewhere else arbitrarily far away. Wormholes can connect 
different regions of spacetime, and you can use them to travel in 
much shorter time periods than if you went the ordinary route.

If it is possible to build a wormhole connecting two different regions 
of space, it is also possible to build a wormhole that connects two 
different moments in time. Again, it’s relatively easy to write down 
the equations to qualify this as a solution to Einstein’s theory 
of relativity.

The problem here is that wormholes involve physics that we 
don’t think works in our world. In particular, wormholes collapse 
instantly into black holes. To get around this problem, we need 

130
Lecture 19: Time Travel
negative energy—something that supplies us with a repulsive 
gravitational force.
o Everything we know about in the universe has the gravitational 
effect of pulling things toward it—positive energy—but to 
keep a wormhole from collapsing, negative energy is needed 
to push it apart. 
o The mathematical physicist and cosmologist Frank Tipler, 
as well as Stephen Hawking, have posited that manipulating 
matter and energy in such a way as to create any form of closed 
timelike curve will inevitably create some sort of singularity. 
The density of curvature and energy in the universe would go 
to inﬁ nity somewhere.
The Paradoxes of Time Travel

The grandfather paradox is one of the most famous problems that 
arises from the idea of time travel: What stops me from traveling 
backward in time and killing my grandparents before they ever met 
so that neither my parents nor I were born? In that situation, who 
committed the murders?

One problem with this scenario is that we can’t pick the time we 
travel back to. The entrance to a wormhole is like a portal; you go 
in one end, and you come out somewhere else and some when else. 
Wormholes connect two distant parts of space; although this concept cannot 
be rendered graphically with complete accuracy, the physical distance could be 
much shorter than the usual distance between the two openings.
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

131
It’s also true that if you can go backward, then someone else can 
come forward. 

Logic must still work even if there is time travel. You cannot kill 
your grandparents and then be born to go back in time and kill your 
grandparents. You can’t change the present moment because you 
are in the present moment and you know what the present moment 
has. It has you, for example, so nothing you do can truly prevent 
you from coming into existence.

If time travel were possible, the most likely scenario is that even 
if you made it into the past, something would prevent you from 
changing things that really happened. 

What is truly bothering us here is the arrow of time, which is 
absolutely built into how we think about the past, present, and 
future. As we said, we believe that we can make choices that affect 
the future but not choices that affect the past. The past is tied down 
in our epistemic knowledge because of the past hypothesis. If you 
have a memory of something happening and your memory is valid, 
then that is what happened and you can’t change it.

If you put the possibility of time travel into this situation, then your 
personal future becomes mixed up with the past of the universe. 
You personally always age into your future light cone, but you go 
off in a spaceship, zoom around a closed timelike curve, and come 
to the past. Now, something that you thought was ﬁ xed—the past—
gets mixed up with something you thought was alterable—your 
personal future.

It’s likely that time travel isn’t possible, but the many-worlds 
interpretation of quantum mechanics offers a tiny loophole to the 
impossibility of time travel. 
o It is conceivable that if we had a closed timelike curve, we 
could imagine going back into the past, truly changing the past, 
and by doing so, bringing into existence a new world, a new 
branch of the wave function of quantum mechanics.

132
Lecture 19: Time Travel
o You could travel back in time from one branch of the wave 
function, in which your grandparents did exist and you were 
born, into another branch of the wave function, in which your 
grandparents were killed and you were never born.
Conceptual Implications of Time Travel

For our purposes, the most signiﬁ cant implication of time travel is 
that it would destroy the universality of the arrow of time.

When we have the possibility of time travel, we no longer have 
Laplace’s demon. We cannot slice the universe into moments of 
time. The moments of time intersect with each other in complicated 
ways, so that we cannot record the data of the universe at any one 
moment and imagine running it forward and backward.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 6.
Thorne, Black Holes and Time Warps.
1. Think of movies or stories that make use of time travel. Are they 
logically consistent? Can you think of an interesting plot for a movie 
that treats time travel seriously?
2. Stephen Hawking has joked that time travel must be impossible because 
we haven’t been invaded by tourists from the future. Is this a good 
argument, as well as a clever joke? 
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

133
Black Hole Entropy 
Lecture 20
G
ravity was of crucial importance in the early universe, and the Big 
Bang clearly plays some crucially important role in understanding 
why the early universe had such low entropy. Unfortunately, we 
don’t understand the Big Bang very well. We don’t understand gravity at the 
microscopic level, but such an understanding is exactly what we need when 
it comes to the Big Bang and entropy. The good news for us in our quest to 
understand entropy is that black holes are places where gravity is incredibly 
important, and in this lecture, we’ll see that we do know the entropy of 
black holes.
Classical Black Holes and Black Hole Mechanics

In classical general relativity, black holes are actually very simple 
things. We can completely specify a black hole by knowing its 
mass, its electric charge, and how fast it’s spinning. The idea that 
black holes possess only these properties is known as the no-hair 
theorem: All black holes are bald.

We think of a black hole as a place from which nothing can 
emerge. It was therefore extremely surprising when, around 1970, 
Roger Penrose showed that energy can be extracted from a rapidly 
spinning black hole if it is slowed down. The mass of a black hole 
actually decreases as it spins more and more slowly.

Of course, there’s only a ﬁ nite amount of energy that can be 
extracted. The black hole is spinning at some rate. We can get 
energy out of it, but we slow it down in the process. Once it is 
slowed down to the point that it’s no longer spinning, there is no 
more useful work we can extract from the black hole. 

This is exactly the situation we saw when we were talking about a 
thermodynamic system approaching thermal equilibrium. Just like 
the gas in our piston, if it’s in a low-entropy state, we can extract 

134
Lecture 20: Black Hole Entropy
useful work from it, but once it reaches equilibrium, there’s nothing 
more we can do. This idea was developed in the 1970s into the 
subﬁ eld of black hole mechanics. 
o The idea here is that there is an analogy between the behavior 
of black holes and thermodynamics. In thermodynamics, we 
have the energy of a system; for a black hole, we have its mass, 
and E = mc2 tells us that mass is just a type of energy, so the 
analogy is obvious.
o The analogy to temperature in thermodynamics is surface 
gravity in black holes. Thermodynamic entropy is analogous 
to the area of the event horizon, which increases as energy is 
extracted from the spinning black hole. 
o The zeroth law of thermodynamics, which states that systems 
in thermal equilibrium will all have the same temperature, is 
analogous to the zeroth law of black hole mechanics, which 
states that the surface gravity is the same everywhere on the 
horizon, whether the black hole is spinning, charged, and so on.
o The ﬁ rst law of thermodynamics says that energy is conserved, 
and the ﬁ rst law of black hole mechanics says that mass 
is conserved.
o The second law of thermodynamics says that the entropy of a 
closed system only increases; the analogy in black holes is that 
the area of the event horizon only increases. In fact, this is a 
theorem that was proven by Stephen Hawking. The area of the 
event horizon only increases; its shape can be changed, but it 
cannot be made smaller.
o The third law of thermodynamics says that zero temperature 
cannot be reached; the third law of black hole mechanics says 
that zero surface gravity cannot be reached. 

135
Jacob Bekenstein v. Stephen Hawking

The set of rules in the thermodynamics regime is spookily 
analogous to the set in the black hole mechanics regime. This 
prompted a graduate student named Jacob Bekenstein to make the 
radical suggestion that the laws of thermodynamics and the laws of 
black hole mechanics aren’t separate. 

Bekenstein said that there is one form of generalized 
thermodynamics that includes black holes in it and that what 
we call the area of the event horizon isn’t analogous to entropy 
but is entropy. He further said that the entropy of a black hole is 
proportional to the area of its event horizon.

Boltzmann had said that entropy is found by counting the number 
of microstates that are macroscopically indistinguishable. If 
Bekenstein was right, black holes must have many indistinguishable 
microstates because they have a large degree of entropy. 
Hawking showed that black holes do radiate—in precisely the fashion to make 
the black hole mechanics/thermodynamics analogy perfect!
y
tir
alu
g
nis
black
hole
region
t
n
e
v
e
n
o
zir
o
h
outgoing
Hawking
radiation
virtual
particles
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

136
Lecture 20: Black Hole Entropy
o But in the classical general relativistic description, those 
microstates are nowhere to be found, just as they’re nowhere 
to be found in thermodynamics. A black hole is speciﬁ ed by its 
mass, charge, and spin and nothing else. Every mass, charge, 
and spin equal black hole should be the same as every other 
one with the same values. How can it be that black holes 
secretly have a huge number of states to accommodate all the 
entropy they have? 
o Further, thermodynamics tells us that a system with 
a temperature will radiate. If black holes are ordinary 
thermodynamic systems, then the surface gravity of a black 
hole should radiate, but we knew that black holes don’t radiate.

Stephen Hawking set about proving Bekenstein wrong by applying 
quantum mechanics to black holes. He found that in the vicinity of 
black holes, virtual pairs of particles could be created, one of which 
could fall into the black hole, but the other could escape. In this 
Information falls into a black hole; meanwhile, the radiation should be conveyed 
outward, but how can it be in two places at once?
!	
"!
!
	
#
	%

'

	
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

137
scenario, the black hole is actually losing mass to its environment 
because the escaping particle carries away mass, while the particle 
that falls into the black hole has a negative mass. The black hole 
gradually shrinks. 

In particular, Hawking derived a formula for the temperature of a 
black hole, T = x/m, which basically says that the temperature is 
inversely proportional to the mass of the black hole. He showed that 
the temperature of a black hole is not zero, but it is smaller for large 
black holes. 
o A tiny black hole gives off a furious amount of radiation, but 
a large black hole is very cold. A black hole with 1 solar mass 
has a temperature of about one-billionth of the background 
radiation that suffuses the universe. 
o In ordinary black holes, we will never observe Hawking radiation.

If black holes do give off radiation, then they lose mass. As a black 
hole gets smaller, its mass goes down, and when it gets smaller, 
a black hole gets hotter. In a ﬁ nite period of time, the black hole 
completely evaporates and disappears. The lifetime of a black 
hole is given by t = yM3, a constant times the mass of the black 
hole cubed. 
The Entropy of Black Holes

If black holes radiate—if the analogy between thermodynamics and 
black hole mechanics is good—that means that black holes have 
entropy. This is our single most important handle on how entropy 
works when gravity is relevant. 

As Bekenstein said, the entropy of a black hole is proportional to the 
area of its event horizon. Why does the entropy go in conjunction 
with the area, not the volume? That question inspired something 
called the holographic principle: When quantum gravity is 
important, physics is no longer strictly local; there are correlations 
between unknown quantum states that all macroscopically look 
alike and exist on the horizon.

138
Lecture 20: Black Hole Entropy

Hawking gave us a formula for black hole entropy, and the short 
story is that it is huge. The entropy of a 1 million–solar mass black 
hole is 1090. For comparison, the entropy of all the non–black hole 
particles in the observable universe is 1088.

We think there are something like 1012 or 1013 million-solar-mass 
black holes in the observable universe. This tells us that the entropy 
in our universe today is overwhelmingly in the form of black holes. 
This is a crucial clue to us when we talk about the evolution of 
entropy through time. 
o In the early universe, there were no black holes; there was 
just plasma and gas spread uniformly throughout the universe. 
Ordinarily, we think of that as a high-entropy state, but when 
gravity is important, things change, and in the early universe, 
gravity was very important. There was a huge amount of stuff 
that was pulling on all the other stuff. 
o This stuff that was pulling could easily have been in the form 
of black holes, and had it been, the entropy would have been 
much, much higher. This is a reminder that the entropy of the 
early universe was actually very low. It’s difﬁ cult to keep so 
much stuff in a perfectly smooth conﬁ guration. 
o We also see this in the real evolution of the universe. The 
universe expands and cools, and gravity pulls things together 
and makes the universe lumpier. That perfectly smooth 
conﬁ guration was not stable. Entropy goes up as structure 
forms in the universe.
o Gravity is important in cosmology, yet when we look back at 
the early universe, we see a very smooth conﬁ guration. That’s 
a reﬂ ection of the fact that it had very low entropy. Black holes 
give us the one clue we have about how to relate gravity and 
entropy. We will have to see if we can use that clue to explain 
why the early universe was so smooth.

139
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 12.
Hawking, A Brief History of Time.
Susskind, The Black Hole War.
1. Physicists have long debated whether information is conserved or 
destroyed when black holes evaporate. What do you think? Should 
it bother us if it turns out that the laws of physics don’t actually 
conserve information?
2. We have never observed Hawking radiation from a black hole. How 
conﬁ dent should we be that it really exists?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

140
Lecture 21: Evolution of the Universe
Evolution of the Universe
Lecture 21
I
n this lecture, we’re going to follow the evolution of entropy through the 
history of the universe. We start near the Big Bang, 13.7 billion years ago, 
and follow the physical processes that occurred as the universe expanded 
and cooled. Along the way, we’ll track what the entropy was at each stage. 
Not surprisingly, we will learn that entropy has been increasing—the second 
law of thermodynamics is correct. We will then follow the evolution of the 
universe past the present moment into the future.
The Present Universe

There are about 100 billion galaxies in the observable universe, 
each with about 100 billion stars. On very large scales, the universe 
seems to be uniform. 

As we know, the universe is expanding. Distant galaxies are 
moving away from us, and the farther away they are, the faster they 
are receding. The amount of space between us and the galaxies is 
becoming greater.

Once we know that the universe is expanding, we can play the 
movie backward. If galaxies are moving away from each other now, 
in the past, they were closer together.
The Moment of the Big Bang

If we keep tracing backward in time, 13.7 billion years ago, we hit 
a point where all the galaxies were on top of each other. That’s the 
Big Bang, the point at which the density of matter was inﬁ nite.

Einstein’s general relativity gives us an equation that relates the rate 
at which the universe is expanding to the amount of stuff in the 
universe. This gives us a quantitative theoretical understanding of 
what the universe should have done in the past, and we can compare 

141
that to the data. Remarkably, the data we have go all the way back 
to the ﬁ rst 3 minutes in the history of the universe. 

When all the matter in the universe was much more densely packed, 
its temperature was extremely high. 
o If we go far enough back, it was so hot that atoms could not 
exist; electrons could not stick to atomic nuclei. 
o If we go more than a few seconds after the Big Bang, even nuclei 
could not exist; protons and neutrons could not stick together.
o In the period between a few seconds and a few minutes after 
the Big Bang, the universe expanded and cooled, and protons 
and neutrons could ﬁ nally join.
o Protons and neutrons want to fuse together to make heavier 
elements, but because the universe was expanding so quickly, 
they didn’t have time. Thus, the density of the universe 
decreased rapidly.
We often say that the universe was smaller in the past, but what we really mean 
is that galaxies were closer together in the past and they will be farther apart in 
the future.
!
!	

!
	
*	!
	!
#
	%
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

142
Lecture 21: Evolution of the Universe
o A certain fraction of the protons and neutrons became helium, 
lithium, and deuterium. Observations of the abundances of 
these elements in primordial regions of the universe match 
scientiﬁ c predictions about what they should be just a few 
seconds after the Big Bang.

That process, called Big Bang nucleosynthesis, occurred when 
the universe cooled down enough to allow nuclei to form. About 
380,000 years after the Big Bang, it cooled enough to allow atoms 
to form. 
o This process, when electrons can ﬁ nally stick to atomic nuclei 
to make atoms, is called recombination. 
o Before recombination—when electrons were free to roam—the 
universe was opaque. Once recombination occurred, the universe 
became transparent, and the photons from that period can move 
all the way across the universe to be detected in our telescopes.
o In 1964, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson, two scientists 
working for Bell Labs, ﬁ rst detected this cosmic microwave 
background radiation from the Big Bang.
The Formation of Large-Scale Structure

As we’ve said, our current universe seems uniform on very large 
scales, but at the moment that the cosmic microwave background 
was formed, the universe was uniform on all scales.

As the universe expanded and cooled, gravity turned up the contrast 
knob. A region of space with slightly more matter would have a 
slightly stronger gravitational ﬁ eld than a region with less matter; it 
would pull nearby atoms toward it. A region that was slightly less 
dense than average would lose atoms to the rest of the universe. This 
process is called the formation of large-scale structure in the universe.

Some small perturbations in space became planets, stars, and black 
holes. Larger ones formed galaxies, and even larger ones formed 
large-scale structure. As this process progressed, entropy increased. 

143
o Recall that when gravity is important, high entropy does not 
necessarily mean smooth. High entropy can be very lumpy. 
The highest entropy of all would be to have all matter in one 
large black hole.
o It’s not true that the early universe had to be smooth. It could 
have been much denser in one region than another. That would 
have been a much higher-entropy conﬁ guration. 
o If we took a high-entropy version of the current universe and 
played the movie backward, there’s no reason why entropy 
would have had to go down. The early universe having low 
entropy is a fact that still needs to be explained.
o Of course, if the entropy of the early universe had been as high 
as it could possibly be, we would not live in a universe with the 
second law of thermodynamics. The reason there’s a second 
law is because of the past hypothesis, the fact that the early 
universe had such a tiny entropy.
Dark Energy

In 1998, astronomers made the surprising discovery that the 
expansion of the universe is accelerating. But ordinary stuff—
matter, radiation, atoms, even dark matter—does not speed up the 
expansion of the universe. 

The fact that the universe is accelerating requires some nonordinary 
stuff: dark energy, which doesn’t dilute away as the universe expands.

In an expanding universe containing nothing but matter and 
radiation, the number of particles doesn’t change in any one volume 
of the universe. In any ﬁ xed cubic centimeter of the universe, the 
density of particles is going down. 

But dark energy hypothesizes that in every cubic centimeter, some 
energy doesn’t dilute away; some amount of energy is present that 
provides a perpetual impulse to the expansion of the universe. That 

144
Lecture 21: Evolution of the Universe
impulse actually builds up as space itself gets larger, and that’s what 
makes the universe seem to accelerate.

The best candidate for dark energy is vacuum energy, a speciﬁ c 
example of dark energy in which the dilution is exactly zero and 
the density of energy is exactly the same in every point in space. 
Vacuum energy is also called the cosmological constant. 

If vacuum energy is the right answer, it has a profound implication 
for the future of the universe, namely, that the expansion will 
continue forever. 
The Future Universe

Right now, the age of the universe is, roughly speaking, 1010 years. 
What will happen in the future if the universe does not recollapse? 

Stars in the galaxies of the universe are burning their fuel. The 
smallest stars, which are the ones that last the longest, will last 
about 1015 years before they ﬁ nally burn out. 

Those dead stars will ultimately fall into black holes, which 
themselves will eventually evaporate. This process will take about 
10100 years, about 1 googol years.

The radiation of the black holes will be diluted away as the universe 
expands and accelerates, so it will be imperceptibly different from 
having nothing at all. And that, if the dark energy is completely 
constant, is the end of the story. After a googol years from now, we 
will have empty space and that empty space will last forever.

In other words, the highest-entropy state the universe can be in 
is nothing but empty space. Right now, the universe is not high 
entropy, but entropy is growing. When entropy hits its maximum 
value, equilibrium is reached and evolution stops. 

145

That will be the heat death of the universe. Rather than recollapsing 
and experiencing a Big Crunch, the universe will calm down and 
become colder and colder until it reaches equilibrium. 
An Inside-Out Black Hole

There is, however, a fascinating extra fact that is forced on us by 
the idea of vacuum energy: If the universe is truly accelerating and 
vacuum energy never goes away, it turns out that the accelerating 
universe is like living inside an inside-out black hole.

A black hole is deﬁ ned by the fact that it has a horizon. If you go 
inside, you can never escape to the outside. There’s a region of the 
universe from which information can never reach us. 

Likewise, in an accelerating universe, a galaxy that is far away 
from us now will eventually be moving away from us at a speed 
faster than light. Any light that galaxy emits will never reach us. In 
other words, that galaxy is past a horizon.

Just as Hawking said that black hole horizons give off radiation, our 
universe, which has a horizon around us, has a temperature and gives 
off radiation. In the far, far future of our purportedly empty universe, 
there will still be a nonzero temperature, about 10–30° Kelvin.

What this scenario means is that we have an eternal universe that 
lasts forever. There’s a ﬁ xed volume that we can see inside our 
horizon, and inside that volume, there is a temperature that remains 
constant forever.

This should remind you of Boltzmann’s scenario for understanding 
why the early universe had low entropy. 
o Boltzmann imagined an eternal universe that had some 
ﬂ uctuations and, every once in a while, would form a low-
entropy conﬁ guration—a planet, a galaxy, or even the 
whole universe.

146
Lecture 21: Evolution of the Universe
o We said that couldn’t be right, but it turns out that our real 
world seems headed for exactly that situation. It might take an 
enormously long time to ﬂ uctuate back into the whole universe, 
but we have forever to wait.

If this is the right cosmological scenario, then we should be 
Boltzmann brains or the universe around us should have just 
ﬂ uctuated randomly into existence. We don’t believe that’s true, 
and therefore, there must be something wrong with our current best 
understanding of cosmology. 
Calculating Entropy across Time

At very early times in the universe, when there was no structure, the 
entropy of the universe was about 1088.

Today, most of the universe has black holes at the centers of 
galaxies, and most of the entropy of the universe is in those black 
holes. Adding up the entropy in black holes, we get about 10103.

In the future, the maximum entropy that we can possibly imagine 
from all the stuff we see in the universe today will be about 
10120. That would be the equilibrium version of the universe, the 
conﬁ guration we could be in with maximal entropy. 
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 13.
Guth, The Inﬂ ationary Universe.
Penrose, The Road to Reality.
1. Before the discovery of the cosmic microwave background, many 
astronomers took seriously the steady-state theory. In that model, the 
universe was expanding, but it was constantly creating new matter so 
    Questions to Consider
Suggested Reading

147
that the average density remained the same. What would the status of 
the arrow of time be in such a universe?
2. Is it surprising that the predicted future of the universe stretches out for 
a much longer time than its known past? Is this something that science 
should be working to explain or just a random fact we should accept? 

148
Lecture 22: The Big Bang
The Big Bang
Lecture 22
S
o far in these lectures, we have not shied away from speculating. 
We’ve talked about time travel, for instance, and Boltzmann brains. 
But these speculations have been grounded in theories we understand 
fairly well. In the next couple of lectures, we move into the realm of 
speculative speculations. We’ve reached a point where what we know about 
the universe isn’t good enough; we don’t know why the entropy of the early 
universe was so low, so we have to imagine what the possibilities might be. 
Time Equals Zero

If we extrapolate Einstein’s equation for general relativity 
backward, given the conditions in the universe as we understand 
them, we hit a singularity, a moment when the expansion rate and 
the density of the universe were inﬁ nite. That’s what we call the 
Big Bang.

Notice that this is a time, not a place. It is a moment in the history of 
the universe, not a location in a preexisting universe. The Big Bang 
was not an explosion of stuff in an otherwise empty spacetime. It 
was all of spacetime as far as we know. The Big Bang is just like 
the singularity of a black hole except backward in time.

We know that the early universe was very dense and very smooth. 
The matter in the universe about 1 second after the Big Bang was 
essentially in thermal equilibrium. It was as smooth as it could be 
and as hot as it could be, as long as we ignore gravity. But we can’t 
ignore gravity, of course; that’s why we have this mystery in front 
of us.

Einstein’s general relativity predicts that if we go backward in time, 
we hit this singularity, but a singularity doesn’t mean a boundary to 
spacetime. What it means is that our equations blow up. 

149
o If general relativity were the correct theory of reality, the 
Big Bang would be the beginning—we cannot go past that 
singularity—but we know that general relativity is not right. 
It is not compatible with quantum mechanics. To reconcile 
general relativity with quantum mechanics, we need a theory 
of quantum gravity. 
o General relativity tells us that there is geometry to spacetime, 
a certain amount of curvature. Quantum gravity would say that 
there’s a wave function of spacetime, a set of possibilities for 
what spacetime would look like if we were to observe it. That’s 
the theory we would like to have, but we don’t have it yet.

Even though we don’t have the right theory, we know what 
quantum gravity should be like in certain regimes. It should, for 
example, reduce to classical general relativity in our solar system. 
We know that 1 second after the Big Bang, the universe was doing 
more or less what general relativity says it should do. We can try to 
see what a full theory of quantum gravity would tell us and use that 
to understand the Big Bang.
Creation from Nothing

One plausible scenario is that, with quantum gravity, the Big Bang 
is the beginning, just as our classical intuition tells us. There is no 
such thing as before the Big Bang; time doesn’t go forever. 
o In all the ordinary quantum mechanical theories we understand, 
time goes forever, but gravity is not ordinary in this sense. 
o We have to take seriously the possibility that gravity added 
to quantum mechanics makes time come to an end at the 
beginning of the universe. That would be a universe that 
essentially comes into existence out of nothing.
o This nothingness is not an absence of anything. It’s not 
even a thing, not a state of the universe, not even a quantum 
mechanical possibility.

150
Lecture 22: The Big Bang

This kind of scenario is favored by Stephen Hawking. He tries to 
solve equations for the wave function of the universe that would 
describe the universe that looks like ours today and came into 
existence at the Big Bang.

That is a plausible scenario given what we understand today. Does 
it help us explain the arrow of time? That depends on what the wave 
function of the universe is. It could be just a new law of nature that 
according to this wave function, the universe came into existence at 
a certain moment, and when it came into existence, the entropy was 
very low.
A Bouncing Universe

An alternative to creation from nothing is a bouncing universe, a 
universe in existence before the Big Bang that essentially was the 
time reverse of the Big Bang. It was a universe in which matter 
and energy were contracting and getting denser, and somehow, the 
magic of quantum gravity, rather than collapsing it to a singularity, 
caused it to bounce back and create what we call the Big Bang. 

In some sense, it seems natural that entropy would be decreasing 
as it approached the bounce. If the bounce that we now call the Big 
Bang is a moment of symmetry in the history of the universe, then 
the entropy goes up in both directions away from it, both toward the 
past and the future.

That’s an aesthetically appealing universe, but it still leaves us with 
the question: Why was entropy so low at that point? What is the 
principle of nature that says that when the universe bounces, the 
entropy should be low? 
The Multiverse and the Theory of Inﬂ ation

A third possibility is the multiverse. According to this idea, our 
Big Bang was an event that is really quite small in the history of 
a much larger universe. We see only a ﬁ nite bit of the universe; 
perhaps farther away than what we can see, the universe looks very 
different. The theory of inﬂ ation gives some credibility to this idea.

151

To understand how inﬂ ation works, we need to go back to the 
idea of dark energy. Remember, dark energy doesn’t dilute away 
as the universe expands. In a universe dominated by dark energy, 
expansion accelerates because space gets bigger and bigger. 
Inﬂ ation posits much higher energies at the earlier time when the 
universe began.
o What would happen if, instead of ordinary matter and radiation, 
the early universe was ﬁ lled with nothing but super–dark energy?
o The rate at which something expands depends on the energy 
density, so if the energy density was very high, the universe 
would expand very quickly. 
o At the same time, if the universe was ﬁ lled with dark energy 
rather than ordinary matter, it would smooth out.
o Thus, after a very short time, the universe would go from whatever 
state it was in to a much larger conﬁ guration, very smooth over 
very large distances, and full of this super–dark energy.

In the process known as reheating, this super–dark energy would 
be converted into ordinary matter and radiation. And, in fact, the 
quantum ﬁ eld that was responsible for inﬂ ation could decay after a 
certain amount of time, eventually becoming a hot, dense gas.

What inﬂ ation gives us, then, is a universe dominated by super–dark 
energy that expands and smoothes out by a huge amount, and then 
suddenly, throughout the universe, all that energy is converted into 
ordinary matter and radiation. This looks exactly like our Big Bang.
The Beneﬁ ts of Inﬂ ation

In modern cosmology, inﬂ ation has become the dominant paradigm, 
and there are numerous beneﬁ ts to believing that inﬂ ation happened. 
One of these is that the universe can start very tiny.
o In conventional cosmology, the actual size of the observable 
universe when the universe started is about 1 centimeter. This 

152
Lecture 22: The Big Bang
seems small to us, but by the standards of particle physics, 
it’s huge.
o The question is: Why would the universe be so incredibly 
smooth over this 1-centimeter size? 
o In inﬂ ation, if we trace our currently observable universe 
backward in time, it can start with a region that’s about 10–30 
centimeters across, and it’s much more plausible to particle 
physicists that the universe started in exactly that state.

Inﬂ ation also explains the spatial geometry of the universe, in 
particular, that its large-scale spatial geometry appears to be ﬂ at. 
The universe could have had substantial curvature at early times, 
but the process of inﬂ ating would have ﬂ attened it out.

Further, inﬂ ation explains the fact that the universe is smooth 
over great distances. Again, the process of inﬂ ating would have 
smoothed out small-scale perturbations. 
Inﬂ ation expands a tiny patch of space to a tremendous size in a fraction of a 
second (representation not to scale).
""

	#
!	
*
#!
!
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

153
o If there was just inﬂ ation in a classical universe, there would 
be no way of understanding why there was any deviation in 
density from place to place at early times. 
o But if we add quantum mechanics to the mix, we ﬁ nd that there 
will, in fact, be perturbations. The pattern of perturbations 
predicted by inﬂ ation is exactly what has been observed in the 
cosmic microwave background radiation.

Inﬂ ation does raise a conceptual question: Where does all that 
energy come from? The short answer is that with the expanding 
universe, energy is not conserved. 
o In the expanding universe, there is energy in stuff—dark 
energy, matter, radiation, dark matter, and so on—but there 
is also energy in spacetime itself, the energy of the curvature 
of spacetime.
o The energy of stuff is positive, while the energy of spacetime is 
negative. In a compact universe or a universe that is perfectly 
smooth everywhere, the total energy is exactly zero.
o As this universe expands, tremendously more energy is created 
in stuff that is compensated by the energy of spacetime itself.
o Energy in stuff does not remain the same as the universe 
expands. We can get as much universe as we like from an 
arbitrarily small amount of energy.
Inﬂ ation and Entropy

Inﬂ ation tries to give us a natural explanation for certain features 
of the universe: the fact that it is spatially ﬂ at, that the density 
was so smooth, and so on. The theory tells us that we shouldn’t be 
surprised by these facts, because if we begin with a small region 
ready to inﬂ ate, that is what we will get. However, the question is: 
Why did we begin with that small region ready to inﬂ ate?

154
Lecture 22: The Big Bang

One way of attacking that question is to think about entropy and 
calculate the entropy of that proto-inﬂ ationary region. This entropy 
is about 1010, much, much lower than the entropy after reheating.

Remember, we said that the entropy of the early universe was 
something like the 1088, and now we’re saying that the entropy of 
the inﬂ ating region was something like 1010. This follows the second 
law of thermodynamics, but it doesn’t explain why entropy was so 
low. We’ve simply started at an even lower-entropy conﬁ guration.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 14.
Guth, The Inﬂ ationary Universe.
The expanding bubbles never completely collide. During the false-vacuum 
phase, the amount of space grows forever; inﬂ ation never truly ends.

*
"""!
	#
!#
"
	
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).
    Suggested Reading

155
1. The Big Bang might be a true beginning, a bounce, or part of a larger 
multiverse. What’s your favorite option? What are the advantages and 
disadvantages of each?
2. Should we be surprised that energy is not conserved in an expanding 
universe? Can you think of good analogies for this phenomenon?
    Questions to Consider

156
Lecture 23: The Multiverse
The Multiverse
Lecture 23
W
e’re beginning to put together a comprehensive theory to explain 
the origin of the difference between the past and the future. 
We’ve said many times that the entropy was lower yesterday, and 
the reason the entropy was lower yesterday is that it started low near the Big 
Bang. In the last lecture, we looked at three different ways of thinking about 
the Big Bang: as the actual beginning of the universe, as a bounce, or as an 
event that occurred in just one universe of a very large multiverse. In this 
lecture, we’ll dig a little deeper into the possibility of the multiverse.
A Scientiﬁ c Parable

To think about the multiverse and how it could be part of science, 
consider this parable: Imagine there is a planet that is much like 
ours, except that it’s always completely overcast. Scientists on this 
planet wouldn’t know that there are other stars in the sky. 
o To these scientists, their planet is the whole universe because 
that is all that they can see. At some point, a philosopher 
wonders whether there might be many similar planets that 
can’t be seen because of the opaque atmosphere. 
o Of course, the other philosophers and scientists say, that idea is 
nonsense. We can’t invoke other parts of the universe that can’t 
be seen. That’s not how science or philosophy works.

The point here is that when we talk about the multiverse, we’re 
not invoking a new kind of thing. Instead, we’re observing that 
there is a point in our universe’s past that we cannot see. Is there a 
ﬁ nite amount of stuff out there? Is there an inﬁ nite amount of stuff 
that works exactly like the stuff we can see? Or is there an inﬁ nite 
amount of stuff and conditions that are very different from place 
to place?

157

In some sense, assuming that the entire rest of the universe 
is inﬁ nitely large and just like the region we see is just as 
presumptuous as assuming that there’s an inﬁ nitely large universe 
where conditions are very different from place to place. The cosmic 
microwave background in our universe functions exactly like the 
opaque atmosphere on our hypothetical planet: It’s a barrier past 
which we cannot see.
The Multiverse and the Anthropic Principle

When we consider a multiverse, we necessarily invoke the anthropic 
principle: If there are many different conditions throughout our 
universe, intelligent beings like ourselves will ﬁ nd ourselves only 
in those conditions that are compatible with us existing.

The anthropic principle may be the explanation for the vacuum 
energy that makes the universe accelerate. 
o In ordinary general relativity, there is a classical contribution 
to the vacuum energy that is present as an unknown constant of 
nature, but there are also quantum mechanical contributions to 
vacuum energy.
o All the particles in the universe vibrate in hidden ways in the 
virtual particle sense. That is to say, even in empty space, these 
particles are providing energy. If we add up these contributions 
to the vacuum energy, we get a huge number.
o The real puzzle of vacuum energy is not why it exists but why 
it is so small compared to its natural value. And the answer 
might be the anthropic principle. 
o If the vacuum energy were huge, space would accelerate very, 
very quickly. In fact, if the vacuum energy had its natural 
value, we couldn’t have atoms or even nuclei. The vacuum 
energy would rip things apart so effectively that no molecules 
could form. Under those conditions, it’s unlikely that life 
could develop.

158
Lecture 23: The Multiverse
o We could also have a large negative vacuum energy. Instead 
of making the universe accelerate, it would make the universe 
recollapse in a tiny fraction of a second. Even if the local 
physics allowed for the existence of life, there wouldn’t be 
time for it to evolve.
o However, if the vacuum energy is small but not zero, then 
there’s plenty of time for life to evolve and there’s nothing to 
stop molecules from forming. 

In 1988, Steven Weinberg, a Nobel Prize–winning physicist, made 
the following prediction: If the vacuum energy is not a constant of 
nature, if we live in a multiverse where the vacuum energy takes 
on different values from place to place, then it can’t be too large, 
and it can’t be too negative. If we live in a multiverse, we should 
observe a nonzero vacuum energy with a certain typical value. In 
1998, Weinberg’s prediction of the energy density was conﬁ rmed.

We cannot, however, explain the entropy of the early universe using 
just the anthropic principle. If we try to make the same kind of 
prediction with entropy that Weinberg did with the cosmological 
constant, we get a prediction that the entropy of the early universe 
was much, much larger than it actually was.
Inﬂ ation and Quantum Mechanics

According to quantum mechanics, things ﬂ uctuate, and we can’t 
predict exactly what will happen; we can predict only different 
probability distributions.

As we saw in the last lecture, inﬂ ation involves super–dark energy 
expanding to make a large region of space and then decaying into 
ordinary matter and radiation; that’s the process called reheating. 
What happens if we add quantum mechanics to that process?

The answer is that space can expand and grow, but we can’t predict 
that it certainly turns into matter and radiation; we can predict only 
that this process takes place with a certain probability.

159
o It’s possible that a small region of space expands to a large 
region and perhaps 90% of that larger region reheats. In the 
aftermath, we get what we call the Big Bang, but that means 
that in 10% of the space, inﬂ ation does not stop and reheating 
does not take place.
o That 10% continues to expand, and after a certain period of 
time, 90% of that region reheats, resulting in a Big Bang. But 
again, 10% continues to inﬂ ate. In other words, we create more 
and more regions of space where inﬂ ation is still going on, 
even though, in any one region, 90% will stop inﬂ ating soon.
o This 10% that keeps inﬂ ating grows in size by a tremendous 
amount. In actual cubic centimeters, the region of space that is 
still inﬂ ating grows without bound. Inﬂ ation never ends in this 
scenario. This is called eternal inﬂ ation. It’s a natural marriage 
between inﬂ ation and quantum mechanics.
o This theory of eternal inﬂ ation tells us that we can get a very 
different universe from place to place.
String Theory

Eternal inﬂ ation could create many regions of universe just like our 
own, or it could create many regions, each of which has different 
local laws of physics. This is a consequence of string theory, the 
leading candidate to reconcile quantum mechanics and gravity.

According to string theory, spacetime has at least 10 or 11 
dimensions; this seems to be an obvious conﬂ ict with experiment 
because we have only 4 dimensions of spacetime. But it turns out 
that in general relativity, it’s not difﬁ cult to hide extra dimensions 
of space. In fact, there could be as many as 10500 ways to hide extra 
spatial dimensions.

Every different way of curling up extra dimensions affects the mass 
and charges of elementary particles, the different forces through 
which they interact, and the ranges over which those forces stretch. 

160
Lecture 23: The Multiverse
Basically, every one of these possibilities is a different way the 
universe can be.

If we combine string theory with eternal inﬂ ation, we bring a wildly 
varying multiverse to life. Inﬂ ation says that we can have different 
regions of space. String theory says that the local physics in all 
those regions can be different. 
Testing the Multiverse Hypothesis

The biggest problem with the multiverse hypothesis is that it is 
difﬁ cult to test, given that other regions of the universe are too far 
away to visit.

It’s possible to look for direct evidence of other universes, that 
is, instances where another universe with different local physics 
bumps into our universe. 
o If another universe came into existence because of inﬂ ation and 
reheating, then that universe would leave a tiny relic of radiation 
and energy heating up our cosmic microwave background.
o The data we have on the microwave background right now 
aren’t good enough to rule out this idea, but they’re also not 
good enough to conﬁ rm that other universes are present.

The more likely scenario is that we will get indirect evidence in 
favor of the multiverse. Here, we use the anthropic principle and 
the multiverse to make statistical predictions for certain parameters 
of particle physics that haven’t yet been measured. 
o Could we use this combination to make predictions about dark 
matter, the Higgs boson, supersymmetry, or other aspects of 
particle physics?
o This is very difﬁ cult to do, but it is the more likely way we will 
discover that the multiverse is on the right track.

161
The Measure Problem

The measure problem is a puzzle associated with the multiverse: If 
we take the multiverse seriously, everything that can happen will 
happen, and it will happen an inﬁ nite number of times. 
o One of the things we want to know, for example, is how many 
observers would observe a small vacuum energy? How many 
observers would observe a large vacuum energy? 
o Again, if we take the multiverse at face value, the answer is: An 
inﬁ nite number of observers measures a certain value and an 
inﬁ nite number measures another value. How can we compare 
these? How can we say that one inﬁ nite number is greater than 
another one?

This may be a profound problem with the multiverse idea. It may 
be that even if the multiverse is real, we will never be able to use 
it to make predictions. As of now, the multiverse is a speculative 
idea that is not yet developed well enough by theorists to make 
ﬁ rm predictions.
The Future of the Multiverse Hypothesis

The reason we think about the multiverse is not that we know it’s 
there, and it’s not even that if we knew it was there, it would make a 
deﬁ nite prediction about the universe. It’s that when we think about 
the puzzles we face in explaining the universe we see, whether or 
not there is a multiverse changes the way we think. 

The way to move forward with the multiverse idea is to 
understand how gravity, quantum mechanics, and particle physics 
work together. We need to develop at least one well-deﬁ ned, 
unambiguous theory, and right now, when it comes to explaining 
the past hypothesis, we have no compelling theories.

162
Lecture 23: The Multiverse
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 14.
Susskind, The Cosmic Landscape.
Vilenkin, Many Worlds in One.
1. Do you think that speculation about the multiverse is a respectable 
part of science? If not, how should we deal with the possibility that the 
multiverse is real? And if so, what if we are never able to test the idea?
2. The anthropic principle relies on some idea about what kind of life can 
possibly exist in the universe (or some other universe). What do you 
think are the necessary conditions for the existence of life? What is the 
form of life you can imagine that is least like our own?
3. In 1998, Stephen Weinberg used the anthropic principle to predict the 
value of the vacuum energy, and his prediction turned out to be correct. 
How much weight should we give to this success?
    Questions to Consider
    Suggested Reading

163
Approaches to the Arrow of Time
Lecture 24
T
hroughout these lectures, our challenge has been to connect two 
realities: the deep underlying reality that there is no difference 
between past and future and our phenomenological reality, in which 
it is obvious that there is an arrow of time. The reconciliation seems to be 
that we are a complicated system, embedded in an environment that is far 
from equilibrium. There is something called entropy that characterizes the 
organization or disorganization of us and our environment. The amazing 
fact about our world is that all the manifestations of the arrow of time seem 
to be explained by increasing entropy. But the question remains: Why did 
the universe start with such low entropy? In this lecture, we’ll look at three 
possibilities for answering that question.
An Intrinsic Arrow of Time?

The ﬁ rst possibility for addressing our central question is that 
despite everything we think we know about the fundamental laws 
of physics, maybe there is an intrinsic arrow of time. 

○
Ever since Galileo and Newton, our attempts to develop deep 
laws of physics have been time symmetric and have conserved 
information, but maybe that’s wrong. 

○
Perhaps laws that are yet to be discovered are not reversible 
and do not conserve information. Maybe entropy is something 
that has an intrinsic arrow of time.

If we do have dynamical laws that pick out a direction of time, they 
need to be laws that make entropy spontaneously decrease. We need 
to start with a high-entropy universe, apply the laws of physics to 
it, watch the entropy decrease, and then imagine that we live in that 
universe, but we perceive it in the other direction. 

It’s not hard to imagine laws of physics that are like that. 

164
Lecture 24: Approaches to the Arrow of Time

○
We can conceive of a billiard table that is not frictionless but 
sticky along the walls. 

○
The billiard balls could start in a high-entropy conﬁ guration 
(with the balls scattered around the table) and end with a low-
entropy conﬁ guration (with the balls “stuck” to one wall of 
the table).

○
This is an irreversible process, but it doesn’t seem to be our 
world. It seems intuitively implausible that we could start 
with an empty universe, expanding with dark energy, and then 
gradually form galaxies all the way back to a reverse-time Big 
Bang and that the result would be our universe. 

It’s worth emphasizing that the past hypothesis, this idea that our 
early universe started with low entropy, is both necessary and 
sufﬁ cient for explaining the arrow of time. Any new theories about 
the arrow of time must explain why our early universe was hot, 
dense, and smooth because these are the conditions that obtained in 
the early universe.

The idea of an intrinsic arrow built into the laws of physics doesn’t 
seem to explain the past hypothesis.
The Simplest Possible Quantum State?

The second possible explanation for understanding why entropy 
was so low in the early universe is that there’s just a reason that 
initial conditions were like that. Maybe it’s just a fact that conditions 
near the Big Bang had low entropy. 

Stephen Hawking and other physicists favor an approach that says 
the quantum state of the universe is the simplest possible. The Big 
Bang was the beginning. The entropy was low, and there’s some 
principle of nature that explains why that makes sense.

That principle of nature can’t be that most possible universes look 
like that because that is simply false. The actual conﬁ guration 

165
of stuff in our early universe is a tiny fraction of all the different 
possible ways it could have been. 

It might be simpler to start with a low-entropy early universe, but 
we don’t seem to have a principle that says the early universe had to 
be simple for that reason. It seems fairly arbitrary to simply say that 
the early universe was just like that; further, this approach doesn’t 
seem to ﬁ t the universe we see.
A Spontaneous Arrow of Time?

The third possibility for answering our question is that the arrow of 
time arises spontaneously out of the natural, reversible evolution of 
the universe. In other words, the universe does not have an arrow of 
A baby universe could be created through a quantum ﬂ uctuation of a false-
vacuum bubble.
© Sean Carroll (created by Jason Torchinsky).

166
Lecture 24: Approaches to the Arrow of Time
time in the laws of physics, but the solutions to the equations of the 
laws of physics always have an arrow of time. 

This is actually a common phenomenon in physics, where the 
symmetries of speciﬁ c solutions to equations are not the same as 
the symmetries of the equations.

○
As a very simple example, think of Newtonian mechanics, 
which is perfectly reversible; it has no arrow of time built 
in. Laplace told us that if we know the state of the universe 
in Newtonian mechanics at one time, we know it at all other 
times, but it’s not hard to think of systems obeying the 
rules of Newtonian mechanics in which an arrow of time 
automatically arises.

○
For example, think of a ball rolling on an inﬁ nite hill. The 
history of this ball is that for an inﬁ nite amount of time, it rolls 
up the hill; it reaches a turning point and then spends an inﬁ nite 
amount of time rolling down the hill. This is the only thing the 
ball can do in this system; if the hill always has a slope, the ball 
can never remain stationary.

○
This is a physical system obeying Newton’s laws, which are 
perfectly reversible, but it doesn’t have an equilibrium. 

○
Could the universe be like that? Could we live in a universe 
where the fundamental laws of physics say that entropy 
doesn’t have a maximum value? If entropy doesn’t have a 
maximum value, the reason we are not in the maximum-
entropy conﬁ guration becomes much less mysterious: There is 
no maximum-entropy conﬁ guration. Entropy can always grow 
without bound.

Even if entropy can grow forever, that certainly doesn’t explain 
why our local region of the universe once had such low entropy. We 
need to do much more work to create a physical system in which 
regions where the entropy had the low value it had at the Big Bang 
are created naturally. 

167
Inﬂ ation and the Multiverse

What we really want to explain is why we’re not in equilibrium, that 
is, why we don’t already have the highest entropy we could possibly 
have. As we know, the entropy of our universe will continue to 
increase into the far future, until it becomes empty space.

When we apply quantum mechanics to this empty space, there 
will be thermal ﬂ uctuations. Very rarely, there will be a random 
ﬂ uctuation of thermal energy that will result in an atom, a molecule, 
a person, a planet, or the universe. The larger the thing that will be 
created, the longer we need to wait for the random ﬂ uctuations, but 
they will all eventually happen.

It sounds difﬁ cult to ﬂ uctuate the entire universe, which has much 
greater entropy than a planet or a person. As we said, it’s easier to 
ﬂ uctuate entropy a little than a lot, so how can we think that it’s 
easier to ﬂ uctuate a whole universe than just a person? It seems 
like this scenario gets us Boltzmann brains. The answer might lie 
in inﬂ ation.

Although it might be very rare to ﬂ uctuate 100 billion galaxies, it 
may not be that difﬁ cult to ﬂ uctuate the tiny region of space that is 
dominated by super–dark energy and is ready to inﬂ ate.

○
Imagine we have empty space, nothing but vacuum energy and 
the very cold thermal radiation we expect because of quantum 
mechanics. Random thermal ﬂ uctuations occur all the time.

○
Because space itself is ﬂ exible, perhaps the shape of space can 
be ﬂ uctuated. Perhaps a small bubble can be pinched off that is 
full of dark energy and ready to inﬂ ate. That little bubble can 
inﬂ ate, expand, reheat, and look exactly like our Big Bang.

○
In this way, what we thought was equilibrium—a state of 
maximum entropy—could be shown not to be equilibrium. We 
can always increase the entropy of the universe, according to 
this way of thinking, by creating new universes that split off 
and go their own way, and this process continues forever.

168
Lecture 24: Approaches to the Arrow of Time

Just as we can evolve this scenario forward in time, we can evolve it 
backward in time and make more universes toward the past. Inside 
every one of those universes is an arrow of time that is pointed 
backward compared to ours. Just as the ball rolling down the hill 
comes from and goes to inﬁ nity, our universe does the same thing 
into the far past and the far future.

This kind of scenario takes advantage of the ﬂ exibility of the 
universe according to the laws of general relativity and quantum 
mechanics to escape the trap of thermal equilibrium. Given the 
ﬂ exibility of space and time, given the quantum mechanical 
freedom to ﬂ uctuate into different things, maybe there is no 
maximum-entropy state the universe could be in. 
The Future of Our Theories

As of right now, our understanding of the multiverse and inﬂ ation 
isn’t good enough to compare these ideas to the data we have. We 
need to push our understanding of cosmology, particle physics, 
gravity, and the evolution of complexity and entropy through time 
to be able to really understand what our theories predict. Once we 
get there, we can compare the theories to data and try to make a 
choice about which theory is right.

We personally are organized systems; we have a great deal of 
complexity but low entropy. Even so, we are not ﬂ outing the second 
law; in fact, we’re manifestations of it. We are side effects of the 
universe’s increasing entropy. If the universe were in thermal 
equilibrium, intelligent life would not exist.

In that sense, we are fortunate to live in a universe with such a 
pronounced arrow of time. The reason we have this arrow of time 
is because of the early universe. It’s because of the conditions in 
the early universe that we have aging, metabolism, memory, and 
causality—everything that, to us, distinguishes the past from 
the future.

169
Albert, Time and Chance.
Carroll, From Eternity to Here, chapter 15.
Greene, The Fabric of the Cosmos.
Lockwood, The Labyrinth of Time.
Price, Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point.
1. Despite what we currently know about the laws of physics, do you think 
it’s plausible that the ultimate laws are actually not invariant under 
time reversal?
2. Do you think the multiverse is a promising route to explaining the arrow 
of time?
3. Would you be satisﬁ ed if the ultimate conclusion of cosmologists was 
that the low entropy of the early universe was simply a brute fact, 
without any deeper explanation?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

Bibliography
170
Bibliography
Adams, F., and G. Laughlin. The Five Ages of the Universe: Inside the 
Physics of Eternity. New York: Free Press, 1999.
Albert, D. Z. Time and Chance. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2000.
Barnett, J. E. Time’s Pendulum: From Sundials to Atomic Clocks, the 
Fascinating History of Timekeeping and How Our Discoveries Changed the 
World. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1999.
Callender, C. Introducing Time. Illustrated by Ralph Edney. Cambridge: 
Totem Books, 2005.
Carroll, S. From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory of 
Time. New York: Plume, 2010.
Davies, P. C. W. About Time: Einstein’s Unﬁ nished Revolution. New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 1995.
Falk, D. In Search of Time: The Science of a Curious Dimension. New York: 
Thomas Dunne Books, 2008.
Frank, A. About Time: Cosmology and Culture at the Twilight of the Big 
Bang. New York: Free Press, 2011.
Gell-Mann, M. The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the 
Complex. New York: St. Martin’s Grifﬁ n, 1995.
Greene, B. The Fabric of the Cosmos: Space, Time, and the Texture of 
Reality. New York: Knopf, 2004.
Guth, A. H. The Inﬂ ationary Universe: The Quest for a New Theory of 
Cosmic Origins. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1997.

171
Hawking, S. W. A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang to Black Holes. 
New York: Bantam, 1988.
Klein, E. Chronos: How Time Shapes Our Universe. Translated by Glenn 
Burney. New York: Thunder’s Mouth Press, 2005.
Levine, R. A Geography of Time: On Tempo, Culture, and the Pace of Life. 
New York: Basic Books, 1998.
Lindley, D. Boltzmann’s Atom: The Great Debate That Launched a 
Revolution in Physics. New York: Free Press, 2001.
Lockwood, M. The Labyrinth of Time: Introducing the Universe. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2005.
Lucretius De Rerum Natura (On the Nature of Things). Edited and translated 
by A. M. Esolen. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1995.
Nahin, P. J. Time Machines: Time Travel in Physics, Metaphysics, and 
Science Fiction. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1999.
Penrose, R. The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the 
Universe. New York: Knopf, 2005.
Price, H. Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point: New Directions for the 
Physics of Time. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996. 
Schacter, D. L. The Seven Sins of Memory: How the Mind Forgets and 
Remembers. New York: Houghton Mifﬂ in, 2001.
Schrödinger, E. What Is Life? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1944.
Susskind, L. The Cosmic Landscape: String Theory and the Illusion of 
Intelligent Design. New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2006.

172
Bibliography
———. The Black Hole War: My Battle with Stephen Hawking to Make 
the World Safe for Quantum Mechanics. New York: Little, Brown and 
Company, 2008.
Thorne, K. S. Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein’s Outrageous Legacy. 
New York: W. W. Norton, 1994.
Vilenkin, A. Many Worlds in One: The Search for Other Universes. New 
York: Hill and Wang, 2006.
Von Baeyer, H. C. Warmth Disperses and Time Passes: The History of Heat. 
New York: Modern Library, 1998.
Zimbardo, P., and J. Boyd. The Time Paradox: The New Psychology of Time 
That Will Change Your Life. New York: Free Press, 2008.

