Nails 
A nail to suit every job, it pays to use the correct type. 
 
 
Round wire nail. These large round head 
nails are mostly used for rough carpentry 
where appearance is not important but 
strength is essential. They are inclined to split 
a piece of wood. Sizes from 20- 150 mm 
(0.75in - 6in).  
 
Oval wire nail. Most suitable for joinery work 
where appearance is important since they 
can easily be punched below the surface. 
They are less likely to split the wood if driven 
in with the longer sides parallel to the grain. 
Sizes from 12-150 mm (0.5in - 6in)  
  
Round or lost head nail. Stronger than oval 
wire nails, they can easily be punched below 
the surface of the wood. Sizes from 12-150 
mm (0.5-6in)  
 
Tack. A short nail with a wide, flat head, the 
tack is used for fixing carpets to floorboards 
and for stretching fabric on to wood.  
  
Panel pin. Round lightweight nail used for 
cabinet-making 
and 
for 
fixing 
small 
mouldings into place.  
 
Cut floor brad. Rectangular, they have an L-
shaped head and are nearly always used for 
nailing floorboards to joists. Sizes from 25-
150 mm (1-6in).  
 
Masonary Nail. Made of hardened steel, this 
nail is used to fix wood to brick, breeze block 
and most types of masonry.  
 
Square twisted nail. Twists into the wood. 
These comparatively expensive nails offer a 
more permanent, screw-like grip than plain 
nails.  
 
Annular nail. Useful where very strong joints 
are required. The sharp ridges round the 
shank become embedded in the wood to give 
a tight grip.  
 
Cloat head nail. Made of galvanized steel, 
with a large, flat retaining head, this nail is 
most suitable for soft materials such as 
plasterboard and roof felt.  
 
Spring-head 
roofing 
nail. 
For 
fixing 
corrugated sheeting to timber. The twisted 
shank and inverted cup head produces a 
very strong purchase.  
 
Corrugated fastener. For reinforcing a weak 
wood joint or for securing mitred or butt joints 
in rough framing.  
 
Cut clasp nail Rectangular in section, they 
are difficult to remove and provide a very 

strong fixing in wood and pre-drilled masonry. 
Sizes from 25-150mm (1-6in).  
  
Hardboard nail. These have a diamond-
shaped head which is virtually hidden when 
hammered into hardboard. Sizes from 9-
38mm (3/8-1.5 in).  
  
Sprig. A small nail without a head. They are 
used mainly to hold glass in window frames 
before applying putty which covers them up. 
Sizes from 12-19mm (0.5-0.75in)  
 
Upholstery nail. Available in chrome, brass 
and other metallic finishes, they are used as 
a secondary fixing with tacks. The dome 
head gives a decorative finish when nailing 
chair coverings into place. Various head 
sizes are available.  
 
Staple. U-shaped round wire nails with two 
points to hold lengths of wire in position. 
Some staples have an insulated lining for 
fixing flex and electric cable.  
 

