Stone Man
NANCY KRESS
 
 
Here’s a walk down the Mean Streets of today’s big cities, which can be
made even meaner by battling wizards—unless you can get a little help
from your friends . . .
 
Nancy Kress began selling her elegant and incisive stories in the
mid seventies and has since become a frequent contributor to Asimov’s
Science Fiction, The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, OMNI, Sci
Fiction, and elsewhere. Her books include the novel version of her Hugo-
and Nebula-winning story, “Beggars in Spain,” and a se-quel, Beggars
and Choosers, as well as The Prince of Morning Bells, The Golden Grove,
The White Pipes, An Alien Light, Brainrose, Oaths and Miracles, Stinger,
Maximum Light, Probability Moon, Probability Sun, Probability Space,
Crossfire, and Nothing Human. Her short work has been collected in
Trinity and Other Stories, The Aliens of Earth, and Beaker’s Dozen. Her
most recent book is the novel Crucible. In addition to the awards for
“Beggars in Spain,” she has also won Nebula Awards for her stories “Out
of All Them Bright Stars” and “The Flowers of Aulit Prison.”
 
* * * *
 
J
ARED Stoffel never even saw the car that hit him. He ollied off the concrete
steps of the Randolph Street Rec Center down onto the street and was
coming down on his skateboard when wham! his butt was smacked hard
enough to rattle his teeth and Jared went down. A second before the pain
registered, he threw up his arms to shield his face. The Bird-house went
flying—he saw it in the air, wheels spinning, a moment before his body hit
the street. All at once he was smothered under a ton of stones he couldn’t
breathe he was going to die and someone was screaming but it was
mostly the rocks—God the boulders flying to land on top of him, un-der
him, everywhere . . . Everything went black.
 
* * * *
 
“YOU with us yet, child?”
 

“Rocks.” It came out “bogs.” Jared put his hand to his face. The hand
stopped an inch away on his swollen mouth.
 
“How many fingers am I holding up?”
 
“Who.”
 
“What day is it?”
 
“Breeday.”
 
“Just rest a while. You took a nasty fall.” The blurry old nurse dressed
in some stupid pants with yellow ducks on them stuck a needle in Jared’s
arm and went away.
 
When he came to again, everything was clearer. A TV on a shelf high
up near the ceiling droned out some news about an earthquake someplace.
An old man in a white coat sat in a chair by Jared’s bed, reading. Jared tried
to sit up, and the man rose and eased him back down. “Just stay quiet a
little longer.”
 
“Where am I?”                                                                          
 
“Perry Street Medical Center. You got hit by a car while
skateboarding, but you have nothing more than two fractured ribs and a
lacerated hand. You’re a very lucky young man.”
 
“Oh, right. Just lousy with luck.” The words came out correctly; his lips
weren’t nearly as swollen. The tiny room had no windows. How long had he
been in here?
 
“I’m Dr. Kendall and I need some information. What’s your name,
son?”
 
“I’m not your son.” Jared lay trying to remember this accident.
Shawn— he’d been skateboarding with Shawn. Shawn had yelled when
Jared got hit. “Shawn?”
 
“Your name’s Shawn? Shawn What?”
 
“I’m not Shawn, dumb-ass. He’s my friend, with me. Where’s
Shawn?”
 
The doctor grimaced. “Some friend. He took off running as soon as

the ambulance arrived. What were you two doing that he didn’t want to get
caught? Never mind, I don’t want to know. But I do need to know your
name.”
 
“Why?”                                                         
 
“To notify your parents, for one thing.”
 
“Forget it. She won’t come.”
 
Something moved behind the doctor’s eyes. He glanced up at the
TV, still showing pictures of an earthquake, then returned to watching Jared
closely. Too closely. The guy was maybe fifty, maybe sixty, with white hair,
but that didn’t mean he couldn’t be a—was he even really a doctor? Jared
said, “Hey, stop staring like that, sicko.”
 
“Ah,” the doctor said sadly. “I see. Damn. But I still need to know your
name. For the records we—”
 
“I don’t got any insurance. So you can just let me out of here now.”
Again Jared tried to sit up.
 
“Lie down, son. We can’t release you yet. Now please tell me your
name.”                                             
 
“Jared.”
 
“Jared What?”
 
“None of your business.” If he didn’t say any more, maybe they’d
throw him out of here. The doc said he wasn’t hurt bad. He could crash at
Shawn’s. If Ma saw him like this, she’d smash the Birdhouse for sure.
She— “Hey! Where’s my deck?”
 
“Your what?”
 
“My deck! The Bird! My skateboard!”
 
“Oh. I’m afraid I don’t know.”
 
“You mean you just left it in the street?” Gone now, for sure. And it
had been a huge set of trouble to steal it!
 
Again that strange expression in Kendall’s eyes. He said quietly,

“Jared, I will personally replace your skateboard, buy you a brand-new and
very good one, if you will answer some questions for me first.”
 
“You? Buy me a new deck? For giving you what?”
 
“I already told you. All you need do is answer some questions.”
 
“Nobody gives away new decks for free!”
 
“I will, to you.” Kendall’s eyes, Jared saw, were light brown, full of
some emotion Jared didn’t understand. But he wasn’t picking up rip-off
vibes from the man. Hope surged through him. A new deck . . . maybe an
Abec four . . .
 
He squashed the hope. Hope just got you hurt.
 
Kendall reached into his pocket and drew out a wad of bills. “How
much does a good skateboard cost?”
 
Jared’s eyes hung on the money. He could get a Hawk deck . . . good
trucks and wheels . . . “Two hundred dollars.” Maybe the old guy didn’t know
what stuff cost.
 
Kendall counted ten twenties and held them out in his closed hand.
“After you answer three questions.”
 
“Just three? Okay, but better not try anything perv.”
 
“First, your name and address.”
 
“Jared Parsell, 62 Randolph.”
 
Kendall withdrew his hand. “You’re lying.”
 
How did the old bastard know? “Wait, don’t put the money away…I’m
Jared Stoffel, and I live at 489 Center Street.” When he lived anywhere at
all. Ma, strung out on crystal most of the time, only noticed when he
screwed up, not when he stayed away. She was pretty lame about time.
 
Kendall said, “When were you born?”
 
“April 6, 1993.”
 
Closing his eyes, Kendall moved his lips silently, as if figuring

some-thing. Finally, he said, as if it mattered, “Full moon.”
 
“Whatever.”
 
“Now the last question: How did all those stones get around you
dur-ing the hit-and-run?”
 
“What?”
 
“When the ambulance arrived, you were lying on, and were covered
with, small stones. They appear to have come from a flower bed on the
other side of the Recreation Center. How did they get with you?”
 
A vague memory stirred in Jared’s mind. Rocks—he was being
smothered with rocks, and someone—him—said “bogs.” And Shawn yelled
something as Jared fell, something Jared couldn’t remember now . . .
Jared had thought the rocks were in his mind—something from, like, the
pain of the accident. Not real. But maybe . . .
 
Kendall was watching him sadly. Why sad? This old psycho gave
Jared the creeps.
 
“I don’t know anything about any stones.”
 
“You and Shawn weren’t playing some game involving the stones?
Throwing them at cars or something?”
 
“Jesus, man, I’m thirteen, not eight!”
 
“I see,” Dr. Kendall said. He handed the two hundred dollars to Jared,
who seized it eagerly, even though leaning forward caused pain to stab
through his torso. Jared moved his legs toward the end of the bed.
 
Kendall eased them back. “Not yet, son, I’m afraid.” He looked even
sadder than before.
 
“Get your hands off me! I answered your stupid questions!”
 
“Yes, and the money is yours. But you can’t leave yet. Not until you
see one other person.”
 
“I don’t want to see any more doctors!”
 
“It’s not a doctor. I’m a doctor. Larson is a . . . well, you’ll see.

Lar-son!”
 
The door opened and another man entered. This one was young, big,
tough-looking, with long hair and a do-rag. He wore a leather jacket and gold
necklace, serious gold. A dealer, maybe a gangbanger, maybe even a
leader. Or a narc. He stood at the end of Jared’s bed, big hands resting
lightly on the metal railing, and stared unsmiling. “So is he, Doc?”
 
“Yes.”                                      
 
“You sure? Never mind, I know you don’t make mistakes. But, God…
look at him.”
 
“Look at your dumb-ass self,” Jared said, but even to him the words
sounded lame. Larson scared him, although he wasn’t going to admit that.
 
“Watch your mouth, kid,” Larson snarled. “I don’t like this any better
than you do. But if you are one of us, then you are. The doc doesn’t make
mistakes. Damn it to hell anyway!”
 
“If I’m what? What am I?” Jared said.
 
“A wizard,” Dr. Kendall said. “You’re a wizard, Jared. As of now.”
 
* * * *
 
LARSON left the explanations to Kendall. With a disgusted look over his
shoulder at the hospital bed, Larson stormed out, slamming the door. Jared
caught the scandalized look of a passing nurse just before the door shook
on its hinges.
 
“A wizard. Yeah, right,” Jared said. “Any minute now I’m gonna turn
you into a pigeon. No, wait—you’re already a pigeon if you believe that
crap.”
 
“I’m afraid it’s true,” Kendall said. “During your accident you
sum-moned those rocks. The smoothest stones from the flower bed flew
through the air and landed on you, under you, around you. You skidded
across the pavement on them as if on ball bearings. That broke your fall,
maybe saved your life.”
 
“Right. Anything you say.”
 
“You were born under the full moon, also a requirement, although we

don’t know why. You—”
 
“And you’re a wizard, too, huh?”
 
“No,” Kendall said sadly, “I’m not. I can spot one, is all, and so the
Brotherhood uses me.”
 
“Uh-huh. So you can’t, like, show me something wizardy right now,
and Larson left before he had to. Convenient.”
 
“Nothing ‘wizardy’ could be done here anyway. Not here, in the
presence of metal. Not by any wizard now living.” Kendall leaned forward,
his hands on his knees. “Magic is very old, Jared, much older than even the
most primitive civilization. It governs only the things found in nature, and it
cannot operate near to the things that are not. The only reason you could
summon those stones at all is because your skateboard went flying, you
weren’t carrying a cell phone, and you had on pull-on running shorts with no
zipper.”
 
“You leave my shorts out of this,” Jared said. “How come I never did
any magic before, huh? You tell me that?”
 
“That’s easy. Your accident. The ability to do magic, among those
who possess it at all, is only released in the presence of pain.”
 
“Pain?”
 
“Yes, Jared,” Kendall said quietly. “Everything in life costs, even
magic. The price is pain.”
 
This was the first thing the old man had said that made any sense to
Jared. He knew things cost. He knew about pain.
 
But the rest of it was pure psycho bull. And bull with a reason. He
said, “So now you tell me I’m going to one of those wizard schools, huh?
Like in that book? Only guess what—it’ll really turn out to be just another
lock-down, like Juvie.”
 
“There is no such thing as a wizard school. All we have is the
Brotherhood, and that all too inadequate to its task.”            
 
“Listen, this sucks. I’m outta here, man. What do I gotta sign?”
 
“You’re a minor. A parent must sign your release forms.”

 
“Like that’s gonna happen. My mom’s strung out most of the time and
my dad’s long gone. You wait on a parent, I’ll be here forever. Where’s my
clothes?”
 
“You can’t—”
 
“Watch me. I ain’t waiting here for Child Services to stick me in a
foster home. And I ain’t listening to no more of your bull, neither.”
 
“You can talk better than that when you want to,” Kendall said. “I’ve
heard you do so. Here, if you’re really going—no, your shoes are in that
cupboard over there—take this. It’s my home address. You can come see
me anytime you want, Jared. For any reason.”
 
“Don’t hold your breath.” He found the shoes, finished dressing, and
walked out of the medical center. He had to lean twice against walls to do it,
breathing deeply and fighting his own stomach, but he did it.
 
“Welcome to the Brotherhood, Jared,” Kendall said sadly.
 
“Forget you,” Jared said.
 
* * * *
 
IT was a week before he could make it out of the house. He lay in his
bed-room, fighting the pain, distracting himself with the songs on the radio
and with the Game Boy he’d stolen three months ago. Ma had sold the
Xbox, but he’d hidden the Game Boy and the radio behind the broken
dishwasher, and she hadn’t found them. He should have gotten painkillers
before he left the clinic. The old doc would probably have given him some,
but Jared hadn’t thought of it. Fortunately, it was one of the times when
there was food in the house. Ma’s new guy, whom Jared encountered in the
kitchen in his underwear, liked to eat well.
 
After a week the bedclothes, not too clean to begin with, stank, but
Jared felt better. He knew he was better because he was bored. The day
af-ter that he dressed and went out. He didn’t find anybody on the street.
Then he remembered that school had started.
 
He walked to Benjamin Franklin Middle School, scowled at the
secu-rity guard, and passed through the metal detector. When classes
changed, kids flooded into the halls.
 

“Hey! Shawn!”
 
Shawn Delancey glanced up from the girl he was talking to, and a
strange expression crossed his face. He nodded coolly. Jared hobbled
over to him.
 
“I’m back, man.”
 
“Yeah, I see.”
 
“So what you doing here? In school?”
 
Shawn didn’t answer. He turned back to the girl, without introducing
her. Jared felt his face grow hot.
 
“Hey, you dissing me, Shawn?”
 
“I’m busy right now. Can’t you see that?”
 
This had never happened before. He and Shawn were tight, had
always been tight. The girl snickered. Jared limped away.
 
The prick, the bastard . . .
 
But he couldn’t let it go. He caught Shawn later, leaving school after
fourth period, carrying his deck. Jared stepped out from an alley and said,
“Shawn. What’s wrong, man?” 
 
“Nothing. I gotta go.”
 
Anger and hurt made him desperate. “Dude, it’s me! Me!”
 
Shawn stopped, turning from embarrassment to anger. Maybe, Jared
suddenly thought, they were the same thing. “Just leave me alone, Jared,
okay? I don’t need you and your lame crap!”
 
His crap. He didn’t have any crap except... it was weird and stupid,
but he couldn’t think of anything else. He said quietly, testing, “The
stones?”     
 
“I don’t know how you did that, but…just leave me alone!” Shawn
hurried off.
 
So it had been the stones. And the stones had happened. They really

had. Only it had been some kind of freak accident, wind devil or
some-thing, not any freaking magic.
 
“Forget you!” he yelled after Shawn, but Shawn was already on his
board, skimming lightly out of Jared’s sight.
 
* * * *
 
WITH Kendall’s two hundred dollars, Jared bought a new deck, a deluxe
Hawk, plus awesome trucks and wheels. He spent every day alone, in
an-other neighborhood, painfully regaining his mobility and skill. After what
happened with Shawn, he didn’t want to approach his other friends, and
anyway he didn’t have too many other friends. Mostly it had been him and
Shawn.
 
Ma’s boyfriend broke up with her, and Jared didn’t want to be home
with her much; she was always wailing, or else out scoring. When the
boyfriend’s food was gone, she barely bought more. Sometimes Jared’s
stomach growled while he practiced, over and over, ollies and kickflips and
fifty-fifty grinds and even a few hardflips. He sped around the
neighbor-hood, a better one than his own, past trees turning from green to
red and gold, past little kids on trikes, past bright flowers in beds edged
with stones.
 
All the stones stayed where they were supposed to.
 
It was hunger and cold that finally made him pull out the card Dr.
Kendall had given him at the clinic. Hunger, cold, and maybe loneliness,
although he didn’t like to admit that. The address was not far away, on
Carter Street. Jared skated over, preparing an excuse in his mind.
 
Kendall’s house wasn’t much, a small two-story—weren’t doctors
supposed to make a lot of money? Neat bushes surrounded it, and the
porch light shone cheerfully in the October dusk. Jared rang the bell and
scowled.
 
“Hi, Doc, something’s wrong with my hand. You must not’ve fixed it
right.”
 
“Come in, Jared,” Kendall said. Why did the guy always look so sad
to see him? What a crock. But the house was warm and smelled of meat
roast-ing. Jared’s mouth filled with sweet water. “Let me see your hand . . .
you had slight damage to your left transverse ligament from the stones, but
it looks all right now. Would you like to stay to dinner?”

 
“I already ate,” Jared said, scowling more deeply. His stomach
growled.
 
“Then have a second dinner just to keep me company. My
housekeeper just left, and she cooks a lot on Mondays so she doesn’t have
to do much the rest of the week.” Kendall led the way to the tiny dining
room without giving Jared a chance to answer, so he followed. The room
had a big table, real curtains, a china chest filled with dishes. Kendall set a
second place.
 
Roast beef and mashed potatoes and peas and a pudding that tasted
of apples. Jared tried not to gobble too hard. When he finished, he glanced
out the window. A cold rain fell. That sucked—it was too easy to snap a
board in the rain, and, anyway, the wood got all soggy.
 
Kendall, who had been silent throughout dinner, said, “How about a
game of Street Fighter?”
 
“You play Street Fighter? You? I know it’s an old game and
everything, but . . . you?”
 
Kendall had a new Nintendo for the vintage game. He wielded the
controllers pretty well for an old guy. Jared beat him, but only barely. As
they played, Kendall said casually, “So how’s everything going?”
 
“Like what . . . got you!”
 
“Like, have you attempted any wizardry?”
 
“Cut the crap, man.”
 
“All right. How’s school?”
 
He said it in such a fake, prissy tone that Jared had to laugh. Then he
didn’t. Throwing down the controller in midgame, abruptly he stood. “I gotta
go.”
 
“School’s not going well?”
 
“Nothing’s going well, thanks to you guys,” Jared shouted, before he
knew he was going to say anything at all. “Shawn won’t hang with me and
the rest is just crap and—”
 

“Shawn is avoiding you?” Kendall said. “What about the other kids?”
 
“None of your business! Now let me outta here!”
 
“The door is that way,” Kendall said calmly. “And you’re welcome for
dinner,” but Jared was already halfway out the front door, yanking up his
collar against the rain, furious at . . . something.
 
Everything.                                                                         
 
“Come back whenever you like,” Kendall called after him. “I’ve got
Super Smash Brothers, too.”
 
* * * *
 
HE went back. The first time back, he planned on breaking in and stealing
the Nintendo. But Kendall was there, so he didn’t, and they had dinner
again, and played the Nintendo, and after that Jared didn’t pretend there
was still something wrong with his hand. Pretty soon he was there nearly
every night. During the day he skated if the weather was sunny, hung out
aimlessly at the mall if it wasn’t, or watched TV at home if Ma wasn’t there.
Kendall never mentioned wizard stuff again. The food was always good.
After a few weeks, Jared started doing the dishes. Sometimes they played
Nintendo; sometimes Jared watched TV while Kendall read. Jared wasn’t
much of a reader. The house was warm.
 
At six thirty, they always had to stop and watch the news on TV. If
there was an earthquake or a flood or a story about some farming problem,
Kendall leaned forward intently, his hands on his knees.
 
On a cold night in November, when Jared knew the heat was off at
home, he stayed the night in the guest room. At four A.M., with Kendall
asleep, Jared prowled the house. Not to steal anything, just to look for . . .
something.
 
In a drawer of the dining room china cabinet, under a pile of
table-cloths, he found the picture. It was totally weird: a group of seventeen
peo-ple who didn’t look like they belonged together. A heavy, middle-aged
woman in brown stretch pants and a pink top. A man in a blue uniform with a
square badge like a security guard. Two kids, seven or eight, who looked
like twins, in miniature gang clothing. An old woman in some kind of long
gown. A black man in a gray suit, holding a briefcase. A guy in one of those
lame Hawaiian shirts, grinning like an idiot. An Asian kid holding an armful of
books.

 
And Shawn.
 
Jared stared at the picture. It really was Shawn. But what was this
group? It sure as hell wasn’t Shawn’s family.
 
“Would you like some coffee?”
 
Jared whirled around. Kendall stood in the doorway in some old-guy
pajamas. He didn’t look mad, just that sad-thing, which was getting really
old.
 
“Who are these guys? Why is Shawn here?”
 
“I just put the water on, Jared. Come into the kitchen.”
 
Jared stood beside the kitchen table, refusing to sit down, while
Kendall puttered with teakettle and instant coffee. “I asked you a
question—who are those people? Is that your dumb-ass ‘Brotherhood’?”
 
“You remembered that I mentioned them,” Kendall said with pleasure.
“I didn’t know if you would. You were still on painkillers.”
 
“I’m not stupid, man!”
 
“I know you’re not. And no, that’s not the Brotherhood. That’s the
Other Side.”
 
“Other side of what? Make sense!”
 
Kendall poured hot water into his cup, stirred it, and sat across the
table. “Jared, didn’t you think it odd that Shawn avoided you after your
ac-cident? Instead of thinking it rather cool that you could command
rocks?”
 
“‘Rather cool,’“ Jared mocked viciously. “‘Command rocks.’ C’mon,
give me an answer! What’s Shawn doing with those people?”
 
“He’s one of them. And he had no idea you were a wizard, too, until
the car hit you. And now he’s staying away from you so you won’t
inadver-tently discover what he is. You see, that’s our main advantage over
the Other Side. We know a lot more about them than they know about us.”
 
“‘Us’? I thought you said you wasn’t a wizard!”

 
“I’m not. But I work with them. Pain releases the power, remember.
I’m a doctor. I see a lot of pain. Sometimes it brings us one of our own,
sometimes one from the Other Side. My position at the Medical Center is
how we’ve been able to identify so many of them.”         
 
“I don’t believe any of this crap.”
 
“Fortunately, your believing or not believing does not change the
reality.” Kendall sipped his coffee. “I wish belief was all it took to make the
Other Side disappear.”
 
“‘The Other Side.’ Give me a break. And what are they supposed to
be doing that’s so bad? What you got against Shawn? You think he’s going
to set off a bomb or something?”
 
“I already told you, magic doesn’t operate in the presence of metal,
which bombs require. Magic is considerably older than that. It belongs to
the sphere of nature, of grass and wind and animals and plants. And rocks,
the oldest of all nature.”
 
“Right. Sure. So Shawn’s gonna mess up the world by growing the
wrong grass? Get real!”
 
Abruptly Kendall leaned forward. “You get real, Jared. Your ignorance
is appalling—what are they teaching you in that school? Yes, the Other Side
might ‘mess up the world’ by growing the wrong grass, if there’s profit in it.
Money or power profit. Don’t you know that there’s money to be made from
drought, from famine, from hurricanes, from killer bees, from mutated
plants? There’s always money to be made in disasters. You cause them,
then you charge heavily to clean them up, as just one example. You’re
poised and ready with whatever is needed, because you know ex-actly
when and where the disaster will occur. And no one ever suspects you
caused it, because hurricanes and volcanoes and droughts and invasive
plant species are all completely natural. Plus, no one in the developed
coun-tries, where money flows like green water, even believes in magic
anyway. Now do you get it?”
 
“No,” Jared shouted. “You telling me Shawn is rich from this magic?
Man, he don’t even have a decent deck!”
 
“No, because riches now would draw attention to the Other Side. And
it takes a lot of international coordination to pull off a big profit from a major
disaster. They’ve already managed a couple of small ones—did you read in

the paper about that unexpected flood, along the Big Thompson River in
Colorado? No, of course you didn’t, you don’t read the papers. But we think
that flood was one of theirs. We’re still organizing, too. One day Shawn will
be very rich, and very powerful, although most of the world will never know
how he did it. The FBI will assume drugs and spend futile years trying to
prove it.”
 
“So now you can see the future, too!”
 
“No, of course not, I just—”
 
“You’re just full of crap! You’re crazy, man, you know that? The
biggest loser ever, and this sucks!” Jared jerked at the locks on the kitchen
door, yanked it open, and bolted outside.
 
“Jared . . . wait. . . don’t—”
 
He was already gone, skimming along the cold sidewalk in the dark.
 
The man was more than crazy, he was totally gone. Psycho.
Loony-bin. Jared was never going back there.
 
Where else was he going to go?
 
Jared shivered. Last evening’s rain had stopped, but it was really cold
out. His hoodie wasn’t enough for this weather. He had to move faster, stay
warm, get home.                                                                                           
 
Home. The heatless apartment where Ma and her new boyfriend
would be sleeping under all the blankets, including Jared’s, or—worse—up
fight-ing, strung out on crystal. And getting home alone, this time of almost
morning when only the gangbangers were out on the streets . . .
 
He stopped under a streetlight. For one terrible minute, he thought he
might cry.
 
Bag that. And bag all the psycho stuff Kendall had been telling him,
too. The old man had been kind to him. So what if he was crazy? He wasn’t
dangerous, and it wasn’t like Jared hadn’t dealt with worse. He could deal
with anything he had to. And Kendall’s place was warm, and had food.
 
Why had Shawn reacted so weird to Jared’s accident?
 
He spun his board around and skated back to Kendall’s, thinking hard.

 
The back door to Kendall’s house still stood wide open. In the
kitchen, the chairs were knocked over, and Kendall’s coffee sloshed all
over the floor. Blood smeared the table. Jared searched the whole house;
Kendall was gone.
 
He found a flashlight in a kitchen drawer and took it outside. Fresh tire
marks slashed across a corner of the soggy lawn. They led down Carter
Street—but where after that?
 
He should call the cops.
 
Oh, like cops would believe in the kidnapping. If an adult went
miss-ing, they wouldn’t even start looking for him for a couple of days. And
they certainly wouldn’t believe Jared, who had a bunch of citations, unpaid,
for illegal skating at the Civic Center and the library.
 
It was only after he thought all this that Jared saw what it meant: that 
he believed Kendall had been kidnapped, and by the so-called “Other
Side.” The second he realized this, he started shaking. Cold, he thought. It
was just the cold. Just the cold.
 
In the dark he skated to one end of the block, peered down it.
Nothing. The other end of the block—also nothing.
 
No one else had been as good to him as Kendall had. Nobody, not
ever.
 
There was no way to know which way the psychos had taken Kendall.
No real way. Unless . . .
 
Jared looked around with his flashlight. The house next door to
Kendall had a flower bed edged with stones. Feeling like the biggest
lame-brain in the whole crappy world, Jared picked up three of the rocks
and thought, Which way?
 
Nothing happened, so he said it out loud: “Which way?”
 
Nothing happened.
 
He stepped away from his deck, with its metal trucks, and tried again.
Nothing.
 
His hoodie had a metal zipper so, shivering, he took it off and laid it

on top of the deck, twenty feet away. “Which way, you psycho stones?”
 
Nothing.                                                                        
 
His jeans had a metal zipper and studs. “No way,” Jared said aloud,
but a second later, shivering, he stripped them off and put them on top of
his hoodie. In his underwear, shoes and socks, and T-shirt, he scanned the
street. Nobody there—it was four thirty in the morning. He picked up the
rocks again. “Which way, you little bastards?”
 
The rocks grew warm in his hand.
 
Jared shrieked and dropped them. A sharp pain shot through his
wrist, gone in a moment. The stones fell in a straight line toward the north
end of Carter Street. Jared stared, disbelieving. He did it again, this time
facing south. The rocks got warm, he dropped them, and they swirled
around his body to form a line going north. The sharp pain hit his wrist.
 
He closed his eyes. No way. This psycho stuff doesn’t happen. All at
once he would have given anything, anything in the entire world, to be back
skating at the Civic Center with Shawn, ollieing off the steps and try-ing to
do grinds down the rail, trying to land a 540 flip.
 
Instead, he picked up his clothing and the three rocks, got on his
deck, and skated north.
 
At the next intersection, he again walked away from the board and
jeans and hoodie, and said, “Which way?” The rocks pointed east.
 
Two more turns and he was glad to see the interstate, no turns off it
for a long ways. His wrist throbbed from the repeated flashes of pain. Jared
put his jeans and hoodie back on. His legs felt like ice—not a good way to
skate. But he wasn’t going to do any tricks, just straight skating, and the
speed would warm him. He skated up the on-ramp, then along the highway,
dodging the trucks that blatted angry horns at him, keeping a sharp eye out
for cops.
 
At the first exit, he got off the highway and did the stones thing. They
told him to get back on. Jared glanced at the sky, worried; already it was
starting to get red in the east. He put on his clothes and skated back onto
the highway. His stomach grumbled and he cursed at it, at Kendall, at the
world.
 
At the next exit, the stones told him to follow a deserted stretch of

country road. Jared noted its name: County Line Road.
 
The house wasn’t far, fortunately: the third house, set back in the
woods. A white van with muddy tires sat in the driveway. The van said 
MCCLELLAN SECURITY. Jared remembered the man in the blue uniform
in the picture.
 
He crept up to the house. All the curtains were shut and the basement
windows painted black, but when he put his ear to the grimy glass, Jared
could hear noises in the basement.
 
A thud. A groan. Then, “Once more, Doctor—all the names, please.
Now. This is getting boring.”       
 
Silence. Then Kendall screamed.
 
They were torturing him to get the Brotherhood names! Including
Jared’s name. “You see, that’s our main advantage over the Other Side.
We know a lot more about them than they know about us.” That’s what
Kendall had said. But now—
 
No, not Jared’s name. They already had Jared’s name, thanks to
Shawn. And if Jared had stayed five minutes longer at Kendall’s house,
they’d have had him down in that basement, too.
 
He could skate away. Get back on the highway, never go home again,
go…where?
 
Kendall screamed again.
 
A rage filled Jared. He thought he’d been angry before—at Shawn, at
his mother, at the cops, at the crap that happened and went on happening
and never seemed to stop. But it hadn’t been anger like this. This was the
mother of angers, the huge one, the serious-hang-time-in-orbit of anger.
 
Woods bordered the back of the house. Jared thrashed a little way
into them, shoved his deck under some bushes, added his jeans and
hoodie. Then he stood there, twigs scratching his bare legs and some kind
of insects biting at his face, and closed his eyes. He pictured rocks. All
kinds of rocks, all sizes, pointy and smooth and rough, smashing through
the black-painted basement windows and into the heads of every single
bastard down there except Kendall. He pictured the blood and the wounds
and the—
 

Jared screamed. Pain tore through his whole body, dropping him into
the bushes. His arms and legs were on fire, he was going to die, he would
never skate again—
 
The pain vanished, leaving him gasping. He staggered to his feet, just
in time to see the rocks homing in on the house, flying in from every
direction like fighter jets on some video game, but real and solid as Jared
himself. All the painted windows smashed, and Jared heard yells and
screams from the house. Then silence.
 
It couldn’t have happened.
 
It did happen.
 
He struggled out of the bushes and ran to the front door. It was
locked, and so was the back door. Finally, he ran to the closest busted
window, knocked out the glass still stuck around the edges, and slid into the
basement, careful to land on his sneakers amid the shards and splinters of
glass.
 
Two men and a woman lay bleeding on the floor, covered with stones.
Kendall was tied to a chair, gaping at him. The old man had a gash on his
forehead and serious blood on the arm of his pajamas. Jared picked up the
knife somebody had dropped and cut Kendall’s ropes. He doubled over,
gasping, and Jared was afraid Kendall was having a heart attack or
some-thing. But then he straightened and staggered to his feet.
 
“Jared ... I’m all…right ...”
 
“Sure you are. Never better, right? C’mon.” Jared helped him up the
stairs, but then didn’t know what to do next.
 
Kendall did. He gasped, “Go back downstairs and get a cell phone
from anybody who has one. Be careful—they’re not dead. Don’t kill
any-body, Jared—we don’t want a murder investigation. Then come back
up here and lock the door at the top of the stairs.”
 
Jared did as he was told, a sudden sick feeling in his stomach. It
fought with a feeling of unreality—this can’t be happening—that only got
stronger when he again saw all the stones lying around the basement.
 
He’d done that. Him, Jared Stoffel.
 
Kendall called somebody on the cell, said, “Code blue. The address

is ...” and looked at Jared. Jared gave it to him. They only had to wait a few
minutes before a car screeched up and they went out to meet it. A sil-ver
Mercedes S, at least seventy grand. Jared blinked. A pretty black girl
jumped out. She had on a school uniform like rich girls wore, green skirt
and jacket and a little green tie on a white blouse. Ordinarily Jared hated
kids like that, rich snobs, but now was different.
 
“He did it?” she said, talking to Kendall but staring at Jared, her eyes
wide. “How did—”
 
“I don’t know yet,” Kendall said. “How much—”
 
“I hadn’t yet told them anything. But I would have, Denise.” She
nodded, grimaced, and tenderly helped Kendall into the car, appar-ently not
caring that he got blood on the leather seat. Jared climbed into the back.
Denise must be old enough to drive, he figured, but she didn’t look it. Was
the Mercedes hers, or her family’s, or maybe stolen?
 
She pulled the car onto the road and accelerated hard. Over her
shoulder Denise threw Jared a glance at once respectful and a little scared.
He sat up straighter in the backseat. She said, “Stones?” 
 
“Yeah,” Jared said.
 
“We don’t have anybody that can do stone.” 
 
He liked the tone of her voice. It let him say, “What do you do?” 
 
“Wind. But strictly small-time. You’re gifted, dude.” 
 
“You ain’t seen nothing yet. You should see me skate.” 
 
In the front seat, one arm cradled carefully in the other, Kendall
smiled.
 
* * * *
 
“NO,” Larson said. “Absolutely not.” He wore his do-rag again and it looked,
Jared thought, just as dumb as the first time. Larson himself looked furious.
 
“I don’t think we have a choice,” said the older woman in a business
suit. Probably she’d been getting dressed for work when they pulled up,
just like Denise had been getting ready for school. This house must be the
woman’s—it looked like something a business lady would have, nice but

really boring. Light brown rugs, brown furniture, tan curtains. The lady acted
like she was in charge. Trouble was, Larson acted in charge, too. Jared
thought they’d square off for a fight, but things didn’t work like that around
here.
 
“We do have a choice, Anna,” Larson said. That was her
name—Anna. “There’s a number of cities we could send them to.”
 
Jared said sharply, “Send? You mean me and the doc? Nobody’s
send-ing me no place!”
 
Anna said, “I’m afraid we have to, Jared. The Other Side now knows
about both of you. They’ll eliminate you if they can, and we might not be
able to protect you.”                                                               
 
“Oh, right. You can’t just put a spell around my house or something?
No? I guess you’re not real wizards after all!”
 
A voice behind him said, “I’m afraid it doesn’t work that way,” and
Jared spun around. Denise, back from parking the car someplace. If he’d
known she was coming back, he wouldn’t have sounded so snotty.
 
She said to Jared, “I can do wind magic, and Anna can communicate
with wild animals, and so on, but only when we’re present at the scene,
Jared. There’s no such thing as a spell that can just be left in place to guard
someone. I wish there was.”
 
If anybody else had explained it like that to Jared, he wouldn’t have
felt so stupid now. Kendall was off in a back room of this house, getting
patched up or something. Jared crossed his arms over his chest and
scowled. “I can’t just leave and, like, move to some other city! I’ve got Ma
and school and crap!”
 
Larson said brutally, “If you don’t go, you’re dead. And some of us,
the ones you can identify, will be with you.”
 
“But my ma—”
 
“Will be told that you’ve been taken away from her by Child Protective
Services. She’ll believe that.”
 
Jared felt hot blood rush into his face. So Larson knew all about his
mother! Furious and embarrassed, he turned to slam out of the room, but
Denise blocked the doorway.

 
Larson said, “We don’t need to send him to Tellerton. Send him
somewhere else, to a nonactive cell. We don’t need a kid this angry in the
very center of the Brotherhood.”
 
“I disagree,” Anna said.
 
“No one will be able to control him. He’ll endanger everybody there.”
 
“I won’t endanger nobody I don’t want to!” Jared said.
 
Anna said, “I think that’s true, Larson. And Nick will be with him.”
 
Denise, still standing in the doorway, spoke in a low voice that only
Jared could hear. “I know it’s hard to be sent away. But Anna’s right—you’ll
have Dr. Kendall with you. And the place you’re going ... I know for a fact
that it has an awesome skate park.”
 
“It does?”
 
“The best.”
 
He blurted, “Will you come there to see me skate?” and instantly
hated himself. She was too old for him, she would think he was a little kid,
she’d shame him in front of Larson—
 
“Sure. I think that one way or another, we’ll end up working together,
anyway. Things are going to get much more serious soon, we’ll need every
wizard we can get, and we don’t have a good stone man. You’re really
talented.”                    
 
That was the second time she’d said that. Jared turned back to Anna,
ignoring Larson. “Okay. I’ll go. Where is this Tellerton?”
 
“In Virginia.”
 
Jared blinked. “I—”
 
“Zack will drive you both down there this afternoon. The sooner you
get out, the better.”
 
“My stuff! I have—”
 
“It has to stay here. They’ll get you new belongings in Tellerton. Don’t

worry, Jared, you’re one of us now.” Anna left. Larson said, “Wait a minute,
Anna, I want to talk more with you about the hurricane.” He strode after her.
 
Jared was left alone with Denise. He blinked, scowled, and said, to
say something, “What hurricane?”
 
“It was on the early-morning news,” Denise said somberly. “A big
hurricane suddenly changed direction and came ashore in Florida, and the
hurricane season is supposed to be over. Eight people dead so far. At
least one big warehouse was destroyed that we found out had just been
bought by the Other Side. Now they’ll file all kinds of insurance claims on
the stuff in-side. Anna, one of our lawyers, just tracked the purchase and
the ware-house insurance yesterday, but she hasn’t had time to follow
through.”
 
Jared tried to understand. Denise was smart; all these people were
smart. And wizard stuff seemed to involve nonmagic things like insurance
claims, which Jared had never thought about. But one thing was clear to
him, the part about eight people dead. So far.
 
He said, “They’d really do that? Kill, like, innocent people just to make
money?”
 
“They would. They do.”
 
He felt a little dizzy. Too much stuff, too fast. Wizards and magic and
moving away and stones . . . He could still feel the rocks warm in his hands,
ready to tell him things. Him, Jared Stoffel, who nobody except Shawn ever
told anything.
 
And Shawn . . . the so-called friend he’d trusted like a brother . . .
 
“Shawn is gonna pay,” he said to Denise.
 
“Yes,” Denise said, and that was what decided him. No lame bull
about not being into revenge, or calming himself down, or being too angry a
kid to be useful. Just: Yes. She understood him.
 
All at once, Jared felt like he’d just ollied off a twelve-set and was
doing serious hang time in the air.
 
A wizard. He was a wizard. He didn’t want to be, but he was. A stone
man. And everything was different now.

 
Maybe that was a good thing.
 
He could learn about insurance claims or whatever. He wasn’t dumb.
He had learned to do a Back-180 down a four-set; he could learn what he
needed to. He could.
 
“Welcome to the Brotherhood, Jared,” Denise said softly.
 
“Thanks,” Jared said.
 
* * * *

