NANO- AND
MICROELECTROMECHANICAL
SYSTEMS
Fundamentals of
Nano- and Microengineering
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

A book in the
Nano- and Microscience, Engineering,
Technology and Medicine Series
NANO- AND
MICROELECTROMECHANICAL
SYSTEMS
Fundamentals of
Nano- and Microengineering
Sergey Edward Lyshevski
CRC Press
Boca Raton
London
New York
Washington, D.C.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lyshevski, Sergey Edward.
Nano- and microelectromechanical systems : fundamentals of nano- and
microengineering / Sergey Edward Lyshevski.
p. cm. -- (Nano- and microscience, engineering, technology, and medicine series)
Includes index.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-8493-916-6 (alk. paper)
 1. Microelectromechanical systems. 1. Title. II. Series.
TK7875 .L96 2000
621.381—dc201
00-057953
CIP
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted material
is quoted with permission, and sources are indicated. A wide variety of references are listed. Reasonable
efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and the publisher cannot
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or for the consequences of their use.
Neither this book nor any part may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, including photocopying, microﬁlming, and recording, or by any information storage or
retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
The consent of CRC Press LLC does not extend to copying for general distribution, for promotion, for cre-
ating new works, or for resale. Speciﬁc permission must be obtained in writing from CRC Press LLC for
such copying.
Direct all inquiries to CRC Press LLC, 2000 N.W. Corporate Blvd., Boca Raton, Florida 33431.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are
used only for identiﬁcation and explanation, without intent to infringe.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC
No claim to original U.S. Government works
International Standard Book Number 0-8493-916-6
Library of Congress Card Number 00-057953
Printed in the United States of America 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0
Printed on acid-free paper

To my family
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

 PREFACE
This book is designed for a one-semester course on Nano- and
Microelectromechanical Systems or Nano- and Microengineering. A typical
background needed includes calculus, electromagnetics, and physics. The
purpose of this book is to bring together in one place the various methods,
techniques, and technologies that students and engineers need in solving a
wide array of engineering problems in formulation, modeling, analysis,
design, and optimization of high-performance microelectromechanical and
nanoelectromechanical systems (MEMS and NEMS). This book is not
intended to cover fabrication aspects and technologies because a great number
of books are available. At the same time, extremely important issues in
analysis, design, modeling, optimization, and simulation of NEMS and
MEMS have not been comprehensively covered in the existing literature.
Twenty first century nano- and microtechnology revolution will lead to
fundamental breakthroughs in the way materials, devices, and systems are
understood, designed, function, manufactured, and used. Nanoengineering
and nanotechnology will change the nature of the majority of the human-
made structures, devices, and systems. Current technological needs and
trends include technology development and transfer, manufacturing and
deployment, implementation and testing, modeling and characterization,
design and optimization, simulation and analysis of complex nano- and
microscale devices (for example, molecular computers, logic gates and
switches, actuators and sensors, digital and analog integrated circuits, et
cetera). Current developments have been focused on analysis and synthesis of
molecular structures and devices which will lead to revolutionary
breakthroughs in the data processing and computing, data storage and
imaging, quantum computing and molecular intelligent automata, etc.
Micro- and nanoengineering and science lead to fundamental breakthroughs
in the way materials, devices and systems are understood, designed,
function, manufactured, and used. High-performance MEMS and NEMS,
micro- and nanoscale structures and devices will be widely used in
nanocomputers, medicine (nanosurgery and nanotherapy, nonrejectable
artificial organ design and implants, drug delivery and diagnosis),
biotechnology (genome synthesis), etc.
New phenomena in nano- and microelectromechanics, physics and
chemistry, benchmarking nanomanufacturing and control of complex
molecular structures, design of large-scale architectures and optimization,
among other problems must be addressed and studied. The major objective
of this book is the development of basic theory (through multidisciplinary
fundamental and applied research) to achieve full understanding, optimize,
and control properties and behavior of a wide range of NEMS and MEMS.
This will lead to new advances and will allow the designer to
comprehensively solve a number of long-standing problems in analysis and
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

control, modeling and simulation, structural optimization and virtual
prototyping, packaging and fabrication, as well as implementation and
deployment of novel NEMS and MEMS. In addition to technological
developments and manufacturing (fabrication), the ability to synthesize and
optimize NEMS and MEMS depends on the analytical and numerical
methods, and the current concepts and conventional technologies cannot be
straightforwardly applied due to the highest degree of complexity as well as
novel phenomena. Current activities have been centered in development and
application of a variety of experimental techniques trying to attain the
characterization of mechanical (structural and thermal), electromagnetic
(conductivity and susceptibility, permittivity and permeability, charge and
current densities, propagation and radiation), optical, and other properties of
NEMS and MEMS. It has been found that CMOS, surface micromachining
and photolithography, near-field optical microscopy and magneto-optics, as
well as other leading-edge technologies and processes to some extent can be
applied and adapted to manufacture nano- and microscale structures and
devices. However, advanced interdisciplinary research must be carried out to
design, develop, and implement high-performance NEMS and MEMS. Our
objectives are to expand the frontiers of the NEMS- and MEMS-based
research through pioneering fundamental and applied multidisciplinary
studies and developments. Rather than designing nano- and microscale
components (integrated circuits and antennas, electromechanical and opto-
electromechanical actuators and sensors), the emphasis will be given to the
synthesis of the integrated large-scale systems. It must be emphasized that
the author feels quite strongly that the individual nano- and microscale
structures must be synthesized, thoroughly analyzed, and studied. We will
consider NEMS and MEMS as the large-scale highly coupled systems, and
the synthesis of groups of cooperative multi-agent NEMS and MEMS can be
achieved using hierarchical structural and algorithmic optimization methods.
The optimality of NEMS and MEMS should be guaranteed with respect to a
certain performance objectives (manufacturing and packaging, cost and
maintenance, size and weight, efficiency and performance, affordability and
reliability, survivability and integrity, et cetera).
Nanoengineering is a very challenging field due to the complex
multidisciplinary nature (engineering and physics, biology and chemistry,
technology and material science, mathematics and medicine). This book
introduces the focused fundamentals of nanoelectromechanics to initiate and
stress, accelerate and perform the basic and applied research in NEMS and
MEMS. Many large-scale systems are too complex to be studied and
optimized analytically, and usually the available information is not sufficient
to derive and obtain performance functionals. Therefore, the stochastic
gradient descent and nonparametric methods can be applied using the
decision variables with conflicting specifications and requirements imposed.
In many applications there is a need to design high-performance intelligent
NEMS and MEMS to accomplish the following functions:
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

• 
programming and self-testing;
• 
collection, compiling, and processing information (sensing – data
accumulation (storage) – processing);
• 
multivariable embedded high-density array coordinated control;
• 
calculation and decision making with outcomes prediction;
• 
actuation and control.
The fundamental goal of this book is to develop the basic theoretical
foundations in order to design and develop, analyze and prototype high-
performance NEMS and MEMS. This book is focused on the development
of fundamental theory of NEMS and MEMS, as well as their components
and structures, using advanced multidisciplinary basic and applied
developments. In particular, it will be illustrated how to perform the
comprehensive studies with analysis of the processes, phenomena, and
relevant properties at nano- and micro-scales, development of NEMS and
MEMS architectures, physical representations, structural design and
optimization, etc. It is the author’s goal to substantially contribute to these
basic issues, and the integration of these problems in the context of specific
applications will be addressed. The primary emphasis will be on the
development of basic theory to attain fundamental understanding of NEMS
and MEMS, processes in nano- and micro-scale structures, as well as the
application of the developed theory. Using the molecular technology, one
can design and manufacture the atomic-scale devices with atomic precision
using the atomic building blocks, design nano-scale devices ranging from
electromechanical motion devices (translational and rotational actuators and
sensors, logic and switches, registers) to nano-scale integrated circuits
(diodes and transistors, logic gates and switches, resistors and inductors,
capacitors). These devices will be widely used in medicine and avionics,
transportation and power, and many other areas.
The leading-edge research in nanosystems is focused on different
technologies and processes. As an example, the discovery of carbon-based
nanoelectronics (carbon nanotubes are made from individual molecules) is
the revolutionary breakthrough in nanoelectronics and nanocomputers,
information technology and medicine, health and national security. In
particular, fibers made using carbon nanotubes (molecular wires) more than
100 times stronger than steel and weighing 5 times less, have conductivity 5
times greater than silver, and transmit heat better than diamond. Carbon
nanotubes are used as the molecular wires. Furthermore, using carbon
molecules, first single molecule transistors were built. It should be
emphasized that the current technology allows one to fill carbon nanotubes
with other media (metals, organic and inorganic materials, et cetera).
The research in nano- and microtechnologies will lead to breakthroughs
in information technology and manufacturing, medicine and health,
environment and energy, avionics and transportation, national security and
other areas of the greatest national importance. Through interdisciplinary
synergism, this book is focused on fundamental studies of phenomena and
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

processes in NEMS and MEMS, synthesis of nano- and micro-scale devices
and systems, design of building blocks and components (which will lead to
efficient and affordable manufacturing of high-performance NEMS and
MEMS), study of molecular structures and their control, NEMS and MEMS
architectures, etc. We will discuss the application and impact of nano- and
micro-scale structures, devices, and systems to information technology,
nanobiotechnology and medicine, nanomanufacturing and environment,
power and energy systems, health and national security, avionics and
transportation.
Acknowledgments
Many people contributed to this book. First thanks go to my beloved
family. I would like to express my sincere acknowledgments and gratitude to
many colleagues and students. It gives me great pleasure to acknowledge the
help I received from many people in the preparation of this book. The
outstanding team of the CRC Press, especially Nora Konopka (Acquisition
Editor Electrical Engineering) and William Heyward (Project Editor),
tremendously helped and assisted me providing valuable and deeply
treasured feedback. Many thanks for all of you.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

CONTENTS
1. 
Nano- and Microengineering,
and Nano- and Microtechnologies
1.1. 
Introduction
1.2. 
Biological Analogies
1.3. 
Nano- and Microelectromechanical Systems
1.4. 
Applications of Nano- and Microelectromechanical Systems
1.5. 
Nano- and Microelectromechanical Systems
1.6. 
Introduction to MEMS Fabrication, Assembling, and Packaging
2.
Mathematical Models and Design of Nano- and
Microelectromechanical Systems
2.1. 
Nano- and Microelectromechanical Systems Architecture
2.2. 
Electromagnetics and its Application For Nano- and
Microscale Electromechanical Motion Devices
2.3. 
Classical Mechanics and its Application 
2.3.1. 
Newtonian Mechanics
2.3.2. 
Lagrange Equations of Motion
2.3.3. 
Hamilton Equations of Motion
2.4. 
Atomic Structures and Quantum Mechanics
2.5. 
Molecular and Nanostructure Dynamics
2.5.1. 
Schrödinger Equation and Wavefunction Theory
2.5.2. 
Density Functional Theory
2.5.3. 
Nanostructures and Molecular Dynamics
2.6. 
Molecular Wires and Molecular Circuits
2.7 
Thermoanalysis and Heat Equation 
3.
Structural Design, Modeling, and Simulation
3.1. 
Nano- and Microelectromechanical Systems
3.1.1. 
Carbon Nanotubes and Nanodevices
3.1.2. 
Microelectromechanical Systems and Microdevices
3.2. 
Structural Synthesis of Nano- and Microelectromechanical
Actuators and Sensors
3.2.1. 
Configurations and Structural Synthesis of Motion Nano-
and Microstructures (actuators and Sensors)
3.2.2. 
Algebra of Sets
3.3. 
Direct-Current Micromachines
3.4. 
Induction Motors
3.4.1. 
Two-Phase Induction Motors
3.4.2. 
Three-Phase Induction Motors
3.5. 
Microscale Synchronous Machines
3.5.1. 
Single-Phase Reluctance Motors
3.5.2. 
Permanent-Magnet Synchronous Machines
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

3.6. 
Microscale Permanent-Magnet Stepper Motors
3.6.1. 
Mathematical Model in the Machine Variables
3.6.2. 
Mathematical Models of Permanent-Magnet Stepper Motors
in the Rotor and Synchronous Reference Frames 
3.7. 
Nanomachines: Nanomotors and Nanogenerators
4.
Control of Nano- and Microelectromechanical Systems
4.1. 
Fundamentals of Electromagnetic Radiation and Antennas
in Nano- and Microscale Electromechanical Systems
4.2. 
Design of Closed-Loop Nano- and Microelectromechanical
Systems Using the Lyapunov Stability Theory
4.3. 
Introduction to Intelligent Control of Nano- and
Microelectromechanical Systems
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

CHAPTER  1
NANO- AND MICROENGINEERING,
AND NANO- AND MICROTECHNOLOGIES
1.1. INTRODUCTION
The development and deployment of NEMS and MEMS are critical to the
U.S. economy and society because nano- and microtechnologies will lead to
major breakthroughs in information technology and computers, medicine and
health, manufacturing and transportation, power and energy systems, and
avionics and national security. NEMS and MEMS have important impacts in
medicine and bioengineering (DNA and genetic code analysis and synthesis,
drug delivery, diagnostics, and imaging), bio and information technologies,
avionics, and aerospace (nano- and microscale actuators and sensors, smart
reconfigurable geometry wings and blades, space-based flexible structures, and
microgyroscopes), automotive systems and transportation (sensors and
actuators, accelerometers), manufacturing and fabrication, public safety, etc.
During the last years, the government and the high-technology industry have
heavily funded basic and applied research in NEMS and MEMS due to the
current and potential rapidly growing positive direct and indirect social and
economic impacts.
Nano- and microengineering are the fundamental theory, engineering
practice, and leading-edge technologies in analysis, design, optimization, and
fabrication of NEMS and MEMS, nano- and microscale structures, devices,
and subsystems. The studied nano- and microscale structures and devices
have dimensions of nano- and micrometers.
To support the nano- and microtechnologies, basic and applied research
and development must be performed. Nanoengineering studies nano- and
microscale-size materials and structures, as well as devices and systems, whose
structures and components exhibit novel physical (electromagnetic and
electromechanical), chemical, and biological properties, phenomena, and
processes. The dimensions of nanosystems and their components are 10-10 m
(molecule size) to 10-7 m; that is, 0.1 to 100 nanometers. Studying
nanostructures, one concentrates one’s attention on the atomic and molecular
levels, manufacturing and fabrication, control and dynamics, augmentation and
structural integration, application and large-scale system synthesis, et cetera.
Reducing the dimensions of systems leads to the application of novel materials
(carbon nanotubes, quantum wires and dots). The problems to be solved range
from mass-production and assembling (fabrication) of nanostructures at the
atomic/molecular scale (e.g., nanostructured electronics and actuators/sensors)
with the desired properties. It is essential to design novel nanodevices such as
nanotransistors and nanodiodes, nanoswitches and nanologic gates, in order
to design nanoscale computers with terascale capabilities. All living biological
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

systems function due to molecular interactions of different subsystems. The
molecular building blocks (proteins and nucleic acids, lipids and
carbohydrates, DNA and RNA) can be viewed as inspiring possible strategy
on how to design high-performance NEMS and MEMS that possess the
properties and characteristics needed. Analytical and numerical methods are
available to analyze the dynamics and three-dimensional geometry, bonding,
and other features of atoms and molecules. Thus, electromagnetic and
mechanical, as well as other physical and chemical properties can be studied.
Nanostructures and nanosystems will be widely used in medicine and
health. Among possible applications of nanotechnology are: drug synthesis
and drug delivery (the therapeutic potential will be enormously enhanced due
to direct effective delivery of new types of drugs to the specified body sites),
nanosurgery and nanotherapy, genome synthesis and diagnostics, nanoscale
actuators and sensors (disease diagnosis and prevention), nonrejectable nano-
artificial organs design and implant, and design of high-performance
nanomaterials.
It is obvious that nano- and microtechnologies drastically change the
fabrication and manufacturing of materials, devices, and systems through:
• 
predictable properties of nano composites and materials (e.g., light
weight and high strength, thermal stability, low volume and size,
extremely high power, torque, force, charge and current densities,
specified thermal conductivity and resistivity, et cetera),
• 
virtual prototyping (design cycle, cost, and maintenance reduction),
• 
improved accuracy and precision, reliability and durability,
• 
higher degree of efficiency and capability, flexibility and integrity,
supportability and affordability, survivability and redundancy,
• 
improved stability and robustness,
• 
higher degree of safety,
• 
environmental competitiveness.
Foreseen by Richard Feyman, the term “nanotechnology” was first used
by N. Taniguchi in his 1974 paper, "On the basic concept of
nanotechnology." 
In 
the 
last 
two 
decades, 
nanoengineering 
and
nanomanufacturing have been popularized by Eric Drexler through the
Foresight Institute.
Advancing miniaturization towards the molecular level with the ultimate
goal to design and manufacture nanocomputers and nanomanipulators
(nanoassemblers), large-scale intelligent NEMS and MEMS (which have
nanocomputers as the core components), the designer faces a great number of
unsolved problems.
Possible basic concepts in the development of nanocomputers are listed
below. Mechanical “computers” have the richest history traced thousand
years back. While the most creative theories and machines have been
developed and demonstrated, the feasibility of mechanical nanocomputers is
questioned by some researchers due to the number of mechanical
components (which are needed to be controlled), as well as due to unsolved
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

manufacturing (assembling) and technological difficulties. Chemical
nanocomputers can be designed based upon the processing information by
making or breaking chemical bonds, and storing the information in the
resulting chemical. In contrast, in quantum nanocomputers, the information
can be represented by a quantum state (e.g., the spin of the atom can be
controlled by the electromagnetic field).
Electronic nanocomputers can be designed using conventional concepts
tested and used for the last thirty years. In particular, molecular transistors or
quantum dots can be used as the basic elements. The nanoswitches
(memoryless processing elements), logic gates, and registers must be
manufactured on the scale of a single molecule. The so-called quantum dots
are metal boxes that hold the discrete number of electrons which is changed
applying the electromagnetic field. The quantum dots are arranged in the
quantum dot cells. Consider the quantum dot cells which have five dots and
two quantum dots with electrons. Two different states are illustrated in
Figure 1.1.1 (the dashed dots contain the electron, while the white dots do
not contain the electron). It is obvious that the quantum dots can be used to
synthesize the logic devices.
Figure 1.1.1. Quantum dots with states “0” and “1”, and “1 1” configuration
It was emphasized that as conventional electromechanical systems,
nanoelectromechanical systems (actuators and other molecular devices) are
controlled by changing the electromagnetic field. It becomes evident that
other nanoscale structures and devices (nanodiodes and nanotransistors) are
also controlled by applying the electromagnetic field (recall that the voltage
and current result due to the electromagnetic field).
1.2. BIOLOGICAL  ANALOGIES
Coordinated behavior and motion, visualization and sensing, motoring
and decision making, memory and learning of living organisms are the results
of the electrical (electromagnetic) transmission of information by neurons.
One cubic centimeter of the brain contains millions of nerve cells, and these
cells communicate with thousands of neurons creating data processing
(communication) networks. The information from the brain to the muscles is
transmitted within the milliseconds, and the baseball and football, basketball,
"1"
"1"
State "0"
State "1"
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

and tennis players calculate the speed and velocity of the ball, analyze the
situation, make the decision, and respond (e.g., run or jump, throw or hit the
ball, et cetera). Human central nervous system, which includes brain and
spinal cord, serves as the link between the sensors (sensor receptors) and
motors peripheral nervous system (effector, muscle, and gland cells). It
should be emphasized that the nervous system has the following major
functions: sensing, integration and decision making (computing), and
motoring (actuation). Human brain consists of hindbrain (controls
homeostasis and coordinate movement), midbrain (receiving, integration, and
processing the sensory information), and forebrain  (neural processing and
integration of information, image processing, short- and long-term memories,
learning functions, decision making and motor command development). The
peripheral nervous system consists of the sensory system (sensory neurons
transmit information from internal and external environment to the central
nervous system, and motor neurons carry information from the brain or
spinal cord to effectors), which supplies information from sensory receptors
to the central nervous system, and the motor nervous system feeds signals
(commands) from  the central nervous system to muscles (effectors) and
glands. The spinal cord mediates reflexes that integrate sensor inputs and
motor outputs, and through the spinal cord the neurons carry information to
and from the brain. The transmission of electrical signals along neurons is a
very complex phenomenon. The membrane potential for a nontransmitting
neuron is due to the unequal distribution of ions (sodium and potassium)
across the membrane. The resting potential is maintained due to the
differential ion permeability and the so-called Na+ - K+ pump. The stimulus
changes the membrane permeability, and ion can depolarize or hyperpolarize
the membrane resting potential. This potential (voltage) change is
proportional to the strength of the stimulus. The stimulus is transmitted due
to the axon mechanism. The nervous system is illustrated in Figure 1.2.1.
Figure 1.2.1. Vertebrate nervous system: high-level functional diagram
There is a great diversity of the nervous system organizations. The
cnidarian (hydra) nerve net is an organized system of nerves with no central
Nervous System
Peripheral Nervous 
System
Central Nervous 
System
Brain
Spinal Cord
Sensor
System
Motor
System
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

control, and a simple nerve net can perform elementary tasks (jellyfishes
swim). Echinoderms have a central nerve ring with radial nerves (for
example, sea stars have central and radial nerves with nerve net). Planarians
have small brains that send information through two or more nerve trunks, as
illustrated in Figure 1.2.2.
Figure 1.2.2. Overview of invertebrate nervous systems
1.3. NANO-  AND  MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS
Through 
biosystems 
analogy, 
a 
great 
variety 
of 
man-made
electromechanical systems have been designed and made. To analyze, design,
develop, and deploy novel NEMS and MEMS, the designer must synthesize
advanced architectures, integrate the latest advances in nano- and microscale
actuators/sensors (transducers) and smart structures, integrated circuits (ICs)
and multiprocessors, materials and fabrications, structural design and
optimization, modeling and simulation, et cetera. It is evident that novel
optimized 
NEMS 
and 
MEMS 
architectures 
(with 
processors 
or
multiprocessors, memory hierarchies and multiple parallelism to guarantee
high-performance computing and decision making), new smart structures and
actuators/sensors, ICs and antennas, as well as other subsystems play a critical
role in advancing the research, developments, and implementation. In this book
we discuss optimized architectures, and the research in architecture
optimization will provide deep insights into how intelligent large-scale
integrated NEMS and MEMS can be synthesized.
Electromechanical systems, as shown in Figure 1.3.1, can be classified as
• 
conventional electromechanical systems,
• 
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS),
• 
nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS).
Nerve
Trunk
Brain
Ring
of Nerve
Radial Nerves
Nerve Net
cnidarian
echinoderm
planarian
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 1.3.1. Classification of electromechanical systems
The operational principles and basic foundations of conventional
electromechanical systems and MEMS are the same, while NEMS are
studied using different concepts and theories. In fact, the designer applies the
classical Lagrangian and Newtonian mechanics as well as electromagnetics
(Maxwell’s equations) to study conventional electromechanical systems and
MEMS. In contrast, NEMS are studied using quantum theory and
nanoelectromechanical concepts. Figure 1.3.2 documents the fundamental
theories to study the processes and phenomena in conventional, micro, and
nanoelectromechanical systems.
Figure 1.3.2. Fundamental theories in electromechanical systems
Conventional
Electromechanical
Systems
Micro-
electromechanical
Systems
Nano-
electromechanical
Systems
Fundamental Theories:
Classical Mechanics
Electromagnetics
Fundamental Theories:
Quantum Theory
Nanoelectromechanics
Electromechanical
Systems
Electromechanical
Systems
Conventional
Electromechanical
Systems
Micro-
electromechanical
Systems
Nano-
electromechanical
Systems
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

NEMS and MEMS integrate different structures, devices, and subsystems.
The research in integration and optimization (optimized architectures and
structural optimization) of these subsystems has not been instituted and
performed, and end-to-end (processors – networks – input/output subsystems –
ICs/antennas – actuators/sensors) performance and behavior must be studied.
Through this book we will study different NEMS and MEMS architectures, and
fundamental and applied theoretical concepts will be developed and
documented in order to design next generation of superior high-performance
NEMS and MEMS.
The large-scale NEMS and MEMS, which can integrate processor
(multiprocessor) and memories, high-performance networks and input-output
(IO) subsystems, are of far greater complexity than MEMS commonly used
today. In particular, the large-scale NEMS and MEMS can integrate:
• 
thousands of nodes of high-performance actuators/sensors and smart
structures controlled by ICs and antennas;
• 
high-performance processors or superscalar multiprocessors;
• 
multi-level memory and storage hierarchies with different latencies
(thousands of secondary and tertiary storage devices supporting data
archives);
• 
interconnected, distributed, heterogeneous databases;
• 
high-performance communication networks (robust, adaptive intelligent
networks).
It must be emphasized that even the simplest nanosystems (for example,
pure actuator) usually cannot function alone. For example, at least the internal
or external source of energy is needed.
The complexity of large-scale NEMS and MEMS requires new
fundamental and applied research and developments, and there is a critical need
for coordination across a broad range of hardware and software. For example,
design of advanced nano- and microscale actuators/sensors and smart
structures, synthesis of optimized (balanced) architectures, development of new
programming languages and compilers, performance and debugging tools,
operating system and resource management, high-fidelity visualization and data
representation systems, design of high-performance networks, et cetera. New
algorithms and data structures, advanced system software and distributed access
to very large data archives, sophisticated data mining and visualization
techniques, as well as advanced data analysis are needed. In addition, advanced
processor and multiprocessors are needed to achieve sustained capability
required of functionally usable large-scale NEMS and MEMS.
The fundamental and applied research in NEMS and MEMS has been
dramatically affected by the emergence of high-performance computing.
Analysis and simulation of NEMS and MEMS have significant outcomes. The
problems in analysis, modeling, and simulation of large-scale NEMS and
MEMS that involves the complete molecular dynamics cannot be solved
because the classical quantum theory cannot be feasibly applied to complex
molecules or simplest nanostructures (1 nm cube of nanoactuator has thousands
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

of molecules). There are a number of very challenging research problems in
which advanced theory and high-end computing are required to advance the
theory and engineering practice. The multidisciplinary fundamentals of
nanoelectromechanics must be developed to guarantee the possibility to
synthesize, analyze, and fabricate high-performance NEMS and MEMS with
desired (specified) performance characteristics. This will dramatically shorten
the time and cost of developments of NEMS and MEMS for medical and
biomedical, aerospace and automotive, electronic and manufacturing systems.
The importance of mathematical model developments and numerical
analysis has been emphasized. Numerical simulation enhances, but does not
substitute for fundamental research. Furthermore, meaningful and explicit
simulations should be based on reliable fundamental studies and must be
validated through experiments. However, it is evident that simulations lead to
understanding of performance of complex NEMS and MEMS (nano- and
microscale structures, devices, and sub-systems), reduce the time and cost of
deriving and leveraging the NEMS and MEMS technologies from concept to
device/system, and from device/system to market. Fundamental and applied
research is the core of the simulation, and focused efforts must be concentrated
on comprehensive modeling and advanced efficient computing.
To comprehensively study NEMS and MEMS, advanced modeling and
computational tools are required primarily for 3D+ (three-dimensional
geometry dynamics in time domain) data intensive modeling and simulations to
study the end-to-end dynamic behavior of actuators and sensors. The
mathematical models of NEMS, MEMS, and their components (structures,
devices, and subsystems) must be developed. These models (augmented with
efficient computational algorithms, terascale computers, and advanced
software) will play the major role to simulate the design of NEMS and MEMS
from virtual prototyping standpoints.
There are three broad categories of problems for which new algorithms
and computational methods are critical:
1. Problems for which basic fundamental theories are developed, but the
complexity of solutions is beyond the range of current and near-future
computing technologies. For example, the conceptually straightforward
classical quantum mechanics and molecular dynamics cannot be applied
even for nanoscale actuators. In contrast, it will be illustrated that it is
possible to perform robust predictive simulations of molecular-scale
behavior for nano- and microscale actuators/sensors and smart structures
which might contain millions of molecules.
2. Problems for which fundamental theories are not completely developed to
justify direct simulations, but can be advanced or developed by advanced
basic and numerical methods.
3. Problems for which the developed advanced modeling and simulation
methods will produce major advances and will have a major impact. For
example, 3D+ transient end-to-end behavior of NEMS and MEMS.
For NEMS and MEMS, as well as for their devices and subsystems,
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

high-fidelity modeling and massive computational simulations (mathematical
models designed with developed intelligent libraries and databases/archives,
intelligent experimental data manipulation and storage, data grouping and
correlation, visualization, data mining and interpretation) offer the promise of
developing and understanding the mechanisms, phenomena and processes in
order to improve efficiency and design novel high-performance NEMS and
MEMS. Predictive model-based simulations require terascale computing and an
unprecedented level of integration between engineering and science. These
modeling and simulations will lead to new fundamental results. To model and
simulate NEMS and MEMS, we augment modern quantum mechanics,
electromagnetics, and electromechanics at the nano- and microscale. In
particular, our goal is to develop the nanoelectromechanical theory.
One can perform the steady-state and dynamic analysis. While steady-state
analysis is important, and the structural optimization to comprehend the
actuators/sensors, smart structures, and antennas design can be performed,
NEMS and MEMS must be analyzed in the time domain. The long-standing
goal of nanoelectromechanics is to develop the basic fundamental conceptual
theory in order to determine and study the interactions between actuation and
sensing, computing and communication, signal processing and hierarchical data
storage (memories), and other processes and phenomena in NEMS and MEMS.
Using the concept of strong electromagnetic-electromechanical interactions, the
fundamental nanoelectromechanical theory will be developed and applied to
nanostructures and nanodevices, NEMS and MEMS to predict the performance
through analytical solutions and numerical simulations. Dynamic macromodels
of nodes can be developed, and single and groups of molecules can be studied.
It is critical to perform this research in order to determine a number of the
parameters to make accurate performance evaluation and to analyze the
phenomena performing simulations and comparing experimental, modeling and
simulation results.
Current advances and developments in modeling and simulation of
complex phenomena in NEMS and MEMS are increasingly dependent upon
new approaches to robustly map, compute, visualize, and validate the results
clarifying, correlating, defining, and describing the limits between the
numerical results and the qualitative-quantitative analytic analysis in order to
comprehend, understand, and grasp the basic features. Simulations of NEMS
and MEMS require terascale computing that will be available within a couple
of years. The computational limitations and inability to develop explicit
mathematical models (some nonlinear phenomena cannot be comprehended,
fitted, and precisely mapped) focus advanced studies on the basic research in
robust modeling and simulation under uncertainties. Robust modeling,
simulation, and design are critical to advance and foster the theoretical and
engineering enterprises. We focus our research on the development of the
nanoelectromechanical theory in order to model and simulate large-scale
NEMS and MEMS. At the subsystem level, for example, nano- and microscale
actuators and sensors will be modeled and analyzed in 3D+ (three-dimensional
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

geometry dynamics in time domain) applying advanced numerical robust
methods and algorithms. Rigorous methods for quantifying uncertainties for
robust analysis should be developed. Uncertainties result due to the fact that it
is impossible to explicitly comprehend the complex interacted subsystems and
processes in NEMS and MEMS (actuators/sensors and smart structures,
antennas, digital and analog ICs, data movement, storage and management
across multilevel memory hierarchies, archives, networks and periphery),
structural and environmental changes, unmeasured and unmodeled phenomena,
et cetera.
To design NEMS and MEMS, we will develop analytical mathematical
models. There are a number of areas where the advances must be made in order
to realize the promises and benefits of modern theoretical developments
recently made. For example, to perform 3D+ modeling and data intensive
simulations of actuators/sensors and smart structures, we will use advanced
analytical and numerical methods and algorithms (novel methods and
algorithms in geometry and mesh generation, data assimilation, and dynamic
adaptive mesh refinement) as well as the computationally efficient and robust
MATLAB environment. There are fundamental and computational problems that
have not been addressed, formulated and solved due to the complexity of large-
scale NEMS and MEMS (e.g., large-scale hybrid models, limited ability to
generate and visualize the massive amount of data, et cetera). Other problems
include nonlinearities and uncertainties which imply fundamental limits to
formulate, set up, and solve analysis and design problems. Therefore, one
should develop rigorous methods and algorithms for quantifying and modeling
uncertainties, 3D+ geometry and mesh generation techniques, as well as
methods for adaptive robust modeling and simulations under uncertainties. A
broad class of fundamental and applied problems ranging from fundamental
theories (quantum mechanics and electromagnetics, electromechanics and
thermodynamics, structural synthesis and optimization, optimized architecture
design and control, modeling and analysis, et cetera) and numerical computing
(to enable the major progress in design and virtual prototyping through the
large scale simulations, data intensive computing, and visualization) will be
addressed and thoroughly studied in this book. Due to the obvious limitations
and the scope of this book, a great number of problems and phenomena will not
be addressed and discussed (among them, fabrication and manufacturing,
chemistry and material science).
1.4. APPLICATIONS  OF  NANO- AND 
MICROELECTROMECHANICAL  SYSTEMS
Depending upon the specifications and requirements, objectives and
applications, NEMS and MEMS must be designed. Usually, NEMS are faster
and simpler, more efficient and reliable, survivable and robust compared
with MEMS. However, due to the limited size and functional capabilities,
one might not attain the desired characteristics. For example, consider nano-
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

and microscale actuators. The actuator size is determined by the force or
torque densities. That is, the size is determined by the force or torque
requirements and materials used. As one uses NEMS or MEMS as the logic
devices, the output electric signal (voltage or current) or electromagnetic
field (intensity or density) must have the specified value.
Although NEMS and MEMS have the common features, the differences
must be emphasized as well. Currently, the research and developments in
NEMS and molecular nanotechnology are primarily concentrated on design,
modeling, simulation, and fabrication of molecular-scale devices. In contrast,
MEMS are usually fabricated using other technologies, for example,
complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) and lithography. The
direct chip attaching technology was developed and widely deployed. Flip-chip
assembly replaces wire banding to connect ICs with micro- and nanoscale
actuators and sensors. The use of flip-chip technology allows one to eliminate
parasitic resistance, capacitance, and inductance. This results in improvements
of performance characteristics. In addition, flip-chip assembly offers
advantages in the implementation of advanced flexible packaging, improving
reliability and survivability, reduces weight and size, et cetera. The flip-chip
assembly involves attaching actuators and sensors directly to ICs. The actuators
and sensors are mounted face down with bumps on the pads that form electrical
and mechanical joints to the ICs substrate. The under-fill encapsulate is then
added between the chip surface and the flex circuit to achieve the high
reliability demanded. Figure 1.4.1 illustrates flip-chip MEMS.
IC
Sensor
Actuator −
Actuator
Sensor
Figure 1.4.1. Flip-chip monolithic MEMS with actuators and sensors
The large-scale integrated MEMS (a single chip that can be mass-produced
using 
the 
complementary 
metal 
oxide 
semiconductor 
(CMOS),
photolithography, and other technologies at low cost) integrates:
• 
N nodes of actuators/sensors, smart structures,
• 
ICs and antennas,
• 
processor and memories,
• 
interconnection networks (communication busses),
• 
input-output (IO) systems.
Different architectures can be synthesized, and this problem is discussed
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

and covered in Chapter 2. One uses NEMS and MEMS to control complex
systems, processes, and phenomena. A high-level functional block diagram
of large-scale MEMS is illustrated in Figure 1.4.2.
Figure 1.4.2. High-level functional block diagram of large-scale MEMS
with rotational and translational actuators and sensors
Actuators are needed to actuate dynamic systems. Actuators respond to
command stimulus (control signals) and develop torque and force. There is a
great number of biological (e.g., human eye and locomotion system) and man-
made actuators. Biological actuators are based upon electromagnetic-
mechanical-chemical phenomena and 
processes. 
Man-made 
actuators
(electromagnetic, electric, hydraulic, thermo, and acoustic motors) are devices
that receive signals or stimulus (stress or pressure, thermo or acoustic, et cetera)
and respond with torque or force.
Consider the flight vehicles. The aircraft, spacecraft, missiles, and
interceptors are controlled by displacing the control surfaces as well as by
changing the control surface and wing geometry. For example, ailerons,
elevators, canards, flaps, rudders, stabilizers and tips of advanced aircraft can
be controlled by nano-, micro-, and miniscale actuators using the NEMS- and
Data
Acquisition
Sensors



Antennas
Amplifiers
ICs
Variables
Measured
Actuators
Analysis
and
Decision
System
Dynamic
Controller
Output
Variables
System
Criteria
Objectives
Variables
MEMS
Sensor
Actuator −
MEMS
Sensor
Actuator −
Sensor
Actuator −
IO
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

MEMS-based smart actuator technology. This NEMS- and MEMS-based
smart actuator technology is uniquely suitable in the flight actuator
applications. Figure 1.4.3 illustrates the aircraft where translational and
rotational actuators are used to actuate the control surfaces, as well as to
change the wing and control surface geometry.
Figure 1.4.3. Aircraft with NEMS- and MEMS-based translational and
rotational flight actuators
Sensors are devices that receive and respond to signals or stimulus. For
example, the loads (which the aircraft experience during the flight),
vibrations, temperature, pressure, velocity, acceleration, noise, and radiation
can be measured by micro- and nanoscale sensors, see Figure 1.4.4. It should
be emphasized that there are many other sensors to measure the
electromagnetic interference and displacement, orientation and position,
voltages and currents in power electronic devices, et cetera.
ψ
φ
θ
,
,
:
Angles
Euler
Actuators
Flight
Based
MEMS
and
NEMS
−
−
Sensor
Actuator −
Sensor
Actuator −
Geometry
Wing
Geometry
Surface
nt
Displaceme
Surface
Control :
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 1.4.4. Application of nano- and microscale sensors in aircraft
Usually, several conversion processes are involved to produce electric,
electromagnetic, or mechanical output sensor signals. The conversion of
energy is our particular interest. Using the energy-based analysis, the general
theoretical fundamentals will be thoroughly studied.
The major developments in NEMS and MEMS have been fabrication
technology driven, and the applied research has been performed mainly to
manufacture structures and devices, as well as to analyze some performance
characteristics. For example, mini- and microscale smart structures as well as
ICs have been studied in details, and feasible manufacturing technologies,
materials, and processes have been developed. Recently, carbon nanotubes
were discovered, and molecular wires and molecular transistors were built.
However, to our best knowledge, nanostructures and nanodevices, NEMS
and MEMS, have not been comprehensively studied at the nanoscale, and the
efforts to develop the fundamental theory have not been reported. In this
book, we will apply the quantum theory and charge density concept,
advanced electromechanics and Maxwell's equations, as well as other
cornerstone methods, to model nanostructures and nanodevices (ICs and
antennas, 
actuators 
and 
sensors, 
et 
cetera). 
In 
particular, 
the
nanoelectromechanical theory will be developed. A large variety of actuators
and sensors, antennas and ICs with different operating features are modeled
and simulated. To perform high-fidelity integrated 3D+ data intensive
modeling with post-processing and animation, the partial and ordinary
nonlinear differential equations are solved.
ψ
φ
θ
,
,
:
Angles
Euler
Radiation
Sensors
Noise
on
Accelerati
Velocity
ressure
P
Vibrations
Loads
e
Temperatur
Flight  Computer
Sensor
Actuator −
Sensor
Actuator −
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

1.5.  NANO-  AND  MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS
In general, monolithic MEMS are integrated microassembled structures
(electromechanical microsystems on a single chip) that have both electrical-
electronic (ICs) and mechanical components. To manufacture MEMS,
advanced modified microelectronics fabrication techniques, technologies,
and materials are used. Actuation and sensing cannot be viewed as the
peripheral function in many applications. Integrated sensors-actuators
(usually motion microstructures) with ICs compose the major class of
MEMS. Due to the use of CMOS lithography-based technologies in
fabrication actuators and sensors, MEMS leverage microelectronics in
important additional areas that revolutionize the application capabilities. In
fact, MEMS have considerably leveraged the microelectronics industry
beyond ICs. The needs for augmented motion microstructures (actuators and
sensors) and ICs have been widely recognized. Simply scaling conventional
electromechanical motion devices and augmenting them with ICs have not
met the needs, and theory and fabrication processes have been developed
beyond component replacement. Dual power operational amplifiers (e.g.,
Motorola TCA0372, DW Suffix plastic package case 751G, DP2 Suffix
plastic package case 648 or DP1 Suffix plastic package case 626) as
monolithic ICs can be used to control DC micro electric machines (motion
microstructures), as shown in Figure 1.5.1.
Figure 1.5.1. Application of monolithic IC to control DC
micromachines (motion microstructures)
Only recently has it become possible to manufacture MEMS at low cost.
However, there is a critical demand for continuous fundamental, applied, and
technological improvements, and multidisciplinary activities are required.
The general lack of synergy theory to augment actuation, sensing, signal
processing, and control is known, and these issues must be addressed through
+
−
1
R
1
V
+
−
C
2
R
3
R
Device
Motion  
  
DC
    
al
romechanic
Microelect
2
V
ICs
  
Monolithic
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

focussed efforts. The set of long-range goals that challenge the analysis,
design, development, fabrication, and deployment of high-performance
MEMS are:
• 
advanced materials and process technology,
• 
microsensors and microactuators (motion microstructures), sensing and
actuation mechanisms, sensors-actuators-ICs integration and MEMS
configurations,
• 
fabrication, packaging, microassembly, and testing,
• 
MEMS analysis, design, optimization, and modeling,
• 
MEMS applications and their deployment.
Significant progress in the application of CMOS technology enables the
industry to fabricate microscale actuators and sensors with the corresponding
ICs, and this guarantees the significant breakthrough. The field of MEMS has
been driven by the rapid global progress in ICs, VLSI, solid-state devices,
materials, microprocessors, memories, and DSPs that have revolutionized
instrumentation, control, and systems design philosophy. In addition, this
progress has facilitated explosive growth in data processing and
communications in high-performance systems. In microelectronics, many
emerging problems deal with nonelectric effects, phenomena and processes
(thermal and structural analysis and optimization, stress and ruggedness,
packaging, et cetera). It has been emphasized that ICs are the necessary
components to perform control, data acquisition, and decision making. For
example, control signals (voltage or currents) are computed, converted,
modulated, and fed to actuators. It is evident that MEMS have found
applications in a wide array of microscale devices (accelerometers, pressure
sensors, gyroscopes, et cetera) due to extremely-high level of integration of
electromechanical components with low cost and maintenance, accuracy,
efficiency, reliability, ruggedness, and survivability. Microelectronics with
integrated sensors and actuators are batch-fabricated as integrated
assemblies.
Therefore, MEMS can be defined as batch-fabricated microscale
devices (ICs and motion microstructures) that convert physical parameters
to electrical signals and vice versa, and in addition, microscale features of
mechanical and electrical components, architectures, structures, and
parameters are important elements of their operation and design.
The manufacturability issues in NEMS and MEMS must be addressed.
One can design and manufacture individually-fabricated devices and
subsystems (ICs and motion microstructures). However, these individually-
fabricated devices and subsystems are unlikely can be used due to very high
cost.
Integrated MEMS combine mechanical structures (microfabricated smart
multifunctional materials are used to manufacture microscale actuators and
sensors, pumps and valves, optical devices) and microelectronics (ICs). The
number of transistors on a chip is frequently used by the microelectronic
industry, and enormous progress in achieving nanoscale transistor dimensions
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

(less than 100 nm) was achieved. However, large-scale MEMS operational
capabilities are measured by the intelligence, system-on-a-chip integration,
integrity, cost, performance, efficiency, size, reliability, and other criteria.
There are a number of challenges in MEMS fabrication because conventional
CMOS technology must be modified and integration strategies (to integrate
mechanical structures and ICs) are needed to be developed. What (ICs or
mechanical micromachined structure) should be fabricated first? Fabrication of
ICs first faces challenges because to reduce stress in the thin films of
polysilicon (multifunctional material to build motion microstructures), a high-
temperature anneal at 10000C is needed for several hours. The aluminum ICs
interconnect will be destroyed (melted), and tungsten can be used for
interconnected metallization. This process leads to difficulties for commercially
manufactured MEMS due to high cost and low reproducibility. Analog Devices
fabricates ICs first up to metallization step, and then, mechanical structures
(polysilicon) are built using high-temperature anneal (micromachines are
fabricated before metallization), and finally, ICs are interconnected. This allows
the manufacturer to use low-cost conventional aluminum interconnects. The
third option is to fabricate mechanical structures, and then ICs. However, to
overcome step coverage, stringer, and topography problems, motion
mechanical microstructures can be fabricated in the bottoms of the etched
shallow trenches (packaged directly) of the wafer. These trenches are filled with
a sacrificial silicon dioxide, and the silicon wafer is planarized through
chemical-mechanical polishing.
The motion mechanical microstructures can be protected (sensor
applications, e.g., accelerometers and gyroscopes) and unprotected (actuator
and interactive environment sensor applications). Therefore, MEMS
(mechanical structure – ICs) can be encased in a clean, hermetically sealed
package or some elements can be unprotected to interact with environment.
This creates challenges in packaging. It is extremely important to develop novel
electromechanical motion microstructures and microdevices (sticky multilayers,
thin films, magnetoelectronic, electrostatic, and quantum-effect-based devices)
and sense their properties. Microfabrication of very large scale integrated
circuits (VLSI), MEMS, and optoelectronics must be addressed. Fabrication
processes include lithography, film growth, diffusion, ion implantation, thin
film deposition, etching, metallization, et cetera. Furthermore, ICs and motion
microstructures (microelectromechanical motion devices) must be connected.
Complete microfabrication processes with integrated process steps must be
developed.
Microelectromechanical systems integrate microscale subsystems (at least
ICs and motion structure). It was emphasized that microsensors sense the
physical variables, and microactuators control (actuate) real-world systems.
These microactuators are regulated by ICs. It must be emphasized that ICs also
performed computations, signal conditioning, decision making, and other
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

functions. For example, in microaccelerometers, the motion microstructure
displaces. Using this displacement, the acceleration can be calculated. In
microaccelerometers, computations, signal conditioning, data acquisition, and
decision making are performed by ICs. Microactuators inflate air-bags if car
crashes (high g acceleration measured).
Microelectromechanical systems contain microscale subsystems designed
and manufactured using different technologies. Single silicon substrate can be
used to fabricate microscale actuators, sensors, and ICs (monolithic MEMS)
using CMOS microfabrication technology. Alternatively, subsystem can be
assembled, connected and packaged, and different microfabrication techniques
for MEMS components and subsystems exist. Usually, monolithic MEMS are
compact, efficient, reliable, and guarantee superior performance.
Typically, MEMS integrate the following subsystems: microscale actuators
(actuate real-world systems), microscale sensors (detect and measure changes
of the physical variables), and microelectronics/ICs (signal processing, data
acquisition, decision making, et cetera).
Microactuators are needed to develop force or torque (mechanical
variable). Typical examples are microscale drives, moving mirrors, pumps,
servos, valves, et cetera. A great variety of methods for achieving actuation are
well-known, e.g., electromagnetic (electrostatic, magnetic, piezoelectric),
hydraulic, 
and 
thermal 
effects. 
This 
book 
covers 
electromagnetic
microactuators, and the so-called comb drives (surface micromachined motion
microstructures) have been widely used. These drives have movable and
stationary plates (fingers). When the voltage is applied, an attractive force is
developed between two plates, and the motion results. A wide variety of
microscale actuators have been fabricated and tested. The common problem is
the difficulties associated with coil fabrication. The choice of magnetic
materials (permanent magnets) is limited to those that can be micromachined.
Magnetic actuators typically fabricated through the photolithography
technology using nickel (ferromagnetic material). Piezoelectric microactuators
have found wide applications due to simplicity and ruggedness (force is
generated if one applies the voltage across a film of piezoelectric material). The
piezoelectric-based concept can be applied to thin silicon membranes, and if the
voltage is applied, the membrane deforms. Thus, silicon membranes can be
used as pumps.
Microsensors are devices that convert one physical variable (quantity) to
another. For example, electromagnetic phenomenon can be converted to
mechanical or optic effects. There are a number of different types of microscale
sensors used in MEMS. For example, microscale thermosensors are designed
and built using the thermoelectric effect (the resistivity varies with
temperature). Extremely low cost thermoresistors (thermistors) are fabricated
on the silicon wafer, and ICs are built on the same substrate. The thermistor
resistivity is a highly nonlinear function of the temperature, and the
compensating circuitry is used to take into account the nonlinear effect.
Microelectromagnetic sensors measure electromagnetic fields, e.g., the Hall
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

effect sensors. Optical sensors can be fabricated on crystals that exhibit a
magneto-optic effect, e.g., optical fibers. In contrast, the quantum effect sensors
can sense extremely weak electromagnetic fields. Silicon-fabricated
piezoresistors (silicon doped with impurities to make it n- or p-type) belong to
the class of mechanical sensors. When the force is applied to the piezoelectric,
the charge induced (measured voltage) is proportional to the applied force. Zinc
oxide and lead zirconate titanate (PZT, PbZrTiO3), which can be deposited on
microstructures, are used as piezoelectric crystals. In this book, the microscale
accelerometers and gyroscopes, as well as microelectric machines will be
studied. Accelerometers and gyroscopes are based upon capacitive sensors. In
two parallel conducting plates, separated by an insulating material, the
capacitance between the plates is a function of distance between plates
(capacitance is inversely proportional to the distance). Thus, measuring the
capacitance, the distance can be easily calculated. In accelerometers and
gyroscopes, the proof mass and rotor are suspended. It will be shown that using
the second Newton’s law, the acceleration is proportional to the displacement.
Hence, the acceleration can be calculated. Thin membranes are the basic
components of pressure sensors. The deformation of the membrane is usually
sensed by piezoresistors or capacitive microsensors.
We have illustrated the critical need for physical- and system-level
concepts in NEMS and MEMS analysis and design. Advances in physical-level
research have tremendously expanded the horizon of NEMS and MEMS
technologies. For example, magnetic-based (magnetoelectronic) memories have
been thoroughly studied (magnetoelectronic devices are grouped in three
categories based upon the physics of their operation: all-metal spin transistors
and valves, hybrid ferromagnetic semiconductor structures, and magnetic
tunnel junctions). Writing and reading the cell data are based on different
physical mechanisms, and high or low cost, densities, power, reliability and
speed (write/read cycle) memories result. As the physical-level analysis and
design are performed, the system-level analysis and design must be
accomplished because the design of integrated large-scale NEMS and MEMS
is the final goal.
1.6.  INTRODUCTION  TO  MEMS  FABRICATION, ASSEMBLING, 
AND  PACKAGING
Two basic components of MEMS and microengineering are
microelectronics (to fabricate ICs) and micromachining (to fabricate motion
microstructures). Using CMOS or VLSI technology, microelectronics (ICs)
fabrication can be performed. Micromachining technology is needed to
fabricate motion microstructures to be used as the MEMS mechanical
subsystems. It was emphasized that one of the main goals of
microengineering is to integrate microelectronics with micromachined
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

mechanical structures in order to produce completely integrated monolithic
high-performance MEMS. To guarantee low cost, reliability, and
manufacturability, the following must by guaranteed: the fabrication process
has a high yield and batch processing techniques are used for as much of the
process as possible (large numbers of microscale structures/devices per silicon
wafer and large number of wafers are processed at the same time at each
fabrication step). Assembling and packaging must be automated, and the most
promising avenues are auto- or self-alignment and self assembly. Some MEMS
subsystems (actuator and interactive environment sensors) must be protected
from mechanical damage, and in addition, protected from contamination. Wear
tolerance, electromagnetic and thermo isolation, among other problems have
always challenged MEMS. Different manufacturing technologies must be
applied to attain the desired performance level and cost. Microsubsystems can
be coated directly by thin films of silicon dioxide or silicon nitride which are
deposited using plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition. It is possible to
deposit (at 7000C to 9000C) films of diamond which have superior wear
capabilities, excellent electric insulation and thermal characteristics. It must be
emphasized that diamond like carbon films can be also deposited.
Microelectromechanical systems are connected (interfaced) with real-
world systems (control surfaces of aircraft, flight computer, communication
ports, et cetera). Furthermore, MEMS are packaged to protect systems from
harsh environments, prevent mechanical damage, minimize stresses and
vibrations, contamination, electromagnetic interference, et cetera. Therefore,
MEMS are usually sealed. It is impossible to specify a generic MEMS package.
Through input-output connections (power and communication bus) one delivers
the power required, feeds control (command) and test (probe) signals, receives
the output signals and data. Packages must be designed to minimize
electromagnetic interference and noise. Heat, generated by MEMS, must be
dissipated, and the thermal expansion problem must be solved. Conventional
MEMS packages are usually ceramic and plastic. In ceramic packages, the die
is bonded to a ceramic base, which includes a metal frame and pins for making
electric outside connections. Plastic packages are connected in the similar way.
However, the package can be molded around the microdevice.
Silicon and silicon carbide micromachining are the most developed
micromachining technologies. Silicon is the primary substrate material which is
used by the microelectronics industry. A single crystal ingot (solid cylinder 300
mm diameter and 1000 mm length) of very high purity silicon is grown, then
sawed with the desired thickness and polished using chemical and mechanical
polishing techniques. Electromagnetic and mechanical wafer properties depend
upon the orientation of the crystal growth, concentration and type of doped
impurities. Depending on the silicon substrate, CMOS processes are used to
manufacture ICs, and the process is classified as n-well, p-well, or twin-well.
The major steps are diffusion, oxidation, polysilicon gate formations,
photolithography, masking, etching, metallization, wire bonding, et cetera. To
fabricate motion microstructures (microelectromechanical motion devices),
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

CMOS technology must be modified. High-resolution photolithography is a
technology that is applied to produce moulds for the fabrication of
micromachined mechanical components and to define their three-dimensional
shape (geometry). That is, the micromachine geometry is defined
photographically. First, a mask is produced on a glass plate. The silicon wafer
is then coated with a polymer which is sensitive to ultraviolet light
(photoresistive layer is called photoresist). Ultraviolet light is shone through the
mask onto the photoresist to build the mask to the photoresist layer. The
positive photoresist becomes softened, and the exposed layer can be removed.
In general, there are two types of photoresist, e.g., positive and negative. Where
the ultraviolet light strikes the positive photoresist, it weakens the polymer.
Hence, when the image is developed, the photoresist is washed where the light
struck it. A high-resolution positive image results. In contrast, if the ultraviolet
light strikes negative photoresist, it strengthens the polymer. Therefore, a
negative image of the mask results. Chemical process is used to remove the
oxide where it is exposed through the openings in the photoresist. When the
photoresist is removed, the patterned oxide appears. Alternatively, electron
beam lithography can be used. Photolithography requires design of masks. The
design of photolithography masks for micromachining is straightforward, and
computer-aided-design (CAD) software is available and widely applied.
There are a number of basic surface silicon micromachining technologies
that can be used in order to pattern thin films that have been deposited on a
silicon wafer, and to shape the silicon wafer itself forming a set of basic
microstructures. Three basic steps associated with silicon micromachining are:
• 
deposition of thin films of materials;
• 
removal of material (patterning) by wet or dry techniques;
• 
doping.
Different microelectromechanical motion devices (motion microstructures)
can be designed, and silicon wafers with different crystal orientations are used.
Reactive ion etching (dry etching) is usually applied. Ions are accelerated
towards the material to be etched, and the etching reaction is enhanced in the
direction of ion traveling. Deep trenches and pits of desired shapes can be
etched in a variety of materials including silicon, oxide, and nitride. A
combination of dry and wet etching can be embedded in the process.
Metal films are patterned using the lift off stenciling technique. A thin film
of the assisting material (oxide) is deposited, and a layer of photoresist is put
over and patterned. The oxide is then etched to undercut the photoresist. The
metal film is then deposited on the silicon wafer through evaporation process.
The metal pattern is stenciled through the gaps in the photoresist, which is then
removed, lifting off the unwanted metal. The assisting layer is then stripped off,
leaving the metal film pattern.
The anisotropic wet etching and concentration dependent etching are
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

called bulk silicon micromachining because the microstructures are formed by
etching away the bulk of the silicon wafer. Surface micromachining forms the
structure in layers of thin films on the surface of the silicon wafer or other
substrate. Hence, the surface micromachining process uses thin films of two
different materials, e.g., structural (usually polysilicon) and sacrificial (oxide)
materials. Sacrificial layers of oxide are deposited on the wafer surface, and dry
etched. Then, the sacrificial material is wet etched away to release the structure.
A variety of different complex motion microstructures with different geometry
have been fabricated using the surface micromachining technology.
Micromachined silicon wafers must be bonded together. Anodic
(electrostatic) bonding technique is used to bond silicon wafer and glass
substrate. In particular, the silicon wafer and glass substrate are attached,
heated, and electric field is applied across the join. These result in extremely
strong bonds between the silicon wafer and glass substrate. In contrast, the
direct silicon bonding is based upon applying pressure to bond silicon wafer
and glass substrate. It must be emphasized that to guarantee strong bonds, the
silicon wafer and glass substrate surfaces must be flat and clean.
The MEMCAD™ software (current version is 4.6), developed by
Microcosm, is widely used to design, model, simulate, characterize, and
package MEMS. Using the built-in Microcosm Catapult™ layout editor,
augmented with materials database and components library, three-
dimensional solid models of motion microstructures can be developed. 
Furthermore, customizable packaging is fully supported.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

CHAPTER 2
MATHEMATICAL MODELS  AND  DESIGN  OF 
NANO- AND  MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS
2.1. NANO-  AND  MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS 
ARCHITECTURE
A large variety of nano- and microscale structures and devices, as well
as NEMS and MEMS 
(systems 
integrate 
structures, 
devices, 
and
subsystems), have been widely used, and a worldwide market for NEMS and
MEMS and their applications will be drastically increased in the near future.
The differences in NEMS and MEMS are emphasized, and NEMS are
smaller than MEMS. For example, carbon nanotubes (nanostructure) can be
used as the molecular wires and sensors in MEMS. Different specifications
are imposed on NEMS and MEMS depending upon their applications. For
example, using carbon nanotubes as the molecular wires, the current density
is defined by the media properties (e.g., resistivity and thermal conductivity).
It is evident that the maximum current is defined by the diameter and the
number of layers of the carbon nanotube. Different molecular-scale
nanotechnologies are applied to manufacture NEMS (controlling and
changing the properties of nanostructures), while analog, discrete, and hybrid
MEMS have been mainly manufactured using surface micro-machining,
silicon-based technology (lithographic processes are used to fabricate CMOS
ICs). To deploy and commercialize NEMS and MEMS, a spectrum of
problems must be solved, and a portfolio of software design tools needs to be
developed using a multidisciplinary concept. In recent years much attention
has been given to MEMS fabrication and manufacturing, structural design and
optimization of actuators and sensors, modeling, analysis, and optimization. It
is evident that NEMS and MEMS can be studied with different level of detail
and comprehensiveness, and different application-specific architectures
should be synthesized and optimized. The majority of research papers study
either nano- and microscale actuators-sensors or ICs that can be the
subsystems of NEMS and MEMS. A great number of publications have been
devoted to the carbon nanotubes (nanostructures used in NEMS and MEMS).
The results for different NEMS and MEMS components are extremely
important and manageable. However, the comprehensive systems-level
research must be performed because the specifications are imposed on the
systems, not on the individual elements, structures, and subsystems of NEMS
and MEMS. Thus, NEMS and MEMS must be developed and studied to
attain the comprehensiveness of the analysis and design.
For example, the actuators are controlled changing the voltage or current
(by ICs) or the electromagnetic field (by nano- or microscale antennas). The
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ICs and antennas (which should be studied as the subsystems) can be
controlled using nano or micro decision-making systems, which can include
central processor and memories (as core), IO devices, etc. Nano- and
microscale sensors are also integrated as elements of NEMS and MEMS, and
through molecular wires (for example, carbon nanotubes) one feeds the
information to the IO devices of the nano-processor. That is, NEMS and
MEMS integrate a large number of structures and subsystems which must be
studied. As a result, the designer usually cannot consider NEMS and MEMS
as six-degrees-of-freedom actuators using conventional mechanics (the linear
or angular displacement is a function of the applied force or torque),
completely ignoring the problem of how these forces or torques are generated
and regulated. In this book, we will illustrate how to integrate and study the
basic components of NEMS and MEMS.
The design and development, modeling and simulation, analysis and
prototyping of NEMS and MEMS must be attacked using advanced theories.
The systems analysis of NEMS and MEMS as systems integrates analysis
and design of structures, devices and subsystems used, structural
optimization and modeling, synthesis and optimization of architectures,
simulation and virtual prototyping, etc. Even though a wide range of
nanoscale structures and devices (e.g., molecular diodes and transistors,
machines and transducers) can be fabricated with atomic precision,
comprehensive systems analysis of NEMS and MEMS must be performed
before the designer embarks in costly fabrication because through
optimization of architecture, structural optimization of subsystems (actuators
and sensors, ICs and antennas), modeling and simulation, analysis and
visualization, the rapid evaluation and prototyping can be performed
facilitating cost-effective solution reducing the design cycle and cost,
guaranteeing design of high-performance NEMS and MEMS which satisfy
the requirements and specifications.
The large-scale integrated MEMS (a single chip that can be mass-produced
using the CMOS, lithography, and other technologies at low cost) integrates:
• 
N nodes of actuators/sensors, smart structures, and antennas;
• 
processor and memories,
• 
interconnected networks (communication busses),
• 
input-output (IO) devices,
• 
etc.
Different architectures can be implemented, for example, linear, star, ring,
and hypercube are illustrated in Figure 2.1.1.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.1.1. Linear, star, ring, and hypercube architectures
More complex architectures can be designed, and the hypercube-
connected-cycle node configuration is illustrated in Figure 2.1.2.
Figure 2.1.2. Hypercube-connected-cycle node architecture
1
Node
N
Node
re
Architectu
Star
re
Architectu
Linear
re
Architectu
Ring
re
Architectu
Hypercube
1
Node
k
Node
i
Node
j
Node
N
Node
1
Node
i
Node
j
Node
k
Node k
Node
!
!
"
"
!
!
!
"
"
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

The nodes can be synthesized, and the elementary node can be simply pure
smart structure, actuator, or sensor. This elementary node can be controlled by
the external electromagnetic field (that is, ICs or antenna are not a part of the
elementary structure). In contrast, the large-scale node can integrate processor
(with decision making, control, signal processing, and data acquisition
capabilities), memories, IO devices, communication bus, ICs and antennas,
actuators and sensors, smart structures, etc. That is, in addition to
actuators/sensors and smart structures, ICs and antennas (to regulate
actuators/sensors and smart structures), processor (to control ICs and antennas),
memories and interconnected networks, IO devices, as well as other subsystems
can be integrated.  Figure 2.1.3 illustrates large-scale and elementary nodes.
Figure 2.1.3. Large-scale and elementary nodes
As NEMS and MEMS are used to control physical dynamic systems
(immune system or drug delivery, propeller or wing, relay or lock), to
illustrate the basic components, a high-level functional block diagram is
shown in Figure 2.1.4.
Sensor
Actuator −
Sensor
Actuator −
Sensor
Actuator −
Controller
rocessor
P
Memories
IO
Antennas
ICs
Node
Scale
rge
La
−
Node
Elementary
Sensor
Actuator −
Sensor
Actuator −
Sensor
Actuator −
Sensors
Actuators
nal
Translatio
Rotationa
−
/
Bus
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.1.4. High-level functional block diagram of large-scale NEMS
and MEMS
For example, the desired flight path of aircraft (maneuvering and
landing) is maintained by displacing the control surfaces (ailerons and
elevators, canards and flaps, rudders and stabilizers) and/or changing the
control surface and wing geometry. Figure 2.1.5 documents the application
of the NEMS- and MEMS-based technology to actuate the control surfaces.
It should be emphasized that the NEMS and MEMS receive the digital
signal-level signals from the flight computer, and these digital signals are
converted into the desired voltages or currents fed to the microactuators or
electromagnetic flux intensity to displace the actuators. It is also important
that NEMS- and MEMS-based transducers can be used as sensors, and, as an
example, the loads on the aircraft structures during the flight can be
measured.
Data
Acquisition
Sensors



Antennas
Amplifiers
ICs
Variables
Measured
Actuators
Analysis
and
Decision
System
Dynamic
Controller
Output
Variables
System
Criteria
Objectives
Variables
MEMS
Sensor
Actuator −
MEMS
Sensor
Actuator −
Sensor
Actuator −
IO
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.1.5. Aircraft with MEMS-based flight actuators
Microelectromechanical and Nanoelectromechanical Systems
Microelectromechanical 
systems 
are 
integrated 
microassembled
structures (electromechanical microsystems on a single chip) that have both
electrical-electronic (ICs) and mechanical components. To manufacture
MEMS, modified advanced microelectronics fabrication techniques and
materials are used. It was emphasized that sensing and actuation cannot be
viewed as the peripheral function in many applications. Integrated
actuators/sensors with ICs compose the major class of MEMS. Due to the use
of CMOS lithography-based technologies in fabrication actuators and
sensors, MEMS leverage microelectronics (signal processing, computing,
and control) in important additional areas that revolutionize the application
capabilities. In fact, MEMS have been considerably leveraged the
microelectronics industry beyond ICs. The needs to augmented actuators,
sensors, and ICs have been widely recognized. For example, mechatronics
concept, used for years in conventional electromechanical systems, integrates
all components and subsystems (electromechanical motion devices, power
converters, microcontrollers, et cetera). Simply scaling conventional
electromechanical motion devices and augmenting them with ICs have not
ψ
φ
θ
,
,
:
Angles
Euler
Actuators
Flight
Based
MEMS −
Sensor
Actuator −
Sensor
Actuator −
Geometry
Wing
Geometry
Surface
nt
Displaceme
Surface
Control :
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

met the needs, and theory and fabrication processes have been developed
beyond component replacement. Only recently it becomes possible to
manufacture MEMS at very low cost. However, there is a critical demand for
continuous fundamental, applied, and technological improvements, and
multidisciplinary activities are required. The general lack of synergy theory
to augment actuation, sensing, signal processing, and control is known, and
these issues must be addressed through focussed efforts. The set of long-
range goals has been emphasized in Chapter 1. The challenges facing the
development of MEMS are
• 
advanced materials and process technology,
• 
microsensors and microactuators, sensing and actuation mechanisms,
sensors-actuators-ICs integration and MEMS configurations,
• 
packaging, microassembly, and testing,
• 
MEMS modeling, analysis, optimization, and design,
• 
MEMS applications and their deployment.
Significant progress in the application of CMOS technology enable the
industry to fabricate microscale actuators and sensors with the corresponding
ICs, and this guarantees the significant breakthrough. The field of MEMS has
been driven by the rapid global progress in ICs, VLSI, solid-state devices,
microprocessors, 
memories, 
and 
DSPs 
that 
have 
revolutionized
instrumentation and control. In addition, this progress has facilitated
explosive growth in data processing and communications in high-
performance systems. In microelectronics, many emerging problems deal
with nonelectric phenomena and processes (thermal and structural analysis
and optimization, packaging, et cetera). It has been emphasized that ICs is
the necessary component to perform control, data acquisition, and decision
making. For example, control signals (voltage or currents) are computer,
converted, modulated, and fed to actuators. It is evident that MEMS have
found application in a wide array of microscale devices (accelerometers,
pressure sensors, gyroscopes, et cetera) due to extremely-high level of
integration of electromechanical components with low cost and maintenance,
accuracy, reliability, and ruggedness. Microelectronics with integrated
sensors and actuators are batch-fabricated as integrated assemblies.
Therefore, MEMS can be defined as
batch-fabricated microscale devices (ICs and motion microstructures) that
convert physical parameters to electrical signals and vise versa, and in
addition, microscale features of mechanical and electrical components,
architectures, structures, and parameters are important elements of their
operation and design.
The manufacturability issues in NEMS and MEMS must be addressed. It
was shown that one can design and manufacture individually-fabricated
devices and subsystems. However, these devices and subsystems are unlikely
will be used due to very high cost.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Piezoactuators and permanent-magnet technology has been used widely,
and rotating and linear electric transducers (actuators and sensors) are
designed. For example, piezoactive materials are used in ultrasonic motors.
Frequently, conventional concepts of the electric machinery theory
(rotational and linear direct-current, induction, and synchronous machine) are
used to design and analyze MEMS-based machines. The use of
piezoactuators is possible as a consequence of the discovery of advanced
materials in sheet and thin-film forms, especially PZT (lead zirconate
titanate) and polyvinylidene fluoride. The deposition of thin films allows
piezo-based electric machines to become a promising candidate for
microactuation in lithography-based fabrication. In particular, microelectric
machines can be fabricated using a deep x-ray lithography and
electrodeposition process. Two-pole synchronous and induction micro-
motors have been fabricated and tested.
To fabricate nanoscale structures, devices, and NEMS, molecular
manufacturing methods and technologies must be developed. Self- and
positional-assembly concepts are the preferable technologies compared
with individually-fabricated in the synthesis and manufacturing of
molecular 
structures. 
To 
perform 
self- 
and 
positional-assembly,
complementary pairs (CP) and molecular building blocks (MBB) should be
designed. These CP or MBB, which can be built from a couple to
thousands atoms, can be studied and designed using the DNA analogy. The
nucleic acids consist of two major classes of molecules (DNA and RNA).
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA) are the largest
and most complex organic molecules which are composed of carbon,
oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, and phosphorus. The structural units of DNA
and RNA are nucleotides, and each nucleotide consists of three
components (nitrogen-base, pentose and phosphate) joined by dehydration
synthesis. The double-helix molecular model of DNA was discovered by
Watson and Crick in 1953. The DNA (long double-stranded polymer with
double chain of nucleotides held together by hydrogen bonds between the
bases), as the genetic material (genes), performs two fundamental roles. It
replicates (identically reproduces) itself before a cell divides, and provides
pattern for protein synthesis directing the growth and development of all
living organisms according to the information DNA supports. The DNA
architecture provides the mechanism for the replication of genes. Specific
pairing of nitrogenous bases obey base-pairing rules and determine the
combinations of nitrogenous bases that form the rungs of the double helix.
In contrast, RNA carries (performs) the protein synthesis using the DNA
information. Four DNA bases are: A (adenine), G (guanine), C (cytosine),
and T (thymine). The ladder-like DNA molecule is formed due to
hydrogen bonds between the bases which paired in the interior of the
double helix (the base pairs are 0.34 nm apart and there are ten pairs per
turn of the helix). Two backbones (sugar and phosphate molecules) form
the uprights of the DNA molecule, while the joined bases form the rungs.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.1.6 illustrates that the hydrogen bonding of the bases are: A bonds
to T, G bonds to C. The complementary base sequence results.
Figure 2.1.6. DNA pairing due to hydrogen bonds
In RNA molecules (single strands of nucleotides), the complementary
bases are A bonds to U (uracil), and G bonds to C. The complementary base
bonding of DNA and RNA molecules gives one the idea of possible sticky-
ended assembling (through complementary pairing) of NEMS structures and
devices with the desired level of specificity, architecture, topology, and
organization. In structural assembling and design, the key element is the
ability of CP or MBB (atoms or molecules) to associate with each other
(recognize and identify other atoms or molecules by means of specific base
pairing relationships). It was emphasized that in DNA, A (adenine) bonds to
T (thymine) and G (guanine) bonds to C (cytosine). Using this idea, one can
design the CP such as A1-A2, B1-B2, C1-C2, etc. That is, A1 pairs with A2,
while B1 pairs with B2. This complementary pairing can be studied using
electromagnetics (Coulomb law) and chemistry (chemical bonding, for
example, hydrogen bonds in DNA between nitrogenous bases A and T, G
and C). Figure 2.1.7 shows how two nanoscale elements with sticky ends
form the complementary pair. In particular, "+" is the sticky end and "-" is its
complement. That is, the complementary pair A1-A2 results.
Figure 2.1.7. Sticky ended electrostatically complementary pair A1-A2
An example of assembling a ring is illustrated in Figure 2.1.8. Using the
sticky ended segmented (asymmetric) electrostatically CP, self-assembling of
T
A −
O
H
N-H   ......   O
N ...... H-N
3
CH
Sugar
N
N
C
G −
N-H   ......    O
H
O   ......    H-N
N-H ...... N
Sugar
N
N
N
N
Sugar
H
N
N
Sugar
−
2
q
+
1q
1A
2
A
1A
2
A
+
1q
−
2
q
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

nanostructure is performed in the XY plane. It is evident that three-
dimensional structures can be formed through the self-assembling.
Figure 2.1.8. Ring self-assembling
It is evident that there are several advantages to use sticky ended
electrostatic CP. In the first place, the ability to recognize (identify) the
complementary pair is clear and reliably predicted. The second advantage is
the possibility to form stiff, strong, and robust structures.
Self-assembled complex nanostructures can be fabricated using
subsegment concept to form the branched junctions. This concept is well-
defined electrostatically and geometrically through Coulomb law and
branching connectivity. Using the subsegment concept, ideal objects (e.g.,
cubes, octahedron, spheres, cones, et cetera) can be manufactured.
Furthermore, the geometry of nanostructures can be easily controlled by the
number of CP and pairing MBB. It must be emphasized that it is possible to
generate a quadrilateral self-assembled nanostructure by using four and more
different CP. That is, in addition to electrostatic CP, chemical CP can be
used. Single- and double-stranded structures can be generated and linked in
the desired topological and architectural manners. The self-assembling must
be controlled during the manufacturing cycle, and CP and MBB, which can
be paired and topologically/architecturally bonded, must be added in the
desired sequence. For example, polyhedral and octahedral synthesis can be
performed when building elements (CP or MBB) are topologically or
geometrically specified. The connectivity of nanostructures determines the
minimum number of linkages that flank the branched junctions. The synthesis
of complex three-dimensional nanostructures is the design of topology, and
the structures are characterized by their branching and linking.
Linkage Groups in Molecular Building Blocks
The hydrogen bonds, which are weak, hold DNA and RNA strands.
Strong bonds are desirable to form stiff, strong, and robust nano- and
microstructures. Using polymer chemistry, functional groups which couple
−
2
q
+
1q
+
1q
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

monomers can be designed. However, polymers made from monomers with
only two linkage groups do not exhibit the desired stiffness and strength.
Tetrahedral MBB structures with four linkage groups result in stiff and
robust structures. Polymers are made from monomers, and each monomer
reacts with two other monomers to form linear chains. Synthetic and organic
polymers (large molecules) are nylon and dacron (synthetic), and proteins
and RNA, respectively.
There are two major ways to assemble parts. In particular, self assembly
and positional assembly. Self-assembling is widely used at the molecular
scale, and the DNA and RNA examples were already emphasized. Positional
assembling is widely used in manufacturing and microelectronic
manufacturing. The current inability to implement positional assembly at the
molecular scale with the same flexibility and integrity that it applied in
microelectronic fabrication limits the range of nanostructures which can be
manufactured. Therefore, the efforts are focused on developments of MBB,
as applied to manufacture nanostructures, which guarantee:
• 
mass-production at low cost and high yield;
• 
simplicity and predictability of synthesis and manufacturing;
• 
high-performance, repeatability, and similarity of characteristics;
• 
stiffness, strength, and robustness;
• 
tolerance to contaminants.
It is possible to select and synthesize MBB that satisfy the requirements
and specifications (non-flammability, non-toxicity, pressure, temperatures,
stiffness, strength, robustness, resistivity, permiability, permittivity, et
cetera). Molecular building blocks are characterized by the number of
linkage groups and bonds. The linkage groups and bonds that can be used to
connect MBB are:
• 
dipolar bonds (weak),
• 
hydrogen bonds (weak),
• 
transition metal complexes bonds (weak),
• 
amide and ester linkages (weak and strong).
It must be emphasized that large molecular building blocks (LMMB) can
be made from MBB. There is a need to synthesize robust three-dimensional
structures.   Molecular building blocks can form planar structures with are
strong, stiff, and robust in-plane, but weak and compliant in the third
dimension. This problem can be resolved by forming tubular structures. It
was emphasized that it is difficult to form three-dimensional structures using
MBB with two linkage groups. Molecular building blocks with three linkage
groups form planar structures, which are strong, stiff, and robust in plane but
bend easily. This plane can be rolled into tubular structures to guarantee
stiffness. Molecular building blocks with four, five, six, and twelve linkage
groups form strong, stiff, and robust three-dimensional structures needed to
synthesize robust nano- and microstructures.
Molecular building blocks with L linkage groups are paired forming L-
pair structures, and planar and non-planar (three-dimensional) nano- and
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

microstructures result. These MBB can have in-plane linkage groups and out-
of-plane linkage groups which are normal to the plane. For example,
hexagonal sheets are formed using three in-plane linkage groups (MBB is a
single carbon atom in a sheet of graphite) with adjacent sheets formed using
two out-of-plane linkage groups. It is evident that this structure has
hexagonal symmetry.
Molecular building blocks with six linkage groups can be connected
together in the cubic structure. These six linkage groups corresponding to six
sides of the cube or rhomb. Thus, MBB with six linkage groups form solid
three-dimensional structures as cubes or rhomboids. It should be emphasized
that buckyballs (C60), which can be used as MMB, are formed with six
functional groups. Molecular building blocks with six in-plane linkage
groups form strong planar structures. Robust, strong, and stiff cubic or
hexagonal closed-packed crystal structures are formed using twelve linkage
groups. Molecular building blocks synthesized and applied should guarantee
the desirable performance characteristics (stiffness, strength, robustness,
resistivity, permiability, permittivity, et cetera) as well as manufacturability.
It is evident that stiffness, strength, and robustness are predetermined by
bonds (weak and strong), while resistivity, permiability and permittivity are
the functions of MBB compounds and media.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

2.2. ELECTROMAGNETICS  AND  ITS  APPLICATION  FOR  NANO-
AND  MICROSCALE  ELECTROMECHANICAL  MOTION DEVICES
To study NEMS and MEMS actuators and sensors, smart structures, ICs
and antennas, one applies the electromagnetic field theory. Electric force holds
atoms and molecules together. Electromagnetics plays a central role in
molecular biology. For example, two DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) chains
wrap about one another in the shape of a double helix. These two strands are
held together by electrostatic forces. Electric force is responsible for energy-
transforming processes in all living organisms (metabolism). Electromagnetism
is used to study protein synthesis and structure, nervous system, etc.
Electrostatic interaction was investigated by Charles Coulomb.
For charges q1 and  q2, separated by a distance x in free space, the
magnitude of the electric force is
F
q q
x
=
1
2
0
2
4πε
,
where ε0  is the permittivity of free space, ε0  = 8.85×10−12 F/m or C2/N-m2,
1
4
9
10
0
9
πε =
×
 N-m2/C.
The unit for the force is the newton N, while the charges are given in
coulombs, C.
The force is the vector, and we have
r
r
F
q q
x
ax
=
1
2
0
2
4πε
,
where rax  is the unit vector which is directed along the line joining these two
charges.
The capacity, elegance and uniformity of electromagnetics arise from a
sequence of fundamental laws linked one to other and needed to study the field
quantities.
Using the Gauss law and denoting the vector of electric flux density as 
r
D
[F/m] and the vector of electric field intensity as 
r
E  [V/m or N/C], the total
electric flux Φ  [C] through a closed surface is found to be equal to the total
force charge enclosed by the surface. That is, one finds
Φ =
⋅
=
∫
r
r
D ds
Qs
s
, 
r
r
D
E
= ε
,
where dsr  is the vector surface area, ds
dsan
r
r
=
, ran  is the unit vector which is
normal to the surface; ε  is the permittivity of the medium; Qs  is the total
charge enclosed by the surface.
Ohm’s law relates the volume charge density 
r
J  and electric field
intensity 
r
E ; in particular,
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

r
r
J
E
= σ
,
where σ  is the conductivity [A/V-m], for copper σ =
×
58
107
.
, and for
aluminum σ =
×
35
107
.
.
 
The current i is proportional to the potential difference, and the resistivity
ρ  of the conductor is the ratio between the electric field 
r
E  and the current
density 
r
J . Thus,
ρ =
r
rE
J
.
The resistance r of the conductor is related to the resistivity and
conductivity by the following formulas
r
l
A
= ρ  and r
l
A
= σ
,
where l is the length; A is the cross-sectional area.
It is important to emphasize that the parameters of NEMS and MEMS
vary. Let us illustrate this using the simplest nano-structure used in NEMS and
MEMS. In particular, the molecular wire. The resistances of the ware vary due
to heating. The resistivity depends on temperature T [oC], and
(
)
(
)
[
]
ρ
ρ
α
α
ρ
ρ
( )
...
T
T
T
T
T
=
+
−
+
−
+
0
1
0
2
0
2
1
,
where αρ1 and αρ2  are the coefficients.
As an example, over the small temperature range (up to 160oC) for copper
(the wire is filled with copper)  at T0 = 20oC, we have
(
)
[
]
ρ( )
.
.
T
T
=
×
+
−
−
17
10
1
0 0039
20
8
.
To study NEMS and MEMS, the basic principles of electromagnetic
theory should be briefly reviewed.
The total magnetic flux through the surface is given by
Φ =
⋅
∫
r
r
B ds ,
where 
r
B  is the magnetic flux density.
The Ampere circuital law is
r
r
r
r
B dl
J ds
l
s
⋅
=
⋅
∫
∫
µ0
,
where µo is the permeability of free space, µo = 4π×10−7 H/m or T-m/A.
For the filamentary current, Ampere’s law connects the magnetic flux with
the algebraic sum of the enclosed (linked) currents (net current) in, and
r
r
B dl
i
l
o n
⋅
=
∫
µ
.
The time-varying magnetic field produces the electromotive force (emf),
denoted as  , which induces the current in the closed circuit. Faraday’s law
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

relates the emf, which is merely the induced voltage due to conductor motion in
the magnetic field, to the rate of change of the magnetic flux Φ  penetrating in
the loop. In approaching the analysis of electromechanical energy
transformation in NEMS and MEMS, Lenz’s law should be used to find the
direction of emf and the current induced. In particular, the emf is in such a
direction as to produce a current whose flux, if added to the original flux, would
reduce the magnitude of the emf. According to Faraday’s law, the induced emf
in a closed-loop circuit is defined in terms of the rate of change of the magnetic
flux Φ  as
       
=
⋅
= −
⋅
= −
= −
∫
∫
r
r
r
r
E t
dl
d
dt
B t
ds
N d
dt
d
dt
l
s
( )
( )
Φ
ψ ,
where N is the number of turns; ψ  denotes the flux linkages.
This formula represents the Faraday law of induction, and the induced emf
(induced voltage), as given by
        = −
= −
d
dt
N d
dt
ψ
Φ ,
is a particular interest
The current flows in an opposite direction to the flux linkages. The
electromotive force (energy-per-unit-charge quantity) represents a magnitude
of the potential difference V in a circuit carrying a current. One obtains,
V = − ir +      = −
−
ir
d
dt
ψ .
The unit for the emf is volts.
The Kirchhoff voltage law states that around a closed path in an electric
circuit, the algebraic sum of the emf is equal to the algebraic sum of the voltage
drop across the resistance.
Another formulation is: the algebraic sum of the voltages around any
closed path in a circuit is zero.
The Kirchhoff current law states that the algebraic sum of the currents at
any node in a circuit is zero.
The magnetomotive force (mmf) is the line integral of the time-varying
magnetic field intensity 
r
H t( ) ; that is,
mmf
H t
dl
l
=
⋅
∫
r
r
( )
.
One concludes that the induced mmf is the sum of the induced current and
the rate of change of the flux penetrating the surface bounded by the contour.
To show that, we apply Stoke’s theorem to find the integral form of Ampere’s
law (second Maxwell’s equation), as given by
∫
∫
∫
+
⋅
=
⋅
s
s
l
s
d
dt
t
D
d
s
d
t
J
ld
t
H
r
r
r
r
r
r
)
(
)
(
)
(
,
where 
r
J t( )  is the time-varying current density vector.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

The unit for the magnetomotive force is amperes or ampere-turns
The duality of the emf and mmf can be observed using
       . =
⋅
∫
r
r
E t
dl
l
( )
 and mmf
H t
dl
l
=
⋅
∫
r
r
( )
.
The inductance (the ratio of the total flux linkages to the current which
they link, L
N
i
=
Φ ) and reluctance (the ratio of the mmf to the total flux,
ℜ= mmf
Φ
) are used to find emf and mmf.
Using the following equation for the self-inductance L
i
= ψ , we have
       = −
= −
= −
−
d
dt
d Li
dt
L di
dt
i dL
dt
ψ
(
)
.
If L = const, one obtains
       = −L di
dt
.
That is, the self-inductance is the magnitude of the self-induced emf per
unit rate of change of current.
Example 2.2.1.
Find the self-inductances of a nano-solenoid with air-core and filled-core
(
o
µ
µ
100
=
). The solenoid has 100 turns (N = 100), the length is 20 nm (l=20
nm), and the uniform circular cross-sectional area is 
18
10
5
−
×
 m2
(
18
10
5
−
×
=
A
 m2).
Solution. The magnetic field inside a solenoid is given by B
Ni
l
= µ0
.
By using       = −
= −
N d
dt
L di
dt
Φ
 and applying Φ =
=
BA
NiA
l
µ0
,
one obtains
L
N A
l
= µ0
2
.
Then, L = 3.14×10−12 H.
If solenoid is filled with a magnetic material, we have
L
N A
l
= µ
2
, and L = 3.14×10−9 H.
Example 2.2.2.
Derive a formula for the self-inductance of a torroidal solenoid which has a
rectangular cross section (2a × b) and mean radius r.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Solution. The magnetic flux through a cross section is found as
Φ =
=
=
=
+
−




−
+
−
+
−
+
∫
∫
∫
Bbdr
Ni
r bdr
Nib
r dr
Nib
r
a
r
a
r a
r a
r a
r a
r a
r a
µ
π
µ
π
µ
π
2
2
1
2
ln
.  
Hence, 
L
N
i
N b
r
a
r
a
=
=
+
−




Φ
µ
π
2
2
ln
.
By studying the electromagnetic torque 
r
T  [N-m] in a current loop, one
obtains the following equation
r
r
r
T
M
B
=
×
,
where 
r
M  denotes the magnetic moment.
Let us examine the torque-energy relations in nano- and microscale
actuators. Our goal is to study the magnetic field energy. It is known that the
energy stored in the capacitor is 1
2
2
CV
, while energy stored in the inductor is
1
2
2
Li .  Observe that the energy in the capacitor is stored in the electric field
between plates, while the energy in the inductor is stored in the magnetic field
within the coils.
Let us find the expressions for energies stored in electrostatic and magnetic
fields in terms of field quantities. The total potential energy stored in the
electrostatic field is found using the potential difference V, and we have
W
Vdv
e
v
v
= ∫
1
2
ρ
 [J],
where ρv  is the volume charge density [C/m3], ρv
D
= ∇⋅
r
r
, 
r
∇ is the curl
operator.
This expression for We  is interpreted in the following way. The potential
energy should be found using the amount of work which is required to
position the charge in the electrostatic field. In particular, the work is found
as the product of the charge and the potential. Considering the region with a
continuous charge distribution ( ρv
const
=
), each charge is replaced by
ρvdv , and hence the equation W
Vdv
e
v
v
= ∫
1
2
ρ
 results.
In the Gauss form, using ρv
D
= ∇⋅
r
r
 and making use 
r
r
E
V
= −∇
, one
obtains the following expression for the energy stored in the electrostatic
field
W
D Edv
e
v
=
⋅
∫
1
2
r
r
,
and the electrostatic volume energy density is 1
2
r
r
D E
⋅
 [J/m3].
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

For a linear isotropic medium W
E dv
D dv
e
v
v
=
=
∫
∫
1
2
2
1
2
2
1
ε
ε
r
r
.
The electric field 
r
E x y z
( , , )  is found using the scalar electrostatic
potential function V x y z
( , , )  as
r
r
E x y z
V x y z
( , , )
( , , )
= −∇
.
In the cylindrical and spherical coordinate systems, we have
r
r
E r
z
V r
z
( , , )
( , , )
φ
φ
= −∇
 and 
r
r
E r
V r
( , , )
( , , )
θ φ
θ φ
= −∇
.
Using W
Vdv
e
v
v
= ∫
1
2
ρ
, the potential energy which is stored in the
electric field between two surfaces (for example, in capacitor) is found to be
W
QV
CV
e =
=
1
2
1
2
2 .
Using the principle of virtual work, for the lossless conservative system,
the differential change of the electrostatic energy dWe  is equal to the
differential change of mechanical energy dWmec ; that is
dW
dW
e
mec
=
.
For translational motion
dW
F
dl
mec
e
=
⋅
r
r
,
where dl
r
 is the differential displacement.
One obtains dW
W
dl
e
e
= ∇
⋅
r
r
.
Hence, the force is the gradient of the stored electrostatic energy,
r
r
F
W
e
e
= ∇
.
In the Cartesian coordinates, we have
F
W
x
F
W
y
ex
e
ey
e
=
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
,
 and F
W
z
ez
e
= ∂
∂
.
Example 2.2.3.
Consider the capacitor (the plates have area A and they are separated by x),
which is charged to a voltage V. The permittivity of the dielectric is ε . Find the
stored electrostatic energy and the force Fex  in the x direction.
Solution. Neglecting the fringing effect at the edges, one concludes that
the electric field is uniform, and E
V
x
=
. Therefore, we have
  W
E dv
V
x
dv
V
x
Ax
A
x
V
C x V
e
v
v
=
=




=
=
=
∫
∫
1
2
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
ε
ε
ε
ε
r
( )
.
Thus, the force is
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

(
)
F
W
x
C x V
x
V
C x
x
ex
e
=
=
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
1
2
2
1
2
2
( )
( )
To find the stored energy in the magnetostatic field in terms of field
quantities, the following formula is used
W
B Hdv
m
v
=
⋅
∫
1
2
r
r
.
The magnetic volume energy density is 1
2
r
r
B H
⋅
 [J/m3].
Using 
r
r
B
H
= µ
, one obtains two alternative formulas
W
H dv
B
dv
m
v
v
=
=
∫
∫
1
2
2
1
2
2
µ
µ
r
r
.
To show how the energy concept studied is applied to electromechanical
devices, we find the energy stored in inductors. To approach this problem,
we substitute 
r
r
r
B
A
= ∇×
, and using the following vector identity
(
)
r r
r
r
r
r
r r
r
H
A
A
H
A
H
⋅∇×
= ∇⋅
×
+
⋅∇×
, one obtains
 
(
)
(
)
.
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
∫
∫
∫
∫
∫
∫
⋅
=
⋅
+
⋅
×
=
×
∇
⋅
+
×
⋅
∇
=
⋅
=
v
v
s
v
v
v
m
dv
J
A
dv
J
A
s
d
H
A
dv
H
A
dv
H
A
dv
H
B
W
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
Using the general expression for the vector magnetic potential 
( )
r r
A r
[Wb/m], as given by
( )
( )
r r
r r
A r
J r
x
dv
A
J
vA
=
∫
µ
π
0
4
, 
r
r
∇⋅
=
A
0,
we have
( )
( )
W
J r
J r
x
dv dv
m
A
J
v
v
J
=
⋅
∫∫
µ
π
8
r r
r r
.
Here, vJ  is the volume of the medium where 
r
J  exists.
The general formula for the self-inductance i
j
=
 and the mutual
inductance i
j
≠
 of loops i and j is
L
N
i
i
ij
i
ij
j
ij
j
=
=
Φ
ψ
,
where ψ ij  is the flux linkage through ith coil due to the current in jth coil; i j  is
the current in jth coil.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

The Neumann formula is applied to find the mutual inductance. We have,
L
L
dl
dl
x
i
j
ij
ji
j
i
ij
l
l
j
i
=
=
⋅
≠
∫∫
µ
π
4
r
r
,
.
Then, using 
( )
( )
W
J r
J r
x
dv dv
m
A
J
v
v
J
=
⋅
∫∫
µ
π
8
r r
r r
, one obtains
W
i dl
i dl
x
m
j
j
i
i
ij
l
l
j
i
=
⋅
∫∫
µ
π
8
r
r
.
Hence, the energy stored in the magnetic field is found to be
W
i L i
m
i
ij j
= 1
2
.
As an example, the energy, stored in the inductor is W
Li
m = 1
2
2 .
The differential change in the stored magnetic energy should be found.
Using
dW
dt
L i di
dt
L i di
dt
i i dL
dt
m
ij j
i
ij i
j
i j
ij
=
+
+








1
2
,
we have dW
L i di
L i di
i i dL
m
ij j
i
ij i
j
i j
ij
=
+
+




1
2
.
For translational motion, the differential change in the mechanical energy
is expressed by
dW
F
dl
mec
m
=
⋅
r
r
.
Assuming that the system is conservative (for lossless systems
dW
dW
mec
m
=
), in the rectangular coordinate system we obtain the following
equation
dW
W
x dx
W
y dy
W
z dz
W
dl
m
m
m
m
m
=
+
+
= ∇
⋅
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
r
r
.
Hence, the force is the gradient of the stored magnetic energy, and
r
r
F
W
m
m
= ∇
.
In the XYZ coordinate system for the translational motion, we have
F
W
x
F
W
y
mx
m
my
m
=
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
,
 and F
W
z
mz
m
= ∂
∂
.
For the rotational motion, the torque should be used. Using the differential
change in the mechanical energy as a function of the angular displacement θ ,
the following formula results if the rigid body (nano- or microactuator) is
constrained to rotate about the z-axis
dW
T d
mec
e
=
θ ,
where Te  is the z-component of the electromagnetic torque.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Assuming that the system is lossless, one obtains the following expression
for the electromagnetic torque
T
W
e
m
= ∂
∂θ
.
Example 2.2.4.
Calculate the magnetic energy of the torroidal microsolenoid if the
self-inductance is 1×10−10 H (L=2×10−10 H) when the current is 0.001 A
(i=0.001 A).
Solution. The stored field energy is W
Li
m = 1
2
2 ,
therefore
13
10
2
1
10
1
001
.0
10
2
−
−
×
=
×
×
=
m
W
J. 
    
Example 2.2.5.
Calculate the force developed by the microelectromagnet with the cross-
sectional area A if the current ia(t) in and N coils produces the constant flux
m
Φ , see Figure 2.2.1.
)
(t
x
)
(t
i
Magnetic force Fmx
,
Φm
N
Spring ks
,
Figure 2.2.1.  Microelectromagnet
Solution.
From W
H dv
B
dv
m
v
v
=
=
∫
∫
1
2
2
1
2
2
µ
µ
r
r
, for the virtual displacement dy,
assuming that the flux is constant and taking into the account the fact that the
displacement changes only the magnetic energy stored in the air gaps, we
have
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

dy
A
Ady
B
dW
dW
m
gap
air
m
m
0
2
0
2
2
2
µ
µ
Φ
=
=
=
.
Thus, if 
m
Φ
=const, one concludes that the increase of the air gap (dy)
leads to increase of the stored magnetic energy, and from 
x
W
F
m
mx
∂
∂
=
 one
finds the expression for the force
A
a
F
m
y
mx
0
2
µ
Φ
−
=
r
r
.
The result indicates that the force tends to reduce the air-gap length, and
the movable member is attached to the spring which develops the force which
opposite to the electromagnetic force.
In nano- and microscale electromechanical motion devices, the coupling
(magnetic interaction) between windings that are carrying currents is
represented by their mutual inductances. In fact, the current in each winding
causes the magnetic field in other windings. The mutually induced emf is
characterized by the mutual inductance which is a function of the position x or
the angular displacement θ . By applying the expression for the coenergy
[
]
W i L x
c , ( )  or 
( )
[
]
W i L
c ,
θ
, the developed electromagnetic torque can be
easily found. In particular,
T i x
W i L x
x
e
c
( , )
[ , ( )]
= ∂
∂
 and T i x
W i L
e
c
( , )
[ , ( )]
= ∂
θ
∂θ
.
Example 2.2.6.
Consider the microelectromagnet which has N turns, see Figure 2.2.2.
The distance between the stationary and movable members is denoted as
x t( ) . The mean lengths of the stationary and movable members are l1 and
l2 , and the cross-sectional area is A. Neglecting the leakage flux, find the
force exerted on the movable member if the time-varying current i
t
a ( )  is
supplied. The permeabilities of stationary and movable members are µ1 and
µ2 .
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

x t( )
i
t
a( )
Spring ks
,
Magnetic force Fmx
,
Φm
l2
l1
N
µ1
µ2
Figure 2.2.2. Schematic of an electromagnet
Solution.
The magnetostatic force is
F
W
x
mx
m
= ∂
∂
,
where W
Li
t
m
a
= 1
2
2( ) .
The magnetizing inductance should be calculated, and we have
L
N
i
t
i
t
a
a
=
=
Φ
( )
( )
ψ
,
where the magnetic flux is Φ = ℜ+ ℜ+ ℜ+ ℜ
Ni
t
a
x
x
( )
1
2
.
The reluctances of the ferromagnetic materials of stationary and movable
members ℜ1  and ℜ2 , as well as the reluctance of the air gap ℜx , are
found as
ℜ=
1
1
0
1
l
A
µ µ
, ℜ=
2
2
0
2
l
A
µ µ
 and ℜ=
x
x t
A
( )
µ0
and the circuit analog with the reluctances of the various paths is illustrated
in Figure 2.2.3.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Ni
t
a( )
ℜ1
ℜx
ℜ2
ℜx
Figure 2.2.3. Circuit analog
By making use the reluctances in the movable and stationary members
and air gap, one obtains the following formula for the flux linkages
ψ
µ µ
µ
µ µ
=
=
+
+
N
N i
t
l
A
x t
A
l
A
a
Φ
2
1
0
1
0
2
0
2
2
( )
( )
,
and the magnetizing inductance is a nonlinear function of the displacement. We
have
L x
N
l
A
x t
A
l
A
N
A
l
x t
l
( )
( )
( )
=
+
+
=
+
+
2
1
0
1
0
2
0
2
2
0
1
2
2 1
1
2
1 2
2
2
µ µ
µ
µ µ
µ µ µ
µ
µ µ
µ
.
Using 
(
)
(
)
F
W
x
L x t i
t
x
mx
m
a
=
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
1
2
2
( )
( )
, the force in the x direction is
found to be
F
N
Ai
l
x t
l
mx
a
= −
+
+
2
0
1
2
2
2
2
2 1
1
2
1 2
2
µ µ µ
µ
µ µ
µ
( )
.
It should be emphasized that as differential equations must be developed
to model the microelectromagnet studied. Using Newton’s second law of
motion, one obtains
dx
dt
v
=
,
dv
dt
m
N
Ai
l
x t
l
k x
a
s
=
−
+
+
−






1
2
2
0
1
2
2
2
2
2 1
1
2
1 2
2
µ µ µ
µ
µ µ
µ
( )
.
Example 2.2.7.
Two micro-coils have mutual inductance 0.00005 H (L12=0.00005 H). The
current in the first coil is i
t
1
4
=
sin
. Find the induced emf in the second
coil.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Solution.
The induced emf is given as     2  = L
di
dt
12
1 .
By using the power rule for the time-varying current in the first coil
i
t
1
4
=
sin
, we have
di
dt
t
t
1
2
4
4
=
cos
sin
.
Hence,     2    
t
t
4
sin
4
cos
0001
.0
=
.
Basic  Foundations  in  Model  Developments  of  Nano-  and 
Microactuators  in  Electromagnetic  Fields
Electromagnetic theory and mechanics form the basis for the
development of NEMS and MEMS models.
The electrostatic and magnetostatic equations in linear isotropic media
are found using the vectors of the electric field intensity E
r
, electric flux
density D
r
, magnetic field intensity H
r
, and magnetic flux density B
r
. In
addition, one uses the constitutive equations
E
D
r
r
ε
=
 and 
H
B
r
r
µ
=
where ε  is the permittivity; µ  is the permiability.
The basic equations are given in the Table 1.
Table 2.2.1.
Fundamental Equations of Electrostatic and Magnetostatic Fields
Electrostatic Model
Magnetostatic Model
Governing
equations
0
)
,
,
,
(
=
×
∇
t
z
y
x
E
r
ε
ρ
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
E
v
=
⋅
∇
r
0
)
,
,
,
(
=
×
∇
t
z
y
x
H
r
0
)
,
,
,
(
=
⋅
∇
t
z
y
x
H
r
Constitutive
equations
E
D
r
r
ε
=
H
B
r
r
µ
=
In the static (time-invariant) fields, electric and magnetic field vectors
form separate and independent pairs. That is, E
r
 and D
r
 are not related to H
r
and B
r
, and vice versa. However, in reality, the electric and magnetic fields are
time-varying, and the changes of magnetic field influence the electric field, and
vice versa.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

The partial differential equations are found by using Maxwell’s
equations. In particular, four Maxwell's equations in the differential form for
time-varying fields are
t
t
z
y
x
H
t
z
y
x
E
∂
∂
µ
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
r
r
−
=
×
∇
,
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
t
z
y
x
J
t
t
z
y
x
E
t
z
y
x
E
t
z
y
x
H
r
r
r
r
+
+
=
×
∇
∂
∂
ε
σ
,
ε
ρ
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
E
v
=
⋅
∇
r
,
0
)
,
,
,
(
=
⋅
∇
t
z
y
x
H
r
,
where E
r
 is the electric field intensity, and using the permittivity ε , the
electric flux density is 
E
D
r
r
ε
=
; H
r
 is the magnetic field intensity, and using
the permeability µ , the magnetic flux density is 
H
B
r
r
µ
=
; J
r
 is the current
density, and using the conductivity σ , we have 
E
J
r
r
σ
=
; 
v
ρ  is the volume
charge density, and the total electric flux through a closed surface is
Q
dv
s
d
D
v
v
s
=
=
⋅
=
Φ
∫
∫
ρ
r
r
 (Gauss’s law), while the magnetic flux crossing
surface is 
∫
⋅
=
Φ
s
s
d
B
r
r
.
The electromotive and magnetomotive forces are found as
(
)
induction
r 
transforme
n)
(generatio
induction 
 
motional
∫
∫
∫
∂
∂
−
⋅
×
=
⋅
=
s
l
l
s
d
t
B
ld
B
v
ld
E
emf
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
and
∫
∫
∫
∂
∂
+
⋅
=
⋅
=
s
s
l
s
d
t
D
s
d
J
ld
H
mmf
r
r
r
r
r
r
.
The motional emf is a function of the velocity and the magnetic flux
density, while the electromotive force induced in a stationary closed circuit is
equal to the negative rate of increase of the magnetic flux (transformer
induction).
We introduce the vector magnetic potential which is denoted as A
r
 .
Using the equation 
A
B
r
r
×
∇
=
, one finds the following nonhomogeneous
vector wave equation
J
t
A
A
r
r
r
µ
µε
−
=
∂
∂
−
×
∇
2
2
2
and the solution gives the waves traveling with the velocity 
µε
1
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

To develop mathematical models, consider the rotational motion of the
bar magnet, current loop, and solenoid in a uniform magnetic field as
illustrated in Figure 2.2.4.
Figure 2.2.4.  Clockwise rotation of a magnetic bar, current loop, and
solenoid
The torque tends to align the magnetic moment mr  with B
r
, and
B
m
T
r
r
r
×
=
.
For a magnetic bar with the length l, the pole strength is Q.
The magnetic moment is 
Ql
m =
, and the force is found as 
QB
F =
.
The electromagnetic torque is found to be
α
α
α
sin
sin
sin
2
2
1
mB
QlB
l
F
T
=
=
=
.
Using the vectors, one obtains
B
a
Ql
B
m
a
B
m
T
m
m
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
 ×
=
×
=
×
=
,
            (2.2.1)
where 
m
ar  is the unit vector in the magnetic moment direction.
For a current loop with the area A, the torque is found as
B
a
iA
B
m
a
B
m
T
m
m
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
 ×
=
×
=
×
=
.
            (2.2.2)
For a solenoid with N turns, one obtains
B
a
iAN
B
m
a
B
m
T
m
m
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
 ×
=
×
=
×
=
.
            (2.2.3)
The straightforward application of Newton’s second law for the
rotational motion gives
dt
d
J
T
r
ω
=
Σ
∑
r
,
            (2.2.4)
where 
Σ
∑T
r
 is the net torque; 
r
ω  is the angular velocity; J is the
equivalent moment of inertia\.
The transient evolution of the angular displacement 
r
θ  is modeled as
r
r
dt
d
ω
θ =
.
            (2.2.5)
α
m
a
m
m
r
r =
r
ω
α
sin
F
α
sin
F
H
B
r
r
µ
=
B
m
T
r
r
r
×
=
m
ar
α
m
a
m
m
r
r =
r
ω
α
sin
F
α
sin
F
H
B
r
r
µ
=
B
m
T
r
r
r
×
=
m
ar
α
m
a
m
m
r
r =
r
ω
α
sin
F
α
sin
F
B
m
T
v
r
r
×
=
m
ar
i
A
H
B
r
r
µ
=
i
i
Q
+
+
Q
−
−
l
N
A
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Augmenting equations (2.2.1), (2.2.2) or (2.2.3) with (2.2.4) and (2.2.5),
the mathematical model of nano and micro rotational actuators results.
The energy is stored in the magnetic field, and media are classified as
diamagnetic, 
paramagnetic, 
ferromagnetic, 
antiferromagnetic, 
and
superparamagnetic. Using the magnetic susceptibility 
m
χ
, the magnetization
is expressed as
H
M
m
r
r
χ
=
.
Magnetization curves should be studied, and the permeability is 
H
B
=
µ
.
The magnetic field density B lags behind the magnetic flux intensity H, and
this phenomenon is called hysterisis. Thus, the B-H magnetization curves must
be studied.
The per-unit volume magnetic energy stored is ∫
B
HdB. The density of the
energy stored in the magnetic field is 
H
B
r
r
⋅
2
1
. If B is linearly related to H, we
have the expression for the total energy stored in the magnetic field as
∫
⋅
v
dv
H
B
r
r
2
1
.
For translational motion, Newton’s second law states that the net force
acting on the object is related to its acceleration as 
r
r
F
ma
=
∑
. In the XYZ
coordinate system, one obtains
F
ma
x
x
=
∑
, 
F
ma
y
y
=
∑
 and 
F
ma
z
z
=
∑
.
The force is the gradient of the stored magnetic energy; that is,
r
r
F
W
m
m
= ∇
.
Hence, in the xyz directions, we have
F
W
x
F
W
y
mx
m
my
m
=
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
,
 and F
W
z
mz
m
= ∂
∂
,
where the stored magnetic energy is found using the volume current density
r
J
( )
( )
W
J r
J r
R
dv dv
m
A
A
v
v
A
=
⋅
∫∫
µ
π
8
r r
r r
.
Applying the field quantities, we have
∫
∫
⋅
=
⋅
=
v
v
m
dv
H
B
dv
J
A
W
r
r
r
r
2
1
2
1
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

The magnetic energy density is
H
B
J
A
wm
r
r
r
r
⋅
=
⋅
=
2
1
2
1
.
Using Newton’s second law and the stored magnetic energy, we have
nine highly coupled nonlinear differential equations for the xyz translational
motion of microactuator. In particular,
(
)
H
x
v
F
f
dt
dF
xyz
xyz
xyz
F
xyz
,
,
,
=
,
(
)
Lxyz
xyz
xyz
xyz
v
xyz
F
x
v
F
f
dt
dv
,
,
,
=
,
(
)
xyz
xyz
x
xyz
x
v
f
dt
dx
,
=
,
            (2.2.6)
where Fxyz  are the forces developed; vxyz  and xxyz  are the linear velocities
and positions; FLxyz  are the load forces.
The expressions for energies stored in electrostatic and magnetic fields in
terms of field quantities should be derived. The total potential energy stored in
the electrostatic field is obtained using the potential difference V as
W
Vdv
e
v
v
= ∫
1
2
ρ
, where the volume charge density is found as ρv
D
= ∇⋅
r
r
,
r
∇ is the curl operator.
In the Gauss form, using ρv
D
= ∇⋅
r
r
 and making use of
r
r
E
V
= −∇
, one
obtains the following expression for the energy stored in the electrostatic
field W
D Edv
e
v
=
⋅
∫
1
2
r
r
, and the electrostatic volume energy density
is 1
2
r
r
D E
⋅
. 
For 
a 
linear 
isotropic 
medium, 
one 
finds
W
E dv
D dv
e
v
v
=
=
∫
∫
1
2
2
1
2
2
1
ε
ε
r
r
.
The electric field 
r
E x y z
( , , )  is found using the scalar electrostatic
potential function V x y z
( , , )  as
r
r
E x y z
V x y z
( , , )
( , , )
= −∇
.
In the cylindrical and spherical coordinate systems, we have
r
r
E r
z
V r
z
( , , )
( , , )
φ
φ
= −∇
 and 
r
r
E r
V r
( , , )
( , , )
θ φ
θ φ
= −∇
.
Using the principle of virtual work, for the lossless conservative nano-
and microelectromechanical systems, the differential change of the
electrostatic energy dWe  is equal to the differential change of mechanical
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

energy dWmec , dW
dW
e
mec
=
. For translational motion dW
F
dl
mec
e
=
⋅
r
r
,
where dl
r
 is the differential displacement.
One obtains dW
W
dl
e
e
= ∇
⋅
r
r
.
Hence, the force is the gradient of the stored electrostatic energy,
r
r
F
W
e
e
= ∇
.
In the Cartesian coordinates, we have
F
W
x
F
W
y
ex
e
ey
e
=
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
,
 and F
W
z
ez
e
= ∂
∂
. 
Energy 
conversion 
takes 
place 
in 
nano- 
and 
microscale
electromechanical motion devices (actuators and sensors, smart structures),
antennas and ICs. We study electromechanical motion devices that convert
electrical energy (more precisely electromagnetic energy) to mechanical
energy and vise versa (conversion of mechanical energy to electromagnetic
energy). Fundamental principles of energy conversion, applicable to nano
and micro electromechanical motion devices were studied to provide basic
foundations. Using the principle of conservation of energy we can formulate:
for a lossless nano- and microelectromechanical motion devices (in the
conservative system no energy is lost through friction, heat, or other
irreversible energy conversion) the sum of the instantaneous kinetic and
potential energies of the system remains constant.
The energy conversion is represented in Figure 2.2.5.
Input
Electrical Energy
:
Output
Mechanical Energy
:
Coupling Electromagnetic Field
Transfered Energy
:
Irreversible Energy Conversion
Energy Losses
:
=
+
+
Figure 2.2.5. Energy transfer in nano and micro electromechanical systems
The total energy stored in the magnetic field is found as
W
B Hdv
m
v
=
⋅
∫
1
2
r
r
,
where 
r
B  and 
r
H  are related using the permeability µ , 
r
r
B
H
= µ
.
The material becomes magnetized in response to the external field 
r
H ,
and the dimensionless magnetic susceptibility χm  or relative permeability
µr  are used.  We have,
(
)
r
r
r
r
r
B
H
H
H
H
m
r
=
=
+
=
=
µ
µ
χ
µ µ
µ
0
0
1
.
Based upon the value of the magnetic susceptibility χm , the materials
are classified as
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

• 
diamagnetic, 
χm ≈−×
−
1 10 5  
( χm = −
×
−
9 5
10 6
.
 
for 
copper,
χm = −
×
−
32
10 5
.
 for gold, and χm = −
×
−
2 6
10 5
.
 for silver);
• 
paramagnetic, 
χm ≈×
−
1 10 4  ( χm =
×
−
14
10 3
.
 for Fe2O3, and
χm =
×
−
17
10 3
.
 for Cr2O3);
• 
ferromagnetic, χm >> 1 (iron, nickel and cobalt, Neodymium Iron
Boron and Samarium Cobalt permanent magnets) .
The magnetization behavior of the ferromagnetic materials is mapped by
the magnetization curve, where H is the externally applied magnetic field,
and B is total magnetic flux density in the medium. Typical B-H curves for
hard and soft ferromagnetic materials are given in Figure 2.2.6, respectively.
B
H
Bmax
Hmin
Hmax
Bmin
Br
−Br
B
H
Bmax
Hmin
Hmax
Bmin
Br
−Br
0
0
Figure 2.2.6. B-H curves for hard and soft ferromagnetic materials
The B versus H curve allows one to establish the energy analysis.
Assume that initially B0
0
=
 and H0
0
=
. Let H increases form H0
0
=
 to
Hmax . Then, B increases from B0
0
=
 until the maximum value of B,
denoted as Bmax , is reached. If then H decreases to Hmin , B decreases to
Bmin  through the remanent value Br  (the so-called the residual magnetic
flux density) along the different curve, see Figure 2.18. For variations of H,
[
]
H
H
H
∈
min
max , 
B 
changes 
within 
the 
hysteresis 
loop, 
and
[
]
B
B
B
∈
min
max .
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

In the per-unit volume, the applied field energy is W
HdB
F
B
= ∫
, while
the stored energy is expressed as W
BdH
c
H
= ∫
.
In the volume v, we have the following expressions for the field and
stored energy
W
v HdB
F
B
= ∫
 and W
v BdH
c
H
= ∫
.
A complete B versus H loop should be considered, and the equations for
field and stored energy represent the areas enclosed by the corresponding
curve. It should be emphasized that each point of the B versus H curve
represent the total energy.
In ferromagnetic materials, time-varying magnetic flux produces core
losses which consist of hysteresis losses (due to the hysteresis loop of the B-
H curve) and the eddy-current losses, which are proportional to the current
frequency and lamination thickness. The area of the hysteresis loop is related
to the hysteresis losses. Soft ferromagnetic materials have narrow hysteresis
loop and they are easily magnetized and demagnetized. Therefore, the lower
hysteresis losses, compared with hard ferromagnetic materials, result.
For electromechanical motion devices, the flux linkages are plotted versus
the current because the current and flux linkages are used rather than the flux
intensity and flux density. In nano- and microectromechanical motion devices
almost all energy is stored in the air gap. Using the fact that the air is a
conservative medium, one concludes that the coupling filed is lossless.
Figure 2.2.7 illustrates the nonlinear magnetizing characteristic (normal
magnetization curve), and the energy stored in the magnetic field is
W
id
F = ∫
ψ
ψ
, while the coenergy is found as W
di
c
i
= ∫ψ
.The total energy is
W
W
id
di
i
F
c
i
+
=
+
=
∫
∫
ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
.
0
i
ψ
W
di
c
i
= ∫ψ
W
id
F = ∫
ψ
ψ
dψ
di
imax
ψ max
Figure 2.2.7. Magnetization curve and energies
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

The flux linkages is the function of the current i and position x (for
translational motion) or angular displacement θ  (for rotational motion). That
is, ψ = f i x
( , )  or ψ
θ
= f i( , ) . The current can be found as the nonlinear
function of the flux linkages and position or angular displacement. Hence, 
d
i x
i
di
i x
x
dx
ψ
∂ψ
∂
∂ψ
∂
=
+
( , )
( , )
, d
i
i
di
i
d
ψ
∂ψ
θ
∂
∂ψ
θ
∂θ
θ
=
+
( , )
( , )
,
and di
i
x d
i
x
x
dx
=
+
∂ψ
∂ψ
ψ
∂ψ
∂
( , )
( , )
,  di
i
d
i
d
=
+
∂ψ θ
∂ψ
ψ
∂ψ θ
∂θ
θ
(
, )
(
, )
.
Therefore,
W
id
i
i x
i
di
i
i x
x
dx
F
i
x
=
=
+
∫
∫
∫
ψ
∂ψ
∂
∂ψ
∂
ψ
( , )
( , )
,
W
id
i
i
i
di
i
i
d
F
i
=
=
+
∫
∫
∫
ψ
∂ψ
θ
∂
∂ψ
θ
∂θ
θ
ψ
θ
( , )
( , )
,
and W
di
i
x d
i
x
x
dx
c
i
x
=
=
+
∫
∫
∫
ψ
ψ ∂ψ
∂ψ
ψ
ψ ∂ψ
∂
ψ
(
, )
(
, )
,
∫
∫
∫
+
=
=
θ
ψ
θ
∂θ
θ
ψ
∂
ψ
ψ
∂ψ
θ
ψ
∂
ψ
ψ
d
i
d
i
di
W
i
c
)
,
(
)
,
(
.
Assuming that the coupling field is lossless, the differential change in the
mechanical energy (which is found using the differential displacement dl
r
 as
dW
F
dl
mec
m
=
⋅
r
r
) is related to the differential change of the coenergy. For
displacement dx  at constant current, one obtains dW
dW
mec
c
=
, and hence,
the electromagnetic force is F i x
W i x
x
e
c
( , )
( , )
= ∂
∂
.
For rotational motion, the electromagnetic torque is
T i
W i
e
c
( , )
( , )
θ
∂
θ
∂θ
=
.
Micro- and meso-scale structures, as well as thin magnetic films, exhibit
anisotropy. Consider the anisotropic ferromagnetic element in the Cartesian
(rectangular) coordinate systems as shown in Figure 2.2.8.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.2.8. Material in the xyz coordinate system
The permeability is µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
( , , )
x y z
xx
xy
xz
yx
yy
yz
zx
zy
zz
=










, and therefore,
r
r
B
x y z H
= µ( , , )
, 
B
B
B
H
H
H
x
y
z
xx
xy
xz
yx
yy
yz
zx
zy
zz
x
y
z










=




















µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
.
The analysis of anisotropic nano- and microscale actuators and sensors
can be performed. Some actuators and sensors can be studied assuming that
the media is linear, homogeneous, and isotropic. Unfortunately, this
assumption is not valid in general.
Control of microactuators position and linear velocity, angular
displacement and angular velocity, is established by changing H. In (2.2.6),
the magnetic field intensity can be considered as a control. However, the
electromagnetic field is developed by ICs or antennas. Hence, the microICs
or microantenna dynamics have to be integrated in (2.2.6). Thus, microscale
antennas and ICs must be thoroughly considered.
Consider the microactuator controlled by the microantenna. Assume that
the linear isotropic media has permittivity 
m
ε
ε0
 and permeability 
m
µ
µ0
.
The force is calculated using the stress energy tensor 
αβ
T
t
 which is given
in terms of the electromagnetic field as
(
)
γ
γ
γ
γ
αβ
β
α
β
α
αβ
µ
µ
ε
ε
δ
µ
µ
ε
ε
H
H
E
E
H
H
E
E
T
m
m
m
m
0
0
2
1
0
0
+
−
+
=
t
,
where 
αβ
δ
 is the Kronecker delta-function, defined as 



≠
=
=
β
α
β
α
δαβ
 
if
 0
 
if
 1
.
The electromagnetic field tensor is expressed as
x
y
z
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC















−
−
−
−
−
−
=
0
0
0
0
x
y
z
x
z
y
y
z
x
z
y
x
B
B
E
B
B
E
B
B
E
E
E
E
F
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
t
αβ
,
and Maxwell’s equation can be expressed in the tensor form.
Then, the electromagnetic force is found as
∫
=
s
s
d
T
F
r
t
r
αβ
.
The results derived can be viewed using the energy analysis, and one has
)
(
)
(
r
r
r
r
r
Π
−∇
=
∑F
, 
∫
∫
⋅
+
⋅
=
Π
s
m
s
m
dv
H
H
dv
E
E
r
r
r
r
r
µ
µ
ε
ε
0
0
2
1
2
)
(r
.
References
1. Hayt W. H., Engineering Electromagnetics, McGraw-Hill, New York,
1989.
2. Krause J. D and Fleisch D. A, Electromagnetics With Applications,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999.
3. Krause P. C. and Wasynczuk O., Electromechanical Motion Devices,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989.
4. Lyshevski S. E., Electromechanical Systems, Electric Machines, and
Applied Mechatronics, CRC Press, FL, 1999.
5. Paul C. R., Whites K. W., and Nasar S. A., Introduction to
Electromagnetic Fields, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1998.
6. White D. C. and Woodson H. H., Electromechanical Energy Conversion,
Wiley, New York, 1959.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

2.3. CLASSICAL  MECHANICS  AND  ITS  APPLICATION
With advanced molecular computer-aided-design tools, one can design,
analyze, and evaluate three-dimensional (3-D) nanostructures in the steady-
state. However, the comprehensive analysis in the time domain needs to be
performed. That is, the designer must study the dynamic evolution of NEMS
and MEMS. Conventional methods of molecular mechanics do not allow one
to perform numerical analysis of complex NEMS and MEMS in time-
domain, and even 3-D modeling is restricted to simple structures. Our goal is
to develop a fundamental understanding of electromechanical and
electromagnetic processes in nano- and microscale structures. An addition,
the basic theoretical foundations will be developed and used in analysis of
NEMS and MEMS from systems standpoints. That is, we depart from the
subsystem analysis and study NEMS and MEMS as dynamics systems.
From modeling, simulation, analysis, and visualization standpoints,
NEMS and MEMS are very complex. In fact, NEMS and MEMS are
modeled using advanced concepts of quantum mechanics, electromagnetic
theory, structural dynamics, thermodynamics, thermochemistry, etc. It was
illustrated that NEMS and MEMS integrate a great number of components
(subsystems), and mathematical model development is an extremely
challenging problem because the commonly used conventional methods,
assumptions, and simplifications may not be applied to NEMS and MEMS
(for example, the Newtonian mechanics are not applicable to the molecular-
scale analysis, and Maxwell’s equations must be used to study the
electromagnetic phenomena). As the result, partial differential equations
describe large-scale multivariable mathematical models of MEMS and
NEMS. The visualization issues must be addressed to study the complex
tensor data (tensor field). Techniques and software for visualizing scalar and
vector field data are available to visualize the data in three dimensions. In
contrast, techniques to visualize tensor fields are not available due to the
complex, multivariate nature of the data, and the fact that no commonly used
experimental analogy exists for visualizing tensor data. The second-order
tensor fields consist of 
3
3×
 matrices defined at each node in a
computational grid. Tensor field variables can include stress, viscous stress,
rate of strain, and momentum (tensor variables in conventional structural
dynamics include stress and strain). The tensor field can be simplified and
visualized as a scalar field. Alternatively, the individual vectors that comprise
the tensor field can be analyzed. However, these simplifications result in the
loss of valuable information needed to analyze complex tensor fields. Vector
fields can be visualized using streamlines that depict a subset of the data.
Hyperstreamlines, as an extension of the streamlines to the second-order
tensor fields, provide one with a continuous representation of the tensor field
along a three-dimensional path. Due to obvious limitations and scope, this
book does not cover the tensor field topologies, and through this brief
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

discussion of the resultant visualization, the author emphasizes the
multidisciplinary nature and complexity of the phenomena in NEMS and
MEMS.
While some results have been thoroughly studied, many important
aspects have not been approached and researched, primarily due to the
multidisciplinary nature and complexity of NEMS and MEMS. The major
objectives of this book are to study the fundamental theoretical foundations,
develop innovative concepts in structural design and optimization, perform
modeling and simulation, as well as solve the motion control problem and
validate the results. To develop mathematical models, we augment nano- or
microactuator/sensor and circuitry dynamics (the dynamics can be studied at
the nano and micro scales). Newtonian and quantum mechanics, Lagrange’s
and Hamilton’s concepts, and other cornerstone theories are used to model
NEMS and MEMS dynamics in the time domain. Taking note of these basic
principles and laws, nonlinear mathematical models are found to perform
comprehensive analysis and design. The control mechanisms and decision
making are discussed, and control algorithms must be synthesized to attain
the desired specifications and requirements imposed on the performance. It is
evident that nano- and microsystem features must be thoroughly considered
when approaching modeling, simulation, analysis, and design. The ability to
find mathematical models is a key problem in NEMS and MEMS analysis
and 
optimization, 
synthesis 
and 
control, 
manufacturing, 
and
commercialization. 
For 
MEMS, 
using 
electromagnetic 
theory 
and
electromechanics, we develop adequate mathematical models to attain the
design objectives. The proposed approach, which augments electromagnetics
and electromechanics, allows the designer to solve a much broader spectrum
of problems compared with finite-element analysis because an interactive
electromagnetic-mechanical-ICs analysis is performed. The developed
theoretical results are verified to demonstrate.
In this book the author studies large-scale NEMS and MEMS (actuators
and sensors have been primarily studied and analyzed from the fabrication
standpoints) and thorough fundamental theory is developed. Applying the
theoretical foundations to analyze and regulate in the desired manner the
energy or information flows in NEMS and MEMS, the designer is confronted
with the need to find adequate mathematical models of the phenomena, and
design NEMS and MEMS configurations. Mathematical models can be
found using basic physical concepts. In particular, in electrical, mechanical,
fluid, or thermal systems, the mechanism of storing, dissipating,
transforming, and transferring energies is analyzed. We will use the Lagrange
equations of motion, Kirchhoff’s and Newton’s laws, Maxwell’s equations,
and quantum theory to illustrate the model developments. It was emphasized
that NEMS and MEMS integrate many components and subsystems. One can
reduce interconnected systems to simple, idealized subsystems (components).
However, this idealization is impractical. For example, one cannot study
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

nano- and microscale actuators and sensors without studying subsystems
(devices) to actuate and control these transducers. That is, NEMS and
MEMS integrate mechanical and electromechanical motion devices
(actuators and sensors), power converters and antennas, processors and IO
devices, etc. One of the primary objectives of this book is to illustrate how
one can develop comprehensive mathematical models of NEMS and MEMS
using basic principles and laws. Through illustrative examples, differential
equations will be found to model dynamic systems.
Based upon the synthesized NEMS and MEMS architectures, to analyze
and regulate in the desired manner the energy or information flows, the
designer needs to find adequate mathematical models and optimize the
performance characteristics through the design of control algorithms. Some
mathematical models can be found using basic foundations and mathematical
theory to map the dynamics of some processes, and system evolution is not
developed yet. In this section we study electrical, mechanical, fluid, and
thermal systems, the mechanism of storing, dissipating, transforming, and
transferring energies in actuators and sensors which can be manufactured
using a large variety of different nano-, micro-, and miniscale technologies.
In this section we will use the Lagrange equations of motion, as well as
Kirchhoff’s and Newton’s laws to illustrate the model developments
applicable to a large class of nano-, micro-, and miniscale transducers. It has
been illustrated that one cannot reduce interconnected systems (NEMS and
MEMS) to simple, idealized sub-systems (components). For example, one
cannot study actuators and smart structures without studying the mechanism
to regulate these actuators, and ICs and antennas must be integrated as well.
These ICs and antennas are controlled by the processor, which receives the
information from sensors. The primary objective of this chapter is to
illustrate how one can develop mathematical models of dynamic systems
using basic principles and laws. Through illustrative examples, differential
equations will be found and simulated.
Nano- and microelectromechanical systems must be studied using the
fundamental laws and basic principles of mechanics and electromagnetics. Let
us identify and study these key concepts to illustrate the use of cornerstone
principles. The study of the motion of systems with the corresponding analysis
of forces that cause motion is our interest.
2.3.1. Newtonian Mechanics
Newtonian  Mechanics:  Translational  Motion
The equations of motion for mechanical systems can be found using
Newton’s second law of motion. Using the position (displacement) vector rr ,
the Newton equation in the vector form is given as
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

a
m
t
F
r
r
r
=
∑
)
,
( r
,
            (2.3.1)
where 
)
,
( rr
r
t
F
∑
 is the vector sum of all forces applied to the body (
r
F  is
called the net force); ra  is the vector of acceleration of the body with respect
to an inertial reference frame; m is the mass of the body.
From (2.3.1), in the Cartesian system (xyz coordinates) we have
(
)


















=
=
=
∑
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
,
dt
z
d
dt
y
d
dt
x
d
m
dt
d
m
a
m
t
F
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
, 


















=










2
2
2
2
2
2
dt
z
d
dt
y
d
dt
x
d
a
a
a
z
y
x
r
r
r
r
r
r
.
In the Cartesian coordinate system, Newton’s second law is expressed as
F
ma
x
x
=
∑
, 
F
ma
y
y
=
∑
, and 
F
ma
z
z
=
∑
.
It is worth noting that mar  represents the magnitude and direction of the
applied net force acting on the object. Hence, mar  is not a force.
A body is at equilibrium (the object is at rest or is moving with constant
speed) if 
r
F =
∑
0 .
Newton’s second law in terms of the linear momentum, which is found
as r
r
p = mv , is given by
r
r
r
F
dp
dt
d mv
dt
=
=
∑
(
) ,
where rv  is the vector of the object velocity.
Thus, the force is equal to the rate of change of the momentum. The object
or particle moves uniformly if 
0
=
dt
p
dr
 (thus, 
const
p =
r
).
Newton’s laws are extended to multi-body systems, and the momentum of
a system of N particles is the vector sum of the individual momenta. That is,
∑
=
=
N
i
ip
P
1
r
r
.
Consider the multi-body system of N particles. The position
(displacement) is represented by the vector r which in the Cartesian coordinate
system has the components x, y and z. Taking note of the expression for the
potential energy 
)
(rr
Π
, one has for the conservative mechanical system
)
(
)
(
r
r
r
r
r
Π
−∇
=
∑F
.
Therefore, the work done per unit time is
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

dt
d
dt
d
dt
d
F
dt
dW
)
(
)
(
)
(
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
Π
−
=
Π
−∇
=
=∑
.
From Newton’s second law one obtains
0
)
(
)
(
2
2
=
−
=
−
∑
∑
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
F
dt
d
m
F
a
m
,
hence, for a conservative system we have
0
)
(
2
2
=
Π
∇
+
r
r
r
r
dt
d
m
.
For the system of N particles, the equations of motion are
0
)
(
2
2
=
Π
∇
+
N
N
N dt
d
m
r
r
r
r
,
or
(
)
(
)
(
)
N
i
z
y
x
z
y
x
dt
z
y
x
d
m
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
,...,
1
,0
,
,
,
,
,
,
2
2
=
=
∂
Π
∂
+
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
.
The total kinetic energy of the particle is 
2
2
1 mv
=
Γ
, and for N particles,
one has
∑
=






=






Γ
N
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
dt
z
d
dt
y
d
dt
x
d
m
dt
z
d
dt
y
d
dt
x
d
1
2
1
,
,
,
,
r
r
r
r
r
r
.
Furthermore, we have 
(
)






∂






Γ
∂
=
dt
z
d
dt
y
d
dt
x
d
dt
z
d
dt
y
d
dt
x
d
dt
z
y
x
d
m
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
,
,
,
,
,
,
.
Using the generilized coordinates (
)
n
q
q ,...,
1
 and generalized velocities






dt
dq
dt
dq
n
,...,
1
, one finds the total kinetic 






Γ
dt
dq
dt
dq
q
q
n
n
,...,
,
,...,
1
1
 and
potential 
(
)
n
q
q ,...,
1
Π
 energies. Hence, using the expressions for the total
kinetic and potential energies, Newton’s second law of motion can be given as
0
=
Π
+





Γ
i
i
q
q
dt
d
∂
∂
∂
∂
&
.
That is, the generalized coordinates qi  are used to model multibody
systems, and (
) (
)
N
N
N
n
z
y
x
z
y
x
q
q
r
r
r
r
r
r
,
,
...,
,
,
,
,...,
1
1
1
1
=
.
The obtained results are connected to the Lagrange equations of motion,
which will be studied later.
Newtonian Mechanics: Rotational Motion
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

For rotational motion, the net torque and angular acceleration must are
used. The rotational analog of Newton’s second law for a rigid bogy is
r
r
T
J
∑
= α ,
where 
r
T
∑
 is the net torque; J is the moment of inertia (rotational inertia);
rα  is the angular acceleration vector, r
r
r
r
α
θ
θ
ω
=
=
=
d
dt
d
dt
d
dt
d
dt
2
2
; 
r
θ  is the
angular displacement; ω  denotes the angular velocity.
The angular momentum of the system 
r
LM  is expressed as
r
r
r
r
r
L
r
p
r
mv
M =
×
=
×
,
and
r
r
r
r
T
dL
dt
r
F
M
∑
=
=
×
,
where rr  is the position vector with respect to the origin.
For the rigid body, rotating around the axis of symmetry, we have
r
r
L
J
M = ω .
Example 2.3.1.
A micro-motor has the equivalent moment of inertia 
20
10
5
−
×
=
J
kg-m2.
Let the angular velocity of the rotor is 
5
/
1
10t
r =
ω
. Find the angular
momentum and the developed electromagnetic torque as functions of time. The
load and friction torques are zero.
Solution.
The angular momentum is found as 
5
/
1
19
10
5
t
J
L
r
M
−
×
=
= ω
.
The developed electromagnetic torque is 
5
/
4
19
10
1
−
−
×
=
=
t
dt
dL
T
M
e 
. 
From Newtonian mechanics one concludes that the applied net force plays
a central role in quantitatively describing the motion. An alternative analysis of
motion can be performed in terms of the energy or momentum quantities, which
are conserved. The principle of conservation of energy states that energy can
only be converted from one form to another. Kinetic energy is associated with
motion, while potential energy is associated with position. The sum of the
kinetic (Γ), potential (Π), and dissipated (D) energies is called the total energy
of the system ( ΣT ), which is conserved, and the total amount of energy
remains constant; that is,
Σ
Γ
Π
T
D
const
=
+
+
=
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

For example, consider the translational motion of a body which is attached
to an ideal spring that obeys Hooke’s law. Neglecting friction, one obtains the
following expression for the total energy
Σ
Γ
Π
T
s
mv
k x
const
=
+
=
+
=
1
2
2
2
(
)
.
Here, the translational kinetic energy is Γ = 1
2
2
mv ; the elastic potential
energy is Π = 1
2
2
k x
s
; ks  is the force constant of the spring; x is the
displacement.
For rotating spring, we have
Σ
Γ
Π
T
s
J
k
const
=
+
=
+
=
1
2
2
2
(
)
ω
θ
,
where the rotational kinetic energy is Γ = 1
2
2
Jω  and the elastic potential
energy is obtained as Π = 1
2
2
ksθ .
The kinetic energy of a rigid body having translational and rotational
components of motion is found to be
Γ =
+
1
2
2
2
(
)
mv
Jω
.
That is, motion of the rigid body is represented as a combination of
translational motion of the center of mass and rotational motion about the axis
through the center of mass. The moment of inertia depends upon how the mass
is distributed with respect to the axis, and J is different for different axes of
rotation. If the body is uniform in density, J can be easily calculated for
regularly shaped bodies in terms of their dimensions. For example, a rigid
cylinder with mass m (which is uniformly distributed), radius R, and length l,
has 
the 
following 
horizontal 
and 
vertical 
moments 
of 
inertia
J
mR
horizontal = 1
2
2  and J
mR
ml
vertical =
+
1
4
2
1
12
2 . The radius of gyration
can be found for irregularly shaped objects, and the moment of inertia can be
easily obtained.
In electromechanical motion devices, the force and torque are thoroughly
studied. Assuming that the body is rigid and the moment of inertia is constant,
one has
r r
r r
r
r
r
r
r r
Td
J d
J d
dt d
J d
dt d
J d
θ
α θ
ω θ
θ
ω
ω ω
=
=
=
=
.
The total work, as given by
W
Td
J d
J
J
f
f
f
=
=
=
−
∫
∫
r r
r r
θ
ω ω
ω
ω
θ
θ
ω
ω
0
0
1
2
2
0
2
(
) ,
represents the change of the kinetic energy.
Furthermore,
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

dW
dt
T d
dt
T
=
=
×
r
r
r
r
θ
ω ,
and the power is defined by
P
T
=
×
r
rω .
This equation is an analog of P
F
v
=
×
r
r , which is applied for
translational motion.
Example 2.3.2.
Consider a micro-positioning table actuated by a micromotor. How much
work is required to accelerate a 2 mg payload (m = 2 mg) from v0 = 0 m/sec to
vf = 1 m/sec?
Solution.
The work needed is calculated as
6
2
6
2
1
2
0
2
2
1
10
1
1
10
2
)
( 
−
−
×
=
×
×
=
−
=
mv
mv
W
f 
J. 
  ~  
Example 2.3.3.
The rated power and angular velocity of a micromotor are 0.001 W and
100 rad/sec. Calculate the rated electromagnetic torque.
Solution.
The electromagnetic torque is
5
10
1
100
001
.0
−
×
=
=
=
r
e
P
T
ω 
N-m. 
 ~   
Example 2.3.4.
Consider a body of mass m in the XY coordinate system. The force 
r
Fa  is
applied in the x direction. Neglecting Coulomb and static friction, and
assuming that the viscous friction force is F
B dx
dt
fr
v
=
, find the equations of
motion. Here Bv  is the viscous friction coefficient.
Solution.
The free-body diagram developed is illustrated in Figure 2.3.1.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Ffr
FN
Fg
Fa
m
X
Y
Figure 2.3.1. Free-body diagram
The sum of  the forces, acting in the y direction, is expressed as
r
r
r
F
F
F
Y
N
g
=
−
∑
,
where 
r
F
mg
g =
 is the gravitational force acting on the mass m; 
r
FN  is the
normal force which is equal and opposite to the gravitational force.
From (2.3.1), the equation of motion in the y direction is expressed as
r
r
F
F
ma
m d y
dt
N
g
y
−
=
=
2
2 ,
where ay  is the acceleration in the y direction, a
d y
dt
y =
2
2 .
Making use 
r
r
F
F
N
g
=
, we have
d y
dt
2
2
0
=
.
The sum of the forces acting in the x direction is found using the applied
force 
r
Fa  and the friction force 
r
Ffr ; in particular, we have
r
r
r
F
F
F
X
a
fr
=
−
∑
.
The applied force can be time-invariant 
r
F
const
a =
 or time-varying
r
F t
f t x y z
a ( )
( , , , )
=
. For example,
(
)
r
F t
x
t
e
dy
dt
t
z
dx
dt
t
y t
a
t
( )
sin
cos
=
−
+
+
−




−
6
4
0.5
2
3
2 4
.
Using (2.1), the equation motion in the x direction is found to be
r
r
F
F
ma
m d x
dt
a
fr
x
−
=
=
2
2 ,
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

where ax  is the acceleration in the X  direction, a
d x
dt
x =
2
2 , and  the
velocity in the X direction is v
dx
dt
=
.
Assuming that the Coulomb and static friction can be neglected, the
friction force, as a function of the viscous friction coefficient Bv  and
velocity v
dx
dt
=
, is given by F
B dx
dt
fr
v
=
.
Hence, one obtains the second-order nonlinear differential equation to
map the body dynamics in the x direction
d x
dt
m F
B dx
dt
a
v
2
2
1
=
−



,
A set of two first-order linear differential equations results, and
dx
dt
v
=
,
(
)
dv
dt
m F
B v
a
v
=
−
1
.
        
The application of Newton’s law leads to the partial differential
equations. To illustrate this, we consider two examples.
Example 2.3.5.
The elastic membrane is illustrated in Figure 2.3.2. Derive the
mathematical model to model the rectangular membrane vibration. That is, the
goal is to study the time varying membrane deflection d(t,x,y) in the xy plane.
The mass of the undeflected membrane per unit area ρ  is constant
(homogeneous membrane).
Figure 2.3.2. Vibrating rectangular membrane
y
T∆
x
β
α
x
T∆
y
T∆
x
T∆
y
)
,
(
y
x
d
x
y
b
a
Membrane
Membrane
a
b
y
T∆
y
T∆
β
α
x
x
x
∆
+
y
y
y
∆
+
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Solution.
Assume that the membrane is perfectly flexible. For small deflections, the
tension T (the force per unit length) is the same at all points in all directions,
and suppose that T is constant during the motion. It should be emphasized that
because the deflection of the membrane is small compared with the membrane
size ab, the inclination angles are small.
Taking note of these assumptions, the forces acting on the sides are
approximated as 
x
T
Fx
∆
=
 and 
y
T
Fy
∆
=
. The membrane is assumed to be
perfectly flexible, therefore, forces Fx and Fy are tangential to the membrane.
The horizontal components of the forces are found as the cosine
functions of the inclination angles. The horizontal components at the
opposite sides (right and left) are equal because angles α  and β are small.
Thus, the membrane motion in the horizontal direction can be neglected.
The vertical components of the forces are 
β
sin
y
T∆
 and 
α
sin
y
T∆
−
.
Using Newton’s second law of motion, the net force must be found. We
have the following expression
(
)
(
))
,
(
)
,
(
)
,
(
)
,
(
2
1
2
1
y
x
d
y
y
x
d
x
T
y
x
d
y
x
x
d
y
T
F
y
y
x
x
−
∆
+
∆
+
−
∆
+
∆
=
∑
Thus, two-dimensional partial (wave) differential equation is
 
)
,
,
(
)
,
,
(
)
,
,
(
)
,
,
(
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
y
x
t
d
T
y
y
x
t
d
x
y
x
t
d
T
t
y
x
t
d
∇
=






∂
∂
+
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
ρ
ρ
.
Using initial and boundary conditions, the solution can be found.
Let 
the 
initial 
conditions 
are 
)
,
(
)
,
,
(
0
0
y
x
d
y
x
t
d
=
 
and
)
,
(
)
,
,
(
1
0
y
x
d
t
y
x
t
d
=
∂
∂
. Thus, the initial displacement 
)
,
(
0
y
x
d
 and initial
velocity 
)
,
(
1
y
x
d
 are given.
Assume that the boundary conditions are
0
)
,
,
(
0
0
=
y
x
t
d
 and 
0
)
,
,
(
=
f
f y
x
t
d
.
Then, the solution is found to be
(
)
,
sin
sin
sin
cos
)
,
,
(
)
,
,
(
1
1
1
1
∑∑
∑∑
∞
=
∞
=
∞
=
∞
=
+
=
=
i
j
ij
ij
ij
ij
i
j
ij
b
x
j
a
x
i
t
B
t
A
y
x
t
d
y
x
t
d
π
π
λ
λ
where the eigenvalues (characteristic values) are found as
2
2
2
2
b
j
a
i
T
ij
+
=
π
ρ
λ
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Using initial conditions, the Fourier coefficients are obtained in the form
of the double Fourier series. In particular, we have
∫∫
=
b a
ij
dxdy
b
y
j
a
x
i
y
x
d
ab
A
0 0
0
sin
sin
)
,
(
4
π
π
,
and  
∫∫
=
b a
ij
ij
dxdy
b
y
j
a
x
i
y
x
d
ab
B
0 0
1
sin
sin
)
,
(
4
π
π
λ 
.
     
Example 2.3.6.
Derive the mathematical model of the infinitely long beam on the elastic
foundation as shown in Figure 2.3.3. The load force is the square function. The
modulus (the spring stiffness per unit length) of the elastic foundation is ks.
sk
sk
x
y
)
(x
f
)
(x
f
)
(x
f
)
(x
f
a
−
a
a
5
a
3
a
7
a
9
a
11
a
13
)
(x
y
Figure 2.3.3. Beam on elastic foundation under the load force f(x)
Solution.
Using the Euler beam theory, the deflection y(x) due to the net load force
F(x) is modeled by the fourth-order differential equation
)
(
4
4
x
F
dt
y
d
kr
=
,
where kr is the flexural rigidity constant.
Therefore, we have the following differential equation to model the
infinite beam under the consideration
)
(
4
4
x
f
y
k
dt
y
d
k
s
r
=
+
.
The general homogeneous solution is given by
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

(
)
(
)
[
]
(
)
(
)
[
],
sin
sin
sin
sin
)
(
4
2
1
4
4
2
1
3
4
2
1
2
4
2
1
1
4
2
1
4
2
1
x
k
k
x
k
k
e
x
k
k
x
k
k
e
x
y
r
r
x
k
r
r
xx
k
r
r
+
+
+
=
−
where the unknown coefficients kI can be determined using the initial and
boundary conditions. The boundary-value problem can be relaxed, and the
solution can be found in the series form.
The load force is the periodic function, and using the Fourier series we
have
(
)
a
x
i
i
i
f
f
x
f
i
2
cos
sin
2
2
)
(
1
2
1
0
0
π
π
π ∑
∞
=
+
=
 .
The solution of the differential equation 
)
(
4
4
x
f
y
k
dt
y
d
k
s
r
=
+
 can be
found in the following form
( )
a
x
i
a
a
x
y
i
i
2
cos
1
0
π
∑
∞
=
+
=
.
Differentiating this equation four times gives
2
0
0
f
a
ks
=
and 
i
i
f
a
k
a
i
k
i
s
r
)
(
sin
2
16
2
1
0
4
4
4
π
π
π
=






+
.
Thus, the Fourier series coefficients are found as
sk
f
a
2
0
0 =
 and 
(
)
.1
,
2
sin
2
4
2
1
0
≥








+






=
i
k
a
i
k
i
i
f
a
s
r
i
π
π
π
Therefore, the solution is given by
( )
(
)
(
)
a
x
i
k
a
i
k
i
i
a
f
k
f
x
y
i
s
r
s
2
cos
16
sin
32
2
1
4
4
4
2
1
4
0
0
π
π
π
π
∑
∞
=
+
+
=
.
The first-order approximation is
(
)
a
x
k
a
k
a
f
k
f
x
y
s
r
2
cos
16
32
2
)
(
4
4
4
0
0
π
π
π
+
+
≈ 
.
     
Friction Models in Electromechanical Systems
A thorough consideration of friction is essential for understanding the
operation of electromechanical systems. Friction is a very complex nonlinear
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

phenomenon that is difficult to model. The classical Coulomb friction is a
retarding frictional force (for translational motion) or torque (for rotational
motion) that changes its sign with the reversal of the direction of motion, and
the amplitude of the frictional force or torque are constant. For translational
and rotational motions, the Coulomb friction force and torque are
F
k
v
k
dx
dt
Coulomb
Fc
Fc
=
=




sgn( )
sgn
,
T
k
k
d
dt
Coulomb
Tc
Tc
=
=




sgn( )
sgn
ω
θ
,
where kFc  and kTc  are the Coulomb friction coefficients.
Figure 2.3.4.a illustrates the Coulomb friction.
F
T
Coulomb
Coulomb
v
dx
dt
d
dt
=
=
,ω
θ
0
T
B
B d
dt
viscous
m
m
=
=
ω
θ
0
F
B v
B dx
dt
viscous
v
v
=
=
+
+
F
T
st
st
0
k
k
Fc
Tc
,
−
−
k
k
Fc
Tc
,
F
T
viscous
viscous
F
T
static
static
−
−
F
T
st
st
v
dx
dt
d
dt
=
=
,ω
θ
v
dx
dt
d
dt
=
=
,ω
θ
     a
           b
  c
Figure 2.3.4. Functional representations of:
             a) Coulomb friction;  b) viscous friction;  c) static friction
Viscous friction is a retarding force or torque that is a linear function of
linear or angular velocity. The viscous friction force and torque versus linear
and angular velocities are shown in Figure 2.3.4.b. The following
expressions are commonly used to model the viscous friction
F
B v
B dx
dt
viscous
v
v
=
=
 for translational motion,
and T
B
B d
dt
viscous
m
m
=
=
ω
θ  for rotational motion,
where Bv  and Bm  are the viscous friction coefficients.
The static friction exists only when the body is stationary, and vanishes
as motion begins. The static friction is a force Fstatic  or torque Tstatic , and
we have the following expressions
F
F
static
st v dx
dt
= ±
=
=0 ,
and T
T
static
st
d
dt
= ±
=
=
ω
θ
0 .
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

One concludes that the static friction is a retarding force or torque that
tends to prevent the initial translational or rotational motion at the beginning
(see Figure 2.3.4.c).
In general, the friction force and torque are nonlinear functions that must
be modeled using frictional memory, presliding conditions, etc. The
empirical formulas, commonly used to express Fstatic  and Tstatic , are
(
)
F
k
k
e
k
v
v
k
k
e
k
dx
dt
dx
dt
fr
fr
fr
k v
fr
t
fr
fr
k dx
dt
fr
=
−
+
=
−
+












−
−
1
2
3
1
2
3
sgn(
)
sgn
and
(
)
T
k
k
e
k
k
k
e
k
d
dt
d
dt
fr
fr
fr
k
fr
fr
fr
k d
dt
fr
=
−
+
=
−
+












−
−
1
2
3
1
2
3
ω
θ
ω
ω
θ
θ
sgn( )
sgn
These Fstatic  and Tstatic  are shown in Figure 2.3.5.
F
T
fr
fr
v
dx
dt
d
dt
=
=
,ω
θ
0
Figure 2.3.5. Friction force and torque are functions of linear and
angular velocities
Example 2.3.7. Transducer model
Figure 2.3.6 shows a simple electromechanical device (actuator) with a
stationary member and movable plunger. Using Newton’s second law, find
the differential equations.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Winding
Winding
Plunger
x(t)
Nonmagnetic sleeve
x t( )
u
t
a( )
Spring ks
,
Damper Bv
,
Magnetic force F t
e
,
( )
Figure 2.3.6. Schematic of a transducer
Solution.
Let us apply Newton’s second law of motion to find the equations of
motion and study the dynamics. Newton’s law states that the acceleration of
an object is proportional to the net force. The vector sum of all forces acting
on the object can be found by using a free-body diagram. In particular, for
the studied translational mechanical system, one obtains
F t
m d x
dt
B dx
dt
k x
k
x
F t
v
s
s
e
( )
(
)
( )
=
+
+
+
+
2
2
1
2
2
,
where x denotes the displacement of a plunger; m is the mass of a movable
member; Bv is the viscous friction coefficient; ks1 and ks2 are the spring
constants; Fe(t) is the magnetic force,
F i x
W i x
x
e
c
( , )
( , )
= ∂
∂
.
It should be emphasized that Hooke’s law is valid only for sufficiently
small displacements. The stretch and restoring forces are not directly
proportional to the displacement, and these forces are different on either side
of the equilibrium position. The restoring/stretching force exerted by the
spring is expressed by (
)
k x
k x
s
s
1
2
2
+
.
Assuming that the magnetic system is linear, the coenergy is expressed
as
W i x
L x i
c( , )
( )
= 1
2
2 ,
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

then  F i x
i dL x
dx
e( , )
( )
= 1
2
2
.
The inductance is found by using the following formula
L x
N
N
A A
A l
A
x
d
f
g
f
f
g
g f
f
f
( )
(
)
= ℜ
+ ℜ
=
+
+
2
2
0
2
2
µ µ
µ
,
where ℜf and ℜg are the reluctances of the ferromagnetic material and air
gap; Af and Ag are  the associated cross section areas; lf and (x + 2d) are the
lengths of the magnetic material and the air gap.
Hence, dL
dx
N
A
A
A l
A
x
d
f
f
g
g f
f
f
= −
+
+
2
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
µ µ
µ
[
(
)]
.
Using Kirchhoff’s law, the voltage equation for the electric circuit is
given as
u
ri
d
dt
a =
+ ψ ,
where the flux linkage ψ  is expressed as ψ = L x i
( ) .
One obtains
u
ri
L x di
dt
i dL x
dx
dx
dt
a =
+
+
( )
( )
,
and thus
di
dt
r
L x i
N
A
A
L x
A l
A
x
d
iv
L x u
f
f
g
g f
f
f
a
= −
+
+
+
+
( )
( )[
(
)]
( )
2
2
2
1
2
2
0
2
2
µ µ
µ
.
Augmenting this equation with differential equation for the mechanical
systems
F t
m d x
dt
B dx
dt
k x
k
x
F t
v
s
s
e
( )
(
)
( )
=
+
+
+
+
2
2
1
2
2
,
three nonlinear differential equations for the considered transducer are found
as
di
dt
r A l
A
x
d
N
A A
i
A
A l
A
x
d iv
A l
A
x
d
N
A A
u
dx
dt
v
dv
dt
N
A
A
m A l
A
x
d
i
m k x
k
x
B
m v
g
f
f
f
f
f
g
f
f
g f
f
f
g f
f
f
f
f
g
a
f
f
g
g
f
f
f
s
s
v
= −
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
= −
+
+
−
+
−
[
(
)]
(
)
(
)
,
,
[
(
)]
(
)
.
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
0
2
0
2
2
0
2
2
1
2
2
µ
µ µ
µ
µ
µ
µ µ
µ µ
µ
        
Newtonian Mechanics: Rotational Motion
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

For one-dimensional rotational systems, Newton’s second law of motion
is expressed as
M = Jα ,
            (2.3.2)
where M is the sum of all moments about the center of mass of a body, (N-
m); J is the moment of inertia about its center of mass, (kg-m2); α  is the
angular acceleration of the body, (rad/sec2).
Example 2.3.8.
Given a point mass m suspended by a massless, unstretchable string of
length l, (see Figure 2.3.7). Derive the equations of motion for a simple
pendulum with negligible friction.
θ
mg
l
Y
X
Y
X
O
Ta ,ω
mgcosθ
mgsinθ
Figure 2.3.7. A simple pendulum
Solution.
The restoring force, which is proportional to sinθ  and given by
−mgsinθ , is the tangential component of the net force. Therefore, the sum
of the moments about the pivot point O  is found as
M
∑
= −
+
mgl
Ta
sinθ
,
where Ta  is the applied torque; l  is the length of the pendulum measured
from the point of rotation.
Using (2.3.2), one obtains the equation of motion
J
J d
dt
mgl
Ta
α
θ
θ
=
= −
+
2
2
sin
,
where J is the moment of inertial of the mass about the point O.
Hence, the second-order differential equation is found to be
(
)
d
dt
J
mgl
Ta
2
2
1
θ
θ
=
−
+
sin
.
Using the following differential equation for the angular displacement
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

d
dt
θ
ω
=
,
one obtains the following set of two first-order differential equations
(
)
d
dt
J
mgl
Ta
ω
θ
=
−
+
1
sin
,
d
dt
θ
ω
=
.
The moment of inertia is expressed by J
ml
=
2 . Hence, we have the
following differential equations to be used in modeling of a simple pendulum
d
dt
g
l
ml
Ta
ω
θ
= −
+
sin
1
2
,
d
dt
θ
ω
= 
.
        
2.3.2. Lagrange Equations of Motion
Electromechanical 
systems 
augment 
mechanical 
and 
electronic
components. Therefore, one studies mechanical, electromagnetic, and
circuitry transients. It was illustrated that the designer can integrate the
torsional-mechanical dynamics and circuitry equations of motion. However,
there exist general concepts to model systems. The Lagrange and Hamilton
concepts are based on the energy analysis. Using the system variables, one finds
the total kinetic, dissipation, and potential energies (which are denoted as Γ ,
D  and Π ). Taking note of the total kinetic 






Γ
dt
dq
dt
dq
q
q
t
n
n
,...,
,
,...,
,
1
1
,
dissipation 






dt
dq
dt
dq
q
q
t
D
n
n
,...,
,
,...,
,
1
1
, and potential 
(
)
n
q
q
t
,...,
,
1
Π
energies, the Lagrange equations of motion are
d
dt
q
q
D
q
q
Q
i
i
i
i
i
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
Γ
Γ
Π
&
&



−
+
+
=
.
            (2.3.3)
Here, qi  and Qi  are the generalized coordinates and the generalized
forces (applied forces and disturbances). The generalized coordinates qi  are
used to derive expressions for energies 






Γ
dt
dq
dt
dq
q
q
t
n
n
,...,
,
,...,
,
1
1
,






dt
dq
dt
dq
q
q
t
D
n
n
,...,
,
,...,
,
1
1
 and 
(
)
n
q
q
t
,...,
,
1
Π
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Taking into account that for conservative (losseless) systems D = 0, we
have the following Lagrange’s equations of motion
d
dt
q
q
q
Q
i
i
i
i
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
Γ
Γ
Π
&



−
+
=
.
Example 2.3.9. Mathematical model of a simple pendulum
Derive the mathematical model for a simple pendulum using the
Lagrange equations of motion.
Solution.
Derivation of the mathematical model for the simple pendulum, shown
in Figure 2.3.7, was performed in Example 2.3.8 using the Newtonian
mechanics. For the studied conservative (losseless) system we have D = 0.
Thus, the Lagrange equations of motion are
d
dt
q
q
q
Q
i
i
i
i
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
Γ
Γ
Π
&



−
+
=
.
The kinetic energy of the pendulum bob is 
( )
Γ = 1
2
2
m l &θ
.
The potential energy is found as 
(
)
Π =
−
mgl 1
cosθ .
As the generalized coordinate, the angular displacement is used, qi = θ .
The generalized force is the torque applied, Q
T
i
a
=
.
One obtains
∂
∂
∂
∂θ
θ
Γ
Γ
&
&
&
q
ml
i
=
=
2
, ∂
∂
∂
∂θ
Γ
Γ
qi
=
= 0, ∂
∂
∂
∂θ
θ
Π
Π
q
mgl
i
=
=
sin
.
Thus, the first term of the Lagrange equation is found to be
d
dt
ml d
dt
ml dl
dt
d
dt
∂
∂θ
θ
θ
Γ
&



=
+
2
2
2
2
.
Assuming that the string is unstretchable, we have dl
dt = 0.
Hence,
ml d
dt
mgl
Ta
2
2
2
θ
θ
+
=
sin
.
Thus, one obtains
(
)
d
dt
ml
mgl
Ta
2
2
2
1
θ
θ
=
−
+
sin
.
Recall that the equation of motion, derived by using Newtonian
mechanics, is
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

(
)
d
dt
J
mgl
Ta
2
2
1
θ
θ
=
−
+
sin
, where J
ml
=
2 .
One concludes that the results are the same, and the equations are
d
dt
g
l
ml
Ta
ω
θ
= −
+
sin
1
2
,
d
dt
θ
ω
= 
.
        
Example 2.3.10. Mathematical Model of a Pendulum
Consider a double pendulum of two degrees of freedom with no external
forces applied to the system (see Figure 2.3.8). Using the Lagrange equations
of motion, derive the differential equations.
l1
l2
θ1
θ2
m1
m2
X
Y
O
(
,
)
x y
1
1
(
,
)
x
y
2
2
Y1
X 1
Y2
X 2
Figure 2.3.8. Double pendulum
Solution.
The angular displacement θ1  and θ2  are chosen as the independent
generalized coordinates. In the XY plane studied, let (
,
)
x
y
1
1  and (
,
)
x
y
2
2
be the rectangular coordinates of m1  and m2 . Then, we obtain
x
l
1
1
1
=
cosθ , x
l
l
2
1
1
2
2
=
+
cos
cos
θ
θ ,
y
l
1
1
1
=
sinθ , y
l
l
2
1
1
2
2
=
+
sin
sin
θ
θ .
The total kinetic energy Γ  is found to be
(
)
(
)
Γ =
+
+
+
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
m x
y
m x
y
&
&
&
&
=
+
+
−
+
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
2 1 2
1
2
2
1
2 2
2
2
2
(
)
&
& & cos(
)
&
.
m
m
l
m l l
m l
θ
θ θ
θ
θ
θ
Then, one obtains
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

∂
∂θ
θ
θ θ θ
Γ
1
2 1 2
2
1
1 2
=
−
m l l sin(
) & & ,
∂
∂θ
θ
θ
θ θ
Γ
&
(
)
&
cos(
) &
1
1
2
1
2
1
2 1 2
2
1
2
=
+
+
−
m
m
l
m l l
,
 ∂
∂θ
θ
θ
θ θ
Γ
2
2 1 2
1
2
1
2
= −
−
m l l sin(
) & & ,
∂
∂θ
θ
θ θ
θ
Γ
&
cos(
) &
&
2
2 1 2
2
1
1
2 1
2
2
=
−
+
m l l
m l
.
The total potential energy is given by
Π =
+
= −
+
−
m gy
m gy
m
m
gl
m gl
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
2
2
(
)
cos
cos
θ
θ .
Hence,  ∂
∂θ
θ
Π
1
1
2
1
1
=
+
(
)
sin
m
m
gl
 and  ∂
∂θ
θ
Π
2
2
2
2
= m gl sin
.
The Lagrange equations of motion are
d
dt
∂
∂θ
∂
∂θ
∂
∂θ
Γ
Γ
Π
&
1
1
1
0



−
+
=
,
d
dt
∂
∂θ
∂
∂θ
∂
∂θ
Γ
Γ
Π
&
2
2
2
0



−
+
=
.
Hence, the dynamic equations of the system are
,0
sin
)
(
)
sin(
)
cos(
)
(
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
=
+
+
−
−
−
+
+
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
g
m
m
l
m
l
m
l
m
m
&
&&
&&
l
l
l
g
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
2
0
&&
cos(
)&&
sin(
) &
sin
θ
θ
θ θ
θ
θ θ
θ
+
−
+
−
+
=
.
It should be emphasized that if the torques T1 and T2  are applied to the
first and second joints, the following equations of motions results
,
sin
)
(
)
sin(
)
cos(
)
(
1
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
T
g
m
m
l
m
l
m
l
m
m
=
+
+
−
−
−
+
+
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
&
&&
&&
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
sin
)
sin(
)
cos(
T
g
l
l
l
=
+
−
+
−
+
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
&
&&
&&
.      
Example 2.3.11. Mathematical Model of a Circuit Network
Consider a two-mesh electric circuit, as shown in Figure 2.3.9. Find the
circuitry dynamics.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

−
+
C2
+
−
C1
R2
N
L12
u
t
a ( )
R1
L1
L2
q2
q1
Figure 2.3.9. Two-mesh circuit network
Solution.
We use q1  and q2  as the independent generalized coordinates, where
q1  is the electric charge in the first loop, q2  represents the electric charge in
the second loop. The generalized force, which is applied to the system, is
denoted as Q1 .  These generalized coordinates are related to the circuitry
variables. In particular, the currents i1  and i2  are found in terms of charges,
i
q
1
1
= &  and i
q
2
2
= & . That is, q
i
s
1
1
=
 and q
i
s
2
2
=
. The generalized force is
the applied voltage, u
t
Q
a ( ) =
1.
The total magnetic energy (kinetic energy) is expressed by
(
)
Γ =
+
−
+
1
2
1 1
2
1
2
12
1
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
L q
L
q
q
L q
&
&
&
&
.
By using this equation for Γ , we have
∂
∂
Γ
q1
0
=
, 
(
)
∂
∂
Γ
&
&
&
q
L
L
q
L q
1
1
12
1
12
2
=
+
−
,
∂
∂
Γ
q2
0
=
, 
(
)
∂
∂
Γ
&
&
&
q
L q
L
L
q
2
12
1
2
12
2
= −
+
+
.
Using the equation for the total electric energy (potential energy)
Π =
+
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
2
2
2
q
C
q
C
,
one finds
∂
∂
Π
q
q
C
1
1
1
=
 and ∂
∂
Π
q
q
C
2
2
2
=
.
The total heat energy dissipated is
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

D= 1
2
1 1
2
1
2
2
2
2
R q
R q
&
&
+
.
Hence,
∂
∂
D =
&
&
q
R q
1
1
1  and ∂
∂
D
q
R q
&
&
2
2
2
=
.
The Lagrange equations of motion are expressed using the independent
coordinates used. We obtain
d
dt
q
q
q
q
Q
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
Γ
Γ
Π
&
&
1
1
1
1



−
+
+
=
D
1  ,      
d
dt
q
q
q
q
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
Γ
Γ
Π
&
&
2
2
2
2
0



−
+
+
=
D
.      
 Hence, the differential equations for the circuit studied are found to be
(
)
L
L
q
L q
R q
q
C
ua
1
12
1
12
2
1 1
1
1
+
−
+
+
=
&&
&&
&
,
(
)
−
+
+
+
+
=
L q
L
L
q
R q
q
C
12
1
2
12
2
2
2
2
2
0
&&
&&
&
.
The SIMULINK model can be built using these derived nonlinear
differential equations. In particular, we have
(
)
&&
&
&&
q
L
L
q
C
R q
L q
ua
1
1
12
1
1
1 1
12
2
1
=
+
−
−
+
+




and 
(
)
&&
&&
&
q
L
L
L q
q
C
R q
2
2
12
12
1
2
2
2
2
1
=
+
−
−



.
The corresponding SIMULINK diagram is shown in Figure 2.3.10.
It should be emphasized that the currents i1  and i2  are expressed in
terms of charges as
i
q
1
1
= &  and i
q
2
2
= & .
That is, we have
q
i
s
1
1
=
 and q
i
s
2
2
=
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

1
s
Transfer Fcn4
1
s
Transfer Fcn3
1
s
Transfer Fcn2
1
s
Transfer Fcn1
Sum1
Sum
Signal
Generator
Scope: q2
Scope: q1
Scope: i2
Scope: i1
1/(L1+L12)
Gain8
R2
Gain7
1/C2
Gain6
L12
Gain5
1/(L1+L12)
Gain4
L12
Gain3
1/C1
Gain2
R1
Gain1
Figure 2.3.10. SIMULINK diagram
To perform simulations (numerical analysis), one must use the parameter
values. The circuitry parameters are assigned to be: L1 =0.01 H, L2 =0.005
H, L12 = 0.0025 H, C1 =0.02 F, C2 =0.1 F, R1 =10 ohm, R2 = 5 ohm and
u
t
a = 100
200
sin(
)  V.
Simulation results, which give the time history of q t
q
t
i t
1
2
1
( ),
( ), ( )  and
i
t
2 ( ) , are documented in Figure 2.3.11.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

     Generalized coordinate, q1                  Generalized coordinate, q2
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
Time (seconds)
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
x 10
-3
Time (seconds)
             Current, i1  [A]                                     Current, i2  [A]
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Time (seconds)
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Time (seconds)
Figure 2.3.11. Circuit dynamics: evolution of the generalized
  coordinates and currents
     
Example 2.3.12. Mathematical Model of an Electric Circuit
Using the Lagrange equations of motion, develop the mathematical
models for the circuit shown in Figure 2.3.12. Prove that the model derived
using the Lagrange equations of motion are equivalent to the model
developed using Kirchhoff’s law.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

−
+
i
t
L( )
C
L
u
t
a ( )
R
+
−
uC
uL
RL
−
+
Load
i
t
a ( )
q1
q2
Figure 2.3.12. Electric circuit
Solution.
Using q1  and q2  as the independent generalized coordinates, the
Lagrange equations of motion can be found. Here, q1  is the electric charge
in the first loop and i
q
a = &1 , and q2  is the electric charge in the second
loop, i
q
L = &2 . The generalized force, applied to the system, is denoted as
Q1 , and u
t
Q
a ( ) =
1.
The total kinetic energy is Γ = 1
2
2
2
Lq&
.
Therefore, we have,
∂
∂
Γ
q1
0
=
, ∂
∂
Γ
&q1
0
=
, and d
dt
q
∂
∂
Γ
&1
0



=
,
∂
∂
Γ
q2
0
=
, ∂
∂
Γ
&
&
q
Lq
2
2
=
, and d
dt
q
Lq
∂
∂
Γ
&
&&
2
2



=
.
The total potential energy is expressed as
(
)
Π =
−
1
2
1
2
2
q
q
C
.
Hence
∂
∂
Π
q
q
q
C
1
1
2
=
−
 and ∂
∂
Π
q
q
q
C
2
1
2
= −
+
.
The total dissipated energy is
D= 1
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
Rq
R q
L
&
&
+
.
Therefore
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

∂
∂
D =
&
&
q
Rq
1
1  and ∂
∂
D
q
R q
L
&
&
2
2
=
.
The Lagrange equations of motion
d
dt
q
q
q
q
Q
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
Γ
Γ
Π
&
&
1
1
1
1



−
+
+
=
D
1 ,
d
dt
q
q
q
q
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
Γ
Γ
Π
&
&
2
2
2
2
0



−
+
+
=
D
lead one to the following two differential equations
Rq
q
q
C
ua
&1
1
2
+
−
=
,
Lq
R q
q
q
C
L
&&
&
2
2
1
2
0
+
+ −
+
=
.
Hence, we have found a set of two differential equations. In particular,
&q
R
q
q
C
ua
1
1
2
1
=
−
+
+



,
&&
&
q
L
R q
q
q
C
L
2
2
1
2
1
=
−
+
−



.
By using Kirchhoff’s law, two differential equations result
du
dt
C
u
R
i
u
t
R
C
C
L
a
=
−
−
+




1
( )
,
(
)
di
dt
L u
R i
L
C
L L
=
−
1
.
Taking note of  i
q
a = &1  and i
q
L = &2 , and making use C du
dt
i
i
C
a
L
=
−
,
we obtain
u
q
q
C
C =
−
1
2 .
The equivalence of the differential equations derived using the Lagrange
equations of motion and Kirchhoff’s law is proven. 
    
Example 2.3.13. Mathematical model of a boost converter
A high-frequency, one-quadrant boost (step-up) dc-dc switching
converter is documented in Figure 2.3.13. Find the mathematical model in
the form of differential equations.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

−
+
rs
L
iL
rL
ic
rc
C
La
ra
ia
Load
+
−
Ea
Vd−
+
ua
us
D
S



=
=
=
0
if
1
0
if
0
off
on
D
t
t
d



=
>
0
if
0
if
s
off
s
on
u
t
u
t
Figure 2.3.13. Boost converter
Solution.
To solve the model development problem, we will derive the differential
equations if the duty ratio 
D
d
 is 1 and 0. Then, we will augment two
mathematical models found to model the boost converter.
When the switch is closed, the diode D is reverse biased. For 
1
=
D
d
(toff = 0), one obtains the following set of linear differential equations
du
dt
C i
C
a
= −1
,
(
)
(
)
di
dt
L
r
r i
V
L
L
s
L
d
=
−
+
+
1
,
(
)
(
)
di
dt
L
u
r
r i
E
a
a
C
a
c
a
a
=
−
+
−
1
.
If the switch is open (
0
=
D
d
), the diode D is forward biased because
the direction of the inductor current iL  does not change instantly. Therefore,
one has three linear differential equations
(
)
du
dt
C i
i
C
L
a
=
−
1
,
(
)
(
)
di
dt
L
u
r
r i
r i
V
L
C
L
c
L
c a
d
=
−
−
+
+
+
1
,
(
)
(
)
di
dt
L
u
r i
r
r i
E
a
a
C
c L
a
c
a
a
=
+
−
+
−
1
.
Assuming the switching frequency id high, the averaging concept is
applied, and we have
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

(
)
du
dt
C i
i
i d
C
L
a
L
D
=
−
−
1
,
(
)
(
)
(
)
di
dt
L
u
r
r i
r i
u d
r
r i d
r i d
V
L
C
L
c
L
c a
C
D
c
s
L
D
c a
D
d
=
−
−
+
+
+
+
−
−
+
1
,
(
)
(
)
di
dt
L
u
r i
r
r i
r i d
E
a
a
C
c L
a
c
a
c L
D
a
=
+
−
+
−
−
1
.
Considering the duty ratio as the control input, one concludes that a set
of nonlinear differential equations result. In fact, the state variables are
multiplied by the control.
Let us illustrate that Lagrange’s concept gives the same differential
equations. We denote the electric charges in the first and the second loops as
q1  and q2 , and the generalized forces are Q1  and Q2 . Then,
d
dt
q
q
q
q
Q
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
Γ
Γ
Π
&
&
1
1
1
1



−
+
+
=
D
1  ,      
d
dt
q
q
q
q
Q
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
Γ
Γ
Π
&
&
2
2
2
2
2



−
+
+
=
D
.
For the closed switch, the total kinetic, potential, and dissipated energies
are
(
)
Γ =
+
1
2
1
2
2
2
Lq
L q
a
&
&
, Π = 1
2
2
2
q
C
,
(
)
(
)
(
)
D= 1
2
1
2
2
2
r
r q
r
r q
L
s
c
a
+
+
+
&
&
.
Assuming that the resistances, inductances, and capacitance are time-
invariant (constant), one obtains
∂
∂
Γ
q1
0
=
, ∂
∂
Γ
q2
0
=
, ∂
∂
Γ
&
&
q
Lq
1
1
=
, ∂
∂
Γ
&
&
q
L q
a
2
2
=
,
d
dt
q
Lq
∂
∂
Γ
&
&&
1
1



=
, d
dt
q
L q
a
∂
∂
Γ
&
&&
2
2



=
,
∂
∂
Π
q1
0
=
, ∂
∂
Π
q
q
C
2
2
=
,
(
)
∂
∂
D =
&
&
q
r
r q
L
s
1
1
+
, 
(
)
∂
∂
D =
&
&
q
r
r q
c
a
2
2
+
.
Therefore,
(
)
Lq
r
r q
Q
L
s
&&
&
1
1
1
+
+
=
,
(
)
L q
r
r q
C q
Q
a
c
a
&&
&
2
2
2
2
1
+
+
+
=
,
and thus,
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

(
)
(
)
&&
&
q
L
r
r q
Q
L
s
1
1
1
1
=
−
+
+
,
(
)
&&
&
q
L
r
r q
C
q
Q
a
c
a
2
2
2
2
1
1
=
−
+
−
+



,
The total kinetic, potential, and dissipated energies if the switch is open
are found to be
(
)
Γ =
+
1
2
1
2
2
2
Lq
L q
a
&
&
,
(
)
Π =
−
1
2
1
2
2
q
q
C
,
(
)
(
)
D= 1
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
r q
r q
q
r q
L
c
a
&
&
&
&
+
−
+
.
Thus,
∂
∂
Γ
q1
0
=
, ∂
∂
Γ
q2
0
=
, ∂
∂
Γ
&
&
q
Lq
1
1
=
, ∂
∂
Γ
&
&
q
L q
a
2
2
=
,
d
dt
q
Lq
∂
∂
Γ
&
&&
1
1



=
, d
dt
q
L q
a
∂
∂
Γ
&
&&
2
2



=
,
∂
∂
Π
q
q
q
C
1
1
2
=
−
, ∂
∂
Π
q
q
q
C
2
1
2
= −
−
,
(
)
∂
∂
D =
&
&
&
q
r
r q
r q
L
c
c
1
1
2
+
−
, 
(
)
∂
∂
D = -
&
&
&
q
r q
r
r q
c
c
a
2
1
2
+
+
.
Using
(
)
Lq
r
r q
r q
q
q
C
Q
L
c
c
&&
&
&
1
1
2
1
2
1
+
+
−
+
−
=
,
(
)
L q
r q
r
r q
q
q
C
Q
a
c
c
a
&&
&
&
2
1
2
1
2
2
−
+
+
−
−
=
,
one has
(
)
&&
&
&
q
L
r
r q
r q
q
q
C
Q
L
c
c
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
=
−
+
+
−
−
+



,
(
)
&&
&
&
q
L
r q
r
r q
q
q
C
Q
a
c
c
a
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
=
−
+
+
−
+



.
It must be emphasized that i
q
L = &1 , i
q
a = &2 , and Q
Vd
1 =
, Q
Ea
2 = −
.
Taking note of the differential equations when the switch is closed and open,
the differential equations in Cauchy’s form are found using dq
dt
iL
1 =
 and
dq
dt
ia
2 =
. The voltage across the capacitor uC  is expressed using the
charges q1  and q2 . When the switch is closed u
q
C
C = −
2 . If the switch is
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

open u
q
q
C
C =
−
1
2 . The analysis of the differential equations derived using
Kirchhoff’s voltage law and the Lagrange equations of motion illustrates that
the mathematical models are found using different state variables. In
particular, u
i
i
C
L
a
,
,
 and q i
q
i
L
a
1
2
,
,
,
 are used. However, the resulting
differential equations are the same as one applies the corresponding variable
transformations as given by
dq
dt
iL
1 =
, dq
dt
ia
2 =
, Q
Vd
1 =
 and Q
Ea
2 = − 
.
        
Example 2.3.14. Mathematical model of an electric motor
Consider a motor with two independently excited stator and rotor
windings, see Figure 2.3.14. Derive the differential equations.
Spring
Load
-
+
Stator
Rotor
Lr
rr
ur
ω r
e
T
,
TL
Ls
.
.
+
-
us
ir
θ
ω
θ
r
r
r
t
=
+
0
Magnetic axis
of the rotor
Magnetic axis
of the stator
is
rs
Figure 2.3.14. Motor with stator and rotor windings
Solution.
The following notations are used: is and ir are the currents in the stator
and rotor windings; us and ur are the applied voltages to the stator and rotor
windings; ω r  and θ r  are the rotor angular velocity and displacement; 
eT
and 
L
T
 are the electromagnetic and load torques; 
sr  and 
rr  are the
resistances of the stator and rotor windings; Ls  and Lr  are the self-
inductances of the stator and rotor windings; Lsr  is the mutual inductance of
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

the stator and rotor windings; ℜm  is the reluctance of the magnetizing path;
Ns and Nr are the number of turns in the stator and rotor windings; J  is the
moment of inertia of the rotor and attached load; Bm  is the viscous friction
coefficient; ks  is the spring constant.
The magnetic fluxes that cross an air gap produce a force of attraction,
and the developed electromagnetic torque Te  is countered by the tortional
spring which causes a counterclockwise rotation. The load torque TL  should
be considered.
Our goal is to find a nonlinear mathematical model. In fact, the ability to
formulate the modeling problem and find the resulting equations that
describe a motion device constitute the most important issues. By using the
Lagrange concept, the independent generalized coordinates must be chosen.
Let us use q1 , q2  and q3 , where q1  and q2  denote the electric charges in
the stator and rotor windings; q3  represents the rotor angular displacement.
We denote the generalized forces, applied to an electromechanical
system, as Q1 , Q2  and Q3, where Q1  and Q2  are the applied voltages to
the stator and rotor windings; Q3 is the load torque.
The first derivative of the generalized coordinates &q1 and &q2  represent
the stator and rotor currents is  and ir , while &q3  is the angular velocity of
the rotor ωr . We have,
q
i
s
s
1 =
, q
i
s
r
2 =
, q
r
3 = θ , &q
is
1 =
,  &q
ir
2 =
, &q
r
3 = ω ,
Q
us
1 =
, Q
ur
2 =
 and Q
TL
3 = −
.
The Lagrange equations are expressed in terms of each independent
coordinates, and we have
d
dt
q
q
D
q
q
Q
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
Γ
Γ
Π
&
&
1
1
1
1
1



−
+
+
=
,
d
dt
q
q
D
q
q
Q
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
Γ
Γ
Π
&
&
2
2
2
2
2



−
+
+
=
,
d
dt
q
q
D
q
q
Q
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
Γ
Γ
Π
&
&
3
3
3
3
3



−
+
+
=
.
The total kinetic energy of electrical and mechanical systems is found as
a sum of the total magnetic (electrical) ΓE  and mechanical ΓM  energies.
The total kinetic energy of the stator and rotor circuitry is given as
ΓE
s
sr
r
L q
L q q
L q
=
+
+
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
&
& &
& .
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

The total kinetic energy of the mechanical system, which is a function of
the equivalent moment of inertia of the rotor and the payload attached, is
expressed by
ΓM
Jq
= 1
2
3
2& .
Then, we have
Γ
Γ
Γ
=
+
=
+
+
+
E
M
s
sr
r
L q
L q q
L q
Jq
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
3
2
&
& &
&
& .
The mutual inductance is a periodic function of the angular rotor
displacement, and L
N N
sr
r
s
r
m
r
(
)
(
)
θ
θ
= ℜ
.
The magnetizing reluctance is maximum if the stator and rotor windings
are not displaced, and ℜm
r
(
)
θ
 is minimum if the coils are displaced by 90
degrees. Then, L
L
L
sr
sr
r
sr
min
max
(
)
≤
≤
θ
, where L
N N
sr
s
r
m
max
(
)
=
ℜ
90o
  and
 L
N N
sr
s
r
m
min
(
)
=
ℜ
0o
.
The mutual inductance can be approximated as a cosine function of the
rotor angular displacement. The amplitude of the mutual inductance between
the stator and rotor windings is found as L
L
N N
M
sr
s
r
m
=
=
ℜ
max
(
)
90o
.
Then,
L
L
L
q
sr
r
M
r
M
(
)
cos
cos
θ
θ
=
=
3 .
One obtains an explicit expression for the total kinetic energy as
Γ =
+
+
+
1
2
1
2
1
2
3
1
2
2
2
1
2
3
2
L q
L q q
q
L q
Jq
s
M
r
&
& & cos
&
& .
The following partial derivatives result
∂
∂
Γ
q1
0
=
, ∂
∂
Γ
&
&
& cos
q
L q
L q
q
s
M
1
1
2
3
=
+
,
∂
∂
Γ
q2
0
=
, ∂
∂
Γ
&
& cos
&
q
L q
q
L q
M
r
2
1
3
2
=
+
,
∂
∂
Γ
q
L q q
q
M
3
1
2
3
= −
& & sin
, ∂
∂
Γ
&
&
q
Jq
3
3
=
.
The potential energy of the spring with constant ks is
Π = 1
2
3
2
k q
s
.
Therefore,
∂
∂
Π
q1
0
=
, ∂
∂
Π
q2
0
=
, and ∂
∂
Π
q
k q
s
3
3
=
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

The total heat energy dissipated is expressed as 
D
D
D
E
M
=
+
,
where DE  is the heat energy dissipated in the stator and rotor windings,
D
r q
r q
E
s
r
=
+
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
&
& ; DM  is the heat energy dissipated by mechanical
system, D
B q
M
m
= 1
2
3
2& .
Hence,
D
r q
r q
B q
s
r
m
=
+
+
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
3
2
&
&
& .
One obtains
∂
∂
D
q
r q
s
&
&
1
1
=
, ∂
∂
D
q
r q
r
&
&
2
2
=
 and ∂
∂
D
q
B q
m
&
&
3
3
=
.
Using
q
i
s
s
1 =
, q
i
s
r
2 =
, q
r
3 = θ , &q
is
1 =
, &q
ir
2 =
, &q
r
3 = ω ,
Q
us
1 =
, Q
ur
2 =
 and Q
TL
3 = −
,
we have three differential equations for a servo-system. In particular,
L di
dt
L
di
dt
L i
d
dt
r i
u
s
s
M
r
r
M r
r
r
s s
s
+
−
+
=
cos
sin
θ
θ
θ
,
L di
dt
L
di
dt
L i
d
dt
r i
u
r
r
M
r
s
M s
r
r
r r
r
+
−
+
=
cos
sin
θ
θ
θ
,
J d
dt
L i i
B d
dt
k
T
r
M s r
r
m
r
s
r
L
2
2
θ
θ
θ
θ
+
+
+
= −
sin
.
The last equation should be rewritten by making use the rotor angular
velocity; that is,
d
dt
r
r
θ
ω
=
.
Finally, using the stator and rotor currents, angular velocity and position
as the state variables, the nonlinear differential equations in Cauchy’s form
are found as
,
cos
cos
sin
cos
2
sin
2
2
2
2
1
r
M
r
s
r
r
M
s
r
r
r
r
M
r
r
r
M
r
r
r
s
M
s
r
s
s
L
L
L
u
L
u
L
i
L
L
i
L
r
i
L
i
L
r
dt
di
θ
θ
θ
ω
θ
θ
ω
−
−
+
+
+
−
−
=
,
cos
cos
2
sin
sin
cos
2
2
2
2
1
r
M
r
s
r
s
s
r
M
r
r
r
M
r
s
r
r
r
s
M
s
r
s
M
s
r
L
L
L
u
L
u
L
i
L
i
L
r
i
L
L
i
L
r
dt
di
θ
θ
θ
ω
θ
ω
θ
−
+
−
−
−
+
=
(
)
d
dt
J
L i i
B
k
T
r
M s r
r
m
r
s
r
L
ω
θ
ω
θ
=
−
−
−
−
1
sin
,
d
dt
r
r
θ
ω
=
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

The developed nonlinear mathematical model in the form of highly
coupled nonlinear differential equations cannot be linearized, and one must
model the doubly exited transducer studied using the nonlinear differential
equations derived.
    
2.3.3. Hamilton Equations of Motion
The Hamilton concept allows one to model the system dynamics, and the
differential equations are found using the generalized momenta pi, 
i
i
q
L
p
&
∂
∂
=
(the generalized coordinates were used in the Lagrange equations of motion).
The 
Lagrangian 
function 






dt
dq
dt
dq
q
q
t
L
n
n
,...,
,
,...,
,
1
1
 
for 
the
conservative systems is the difference between the total kinetic and potential
energies. In particular,
(
)
n
n
n
n
n
q
q
t
dt
dq
dt
dq
q
q
t
dt
dq
dt
dq
q
q
t
L
,...,
,
,...,
,
,...,
,
,...,
,
,...,
,
1
1
1
1
1
Π
−






Γ
=






 .
Thus, 






dt
dq
dt
dq
q
q
t
L
n
n
,...,
,
,...,
,
1
1
 is the function of 2n independent
variables. One has
(
)
∑
∑
=
=
+
=






∂
∂
+
∂
∂
=
n
i
i
i
i
i
n
i
i
i
i
i
q
d
p
dq
p
q
d
q
L
dq
q
L
dL
1
1
&
&
&
&
.
We define the Hamiltonian function as
(
)
∑
=
+






−
=
n
i
i
i
n
n
n
n
q
p
dt
dq
dt
dq
q
q
t
L
p
p
q
q
t
H
1
1
1
1
1
,...,
,
,...,
,
,...,
,
,...,
,
& ,
(
)
∑
=
+
−
=
n
i
i
i
i
i
dp
q
dq
p
dH
1
&
&
,
where 
Γ
=
∂
Γ
∂
=
∂
∂
=
∑
∑
∑
=
=
=
2
1
1
1
n
i
i
i
n
i
i
i
n
i
i
i
q
q
q
q
L
q
p
&
&
&
&
&
.
Thus, we have
(
)
n
n
n
n
n
q
q
t
dt
dq
dt
dq
q
q
t
dt
dq
dt
dq
q
q
t
H
,...,
,
,...,
,
,...,
,
,...,
,
,...,
,
1
1
1
1
1
Π
+






Γ
=






or
(
)
(
)
(
)
n
n
n
n
n
q
q
t
p
p
q
q
t
p
p
q
q
t
H
,...,
,
,...,
,
,...,
,
,...,
,
,...,
,
1
1
1
1
1
Π
+
Γ
=
.
One concludes that the Hamiltonian, which is equal to the total energy, is
expressed as a function of the generalized coordinates and generalized
momenta. The equations of motion are governed by the following equations
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

i
i
q
H
p
∂
∂
−
=
&
, 
i
i
p
H
q
∂
∂
=
&
,
            (2.3.4)
which are called the Hamiltonian equations of motion.
It is evident that using the Hamiltonian mechanics, one obtains the
system of 2n first-order partial differential equations to model the system
dynamics. In contrast, using the Lagrange equations of motion, the system of
n second-order differential equations results. However, the derived
differential equations are equivalent.
Example 2.3.15.
Consider the harmonic oscillator. The total energy is given as the sum of
the kinetic and potential energies, 
)
(
2
2
2
1
x
k
mv
s
T
+
=
Π
+
Γ
=
Σ
. Find the
equations of motion using the Lagrange and Hamilton concepts.
Solution.
The Lagrangian function is
)
(
)
(
,
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
x
k
x
m
x
k
mv
dt
dx
x
L
s
s
−
=
−
=
Π
−
Γ
=






&
.
Making use of the Lagrange equations of motion
0
=
∂
∂
−
∂
∂
x
L
x
L
dt
d
&
,
we have
0
2
2
=
+
x
k
dt
x
d
m
s
.
From Newton’s second law, the second-order differential equation motion
is
0
2
2
=
+
x
k
dt
x
d
m
s
.
The Hamiltonian function is expressed as
(
)






−
=
−
=
Π
+
Γ
=
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
1
)
(
,
x
k
p
m
x
k
mv
p
x
H
s
s
.
From the Hamiltonian equations of motion 
i
i
q
H
p
∂
∂
−
=
&
 and 
i
i
p
H
q
∂
∂
=
&
,
as given by (2.3.4), one obtains
x
k
x
H
p
s
−
=
∂
∂
−
=
&
,
m
p
p
H
q
x
=
∂
∂
=
= &
&
.
The equivalence the results and equations of motion are obvious.
    
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

2.4. ATOMIC  STRUCTURES  AND  QUANTUM  MECHANICS
The fundamental and applied research as well as engineering
developments in NEMS and MEMS have undergone major developments in
last years. High-performance nanostructures and nanodevices, as well as
MEMS have been manufactured and implemented (accelerometers and
microphones, actuators and sensors, molecular wires and transistors, et
cetera). Smart structures and MEMS have been mainly designed and built
using conventional electromechanical and CMOS technologies. The next
critical step to be made is to research nanoelectromechanical structures and
systems, and these developments will have a tremendous positive impact on
economy and society. Nanoengineering studies NEMS and MEMS, as well
as their structures and subsystems, which are made from atoms and
molecules, and the electron is considered as a fundamental particle. The
students and engineers have obtained the necessary background in physics
classes. The properties and performance of materials (media) is understood
through the analysis of the atomic structure.
The atomic structures were studied by Rutherford and Einstein (in the
1900’s), Heisenberg and Dirac (in the 1920’s), Schrödinger, Bohr, Feynman,
and many other scientists. For example, the theory of quantum
electrodynamics studies the interaction of electrons and photons. In the
1940’s, the major breakthrough appears in augmentation of the electron
dynamics with electromagnetic field. One can control molecules and group
of molecules (nanostructures) applying the electromagnetic field, and micro-
and nanoscale devices (e.g., actuators and sensors) have been fabricated, and
some problems in structural design and optimization have been approached
and solved. However, these nano- and micro-scale devices (which have
dimensions nano- and micrometers) must be controlled, and one faces an
extremely challenging problem to design NEMS and MEMS integrating
control and optimization, self-organization and decision making, diagnostics
and self-repairing, signal processing and communication, as well as other
features. In 1959, Richard Feynman gave a talk to the American Physical
Society in which he emphasized the important role of nanotechnology and
nanoscale organic and inorganic systems on the society and progress.
All media are made from atoms, and the medium properties depend on
the atomic structure. Recalling the Rutherford’s structure of the atomic
nuclei, we can view here very simple atomic model and omit detailed
composition, because only three subatomic particles (proton, neutron and
electron) have bearing on chemical behavior.
The nucleus of the atom bears the major mass. It is an extremely dense
region, which contains positively charged protons and neutral neutrons. It
occupies small amount of the atomic volume compared with the virtually
indistinct cloud of negatively charged electrons attracted to the positively
charged nucleus by the force that exists between the particles of opposite
electric charge.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

For the atom of the element the number of protons is always the same
but the number of neutrons may vary. Atoms of a given element, which
differ in number of neutrons (and consequently in mass), are called isotopes.
For example, carbon always has 6 protons, but it may have 6 neutrons as
well. In this case it is called “carbon-12” (12C ). The representation of the
carbon atom is given in Figure 2.4.1.
4e-
2e-
 6 p+
6 n
  Figure 2.4.1.Simplified two-dimensional representation of carbon atom (C).
Six protons  (p+, dashed color) and six neutrons (n, white) are
in centrally located nucleus. Six electrons (e-, black), orbiting
the nucleus, occupy two shells
Atom has no net charge due to the equal number of positively charged
protons in the nucleus and negatively charged electrons around it. For
example, all atoms of carbon have 6 protons and 6 electrons. If electrons are
lost or gained by the neutral atom due to the chemical reaction, a charged
particle called ion is formed.
When one deals with such subatomic particles as electron, the dual
nature of matter places a fundamental limitation on how accurate we can
describe both location and momentum of the object. Austrian physicist
Erwin Schrödinger in 1926 derived an equation that describes wave and
particle natures of the electron. This fundamental equation led to the new
area in physics, called quantum mechanics, which enables us to deal with
subatomic particles. The complete solution to Schrödinger’s equation gives a
set of wave functions and set of corresponding energies. These wave
functions are called orbitals. A collection of orbitals with the same principal
quantum number, which describes the orbit, called electron shell. Each shell
is divided into the number of subshells with the equal principal quantum
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

number. Each subshell consists of number of orbitals. Each shell may
contain only two electrons of the opposite spin (Pouli exclusion principle).
When the electron in the lowest energy orbital, the atom is in its ground
state. When the electron enters the orbital, the atom is in an excited state. To
promote the electron to the excited-state orbital, the photon of the
appropriate energy should be absorbed as the energy supplement.
 
When the size of the orbital increases, and the electron spends more
time farther from the nucleus. It possesses more energy and less tightly
bound to the nucleus. The most outer shell is called the valence shell.  The
electrons, which occupy it, are referred as valence electrons. Inner shells
electrons are called the core electrons.  There are valence electrons, which
participate in the bond formation between atoms when molecules are
formed, and in ion formation when the electrons are removed from the
electrically neutral atom and the positively charged cation is formed. They
possess the highest ionization energies (the energy which measure the easy
of the removing the electron from the atom), and occupy energetically
weakest orbital since it is the most remote orbital from the nucleus. The
valence electrons removed from the valence shell become free electrons
transferring the energy from one atom to another. We will describe the
influence of the electromagnetic field on the atom later in the text, and it is
relevant to include more detailed description of the Pauli exclusion principal.
The electric conductivity of a media is predetermined by the density of
free electrons, and good conductors have the free electron density in the
range of 1023 free electrons per cm3. In contrast, the free electron density of
good insulators is in the range of 10 free electrons per cm3. The free electron
density of semiconductors in the range from 107/cm3 to 1015/cm3 (for
example, the free electron concentration in silicon at 250C and 1000C are
2×1010/cm3 and 2×1012/cm3, respectively). The free electron density is
determined by the energy gap between valence and conduction (free)
electrons. That is, the properties of the media (conductors, semiconductors,
and insulators) are determined by the atomic structure.
Using the atoms as building blocks, one can manufacture different
structures using the molecular nanotechnology. There are many challenging
problems needed to be solve such as mathematical modeling and analysis,
simulation and design, optimization and testing, implementation and
deployment, technology transfer and mass production. In addition, to build
NEMS, advanced manufacturing technologies must be developed and
applied. To fabricate nanoscale systems at the molecular level, the problems
in atomic-scale positional assembly (“maneuvering things atom by atom" as
Richard Feynman predicted) and artificial self-replication (systems are able
to build copies of themselves, e.g., like the crystals growth process, complex
DNA strands which copy tens of millions atoms with perfect accuracy, or
self replicating tomato which has millions of genes, proteins, and other
molecular components) must be solved. The author does not encourage the
blind copying, and the submarine and whale are very different even though
both sail. Using the Scanning or Atomic Probe Microscopes, it is possible to
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

achieve positional accuracy in the angstrom-range. However, the atomic-
scale “manipulator” (which will have a wide range of motion guaranteeing
the flexible assembly of molecular components), controlled by the external
source (electromagnetic field, pressure, or temperature) must be designed
and used. The position control will be achieved by the molecular computer
and which will be based on molecular computational devices.
The quantitative explanation, analysis and simulation of natural
phenomena can be approached using comprehensive mathematical models
which map essential features. The Newton laws and Lagrange equations of
motion, Hamilton concept and d’Alambert concept allow one to model
conventional mechanical systems, and the Maxwell equations applied to
model electromagnetic phenomena. In the 1920’s, new theoretical
developments, concepts and formulations (quantum mechanics) have been
made to develop the atomic scale theory because atomic-scale systems do
not obey the classical laws of physics and mechanics. In 1900 Max Plank
discovered the effect of quantization of energy, and he found that the
radiated (emitted) energy  is given as
E = nhv,
where n is the nonnegative integer, n = 0, 1, 2, …; h is the Plank constant,
sec
-
J 
10
626
.6
34
−
×
=
h
; v is the frequency of radiation, 
λ
c
v =
, c is the
speed of light, 
sec
m
8 
10
3×
=
c
; λ  is the wavelength which is measured in
angstroms (
m
 
10
1
10
−
×
=
o
A
),
v
c
=
λ
.
The following discrete energy values result:
E0 = 0, E1 = hv, E2 = 2hv, E3 = 3hv, etc.
The observation of discrete energy spectra suggests that each particle
has the energy hv (the radiation results due to N particles), and the particle
with the energy hv is called photon.
The photon has the momentum as expressed as
λ
h
c
hv
p
=
=
.
Soon, Einstein demonstrated the discrete nature of light, and Niels Bohr
develop the model of the hydrogen atom using the planetary system analog,
see Figure 2.4.2. It is clear that if the electron has planetary-type orbits, it
can be excited to an outer orbit and can “fall” to the inner orbits. Therefore,
to develop the model, Bohr postulated that the electron has the certain stable
circular orbit (that is, the orbiting electron does not produces the radiation
because otherwise the electron would lost the energy and change the path);
the electron changes the orbit of higher or lower energy by receiving or
radiating discrete amount of energy; the angular momentum of the electron
is p = nh.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.4.2. Hydrogen atom: uniform circular motion
To attain the uniform circular motion, using Newton’s law, the
electrostatic (Coulomb) force must be equal to the radial force, and for radii
R1 and R2 we have
1
2
2
1
0
2
4
R
mv
R
q
=
πε
 and 
2
2
2
2
0
2
4
R
mv
R
q
=
πε
.
That is, in general
n
n
R
mv
R
q
2
2
0
2
4
=
πε
,
where Rn is the radius of the n orbit, and 
2
2
2
0
4
mq
h
n
Rn
πε
=
.
Applying the expression for the angular momentum
p = nh = mvRn,
we have
2
2
2
2
2
0
2
1
4
n
n
n
n
n
R
h
n
mR
mR
nh
R
m
R
q
=






=
πε
.
The kinetic and potential energies are
2
2
2
0
2
4
2
2
1
32
h
n
mq
mv
ε
π
=
=
Γ
 and 
2
2
2
0
2
4
0
2
16
4
h
n
mq
R
q
n
ε
π
πε
−
=
−
=
Π
.
The total energy of the electron in the nth orbit is found to be
2
2
2
0
2
4
32
h
n
mq
En
ε
π
−
=
Π
+
Γ
=
.
One finds the energy difference between the orbits as
protons and neutrons
electron
q
+
q
−
n
R
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC







−
=
−
=
∆
2
2
2
1
2
2
0
2
4
1
2
1
1
32
n
n
h
mq
E
E
E
n
n
ε
π
.
Bohr’s model was expanded and generalized by Heisenberg and
Schrödinger using the matrix and wave mechanics. The characteristics of
particles and waves are augmented replacing the trajectory consideration by
the waves using continuous, finite, and single-valued wave function
• 
)
,
,
,
(
t
z
y
x
Ψ
 in the Cartesian coordinate system,
• 
)
,
,
,
(
t
z
r φ
Ψ
 in the cylindrical coordinate system,
• 
)
,
,
,
(
t
r
φ
θ
Ψ
 in the spherical coordinate system.
The wavefunction gives the dependence of the wave amplitude on space
coordinates and time.
Using the classical mechanics, for a particle of mass m with energy E
moving in the Cartesian coordinate system one has
.)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
2
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
2
n
Hamiltonia
energy
potential
energy
kinetic
energy
total
t
z
y
x
H
t
z
y
x
m
t
z
y
x
p
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
E
=
Π
+
=
Π
+
Γ
=
Thus, we have
[
])
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
2
)
,
,
,
(
2
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
E
m
t
z
y
x
p
Π
−
=
.
Using the formula for the wavelength (Broglie’s equation)
mv
h
p
h =
=
λ
,
one finds
[
])
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
2
1
2
2
2
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
E
h
m
h
p
Π
−
=






=
λ
.
This expression is substituted in the Helmholtz equation
0
4
2
2
2
=
Ψ
+
Ψ
∇
λ
π
which gives the evolution of the wavefunction.
We obtain the Schrödinger equation as
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
2
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
2
2
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
m
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
E
Ψ
Π
+
Ψ
∇
−
=
Ψ
h
or
).
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
2
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
z
t
z
y
x
y
t
z
y
x
x
t
z
y
x
m
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
E
Ψ
Π
+






∂
Ψ
∂
+
∂
Ψ
∂
+
∂
Ψ
∂
−
=
Ψ
h
Here, the modified Plank constant is
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

34
10
055
.1
2
−
×
=
= π
h
h
 J-sec.
In 1926, Erwine Schrödinger derive the following equation
Ψ
=
ΠΨ
+
Ψ
∇
−
E
m
2
2
2
h
which can be related to the Hamiltonian
Π
+
∇
−
=
m
H
2
2
h
,
and thus
Ψ
=
Ψ
E
H
.
For different coordinate systems we have
• 
Cartesian system
;)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
z
t
z
y
x
y
t
z
y
x
x
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
∂
Ψ
∂
+
∂
Ψ
∂
+
∂
Ψ
∂
=
Ψ
∇
• 
cylindrical system
;)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
1
)
,
,
,
(
1
)
,
,
,
(
2
2
2
2
2
2
z
t
z
r
t
z
r
r
r
t
z
r
r
r
r
t
z
r
∂
Ψ
∂
+
∂
Ψ
∂
+






∂
Ψ
∂
∂
∂
=
Ψ
∇
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
• 
spherical system
.)
,
,
,
(
sin
1
)
,
,
,
(
sin
sin
1
)
,
,
,
(
1
)
,
,
,
(
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
φ
φ
θ
θ
θ
φ
θ
θ
θ
θ
φ
θ
φ
θ
∂
Ψ
∂
+






∂
Ψ
∂
∂
∂
+






∂
Ψ
∂
∂
∂
=
Ψ
∇
t
r
r
t
r
r
r
t
r
r
r
r
t
r
The Schrödinger partial differential equation must be solved, and the
wavefunction is normalized using the probability density
1
2
=
Ψ
∫
ς
d
.
Let us illustrate the application of the Schrödinger equation.
Example 2.4.1.
Assume that the particle moves in the x direction (translational motion).
We have,
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
2
2
2
2
x
x
E
x
x
dx
x
d
m
Ψ
=
Ψ
Π
+
Ψ
−h
.
The Hamiltonian function is given as
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

)
(
2
)
(
2
)
(
)
,
(
2
2
2
2
x
dx
d
m
x
m
x
p
p
x
H
Π
+
−
=
Π
+
=
h
.
Let the particle moves from x = 0 to x = xf, and the potential energy is



>
<
∞
≤
≤
=
Π
f
f
x
x
x
x
x
x
 
and
 0
,
0
,0
)
(
.
Thus, the motion of the particle is bounded in the “potential wall”, and



>
<
≤
≤
=
Ψ
f
f
x
x
x
x
x
x
 
and
 0
if
 0
0
if
 
continuous
)
(
.
If 
fx
x ≤
≤
0
, the potential energy is zero, and we have
)
(
)
(
2
2
2
2
x
E
dx
x
d
m
Ψ
=
Ψ
−h
, 
fx
x ≤
≤
0
.
The solution of the resulting second-order differential equation
2
2
2
2
2
,0
)
(
)
(
h
mE
k
x
k
dx
x
d
=
=
Ψ
+
Ψ
is
(
)
(
)
.
cos
sin
sin
cos
sin
cos
)
(
kx
d
kx
c
kx
i
kx
b
kx
i
kx
a
be
ae
x
ikx
ikx
+
=
−
+
+
=
+
=
Ψ
−
The solution can be easily verified by plugging the solution in the left-
side of the differential equation
)
(
)
(
2
2
2
2
x
E
dx
x
d
m
Ψ
=
Ψ
−h
,
and we have
)
(
)
(
x
E
x
E
Ψ
=
Ψ
.
It should be emphasized that the kinetic energy of the particle is given as
m
p
2
2
, where p = kh.
It is obvious that one must use the boundary conditions.
We have 
0
)
0
(
)
(
0
=
Ψ
=
Ψ
=
x
x
, and therefore d = 0.
From 
0
)
(
)
(
=
Ψ
=
Ψ
=
f
x
x
x
x
f
 using 
0
sin
=
f
kx
c
 one must find the
constant c and the expression for 
f
kx .
Assuming that 
0
≠
c
 from 
0
sin
=
f
kx
c
, we have
π
n
kx f =
,
where n is the positive or negative integer (if n = 0, the wavefunction
vanishes everywhere, and thus, 
0
≠
n
).
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

From 
2
2
h
mE
k =
 and making use of 
π
n
kx f =
 we have the
expression for the energy (discrete values of the energy which allow of
solution of the Schrödinger equation) as
,...
3
,2
,1
,
2
2
2
2
2
=
=
n
n
mx
E
f
n
π
h
,
where the integer n designates the allowed energy level (n is called the
quantum number).
For example, if n = 1 and n = 2, we have 
2
2
2
1
2mc
E
π
h
=
 (the lowest
possible energy which is called the ground state) and 
2
2
2
2
2
mc
E
π
h
=
.
Thus, we have illustrated that the energy of the particle is quantized.
The expression for the wavefunction is found to be
x
x
n
c
kx
d
kx
c
x
f
n
π
sin
cos
sin
)
(
=
+
=
Ψ
.
Using the probability density, we normalize the wavefunction, and the
following results
.
,1
2
2
sin
sin
)
(
2
2
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
x
x
n
g
x
c
n
n
x
c
gdg
n
x
c
xdx
x
n
c
dx
x
f
f
f
x
x
n
f
f
n
f
f
π
π
π
π
π
π
=
=
=
=
=
Ψ
∫
∫
∫
Hence, 
fx
c
2
=
, and one finally obtains
x
x
n
x
x
f
f
n
π
sin
2
)
(
=
Ψ
, 
fx
x ≤
≤
0
.
For n = 1 and n = 2, we have
x
x
x
x
f
f
π
sin
2
)
(
1
=
Ψ
 and 
x
x
x
x
f
f
π
2
sin
2
)
(
2
=
Ψ
.
 Using the formula for the probability density, as given by 
Ψ
Ψ
=
T
ρ
,
one has
x
x
n
x
x
f
f
n
π
ρ
2
sin
2
)
(
=
.
It was shown that
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Ψ
=
Ψ
E
H
, 
Π
+
∇
−
=
m
H
2
2
h
.
Using 
the 
CGS 
(centimeter/gram/second) 
units, 
when 
the
electromagnetic field is quantized, the potential can be used instead of
wavefunction. In particular, using the momentum operator due to electron
orbital angular momentum L, the classical Hamiltonian for electrons in
electromagnetic field is
φ
e
c
e
m
H
−






+
=
2
2
1
A
p
.
From the Hamilton equations
p
H
q
∂
∂
=
&
 and 
q
H
p
∂
∂
−
=
&
,
by making use of






+
=
A
p
r
c
e
m
dt
d
1
,
A
v
p
c
e
m −
=
, 
x
x
A
A
p
p
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
⋅





+
−
=
φ
e
c
e
mc
e
&
,
one finds the Lorentz force equation
E
B
v
F
e
c
e
−
×
−
=
.
This equation gives the force due to motion in a magnetic field and the
force due to electric field.
It is important to emphasize that the following equation results
(
)
(
)
(
)Ψ
+
=
Ψ
⋅
−
+
Ψ
⋅
+
Ψ
∇
−
φ
e
E
B
r
mc
e
mc
e
m
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
8
2
2
B
r
L
B
h
to study the quantized Hamilton equation, where the dominant term due to
magnetic field is
B
ì
L
B
⋅
−
=
⋅
mc
e
2
,
where ì  the magnetic momentum due to the electron orbital angular
momentum (the so-called Zeeman effect) is 
L
ì
mc
e
2
−
=
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

2.5. MOLECULAR AND NANOSTRUCTURE DYNAMICS
Conventional, mini- and microscale electromechanical systems can be
modeled using electromagnetic and circuitry theories, classical mechanics
and thermodynamic, as well as other fundamental concepts. The complexity
of mathematical models of mini- and microelectromechanical systems
(nonlinear ordinary and partial differential equations explicitly describe the
spectrum of electromagnetics and electromechanics phenomena and
processes) is not ambiguous, and numerical algorithms to solve the equations
derived are available. Illustrated examples have been studied in sections 2.2
and 2.3. Nano-scale structures, in general, cannot be studied using the
conventional concepts, and the basis of quantum mechanics was covered in
chapter 2.4.
The fundamental and applied research in molecular nanotechnology and
nanostructures, nanodevices and nanosystems, NEMS and MEMS, is
concentrated on design, modeling, simulation, and fabrication of molecular
scale structures and devices. The design, modeling, and simulation of
NEMS, MEMS, and their components can be attacked using advanced
theoretical developments and simulation concepts. Comprehensive analysis
must be performed before the designer embarks in costly fabrication (a wide
range of nano-scale structures and devices, molecular machines and
subsystems, can be fabricated with atomic precision) because through
modeling and simulation the rapid evaluation and prototyping can be
performed facilitating significant advantages and manageable perspectives to
attain the desired objectives. With advanced computer-aided-design tools,
complex large-scale nanostructures, nanodevices, and nanosystems can be
designed, analyzed, and evaluated.
Classical quantum mechanics does not allow the designer to perform
analytical and numerical analysis even for simple nanostructures which
consist of a couple of molecules. Steady-state three-dimensional modeling
and simulation are also restricted to simple nanostructures. Our goal is to
develop a fundamental understanding of phenomena and processes in
nanostructures with emphasis on their further applications in nanodevices,
nanosubsystems, NEMS, and MEMS. The objective is the development of
theoretical fundamentals (theory of nanoelectromechanics) to perform 3D+
(three-dimensional geometry dynamics in time domain) modeling and
simulation.
The atomic level electomechanics can be studied using the wave
function solving the Schrödinger equation for N-electron systems (multi-
body problem). However, this problem cannot be solved even for simple
nanostrustures. In papers [2 - 4], the density functional theory was
developed, and the charge density is used rather than the electron
wavefunctions. In particular, the N-electron problem is formulated as N one-
electron equations where each electron interacts with all other electrons via
an effective exchange-correlation potential. These interactions are
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

augmented using the charge density. Plane wave sets and total energy
pseudo-potential methods can be used to solve the Kohn-Sham one electron
equations [2 - 4]. The Hellmann-Feynman theory can be applied to calculate
the forces solving the molecular dynamics problem [1 - 5].
2.5.1. Schrödinger Equation and Wavefunction Theory
For two point charges, Coulomb’s law is given as
3
2
1
2
2
1
'
)'
(
4
4
r
r
r
r
a
F
−
−
=
=
πε
πε
q
q
d
q
q
r
,
and in the Cartesian coordinate systems one has
.
)'
(
)'
(
)'
(
)'
(
)'
(
)'
(
4
4
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
1
z
z
y
y
x
x
z
z
y
y
x
x
d
q
q
d
q
q
z
y
x
r
−
+
−
+
−
−
+
−
+
−
=
=
a
a
a
a
F
πε
πε
In the case of charge distribution, using the volume charge density 
v
ρ ,
the net force exerted on q1 by the entire volume charge distribution is the
vector sum of the contribution from all differential elements of charge within
this distribution. In particular,
∫
−
−
=
v
v
dv
q
3
1
'
)'
(
4
r
r
r
r
F
ρ
πε
,
see Figure 2.5.1.
Figure 2.5.1. Coulomb’s law
In the electrostatic field, the potential energy stored in a region of
continuous charge distribution is found as
)'
,'
,'
(
z
y
x
'r
r
)
,
,
(
z
y
x
z
y
x
xyz
z
z
y
y
x
x
a
a
a
r
)'
(
)'
(
)'
(
−
+
−
+
−
=
F
1q
v
ρ
y
x
z
xyz
r
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

∫
∫
∫
=
=
⋅
=
Π
v
v
v
v
V
dv
V
dv
dv
)
(
)
(
2
1
2
2
1
2
1
r
r
E
E
D
ρ
ε
,
where 
)
(r
V
 is the potential; v is the volume containing 
v
ρ .
The charge distribution can be given in terms of volume, surface, and
line charges. In particular, we have
'
'
4
)'
(
)
(
∫
−
=
v
v
dv
V
r
r
r
r
πε
ρ
,
'
'
4
)'
(
)
(
∫
−
=
s
s
ds
V
r
r
r
r
πε
ρ
,
and 
'
'
4
)'
(
)
(
∫
−
=
l
l
dl
V
r
r
r
r
πε
ρ
.
It should be emphasized that that the electric field intensity is found as
'
'
)'
(
4
)'
(
)
(
3
∫
−
−
=
v
v
dv
r
r
r
r
r
r
E
πε
ρ
.
Thus, the energy of an electric field or a charge distribution is stored in
the field.
The energy, stored in the steady magnetic field is
∫
⋅
=
Π
v
M
dv
H
B
2
1
.
The Hamiltonian function, which in section 2.4 was given as
energy
 
potential
energy
 
kinetic
electron 
-
one
2
2
2
Π
+
∇
−
=
m
H
!
,
was used to derive the one-electron Schrödinger equation.
To describe the behavior of electrons in a media, one must use N-
dimensional Schrödinger equation to obtain the N-electron wavefunction
(
)
N
N
t
r
r
r
r
,
,...,
,
,
1
2
1
−
Ψ
.
The Hamiltonian for an isolated N-electron atomic system is
     
∑
∑
∑
≠
=
=
−
+
−
−
∇
−
∇
−
=
N
j
i
j
i
N
i
n
i
i
N
i
i
e
q
e
M
m
H
'
2
1
'
2
2
1
2
2
4
1
4
1
2
2
r
r
r
r
πε
πε
!
!
,
where q is the potential due to nucleus; 
19
10
6.1
−
×
=
e
 C.
For an isolated N-electron, Z-nucleus molecular system, the Hamiltonian
function (Hamiltonian operator) is found to be
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

,
4
1
4
1
4
1
2
2
'
'
2
1
1
'
1
2
2
1
2
2
∑
∑
∑∑
∑
∑
≠
≠
=
=
=
=
−
+
−
+
−
−
∇
−
∇
−
=
Z
m
k
m
k
m
k
N
j
i
j
i
N
i
Z
k
k
i
k
i
Z
k
k
k
N
i
i
q
q
e
q
e
m
m
H
r
r
r
r
r
r
πε
πε
πε
!
!
where qk are the potentials due to nuclei.
Terms of the Hamiltonian function 
∑
=
∇
−
N
i
i
m
1
2
2
2
!
 and ∑
=
∇
−
Z
k
k
k
m
1
2
2
2
!
are the multi-body kinetic energy operators.
Term ∑∑
=
=
−
−
N
i
Z
k
k
i
k
iq
e
1
1
'
4
1
r
r
πε
 maps the interaction of the electrons with
the nuclei at R (the electron-nucleus attraction energy operator).
In the Hamiltonian, the fourth term ∑
≠
−
N
j
i
j
i
e
'
2
4
1
r
r
πε
 gives the
interactions of electrons with each other (the electron-electron repulsion
energy operator).
Term ∑
≠
−
Z
m
k
m
k
m
kq
q
'
4
1
r
r
πε
 describes the interaction of the Z nuclei at R
(the nucleus-nucleus repulsion energy operator).
For an isolated N-electron Z-nucleus atomic or molecular systems in the
Born-Oppenheimer nonrelativistic approximation, we have
Ψ
=
Ψ
E
H
.
Thus, the Schrödinger equation is
      
(
)
(
) (
).
,
,...,
,
,
,
,...,
,
,
,
,...,
,
,
4
1
4
1
4
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
'
'
2
1
1
'
1
2
2
1
2
2
N
N
N
N
N
N
Z
m
k
m
k
m
k
N
j
i
j
i
N
i
Z
k
k
i
k
i
Z
k
k
k
N
i
i
t
t
E
t
q
q
e
q
e
m
m
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
−
−
−
≠
≠
=
=
=
=
Ψ
=
Ψ
×




−
+
−
+
−
−



∇
−
∇
−
∑
∑
∑∑
∑
∑
πε
πε
πε
!
!
 (2.5.1)
 
The total energy 
(
)
N
N
t
E
r
r
r
r
,
,...,
,
,
1
2
1
−
 must be found using the
nucleus-nucleus Coulomb repulsion energy as well as the electron energy.
It is very difficult, or impossible, to solve analytically or numerically the
nonlinear partial differential equation (2.5.1). Taking into account only the
Coulomb force (electrons and nuclei are assumed to interact due to the
Coulomb force only), the Hartree approximation is applied. In particular, the
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

N-electron wavefunction 
(
)
N
N
t
r
r
r
r
,
,...,
,
,
1
2
1
−
Ψ
 is expressed as a product of
N one-electron wavefunctions as
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
N
N
N
N
N
N
t
t
t
t
t
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
,
,
...
,
,
,
,...,
,
,
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
−
−
−
=
Ψ
.
The one-electron Schrödinger equation for jth electron is
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
r
r
r
r
,
,
,
,
2
2
2
t
t
E
t
t
m
j
j
j
j
ψ
ψ
=






Π
+
∇
−!
.
            (2.5.2)
In equation (2.5.2), the first term 
2
2
2
j
m ∇
−!
 is the one-electron kinetic
energy, and 
(
)
j
t r,
Π
 is the total potential energy. The potential energy
includes the potential that jth electron feels from the nucleus (considering the
ion, the repulsive potential in the case of anion, or attractive in the case of
cation). It is obvious that jth electron feels the repulsion (repulsive forces)
from other electrons. Assumed that the negative electrons charge density
)
(r
ρ
 is smoothly distributed in R. Hence, the potential energy due
interaction (repulsion) of an electron in R is
(
)
( )
∫
−
=
Π
R
r
r
r
r
r
'
'
4
'
,
d
e
t
Ej
πε
ρ
.
We made some assumptions, and the results derived contradict with
some fundamental principles. The Pauli exclusion principle requires that the
multi-system wavefunction is an antisymmetric under the interchange of
electrons. For two electrons, we have,
(
)
(
)
N
N
j
i
j
N
N
i
j
j
t
t
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
,
,...,
,...,
,...,
,
,
,
,...,
,...,
,...,
,
,
1
2
1
1
2
1
−
+
−
+
Ψ
−
=
Ψ
.
This principle is not satisfied, and the generalizations is needed to
integrate  the asymmetry phenomenon using the asymmetric coefficient 
1
±
.
The Hartree-Fock equation is
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
) (
)
(
)
(
)
(
).
,
,
'
'
,
,
'
,
'
,
,
,
2
*
*
2
2
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
R
t
t
E
d
t
t
t
t
t
t
m
j
j
i
j
i
j
i
j
j
ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
=
−
−






Π
+
∇
−
∑∫
!
       (2.5.3)
The so-called Hartree-Fock nonlinear partial differential equation
(2.5.3), which is difficult to solve, is the approximation because the multi-
body electron interactions should be considered in general. Thus, the explicit
equation for the total energy must be used. This phenomenon can be
integrated using the charge density function.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

2.5.2. Density Functional Theory
There is a critical need to develop computationally efficient and accurate
procedures to perform quantum modeling of nano-scale structures. This
section reports the related results and gives the formulation of the modeling
problem to avoid the complexity associated 
with 
many-electron
wavefunctions which result if the classical quantum mechanics formulation
is used. The complexity of the Schrödinger equation is enormous even for
very simple molecules. For example, the carbon atom has 6 electrons. Can
one visualize six-dimensional space? Furthermore, the simplest carbon
nanotube molecule has 6 carbon atoms. That is, one has 36 electrons, and 36-
dimensional problem results. The difficulties associated with the solution of
the Schrödinger equation drastically limit the applicability of the
conventional quantum mechanics. The analysis of properties, processes,
phenomena, and effects in even simplest nanostructures cannot be studied
and comprehended. The problems can be solved applying the Hohenberg-
Kohn density functional theory.
The statistical consideration, proposed by Thomas and Fermi in 1927,
gives the distribution of electrons in atoms. The following assumptions were
used: electrons are distributed uniformly, and there is an effective potential
field that is determined by the nuclei charge and the distribution of electrons.
Considering electrons distributed in a three-dimensional box, the energy
analysis can be performed. Summing all energy levels, one finds the energy.
Thus, one can relate the total kinetic energy and the electron charge density.
The statistical consideration can be used in order to approximate the
distribution of electrons in an atom. The relation between the total kinetic
energy of N electrons E, and the electron density was derived using the local
density approximation concept. The Thomas-Fermi kinetic energy functional
is
(
)
∫
=
Γ
R
r
r
r
d
e
e
F
)
(
87
.2
)
(
3
/
5
ρ
ρ
,
and the exchange energy is found to be
(
)
∫
=
R
r
r
r
d
E
e
e
F
)
(
739
.0
)
(
3
/
4
ρ
ρ
.
For homogeneous atomic systems, the application of the electron charge
density 
)
(r
e
ρ
, considering electrostatic electron-nucleus attraction and
electron-electron repulsion, Thomas and Fermi derived the following energy
functional
(
)
∫∫
∫
∫
−
+
−
=
R R
R
R
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
'
'
)'
(
)
(
4
1
)
(
)
(
87
.2
)
(
3
/
5
d
d
d
r
q
d
E
e
e
e
e
e
F
ρ
ρ
πε
ρ
ρ
ρ
.
Following this idea, instead of the many-electron wavefunctions, Kohn
proposed to use the charge density for N-electron systems [2, 4]. Only the
knowledge of the charge density is needed to perform analysis of molecular
dynamics. The charge density is the function that describes the number of
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

electrons per unit volume (function of three spatial variables x, y and z in the
Cartesian coordinate system). The quantum mechanics and quantum
modeling must be applied to understand and analyze nanostructures and
nanodevices because they operate under the quantum effects.
The total energy of N-electron system under the external field is defined
in the term of the three-dimensional charge density 
)
(r
ρ
 [1 - 5]. The
complexity is significantly decreased because the problem of modeling of N-
electron Z-nucleus systems become equivalent to the solution of equation for
one electron. The total energy is given as
(
)
(
)
(
)
( )
energy
potential
energy
kinetic
2
1
'
'
4
'
)
(
,
)
(
,
)
(
,
∫
−
+
Γ
+
Γ
=
R
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
d
e
t
t
t
E
πε
ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ
,           (2.5.4)
where 
(
))
(
,
1
r
ρ
t
Γ
 and 
(
))
(
,
2
r
ρ
t
Γ
 are the interacting (exchange) and non-
interacting kinetic energies of a single electron in N-electron Z-nucleus
system,
(
)
(
)
r
r
r
r
R
d
t
t
)
(
)
(
,
)
(
,
1
ρ
ρ
γ
ρ
∫
=
Γ
,
(
)
r
r
r
r
R
d
t
t
m
t
j
N
j
j
j
)
,
(
)
,
(
2
)
(
,
1
2
*
2
2
ψ
ψ
ρ
∑∫
=
∇
−
=
Γ
!
;
(
))
(
,
r
ρ
γ t
 is the parameterization function.
It should be emphasized that the Kohn-Sham electronic orbitals are
subject to the following orthogonal condition
ij
j
i
d
t
t
δ
ψ
ψ
=
∫
r
r
r
R
)
,
(
)
,
(
*
.
The state of substance (media) depends largely on the balance between
the kinetic energies of the particles and the interparticle energies of
attraction.
The expression for the total potential energy is easily justified.
Term 
( )
∫
−
R
r
r
r
r
'
'
4
'
d
e
πε
ρ
 represents the Coulomb interaction in R, and the
total potential energy is a functions of the charge density 
)
(r
ρ
.
The total kinetic energy (interactions of electrons and nuclei, and
electrons) is integrated into the equation for the total energy. The total
energy, as given by (2.5.4), is stationary with respect to variations in the
charge density. The charge density is found taking note of the Schrödinger
equation. The first-order Fock-Dirac electron charge density matrix is
∑
=
=
N
j
j
j
e
t
t
1
*
)
,
(
)
,
(
)
(
r
r
r
ψ
ψ
ρ
.
            (2.5.5)
The three-dimensional electron charge density is a function in three
variables (x, y and z in the Cartesian coordinate system). Integrating the
electron charge density 
)
(r
e
ρ
, one obtains the charge of the total number of
electrons N. Thus,
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Ne
d
e
=
∫
r
r
R
)
(
ρ
.
Hence, 
)
(r
e
ρ
 satisfies the following properties
0
)
(
>
r
e
ρ
,
Ne
d
e
=
∫
r
r
R
)
(
ρ
,
∞
<
∇
∫
r
r
R
d
e
2
)
(
ρ
,
∞
=
∇∫
r
r
R
d
e
)
(
2ρ
.
For the nuclei charge density, we have
0
)
(
>
r
n
ρ
 and 
∑
∫
=
=
Z
k
k
n
q
d
1
)
(
r
r
R
ρ
.
There exist an infinite number of antisymmetric wavefunctions that give
the same 
)
(r
ρ
. The minimum-energy concept (energy-functional minimum
principle) is applied. The total energy is a function of 
)
(r
ρ
, and the so-
called ground state Ψ  must minimize the expectation value 
)
(ρ
E
.
The searching density functional 
)
(ρ
F
, which searches all Ψ  in the
N-electron Hilbert space H to find 
)
(r
ρ
 and guarantee the minimum to the
energy expectation value, is expressed as
Ψ
Ψ
≤
Ψ
∈
Ψ
→
Ψ
)
(
min
)
(
ρ
ρ
ρ
E
F
H
,
where 
Ψ
H  is any subset of the N-electron Hilbert space.
Using the variational principle, we have
0
'
)
(
)'
(
)'
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
=
∆
∆
∆
∆
=
∆
∆
∫
r
r
r
r
R
d
f
E
f
E
ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ
,
where 
)
(ρ
f
 is the nonnegative function.
Thus, 
const
)
(
)
(
=
∆
∆
N
f
E
ρ
ρ
.
The solutions to the system of equations (2.5.2) is found using the
charge density (2.5.5).
To perform the analysis of nanostructure dynamics, one studies the
molecular dynamics. The force and displacement must be found.
Substituting the expression for the total kinetic and potential energies in
(2.5.4), where the charge density is given by (2.5.5), the total energy
(
))
(
,
r
ρ
t
E
 results.
 
The external energy is supplied to control nanoscale actuators, and one
has
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

(
)
(
)
(
))
(
,
,
,
r
r
r
ρ
t
E
t
E
t
E
external
+
=
Σ
.
Then, the force at position 
rr  is
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
∑
∑
∂
∂
∂
∂
−
∂
∂
∂
∂
−
∂
∂
−
=
−
=
Σ
Σ
j
r
j
j
j
r
j
j
r
r
r
t
t
t
E
t
t
t
E
t
E
d
t
dE
t
.
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
*
*
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
F
ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
 (2.5.6)
Taking note of
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
∑
∑
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
∂
∂
j
r
j
j
j
r
j
j
t
t
t
E
t
t
t
E
0
,
,
,
,
,
,
*
*
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
,
the expression for the force is found from (2.5.6). In particular, one finds
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
[
]
(
)
(
)
(
)
.
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
∫
∫
∂
∂
∂
∂
−
∂
Γ
+
Π
∂
−
∂
∂
−
=
Σ
R
R
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
F
d
t
t
t
E
d
t
t
t
t
E
t
r
r
r
r
r
external
r
ρ
ρ
ρ
As the wavefunctions converge (the conditions of the Hellmann-
Feynman theorem are satisfied), we have
(
)
(
)
(
)
0
,
,
,
=
∂
∂
∂
∂∫
R
r
r
r
r
r
d
t
t
t
E
r
ρ
ρ
.
One can deduce the expression for the wavefunctions, find the charge
density, calculate the forces, and study processes and phenomena in
nanoscale. The displacement is found using the following equation of motion
)
,
(
2
2
r
F
r
t
dt
d
m
r
=
,
or
(
)
(
)
z
y
x
dt
z
y
x
d
m
r
"
"
"
"
"
"
,
,
,
,
2
2
F
=
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

2.5.3. Nanostructures and Molecular Dynamics
Atomistic modeling can be performed using the force field method. The
effective interatomic potential for a system of N particles is found as the sum
of the second-, third-, fourth-, and higher-order terms as
(
)
( )
(
)
(
)
∑
∑
∑
=
=
=
+
Π
+
Π
+
Π
=
Π
N
l
k
j
i
l
k
j
i
N
k
j
i
k
j
i
N
j
i
ij
N
1
,
,
,
)
4
(
1
,
,
)
3
(
1
,
)
2
(
1
...
,
,
,
,
,
,...,
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
Usually, the interatomic effective pair potential 
( )
∑
=
Π
N
j
i
ij
1
,
)
2
(
r
, which
depends on the interatomic distance rij between the nuclei i and j, dominates.
For example, the three-body interconnection terms cannot be omitted only if
the angle-dependent potentials are considered. Using the effective ionic
charges Qi and Qj, we have
range
short
ij
tic
electrosta
ij
j
i
r
Q
Q
−
+
=
Π
)
(
4
)
2
(
r
φ
πε
,
where 
)
( ijr
φ
 is the short-range interaction energy due to the repulsion
between electron charge clouds, Van der Waals attraction, bond bending and
stretching phenomena.
For ionic and partially ionic media we have
12
4
6
3
1
2
)
(
−
−
−
+
−
=
ij
ij
ij
ij
r
k
ij
ij
r
k
r
k
e
k
r
ij
ij
φ
,
where 
j
i
ij
j
i
ij
j
i
ij
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
3
3
3
2
2
2
1
1
1
,
,
=
=
=
 and 
j
i
ij
k
k
k
4
4
4 =
; ki
are the bond energy constants (for example, for Si we have Q = 2.4, k3 =
0.00069 and k4 = 104, for Al one has Q = 1.4, k3 = 1690 and k4 = 278, and for
Na+ we have Q = 1, k3 = 0.00046 and k4 = 67423).
Another, commonly used approximation is 
(
)
Eij
ij
ij
ij
r
r
k
r
−
=
5
)
(
φ
, where
ijr  is the bond length, 
i
j
ijr
r
r −
=
; Eij
r
 is the equilibrium bond distance
Performing the summations in the studied R, one finds the potential
energy, and the force results. The position (displacement) is represented by the
vector r which in the Cartesian coordinate system has the components x, y and
z. Taking note of the expression for the potential energy 
(
)
N
r
r
r
,...,
)
(
1
Π
=
Π "
,
one has
)
(
)
(
r
r
"
"
"
Π
−∇
=
∑F
.
From Newton’s second law for the system of N particles, we have the
following equation of motion
0
)
(
2
2
=
Π
∇
+
N
N
N dt
d
m
r
r
"
"
,
or
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

(
)
(
)
(
)
N
i
z
y
x
z
y
x
dt
z
y
x
d
m
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
,...,
1
,0
,
,
,
,
,
,
2
2
=
=
∂
Π
∂
+
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
.
To perform molecular modeling one applies the energy-based methods.
It was shown that electrons can be considered explicitly. However, it can be
assumed that electrons will obey the optimum distribution once the positions
of the nuclei in R are known. This assumption is based on the Born-
Oppenheimer 
approximation 
of 
the 
Schrödinger 
equation. 
This
approximation is satisfied because nuclei mass is much greater then electron
mass, and thus, nuclei motions (vibrations and rotations) are slow compared
with the electrons’ motions. Therefore, nuclei motions can be studied
separately from electrons dynamics. Molecules can be studied as Z-body
systems of elementary masses (nuclei) with springs (bonds between nuclei).
The molecule potential energy (potential energy equation) is found using the
number of nuclei and bond types (bending, stretching, lengths, geometry,
angles, and other parameters), van der Waals radius, parameters of media,
etc. The molecule potential energy surface is
dd
W
ts
sb
b
bs
T
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
+
+
+
+
+
=
.
Here, the energy due to bond stretching is found using the equation
similar to Hook’s law. In particular,
3
0
3
0
1
)
(
)
(
l
l
k
l
l
k
E
bs
bs
bs
−
+
−
=
,
where kbs1 and kbs3 are the constants; l and l0 are the actual and natural bond
length (displacement).
The equations for energies due to bond angle bending Eb, stretch-bend
interactions Esb, torsion strain Ets, van der Waals interactions EW, and dipole-
dipole interactions Edd are well known and can be readily applied.
2.6. MOLECULAR WIRES AND MOLECULAR CIRCUITS
The molecular wire consists of the single molecule chain with its end
adsorbed to the surface of the gold lead that can cover monolayers of other
molecules. Molecular wires connect the nanoscale structures and devices. The
current density of carbon nanotubes, 1,4-dithiol benzene (molecular wire)
and copper are 1011, 1012 and 106 electroncs/sec-nm2, respectively. The
current technology allows one to fill carbon nanotubes with other media
(metals, organic and inorganic materials). That is, to connect nanostructures,
as shown in Figure 2.6.1, it is feasible to use molecular wires which can be
synthesized through the organic synthesis.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.6.1. Nanoswitch with carbon nanotube, molecular wire
(1,4-dithiol benzene) and nanoantenna
Consider covalent bonds. These bonds occur from sharing the electrons
between two atoms. Covalent bonds represent the interactions of two
nonmetallic elements, or metallic and nonmetallic elements. Let us study the
electron density around the nuclei of two atoms. If electron clouds overlap
region passes through on the line joining two nuclei, the bond is called σ
bond, see Figure 2.6.2. The overlap may occur between orbitals
perpendicularly oriented to the internuclear axis. The resulting covalent bond
produces overlap above and below the internuclear axis. Such bond is called
π bond. There is no probability of finding the electron on the internuclear
axis in a π bond, and the overlap in it is lesser than in the σ bond. Therefore,
π bonds are generally weaker than σ bonds.
Figure 2.6.2. σ and π covalent bonds
Single bonds are usually σ bonds. Double bonds, which are much
stronger, consist of one σ bond and one π bond, and the triple bond (the
strongest one) consists of one σ bond and two π bonds. In the case of carbon
nanotubes, the strong interaction among the carbon atoms is guaranteed by
the strength of the C-C single bond which holds carbon atoms together in the
honeycomb-like hexagon unit (open-ended nanotube).
Nanoantenna
nanotube
Carbon
Nanoswitch
netic
Electromag
S
S
S
S
Au Connector
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
S
H
H
S
Au
Au
Au Connector
Au
Au
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

In molecular wires, the current im is a function of the applied voltage um,
and Landauer’s formula is
(
)
∫
∞
+
∞
−
−
−










+
−
+
=
m
T
k
E
T
k
E
m
m
m
dE
e
e
u
E
T
h
e
i
B
p
m
B
p
m
1
1
1
1
,
2
2
1
µ
µ
,
where 
1
p
µ
 and 
2
p
µ
 are the electrochemical potentials, 
m
F
p
eu
E
2
1
1
+
=
µ
and 
m
F
p
eu
E
2
1
2
−
=
µ
; 
F
E  is the equilibrium Fermi energy of the source;
(
)
m
m u
E
T
,
 is the transmission function obtained using the molecular energy
levels and coupling.
We have [7]
(
)
∫






=
2
1
2
sech
4
1
,
2
2
p
p
m
B
m
B
m
m
m
dE
T
k
E
T
k
u
E
T
h
e
i
µ
µ
,
T
kB
=26meV.
Thus, the molecular wire conductance is found as
(
)
(
)
[
]
2
1
2
p
p
m
m
m
T
T
h
e
u
i
c
µ
µ
+
≈
∂
∂
=
.
Using molecular wires and molecular circuits (which form molecular
electronic switches and devices), the designer can synthesize polyphenylene-
based rectifying diodes, switching logics, as well as other devices. It must be
emphasized that the results given above are based upon the thorough and
comprehensive overview of molecular circuits reported in [2]. Figure 2.6.3
illustrates the molecular circuitry for a polyphenylene-based molecular
rectifying diode. This diode can be fabricated using the chemically doped
polyphenylene-based molecular wire as the constructive medium. The
electron donating substituent group X (n-dopant) and the electron
withdrawing substituent group Y (p-dopant) form two intermolecular dopant
groups. These groups are separated by the semi-insulating group R (potential
energy barrier) from an electron acceptor subcomplex. Thus, the R group
serves as an insulation (barrier) between the donor X and acceptor Y. The
semi-insulating group R can be synthesized using the aliphatic (sigma-
bounded methylene) or dimethylene groups.  To guarantee electrical
isolation between the molecular circuitry and gold substrate, additional
barrier is used as shown in Figure 2.6.3.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.6.3. Molecular circuit and schematics of electron orbital energylevels levels  
for a polyphenylene-based molecular rectifying diode [2]
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

In computers, DSPs, microcontrollers, and microprocessors, simple
arithmetic functions, e.g. addition and subtraction, are implemented using
combinational register-level components. Adders and subtracters (which
have carry-in and carry-out lines) of fixed-point binary numbers are basic
register-level components from which other arithmetic circuits are formed.
Other arithmetic components are widely used, and comparators compare the
magnitude of two binary numbers. These arithmetic elements can be
fabricated using molecular circuit technology. In fact, to perform logic
operations (AND, OR, XOR, and NOT gates) and arithmetic, diode-based
molecular electronic digital circuits and nanologic gates can be synthesized
using single nanoscale molecule structures. It should be emphasized that the
size of these molecular logic gates is within 5 nm (thousand times less then
the logic gates used in current computers which are fabricated using most
advanced CMOS technologies). Using diode-diode logic, AND and OR logic
gates are designed using molecular circuits, and the schematics are
illustrated in Figures 2.6.4 and 2.6.5. The molecular AND logic gate is
designed by connecting in parallel two diodes. The doped polyphenylene-
based diodes are connected through polyphenylene-based wire. The semi-
insulating group R (potential energy barrier) reduces power dissipation and
maintains a distinct output voltage signal at the terminal C when the A and B
inputs (carry-in lines) cause the molecular diodes to be forward biased
(current flows through diodes). The difference between the AND and OR
gates is that the diode orientations, see Figures 2.6.4 and 2.6.5. The diode-
based molecular electronic digital circuit (XOR gate) is illustrated in Figure
2.6.6, and the truth table is also documented. The total voltage applied across
the XOR gate is the sum of the voltage drop across the input resistances plus
the voltage drop across the resonant tunneling diode (RTD). The effective
resistance of the logic gate, containing two rectifying diodes, differs whether
one or both parallel signals (A and B can be 1 or 0) are on. If A and B are on
(1), the effective resistance is half. Thus, according to Ohm’s law, there are
two possible cases: full voltage drop and half voltage drop which distinct the
XOR gate operating points.  Figure 2.6.7 documents the molecular half adder
which is synthesized using the AND and XOR molecular gates. Here, A and
B denote the one-bit binary signals (inputs) to the adder, while S (sum bit)
and C (carry bit) are one-bit binary signals (outputs). The XOR gate gives
the sum of two bits, and the resulting output is at lead S. The AND gate
forms the sum of two bits, and the resulting output is at lead C. The
molecular full adder is given in Figure 2.6.8.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.6.4. Molecular circuit and schematics of AND molecular gate [2]
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.6.5. Molecular circuit and schematics of OR molecular gate [2]
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.6.6. Molecular circuit and schematics of XOR molecular gate [2]
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.6.7. Molecular circuit and schematics of molecular half adder [2]
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 2.6.8. Molecular circuit and schematics of molecular full adder [2]
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

References
1. E. R. Davidson, Reduced Density Matrices in Quantum Chemistry,
Academic Press, New York, NY, 1976.
2. J. C. Ellenbogen and J. C. Love, Architectures for molecular electronic
computers, MP 98W0000183, MITRE Corporation, 1999.
3. P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, “Inhomogeneous electron gas,” Phys. Rev.,
vol. 136, pp. B864-B871, 1964.
4. W. Kohn and R. M. Driezler, “Time-dependent density-fuctional theory:
conceptual and practical aspects,” Phys. Rev. Letters, vol. 56, pp. 1993 -
1995, 1986.
5. W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, “Self-consistent equations including exchange
and correlation effects,” Phys. Rev., vol. 140, pp. A1133 - A1138, 1965.
6. R. G. Parr and W Yang, Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and
Molecules, Oxford University Press, New York, NY, 1989.
7. W. T. Tian, S. Datta, S. Hong, R. Reifenberger, J. I. Henderson, and C. P.
Kubiak, “Conductance spectra of molecular wires,” Int. Journal Chemical
Phisics, vol. 109, no. 7, pp. 2874-2882, 1998.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

2.7. THERMOANALYSIS AND HEAT EQUATION
It is known that the heat propagates (flows) in the direction of
decreasing temperature, and the rate of propagation is proportional to the
gradient of the temperature. Using the thermal conductivity of the media kt
and the temperature (
)
z
y
x
t
T
,
,
,
, one has the following equation to calculate
the velocity of the heat flow
(
)
z
y
x
t
T
kt
h
,
,
,
∇
−
=
v!
.
            (2.7.1)
Consider the region R and let s is the boundary surface. Using the
divergence theorem, from (2.7.1) one obtains the partial differential equation
(heat equation) which is expressed as
(
)
(
)
z
y
x
t
T
k
t
z
y
x
t
T
,
,
,
,
,
,
2
2∇
=
∂
∂
,
            (2.7.2)
where k is the thermal diffusivity of the media.
We have
d
h
t
k
k
k
k =
,
where kh and kd are the specific heat and density constants.
Solving partial differential equation (2.7.2), which is subject to the
initial and boundary conditions, one finds the temperature of the
homogeneous media. In the Cartesian coordinate system, one has
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
z
z
y
x
t
T
y
z
y
x
t
T
x
z
y
x
t
T
z
y
x
t
T
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
=
∇
.
Using the Laplacian of T in the cylindrical and spherical coordinate
systems, one can reformulate the thermoanalysis problem using different
coordinates in order to straightforwardly solve the problem.
It the heat flow is steady (time-invariant), then
(
)
0
,
,
,
=
∂
∂
t
z
y
x
t
T
.
Hence, three-dimensional heat equation (2.7.2) becomes Laplace’s
equation as given by
(
)
z
y
x
t
T
k
,
,
,
0
2
2∇
=
.
The two-dimensional heat equation is
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)






∂
∂
+
∂
∂
=
∇
=
∂
∂
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
y
y
x
t
T
x
y
x
t
T
k
y
x
t
T
k
t
y
x
t
T
.
If
(
)
0
,
,
=
∂
∂
t
y
x
t
T
,
one has
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

(
)
(
)
(
)






∂
∂
+
∂
∂
=
∇
=
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
,
,
,
,
,
,
0
y
y
x
t
T
x
y
x
t
T
k
y
x
t
T
k
.
Using initial and boundary conditions, this partial differential equation
can be solved using Fourier series, Fourier integrals, Fourier transforms.
The so-called one-dimensional heat equation is
(
)
(
)
2
2
2
,
,
x
x
t
T
k
t
x
t
T
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
with initial and boundary conditions
(
)
( )
x
T
x
t
T
t
=
,
0
, (
)
0
0
,
T
x
t
T
=
 and (
)
f
f
T
x
t
T
=
,
.
A large number of analytical and numerical methods are available to
solve the heat equation.
The analytic solution if
(
)
0
,
0 =
x
t
T
 and (
)
0
,
=
fx
t
T
is given as
 (
) ∑
∞
=
−
=
1
2
2
2
2
sin
,
i
t
x
k
i
f
i
f
e
x
x
i
B
x
t
T
π
π
,
( )
∫
=
fx
x
f
t
f
i
dx
x
x
i
x
T
x
B
0
sin
2
π
.
Assuming that 
( )
x
Tt
 is piecewise continuous in 
]
[
0
fx
x
x∈
 and has
one-sided derivatives at all interior points, one finds the coefficients of the
Fourier sine series Bi.
Example 2.7.1.
Consider the copper bar with length 0.1 mm. The thermal conductivity,
specific heat and density constants are kt = 1, kh = 0.09 and kd = 9. The initial
and boundary conditions are
(
)
( )
001
.0
sin
2.0
,0
x
x
T
x
T
t
π
=
=
, (
)
0
0,
=
t
T
 and (
)
0
001
.0,
=
t
T
.
Find the temperature in the bar as a function of the position and time.
Solution.
From the general solution
(
) ∑
∞
=
−
=
1
2
2
2
2
sin
,
i
t
x
k
i
f
i
f
e
x
x
i
B
x
t
T
π
π
,
using the initial condition, we have
(
)
001
.0
sin
2.0
sin
,0
1
x
x
x
i
B
x
T
i
f
i
π
π
∑
∞
=
=
=
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Thus, B1 = 0.2 and all other Bi coefficients are zero.n
Hence, the solution (temperature as the function of the position and
time) is found to be
(
)
.
001
.0
sin
2.0
sin
sin
,
7
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
10
5.1
1
1
t
t
x
k
f
i
t
x
k
i
f
i
e
x
e
x
x
B
e
x
x
i
B
x
t
T
f
f
×
−
−
∞
=
−
=
=
=∑
π
π
π
π
π
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

CHAPTER  3
STRUCTURAL DESIGN, MODELING, AND SIMULATION
3.1. NANO- AND MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS
3.1.1. Carbon Nanotubes and Nanodevices
Carbon nanotubes, discovered in 1991, are molecular structures which
consist of graphene cylinders closed at either end with caps containing
pentagonal rings. Carbon nanotubes are produced by vaporizing carbon
graphite with an electric arc under an inert atmosphere. The carbon
molecules organize a perfect network of hexagonal graphite rolled up onto
itself to form a hollow tube. Buckytubes are extremely strong and flexible
and can be single- or multi-walled. The standard arc-evaporation method
produces only multilayered tubes, and the single-layer uniform nanotubes
(constant diameter) were synthesis only a couple years ago. One can fill
nanotubes with any media, including biological molecules. The carbon
nanotubes can be conducting or insulating medium depending upon their
structure.
A single-walled carbon nanotube (one atom thick), which consists of
carbon molecules, is illustrated in Figure 3.1.1. The application of these
nanotubes, formed with a few carbon atoms in diameter, provides the
possibility to fabricate devices on an atomic and molecular scale. The
diameter of nanotube is 100000 times less that the diameter of the sawing
needle. The carbon nanotubes, which are much stronger than steel wire, are
the perfect conductor (better than silver), and have thermal conductivity
better than diamond. The carbon nanotubes, manufactured using the carbon
vapor technology, and carbon atoms bond together forming the pattern.
Single-wall carbon nanotubes are manufactured using laser vaporization, arc
technology, vapor growth, as well as other methods. Figure 3.1.2. illustrates
the carbon ring with six atoms. When such a sheet rolls itself into a tube so
that its edges join seamlessly together, a nanotube is formed.
Figure 3.1.1. Single-walled carbon nanotube
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 3.1.2. Single carbon nanotube ring with six atoms
Carbon nanotubes, which allow one to implement the molecular wire
technology in nanoscale ICs, are used in NEMS and MEMS. Two slightly
displaced (twisted) nanotube molecules, joined end to end, act as the diode.
Molecular-scale transistors can be manufactured using different alignments.
There are strong relationships between the nanotube electromagnetic
properties and its diameter and degree of the molecule twist. In fact, the
electromagnetic properties of the carbon nanotubes depend on the molecule's
twist, and Figures 3.1.3 illustrate possible configurations. If the graphite
sheet forming the single-wall carbon nanotube is rolled up perfectly (all its
hexagons line up along the molecules axis), the nanotube is a perfect
conductor. If the graphite sheet rolls up at a twisted angle, the nanotube
exhibits the semiconductor properties. The carbon nanotubes, which are
much stronger than steel wire, can be added to the plastic to make the
conductive composite materials.
Figure 3.1.3. Carbon nanotubes
The vapor grown carbon nanotubes with N layers are illustrated in
Figure 3.1.4, and the industrially manufactured nanotubes have ∆ngstroms
diameter and length.
Figure 3.1.4. N-layer carbon nanotube
The carbon nanotubes can be organized as large-scale complex neural
networks to perform computing and data storage, sensing and actuation, etc.
The density of ICs designed and manufactured using the carbon nanotube
technology thousands time exceed the density of ICs developed using
convention silicon and silicon-carbide technologies.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Metallic solids (conductor, for example copper, silver, and iron) consist
of metal atoms. These metallic solids usually have hexagonal, cubic, or body-
centered cubic close-packed structures (see Figure 3.1.5). Each atom has 8 or
12 adjacent atoms. The bonding is due to valence electrons that are
delocalized thought the entire solid. The mobility of electrons is examined to
study the conductivity properties.
(a)
(b)
       (c)
Figure 3.1.5. Close packing of metal atoms: a) cubic packing;
b) hexagonal packing; c) body-centered cubic
More than two electrons can fit in an orbital. Furthermore, these two
electrons must have two opposite spin states (spin-up and spin-down).
Therefore, the spins are said to be paired. Two opposite directions in which
the electron spins (up + 2
1  and down – 2
1 ) produce oppositely directed
magnetic fields. For an atom with two electrons, the spin may be either
parallel (S = 1) or opposed and thus cancel (S = 0). Because of spin pairing,
most molecules have no net magnetic field, and these molecules are called
diamagnetic (in the absence of the external magnetic field, the net magnetic
field produced by the magnetic fields of the orbiting electrons and the
magnetic fields produced by the electron spins is zero). The external
magnetic field will produce no torque on the diamagnetic atom as well as no
realignment of the dipole fields. Accurate quantitative analysis can be
performed using the quantum theory. Using the simplest atomic model, we
assume that a positive nucleus is surrounded by electrons which orbit in
various circular orbits (an electron on the orbit can be studied as a current
loop, and the direction of current is opposite to the direction of the electron
rotation). The torque tends to align the magnetic field, produced by the
orbiting electron, with the external magnetic field. The electron can have a
spin magnetic moment of 
24
10
9
−
×
±
 A-m2. The plus and minus signs that
there are two possible electron alignments; in particular, aiding or opposing
to the external magnetic field. The atom has many electrons, and only the
spins of those electrons in shells which are not completely filed contribute to
the atom magnetic moment. The nuclear spin negligible contributes to the
atom moment. The magnetic properties of the media (diamagnetic,
paramagnetic, 
superparamagnetic, 
ferromagnetic, 
antiferromagnetic,
ferrimagnetic) result due to the combination of the listed atom moments
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Let us discuss the paramagnetic materials. The atom can have small
magnetic moment, however, the random orientation of the atoms results that
the net torque is zero. Thus, the media do not show the magnetic effect in the
absence the external magnetic field. As the external magnetic field is applied,
due to the atom moments, the atoms will align with the external field. If the
atom has large dipole moment (due to electron spin moments), the material is
called ferromagnetic. In antiferromagnetic materials, the net magnetic
moment is zero, and thus the ferromagnetic media are only slightly affected
by the external magnetic field.
Using carbon nanotubes, one can design electromechanical and
electromagnetic nanoswitches, which are illustrated in Figure 3.1.6.
Figure 3.1.6. Application of carbon nanotubes in nanoswitches
3.1.2. Microelectromechanical Systems and Microdevices
Different MEMS have been discussed, and it was emphasized that
MEMS can be used as actuators, sensors, and actuators-sensors. Due to the
limited torque and force densities, MEMS usually cannot develop high
torque and force, and large-scale cooperative MEMS are used, e.g.
multilayer configurations.  In contrast, these characteristics (power, torque,
and force densities) are not critical in sensor applications. Therefore, MEMS
are widely used as sensors. Signal-level signals, measured by sensors, are fed
to analog or digital controllers, and sensor design, signal processing, and
interfacing are extremely important in engineering practice. Smart integrated
sensors are the sensors in which in addition to sensing the physical variable,
data acquisition, filtering, data storage, communication, interfacing, and
networking are embedded. Thus, while the primary component is the sensing
element (microstructure), multifunctional integration of sensors and ICs is
the current demand. High-performance accelerometers, manufactured by
Analog Devices using integrated microelectromechanical system technology
(iMEMS), are studied in this section. In addition, the application of smart
integrated sensors is discussed.
Nano-Antenna
nanotube
Carbon
Nanoswitch
hanical
Electromec
nanotube
Carbon
Nanoswitch
netic
Electromag
Switching
Off
On −
Nano-Antenna
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

We study the dual-axis, surface-micromachined ADXL202 accelerometer
(manufactured on a single monolithic silicon chip) which combines highly
accurate acceleration sensing motion microstructure (proof mass) and signal
processing electronics (signal conditioning ICs). As documented in the Analog
Device Catalog data (which is attached), this accelerometer, which is
manufactured using the iMEMS technology, can measure dynamic positive and
negative acceleration (vibration) as well as static acceleration (force of gravity).
The functional block diagram of the ADXL202 accelerometer with two digital
outputs (ratio of pulse width to period is proportional to the acceleration) is
illustrated in Figure 3.1.7.
Figure 3.1.7. Functional block diagram of the ADXL202 accelerometer
Polysilicon surface-micromachined sensor motion microstructure is
fabricated on the silicon wafer by depositing polysilicon on the sacrificial oxide
layer which is then etched away leaving the suspended proof mass (beam).
Polysilicon springs suspend this proof mass over the surface of the wafer. The
deflection of the proof mass is measured using the capacitance difference, see
Figure 3.1.8.
Demodulator
Demodulator
Y–Axis Sensor
X–Axis Sensor
Oscillator
Duty Cycle
Modulator
Output:
X–Axis
Output:
Y–Axis
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 3.1.8. Accelerometer structure: proof mass, polysilicon springs, and
sensing elements (fixed outer plates and central movable
plates attached to the proof mass)
The proof mass (
m
3.1
µ
, 
m
2 µ
 thick) has movable plates which are
shown in Figure 3.1.8. The air capacitances 
1
C  and 
2
C  (capacitances between
the movable plate and two stationary outer plates) are functions of the
corresponding displacements 
1x  and 
2x .
The parallel-plate capacitance is proportional to the overlapping area
between the plates (
m
2
m
125
µ
µ
×
) and the displacement (up to 
m
3.1
µ
). In
particular, neglecting the fringing effects (nonuniform distribution near the
edges), the parallel-plate capacitance is
d
d
A
C
A
1
ε
ε
=
=
,
where ε  is the permittivity; A is the overlapping area; d is the displacement
between plates; 
A
A
ε
ε
=
If the acceleration is zero, the capacitances 
1
C  and 
2
C  are equal
because 
2
1
x
x =
 (in ADXL202 accelerometer, 
m
3.1
2
1
µ
=
= x
x
 ).
Thus, one has
Fixed Outer
Plates
m
125 µ
Proof Mass:
Movable
Microstructure
m
3.1
µ
Motion, x
Base (Substrate)
Polysilicon
Spring
Movable Plates
2
C
1
C
2x
1x
2x
sk
Spring 2
1
,
sk
Spring 2
1
,
Polysilicon
Spring
Base (Substrate)
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

2
1
C
C =
,
where 
1
1
1
x
C
A
ε
=
 and 
2
2
1
x
C
A
ε
=
.
The proof mass (movable microstructure) displacement x results due to
acceleration. If 
0
≠
x
, we have the following expressions for capacitances
x
x
C
A
+
=
1
1
1
ε
 and 
x
x
x
x
C
A
A
−
=
−
=
1
2
2
1
1
ε
ε
.
The capacitance difference is found to be
2
1
2
2
1
2
x
x
x
C
C
C
A
−
=
−
=
∆
ε
.
Measuring 
C
∆
, one finds the displacement x by solving the following
nonlinear algebraic equation
0
2
2
1
2
=
∆
−
−
∆
Cx
x
Cx
A
ε
.
For small displacements, neglecting the term 
2
Cx
∆
, one has
C
x
x
A
∆
−
≈
ε
2
2
1
.
Hence, the displacement is proportional to the capacitance difference C
∆
.
For an ideal spring, Hook’s law states that the spring exhibits a restoring
force Fs which is proportional to the displacement x. Hence, we have the
following formula
Fs = ksx,
where ks is the spring constant.
From Newton’s second law of motion, neglecting friction, one writes
x
k
dt
x
d
m
ma
s
=
=
2
2
.
Thus, the displacement due to the acceleration is
a
k
m
x
s
=
,
while the acceleration, as a function of the displacement, is given as
x
m
k
a
s
=
.
Then, making use of the measured (calculated) 
C
∆
, the acceleration is
found to be
C
m
x
k
a
A
s
∆
−
=
ε
2
2
1
.
Making use of Newton’s second law of motion, we have
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

 
force
  
spring
2
2
)
(x
f
dt
x
d
m
ma
s
=
=
,
where 
)
(x
fs
 is the spring restoring force which is a nonlinear function of the
displacement, and 
3
3
2
2
1
)
(
x
k
x
k
x
k
x
f
s
s
s
s
+
+
=
; ks1, ks2 and ks3 are the
spring constants.
Therefore, the following nonlinear equation results
3
3
2
2
1
x
k
x
k
x
k
ma
s
s
s
+
+
=
.
Thus,
(
)
3
3
2
2
1
1
x
k
x
k
x
k
m
a
s
s
s
+
+
=
,
where 
C
x
x
A
∆
−
≈
ε
2
2
1
.
This equation can be used to calculate the acceleration a using the
capacitance difference C
∆
.
Two beams (proof masses which are motion microstructures) can be
placed orthogonally to measure the accelerations in the X and Y axis
(ADXL250), as well as the movable plates can be mounted along the sides of
the square beam (ADXL202). Figures 3.1.9 and 3.1.10 document the
ADXL202 and ADXL250 accelerometers.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 3.1.9. ADXL202 accelerometer: proof mass with fingers and ICs
(courtesy of Analog Devices)
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 3.1.10.ADXL250 accelerometer: proof masses with fingers and ICs
(courtesy of Analog Devices)
Responding to acceleration, the proof mass moves due to the mass of the
movable microstructure (m) along X and Y axes relative to the stationary
member (accelerometer). The motion of the proof mass is constrained, and the
polysilicon springs hold the movable microstructure (beam). Assuming that the
polysilicon springs and the proof mass obey Hook’s and Newton’s laws, it was
shown that  the acceleration is found using the following formula
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

x
m
k
a
s
=
.
The fixed outer plates are excited by two square wave 1 MHz signals of
equal magnitude that are 180 degrees out of phase from each other. When the
movable plates are centered between the fixed outer plates we have 
2
1
x
x =
.
Thus, the capacitance difference 
C
∆
 and the output signal is zero. If the proof
mass (movable microstructure) is displaced due to the acceleration, we have
0
≠
∆C
. Thus, the capacitance imbalance, and the amplitude of the output
voltage is a function (proportional) to the displacement of the proof mass x.
Phase demodulation is used to determine the sign (positive or negative) of
acceleration. The ac signal is amplified by buffer amplifier and demodulated by
a synchronous synchronized demodulator. The output of the demodulator
drives the high-resolution duty cycle modulator. In particular, the filtered signal
is converted to a PWM signal by the 14-bit duty cycle modulator. The zero
acceleration produces 50% duty cycle. The PWM output fundamental period
can be set from 0.5 to 10ms.
There is a wide range of industrial systems where smart integrated sensors
are used. For example, accelerometers can be used for
1. active vibration control and diagnostics,
2. health and structural integrity monitoring,
3. internal navigation systems,
4. earthquake-actuated safety systems,
5. seismic instrumentation: monitoring and detection,
6. etc.
Current research activities in analysis, design, and optimization of
flexible structures (aircraft, missiles, manipulators and robots, spacecraft,
surface and underwater vehicles) are driven by requirements and standards
which must be guaranteed. The vibration, structural integrity, and structural
behavior are addressed and studied. For example, fundamental, applied, and
experimental research in aeroelasticity and structural dynamics are conducted
to obtain fundamental understanding of the basic phenomena involved in
flutter, force and control responses, vibration, and control. Through
optimization of aeroelastic characteristics as well as applying passive and
active vibration control, the designer minimizes vibration and noise, and
current research integrates development of aeroelastic models and
diagnostics to predict stalled/whirl flutter, force and control responses,
unsteady flight, aerodynamic flow, etc. Vibration control is a very
challenging problem because the designer must account complex interactive
physical phenomena (elastic theory, structural and continuum mechanics,
radiation and transduction, wave propagation, chaos, et cetera). Thus, it is
necessary to accurately measure the vibration, and the accelerometers, which
allow one to measure the acceleration in the micro-g range, are used. The
application of the MEMS-based accelerometers ensures small size, low cost,
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ruggedness, 
hermeticity, 
reliability, 
and 
flexible 
interfacing 
with
microcontrollers, microprocessors, and DSPs.
High-accuracy low-noise accelerometers can be used to measure the
velocity and position. This provides the back-up in the case of the GPS system
failures or in the dead reckoning applications (the initial coordinates and speed
are assumed to be known). Measuring the acceleration, the velocity and
position in the xy plane are found using integration. In particular,
 
∫
=
ft
t
x
x
dt
t
a
t
v
0
)
(
)
(
, 
∫
=
ft
t
y
y
dt
t
a
t
v
0
)
(
)
(
,
∫
=
ft
t
x
x
dt
t
v
t
x
0
)
(
)
(
, 
∫
=
ft
t
y
y
dt
t
v
t
x
0
)
(
)
(
.
The 
Analog 
Devices 
data 
for 
iMEMS 
accelerometers
ADXL202/ADXL210 and ADXL150/ADXL250 are given below (courtesy of
Analog Devices).
It is important to emphasize that microgyroscope have been designed,
fabricated, and deployed using the similar technology as iMEMS
accelerometers. In particular, using the difference capacitance (between the
movable rotor and stationary stator plates), the angular acceleration is
measured. The butterfly-shaped polysilicon rotor suspended above the
substrate, and Figure 3.1.11 illustrates the microgyroscope.
Figure 3.1.11. Angular microgyroscope structure
Angular
displacement
Rotor:
Movable
Microstructure
Movable Plates
Stator: Stationary Base
Stationary Plates
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Microaccelerometer Mathematical Model
Using the experimental data (input-output dynamic behavior and Bode
plots), the mathematical model of microaccelerometers is obtained in the form
of ordinary differential equations, and the coefficients (accelerometer
parameters) are identified. The dominant microaccelerometer dynamics is
described by a system of six linear differential equations
,
,
Cx
y
Bu
Ax
dt
dx
=
+
=
where the matrices of coefficients are
[
].
,
,
27
27
23
20
14
10
4
10
7.3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
10
7.3
10
9
10
5.1
10
2.4
10
7.2
10
6.2
×
×
−
×
−
×
−
×
−
×
−
×
−
=












=














=
C
B
A
The accelerometer output, which is the measured acceleration a, was
denoted as y, y = a. It is evident that the acceleration is a function of the state
variable x6. All other five states model the proof mass (motion microstructure)
and microICs (oscillator, demodulator, modulator, filter, et cetera) dynamics.
The eigenvalues are found to be
4
3
5
3
10
8.8
10
2.4
,
10
4.1
10
9.5
×
±
×
−
×
±
×
−
i
i
, 
.
10
4
10
3
3
3
×
±
×
−
i
This mathematical model of the microaccelerometer can be used in
systems analysis, diagnostics, and design of a wide variety of systems where
iMEMS are used.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

FEATURES
2-Axis Acceleration Sensor on a Single IC Chip
Measures Static Acceleration as Well as Dynamic
Acceleration
Duty Cycle Output with User Adjustable Period
Low Power <0.6 mA
Faster Response than Electrolytic, Mercury or Thermal
Tilt Sensors
Bandwidth Adjustment with a Single Capacitor Per Axis
5 mg Resolution at 60 Hz Bandwidth
+3 V to +5.25 V Single Supply Operation
1000 g Shock Survival
APPLICATIONS
2-Axis Tilt Sensing
Computer Peripherals
Inertial Navigation
Seismic Monitoring
Vehicle Security Systems
Battery Powered Motion Sensing
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The ADXL202/ADXL210 are low cost, low power, complete 
2-axis accelerometers with a measurement range of either 
±2 g/±10 g. The ADXL202/ADXL210 can measure both dy-
namic acceleration (e.g., vibration) and static acceleration (e.g., 
gravity).
The outputs are digital signals whose duty cycles (ratio of pulse-
width to period) are proportional to the acceleration in each of 
the 2 sensitive axes. These outputs may be measured directly 
with a microprocessor counter, requiring no A/D converter or 
glue logic. The output period is adjustable from 0.5 ms to 10 ms 
via a single resistor (RSET). If a voltage output is desired, a 
voltage output proportional to acceleration is available from the 
XFILT and YFILT pins, or may be reconstructed by ﬁltering the 
duty cycle outputs.
The bandwidth of the ADXL202/ADXL210 may be set from 
0.01 Hz to 5 kHz via capacitors CX and CY. The typical noise 
ﬂoor is 500 µg/
 allowing signals below 5 mg to be resolved 
for bandwidths below 60 Hz.
The ADXL202/ADXL210 is available in a hermetic 14-lead 
Surface Mount CERPAK, speciﬁed over the 0°C to +70°C com-
mercial or −40°C to +85°C industrial temperature range.
iMEMS is a registered trademark of Analog Devices, Inc.
REV. B
Information fumishisd by Analog Devices is believed to be accurate 
and reliable. However, no responsibility is assumed by Analog Devices 
for its use, nor for any infringements of patents or other rights of third 
parties which may result from its use. No license is granted by impli-
cation or otherwise under any patent or patent rights of Analog Devices.
One Technology Way, P.O. Box 9106, Norwood, MA 02062-9106, U.S.A.
Tel: 781/329-4700   
 World Wide Web Site: http://www.analog.com
Fax: 781/326-8703        
            © Analog Devices, Inc., 1999
Hz
FUNCTIONAL BLOCK DIAGRAM
ADXL202/ADXL210
Low Cost ±2 g/±10 g Dual Axis
iMEMS® Accelerometers
with Digital Output
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL202/ADXL210–SPECIFICATIONS
(TA = TMIN to TMAX, TA = +25°C for J Grade only, VDD = +5 V,
RSET = 125 kΩ, Acceleration = 0 g, unless otherwise noted)
ADXL202/JQC/AQC
ADXL210/JQC/AQC
Parameter
Conditions
Min
Typ
Max
Min
Typ
Max
Units
SENSOR INPUT
Measurement Range1
Nonlinearity
Alignment Error2
Alignment Error
Transverse Sensitivity3
Each Axis
Best Fit Straight Line
X Sensor to Y Sensor
±1.5
±2
0.2
±1
±0.01
±2
±8
±10
0.2
±1
±0.01
±2
g
% of FS
Degrees
Degrees
%
SENSITIVITY
Duty Cycle per g
Sensitivity, Analog Output
Temperature Drift4
Each Axis
T1/T2 @ +25°C
At Pins XFILT, YFILT
∆ from +25°C
10
12.5
312
±0.5
15
3.2
4.0
100
±0.5
4.8
%/g
mV/g
% Rdg
ZERO g BIAS LEVEL
0 g Duty Cycle
Initial Offset
0 g Duty Cycle vs. Supply
0 g Offset vs. Temperature4
Each Axis
T1/T2
∆ from +25°C
25
50
±2
1.0
2.0
75
4.0
42
50
±2
1.0
2.0
58
4.0
%
g
%/V
mg/°C
NOISE PERFORMANCE
Noise Density5
@ +25°C
500
1000
500
1000
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
3 dB Bandwidth
3 dB Bandwidth
Sensor Resonant Frequency
Duty Cycle Output
At Pins XFILT, YFILT
500
5
10
500
5
14
Hz
kHz
kHz
FILTER
RFILT Tolerance
Minimum Capacitance
32 kΩ Nominal
At XFILT, YFILT
1000
±15
1000
±15
%
pF
SELF TEST
Duty Cycle Change
Self-Test “0” to “1”
10
10
%
DUTY CYCLE OUTPUT STAGE
FSET
FSET Tolerance
Output High Voltage
Output Low Voltage
T2 Drift vs. Temperature
Rise/Fall Time
RSET = 125 kΩ
I = 25 µA
I = 25 µA
0.7
35
200
1.3
200
0.7
35
200
1.3
200
kHz
mV
mV
ppm/°C
ns
POWER SUPPLY
Operating Voltage Range
Speciﬁed Performance
Quiescent Supply Current
Turn-On Time6
To 99%
3.0
4.75
0.6
5.25
5.25
1.0
2.7
4.75
0.6
5.25
5.25
1.0
V
V
mA
ms
TEMPERATURE RANGE
Operating Range
Speciﬁed Performance
JQC
AQC
0
−40
+70
+85
0
−40
+70
+85
°C
°C
NOTES
1For all combination of offset no sensitivity variation.
2Alignment error is speciﬁed as the angle between the true and indicated axis of sensitivity.
3Transverse sensitivity is the algebraic non of the alignment and the inherent sensitivity errors.
4Speciﬁcation refers to the maximum change in parameter from its initial at +25°C to its worst case value at TMIN TMAX.
5Noose density 
 is the average noise at any frequency in the bandwith of the part.
6CFILT in µF. Addition of ﬁlter capacitor will increase turn on time. Please see the Application section on power cycling.
All min and max speciﬁcations are guaranteed. Typical speciﬁcations are not tested or guaranteed.
Speciﬁcations subject to change without notice.
µg/ Hz
µg/ Hz
(
)
125 MΩ/RSET
125 MΩ/RSET
VS − 200 mV
VS − 200 mV
160 CFILT + 0.3
160 CFILT + 0.3
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL202/ADXL210
ABSOLUTE MAXIMUM RATINGS*
Acceleration (Any Axis, Unpowered for 0.5 ms) . . . . .1000 g
Acceleration (Any Axis, Powered for 0.5 ms)  . . . . . . . .500 g
+VS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . −0.3 V to +7.0 V
Output Short Circuit Duration
  (Any Pin to Common) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Indeﬁnite
Operating Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . −55°C to +125°C
Storage Temperature. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . −65°C to +I 50°C
*Stresses above those listed under Absolute Maximum Ratings may cause perma-
nent damage to the device. This is a stress rating only; the functional operation of 
the device at these or any other conditions above those indicated in the operational 
sections of this speciﬁcation is not implied. Exposure to absolute maximum rating 
conditions for extended periods may affect device reliability.
Drops onto hard surfaces can cause shocks of greater than 1000 g 
and exceed the absolute maximum rating of the device. Care 
should be exercised in handling to avoid damage.
PIN FUNCTION DESCRIPTIONS
Pin
Name
 Description
1
NC
Not Connect
2 
VTP
Test Point, Do Not Connect
3
ST
Self Test
4 
COM
Common
5 
T2
Connect RSET to Set T2 Period
6 
NC
No Connect
7 
COM
Common
8 
NC 
No Connect
9 
YOUT
Y Axis Duty Cycle Output
10 
XOUT
X Axis Duty Cycle Output
11 
YFILT
Connect Capacitor for Y Filter
12 
XFILT
Connect Capacitor for X Filter
13 
VDD
+3 V to +5.25 V, Connect to 14
14
VDD
+3 V to +5.25 V, Connect to 13
PACKAGE CHARACTERISTICS
Package
θJA
θJC
Device Weight
14-Lead CERPAK
110°C/W
30°C/W
5 Grams
PIN CONFIGURATION
Figure 1 shows the response of the ADXL202 to the Earth’s 
gravitational ﬁeld. The output values shown are nominal. They 
are presented to show the user what type of response to expect 
from each of the output pins due to changes in orientation with 
respect to the Earth. The ADXL210 reacts similarly with output 
changes appropriate to its scale.
Figure 1. ADXL202/ADXL210 Nominal Response Due to 
Gravity
ORDERING GUIDE
Model
g
Range
Temperature
Range
Package
Description
Package
Option
ADXL202JQC
±2
0°C to +70°C
14-Lead CERPAK
QC-14
ADXL202AQC
±2
−40°C to +85°C
14-Lead CERPAK
QC-14
ADXL210JQC
±10
0°C to +70°C
14-Lead CERPAK
QC-14
ADXL210AQC
±10
−40°C to +85°C
14-Lead CERPAK
QC-14
CAUTION
ESD (electrostatic discharge) sensitive device. Electrostatic charges as high as 4000 V readily
accumulate on the human body and test equipment and can discharge without detection. Although
the ADXL202/ADXL210 features proprietary ESD protection circuitry, permanent damage may
occur on devices subjected to high energy electrostatic discharges. Therefore, proper ESD pre-
cautions are recommended to avoid performance degradation or loss of functionality.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL202/ADXL210
TYPICAL CHARACTERISTICS (@ +25°C RSET = 125 kΩ, VDD = +5 V, unless otherwise noted)
Figure 2. Normalized DCM Period (T2) vs. Temperature
Figure 5. Typical X Axis Sensitivity Drift Due to Temperature
Figure 3. Typical Zero g Offset vs. Temperature
Figure 6. Typical Turn-On Time
Figure 4. Typical Supply Current vs. Temperature
Figure 7. Typical Zero g Distribution at +25°C
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL202/ADXL210
Figure 8. Typical Sensitivity per g at +25°C
Figure 10. Typical Noise at Digital Outputs
Figure 9. Typical Noise at XFILT Output
Figure 11. Rotational Die Alignment
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL202/ADXL210
DEFINITIONS
T1 
Length of the “on” portion of the cycle.
T2 
Length of the total cycle.
Duty Cycle
Ratio of the “on” time (T1) of the cycle to the 
total cycle (T2). Deﬁned as TIM for the 
ADXL202/ADXL210.
Pulsewidth
Time period of the “on” pulse. Deﬁned as T1 for 
the ADXL202/ADXL210.
THEORY OF OPERATION
The ADXL202/ADXL210 are complete dual axis acceleration 
measurement systems on a single monolithic IC. They contain a 
polysilicon surface-micromachined sensor and signal condition-
ing circuitry to implement an open loop acceleration measure-
ment architecture. For each axis, an output circuit converts the 
analog signal to a duty cycle modulated (DCM) digital signal that 
can be decoded with a counter/timer port on a microprocessor 
cessor. The ADXL202/ADXL210 are capable of measuring both 
positive and negative accelerations to a maximum level of ± 2 g 
or ± 10 g. The accelerometer measures static acceleration forces 
such as gravity, allowing it to be used as a tilt sensor.
The sensor is a surface micromachined polysilicon structure 
built on top of the silicon wafer. Polysilicon springs suspend 
the structure over the surface of the wafer and provide a resis-
tance against acceleration forces. Deﬂection of the structure is 
measured using a differential capacitor that consists of indepen-
dent ﬁxed plates and central plates attached to the moving mass. 
The ﬁxed plates are driven by 180° out of phase square waves. 
An acceleration will deﬂect the beam and unbalance the differ-
ential capacitor, resulting in an output square wave whose 
amplitude is proportional to acceleration. Phase sensitive 
demodulation techniques are then used to rectify the signal and 
determine the direction of the acceleration.
The output of the demodulator drives a duty cycle modulator 
(DCM) stage through a 32 kΩ resistor. At this point a pin is 
available on each channel to allow the user to set the signal 
bandwidth of the device by adding a capacitor. This ﬁltering 
improves measurement resolution and helps prevent aliasing.
After being low-pass ﬁltered, the analog signal is converted to 
a duty cycle modulated signal by the DCM stage. A single 
resistor sets the period for a complete cycle (T2), which can be 
set between 0.5 ms and 10 ms (see Figure 12). A 0 g acceleration 
produces a nominally 50% duty cycle. The acceleration signal 
can be determined by measuring the length of the T1 and T2 
pulses with a counter/timer or with a polling loop using a low 
cost microcontroller
An analog output voltage can be obtained either by buffering 
the signal from the XFILT and YFILT pin, or by passing the duty 
cycle signal through an RC ﬁlter to reconstruct the dc value.
The ADXL202/ADXL210 will operate with supply voltages as 
low as 3.0 V or as high as 5.25 V.
APPLICATIONS 
POWER SUPPLY DECOUPLING 
For most applications a single 0. 1 µF capacitor, CDC, will ade-
quately decouple the accelerometer from signal and noise on the 
power supply. However, in some cases, especially where digital 
devices such as microcontrollers share the same power supply, 
digital noise on the supply may cause interference on the 
ADXL202/ ADXL210 output. This is often observed as a slowly 
undulating ﬂuctuation of voltage at XFILT and YFILT. If additional 
decoupling is needed, a 100 Ω (or smaller) resistor or ferrite beads, 
may be inserted in the ADXL202/ADXL210’s supply line.
DESIGN PROCEDURE FOR THE ADXL202/ADXL210
The design procedure for using the ADXL202/ADXL210 with 
a duty cycle output involves selecting a duty cycle period and 
a ﬁlter capacitor. A proper design will take into account the 
Application requirements for bandwidth, signal resolution and 
acquisition time, as discussed in the following sections.
VDD
The ADXL202/ADXL210 have two power supply (VDD) Pins: 
13 and 14. These two pins should be connected directly together.
COM
The ADXL202/ADXL210 have two commons, Pins 4 and 7. 
These two pins should be connected directly together and Pin 
7 grounded.
VTP
This pin is to be left open; make no connections of any kind to 
this pin.
Decoupling Capacitor CDC
A 0.1 µF Capacitor is recommended from Von to COM for 
power supply decoupling.
ST 
The ST pin controls the self-test feature. When this pin is set 
to VDD, an electrostatic force is exerted on the beam of the 
accelerometer. The resulting movement of the beam allows the 
user to test if the accelerometer is functional. The typical change 
in output will be 10% at the duty cycle outputs (corresponding 
to 800 mg). This pin may be left open circuit or connected to 
common in normal use.
Duty Cycle Decoding
The ADXL202/ADXL210’s digital output is a duty cycle mod-
ulator. Acceleration is proportional to the ratio T1/T2. The nom-
inal output of the ADXL202 is:
0 g = 50% Duty Cycle
Scale factor is 12.5% Duty Cycle Change per g
The nominal output of the ADXL210 is:
0 g = 50% Duty Cycle
Scale factor is 4% Duty Cycle Change per g
These nominal values are affectcd by the initial tolerance of the 
device including zero g offset error and sensitivity error.
T2 does not have to be measured for every measurement cycle. 
It need only be updated to account for changes due to temper-
ature, (a relatively slow process). Since the T2 time period is 
shared by both X and Y channels, it is necessary only to measure 
it on one channel of the ADXL202/ADXL210. Decoding algo-
rithms for various microcontrollers have been developed. Con-
sult the appropriate Application Note.
Figure 12. Typical Output Duty Cycle
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL202/ADXL210
Setting the Bandwidth Using CX and CY
The ADXL202/ADXL210 have provisions for bandlimiting the 
XFILT and YFILT pins. Capacitors must be added at these pins to 
implement low-pass ﬁltering for antialiasing and noise reduc-
tion. The equation for the 3 dB bandwidth is:
or, more simply, 
The tolerance of the internal resistor (RFILT) can vary as much 
as ±25% of its nominal value of 32 kΩ; so the bandwidth will 
vary accordingly. A minimum capacitance of 1000 pF for C(X,Y) 
is required in all cases.
Setting the DCM Period with RSET 
The period of the DCM output is set for both channels by a 
single resistor from RSET to ground. The equation for the period 
is:
A 125 kΩ resistor will set the duty cycle repetition rate to 
approximately 1 kHz, or 1 ms. The device is designed to operate 
at duty cycle periods between 0.5 ins and 10 ms.
Note that the RSET should always be included, even if only an 
analog output is desired. Use an RSET value between 500 kΩ 
and 2 MΩ when taking the output from XFILT or YFILT. The RSET 
resistor should be place close to the T2 Pin to minimize parasitic 
capacitance at this node.
Selecting the Right accelerometer
For most tilt sensing applications the ADXL202 is the most 
appropriate accelerometer. Its higher sensitivity (12.5%/g 
allows the user to use a lower speed counter for PWM decoding 
while maintaining high resolution. The ADXL210 should be 
used in applications where accelerations of greater than ±2 g 
are expected.
MICROCOMPUTER INTERFACES
The ADXL202/ADXL210 were speciﬁcally designed to work 
with low cost microcontrollers. Speciﬁc code sets, reference 
designs, and application notes are available from the factory. 
This section will outline a general design procedure and discuss 
the various trade-offs that need to be considered.
The designer should have some idea of the required performance 
of the system in terms of:
Resolution: the smallest signal change that needs to be detected.
Bandwidth: the highest frequency that needs to be detected.
Acquisition Time: the time that will be available to acquire the 
signal on each axis.
These requirements will help to determine the accelerometer 
bandwidth, the speed of the microcontroller clock and the length 
of the T2 period.
When selecting a microcontroller it is helpful to have a counter 
timer port available. The microcontroller should have provisions 
for software calibration. While the ADXL202/ADXL210 are 
highly accurate accelerometers, they have a wide tolerance for
Figure 13. Block Diagram
Table I. Filter Capacitor Selection, CX and CY
Bandwidth
Capacitor
Value
10 Hz
0.47 µF
50 Hz
0.10 µF
100 Hz
0.05 µF
200 Hz
0.027 µF
500 Hz
0.01 µF
5 kHz
0.001 µF
F 3 dB
–
1
2π 32 kΩ
(
)
C x y
,
(
)
×




---------------------------------------------------------
=
F 3 dB
–
5µF
C X Y
,
(
)
--------------
=
T 2
RSET Ω
(
)
125 MΩ
---------------------
=
Table II. Resistor Values to Set T2
T2
RSET
1 ms
125 kΩ
2 ins
250 kΩ
5 ms
625 kΩ
10 ms
1.25 MΩ
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL202/ADXL210
initial offset. The easiest way to null this offset is with a cali-
bration factor saved on the mictrocontroller or by a user cali-
bration for zero g. In the case where the offset is calibrated 
during manufacture, there are several options, including external 
EEPROM and microcontrollers with “one-time programmable” 
features.
DESIGN TRADE-OFFS FOR SELECTING FILTER 
CHARACTERISTICS: THE NOISE/BW TRADE-OFF
The accelerometer bandwidth selected will determine the mea-
surement resolution (smallest detectable acceleration). Filtering 
can be used to lower the noise ﬂoor and improve the resolution 
of the accelerometer. Resolution is dependent on both the analog 
ﬁlter bandwidth at XFILT and YFILT and on the speed of the 
microcontroller counter.
The analog output of the ADXL202/ADXL210 has a typical 
bandwidth of 5 kHz, much higher than the duty cycle stage is 
capable of converting. The user must ﬁlter the signal at this 
point to limit aliasing errors. To minimize DCM errors the 
analog bandwidth should be less than 1/10 the DCM frequency. 
Analog bandwidth may be increased to up to 1/2 the DCM 
frequency in many applications. This will result in greater 
dynamic error generated at the DCM. 
The analog bandwidth may be further decreased to reduce noise 
and improve resolution. The ADXL202/ADXL210 noise has 
the characteristics of white Gaussian noise that contributes 
equally at all frequencies and is described in terms of µg per 
root Hz; i.e., the noise is proportional to the square root of the 
handwidth of the accelerometer. It is recommended that the user 
limit bandwidth to the lowest frequency needed by the applica-
tion, to maximize the resolution and dynamic range of the 
accelerometer.
With the single pole roll-off characteristic, the typical noise of the 
ADXL202/ADXL210 is determined by the following equation:
At 100 Hz the noise will be:
Often the peak value of the noise is desired. Peak-to-peak noise 
can only be estimated by statistical methods. Table III is useful 
for estimating the probabilities of exceeding various peak val-
ues, given the rms value.
The peak-to-peak noise value will give the best estimate of the 
uncertainty in a single measurement.
Table IV gives typical noise output of the ADXL202/ADXL210 
for various CX and CY values.
CHOOSING T2 AND COUNTER FREQUENCY: DESIGN 
TRADE-OFFS 
The noise level is one determinant of accelerometer resolution. 
The second relates to the measurement resolution of the counter 
when decoding the duty cycle output.
The ADXL202/ADXL210’s duty cycle converter has a resolu-
tion of approximately 14 bits; better resolution than the accel-
erometer itself. The actual resolution of the acceleration signal 
is, however, limited by the time resolution of the counting 
devices used to decode the duty cycle. The faster the counter 
clock, the higher the resolution of the duty cycle and the shorter 
the T2 period can be for a given resolution. The following table 
shows some of the trade-offs. It is important to note that this is 
the resolution due to the microprocessors’s counter. It is prob-
able that the accelerometer’s noise ﬂoor may set the lower limit 
on the resolution as discussed in the previous section.
Table III. Estimation of Peak-to-Peak Noise
Nominal Peak-to-Peak
Value
% of Time that Noise 
Will Exceed Nominal
Peak-to-Peak Value
2.0 × rms
32%
4.0 × rms
4.6%
6.0 × rms
0.27%
8.0 × rms
0.006%
Noise rms
(
)
500 µg/ Hz




BW
1.5
×




×
=
Noise rms
(
)
500µg/ Hz




100
1.5
(
)
×




×
6.12 mg
=
=
Table IV. Filter Capacitor Selection, CX and CY
Bandwidth
CX, CY
rms Noise
Peak-to-Peak Noise 
Estimate 95% 
Probability (rms ×××× 4)
10 Hz
0.47 µF
1.9 mg
7.6 mg
50 Hz
0.10 µF
4.3 mg
17.2 mg
100 Hz
0.05 µF
6.1 mg
24.4 mg
200 Hz
0.027 µF
8.7 mg
35.8 mg
500 Hz
0.01 µF
13.7 mg
54.8 mg
Table V. Trade-offs Between Microcontroller Counter Rate, 
T2 Period and Resolution of Duty Cycle Modulator
T2(ms)
RSET
(kΩΩΩΩ)
ADXL202/
ADXL210
Sample 
Rate
Counter-
Clock
Rate
(MHz)
Counts
per T2
Cycle
Counts
per g
Resolution
(mg)
1.0
124
1000
2.0
2000
250
4.0
1.0
124
1000
1.0
1000
125
8.0
1.0
124
1000
0.5
500
62.5
16.0
5.0
625
200
2.0
10000
1250
0.8
5.0
625
200
1.0
5000
625
1.6
5.0
625
200
0.5
2500
312.5
3.2
10.0
1250
100
2.0
20000
2500
0.4
10.0
1250
100
1.0
10000
1250
0.8
10.0
1250
100
0.5
5000
625
1.6
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL202/ADXL210
STRATEGIES FOR USING THE DUTY CYCLE OUTPUT 
WITH MICROCONTROLLERS
Application notes outlining various strategies for using the duty 
cycle output with low cost microcontrollers are available from 
the factory.
USING THE ADXL202/ADXL210 AS A DUAL AXIS TILT 
SENSOR
One of the most popular applications of the ADXL202/ADXL210 
is tilt measurement. An accelerometer uses the force of gravity 
as an input vector to determine orientation of an object in space.
An accelerometer is most sensitive to tilt when its sensitive axis 
is perpendicular to the force of gravity, i.e., parallel to the earth’s 
surface. At this orientation its sensitivity to changes in tilt is 
highest. When the accelerometer is oriented on axis to gravity, 
i. e., near its +1 g or −1 g reading, the change in output accel-
eration per degree of tilt is negligible. When the accelerometer 
is perpendicular to gravity, its output will change nearly 17.5 mg 
per degree of tilt, but at 45° degrees it is changing only at 12.2 mg 
per degree and resolution declines. The following table illus-
trates the changes in the X and Y axes as the device is tilted 
±90° through gravity.
A DUAL AXIS TILT SENSOR: CONVERTING 
ACCELERATION TO TILT
When the accelerometer is oriented so both its X and Y axes 
are parallel to the earth’s surface it can be used as a two axis 
tilt sensor with a roll and a pitch axis. Once the output signal 
from the accelerometer has been converted to an acceleration 
that varies between −1 g and +1 g, the output tilt in degrees is 
calculated as follows:
Pitch = ASIN (Ax/1 g)
Roll = ASIN (Ay/1 g)
Be sure to account for overranges. It is possible for the accel-
erometers to output a signal greater than ± 1 g due to vibration, 
shock or other accelerations.
MEASURING 360° OF TILT
It is possible to measure a full 360° of orientation through gravity 
by using two accelerometers oriented perpendicular to one 
another (see Figure 15). When one sensor is reading a maximum 
change in output per degree, the other is at its minimum.
X OUTPUT
Y OUTPUT (g)
X AXIS 
ORIENTATION
TO HORIZON (°)
X OUTPUT (g)
D PER 
DEGREE OF 
TILT (mg)
Y OUTPUT (g)
∆ PER 
DEGREE OF 
TILT (mg)
−90
−1.000
−0.2
0.000
17.5
−75
−0.966
4.4
0.259
16.9
−60
−0.866
8.6
0.500
15.2
−45
−0.707
12.2
0.707
12.4
−30
−0.500
15.0
0.866
8.9
−15
−0.259
16.8
0.966
4.7
0
0.000
17.5
1.000
0.2
15
0.259
16.9
0.966
−4.4
30
0.500
15.2
0.866
−8.6
45
0.707
12.4
0.707
−12.2
60
0.866
8.9
0.500
−15.0
75
0.966
4.7
0.259
−16.8
90
1.000
0.2
0.000
−17.5
Figure 14. How the X and Y Axes Respond to Changes in Tilt
Figure 15. Using a Two-Axis Accelerometer to Measure 360° 
of Tilt
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL202/ADXL210
USING THE ANALOG OUTPUT
The ADXL202/ADXL210 was speciﬁcally designed for use 
with its digital outputs, but has provisions to provide analog 
outputs as well.
Duty Cycle Filtering
An analog output can be reconstructed by ﬁltering the duty cycle 
output. This technique requires only passive components. The 
duty cycle period (T2) should be set to 1 ms. An RC ﬁlter with 
a 3 dB point at least a factor of 10 less than the duty cycle 
frequency is connected to the duty cycle output. The ﬁlter resis-
tor should be no less than 100 kΩ to prevent loading of the 
output stage. The analog output signal will be ratiometric to the 
supply voltage. The advantage of this method is an output scale 
factor of approximately double the analog output. Its disadvan-
tage is that the frequency response will be lower than when 
using the XFILT, YFILT output.
XFILT, YFILT Output
The second method is to use the analog output present at the 
XFILT and YFILT pin. Unfortunately, these pins have a 32 kΩ 
output impedance and are not designed to drive a load directly. 
An op amp follower may be required to buffer this pin. The 
advantage of this method is that the full 5 kHz bandwidth of 
the accelerometer is available to the user. A capacitor still must 
be added at this point for ﬁltering. The duty cycle converter 
should be kept running by using RSET <10 MΩ. Note that the 
accelerometer offset and sensitivity are ratiometric to the supply 
voltage. The offset and sensitivity are nominally:
0 g Offset = VDD/2
2.5 V at +5 V
ADXL202 Sensitivity = (60 mV × VS)/g
300 mV/g at +5 V, VDD
ADXL2l0 Sensitivity = (20 mV × VS)/g
100 mV/g at +5 V, VDD
USING THE ADXL202/ADXL210 IN VERY LOW POWER 
APPLICATIONS
An application note outlining low power strategies for the 
ADXL202/ADXL210 is available. Some key points are pre-
sented here. It is possible to reduce the ADXL202/ADXL210’s 
average current from 0.6 mA to less than 20 µA by using the 
following techniques:
1. Power Cycle the accelerometer.
2. Run the accelerometer at a Lower Voltage, (Down to 3 V).
Power Cycling with an External A/D
Depending on the value of the XFILT capacitor, the ADXL202/ 
ADXL210 is capable of turning on and giving a good reading 
in 1.6 ms. Most microcontroller based A/Ds can acquire a read-
ing in another 25 µs. Thus it is possible to turn on the ADXL202/ 
ADXL210 and take a reading in <2 ms. If we assume that a 
20 Hz sample rate is sufﬁcient, the total current required to 
take 20 samples is 2 ms × 20 samples/s × 0.6 mA = 24 µA 
average current. Running the part at 3 V will reduce the supply 
current from 0.6 mA to 0.4 mA, bringing the average current 
down to 16 µA.
The A/D should read the analog output of the ADXL202/ 
ADXL210 at the XFILT and YFILT pins. A buffer ampliﬁer is 
recommended, and may be required in any case to amplify the 
analog Output to give enough resolution with an 8-bit to 10-bit 
converter.
Power Cycling When Using the Digital Output
An alternative is to run the microcontroller at a higher clock 
rate and put it into shutdown between readings, allowing the 
use of the digital output. In this approach the 
ADXL202/ADXL210 should be set at its fastest sample rate 
(T2 = 0.5 ms), with a 500 Hz ﬁlter at XFILT and YFILT. The concept 
is to acquire a reading as quickly as possible and then shut down 
the ADXL202/ADXL210 and the microcontroller until the next 
sample is needed.
In either of the above approaches, the ADXL202/ADXL210 can 
be turned on and off directly using a digital port pin on the 
microcontroller to power the accelerometer without additional 
components. The port should be used to switch the common 
pin of the accelerometer so the port pin is “pulling down.”
CALIBRATING THE ADXL202/ADXL210
The initial value of the offset and scale factor for the ADXL202/ 
ADXL210 will require calibration for applications such as tilt 
measurement. The ADXL202/ADXL210 architecture has been 
designed so that these calibrations take place in the software of 
the microcontroller used to decode the duty cycle signal. Cali-
bration factors can be stored in EEPROM or determined at turn-
on and saved in dynamic memory.
For low g applications, the force of gravity is the most stable, 
accurate and convenient acceleration reference available. A 
reading of the 0 g point can be determined by orientating the 
device parallel to the earth’s surface and then reading the output.
A more accurate calibration method is to make a measurements 
at +1 g and −1 g. The sensitivity can be determined by the two 
measurements.
To calibrate, the accelerometer’s measurement axis is pointed 
directly at the earth. The 1 g reading is saved and the sensor is 
turned 180° to measure −1 g. Using the two readings, the 
sensitivity is:
Let A = Accelerometer output with axis oriented to +1 g
Let B = Accelerometer output with axis oriented to −1 g then:
Sensitivity = [A − B]/2 g
For example, if the +1 g reading (A) is 55% duty cycle and the 
−1 g reading (B) is 32% duty cycle, then:
Sensitivity = [55% − 32%]/2 g = 11.5%/g
These equations apply whether the output is analog, or duty 
cycle.
Application notes outlining algorithms for calculating acceler-
ation from duty cycle and automated calibration routines are 
available from the factory.
OUTLINE DIMENSIONS
Dimensions shown in inches and (mm).
14-Lead CERPAK
(QC-14)
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

 FEATURES
 Complete Acceleration Measurement System
 on a Single Monolithic IC
 80 dB Dynamic Range
 Pin Programmable ±50 g or ±25 g Full Scale
 Low Noise: 1 mg
 Typical
 Low Power: <2 mA per Axis
 Supply Voltages as Low as 4 V
 2-Pole Filter On-Chip
 Ratiometric Operation
 Complete Mechanical & Electrical Self-Test
 Dual & Single Axis Versions Available
 Surface Mount Package
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The ADXL150 and ADXL250 are third generation ±50 g sur-
face micromachined accelerometers. These improved replace-
ments for the ADXL50 offer lower noise, wider dynamic range, 
reduced power consumption and improved zero g bias drift.
The ADXL150 is a single axis product; the ADXL250 is a fully 
integrated dual axis accelerometer with signal conditioning on 
a single monolithic IC, the ﬁrst of its kind available on the 
commercial market. The two sensitive axes of the ADXL250 
are orthogonal (90°) to each other. Both devices have their 
sensitive axes in the same plane as the silicon chip.
The ADXL150/ADXL250 offer lower noise and improved 
signal-to-noise ratio over the ADXL50. Typical S/N is 80 dB, 
allowing resolution of signals as low as 10 mg, yet still provid-
ing a ±50 g full-scale range. Device scale factor can be increased 
from 38 mV/g to 76 mV/g by connecting a jumper between 
VOUT and the offset null pin. Zero g drift has been reduced to 
0.4 g over the industrial temperature range, a 10× improvement 
over the ADXL50. Power consumption is a modest 1.8 mA per 
axis. The scale factor and zero g output level are both ratiometric 
to the power supply, eliminating the need for a voltage reference 
when driving ratiometric A/D converters such as those found in 
most microprocessors. A power supply bypass capacitor is the 
only external component needed for normal operation.
The ADXL150/ADXL250 are available in a hermetic 14-lead 
surface mount cerpac package speciﬁed over the 0°C to +70°C 
commercial and −40°C to +85°C industrial temperature ranges. 
Contact factory for availability of devices speciﬁed over auto-
motive and military temperature ranges.
Hz
FUNCTIONAL BLOCK DIAGRAMS
ADXL150/ADXL250
±5 g to±50 g, Low Noise, Low Power,
Single/Dual Axis iMEMS® Accelerometers
iMEMS is registered trademark of Analog Devices, Inc.
REV. 0
Information furnished by Analog Devices is believed to be accurate and
reliable. However, no responsibility is assumed by Analog Devices for
its use, nor for any infringements of patents or other rights of third
parties which may result from its use. No license is granted by impli-
cation or otherwise under any patent or patent rights of Analog Devices.
One Technology Way, P.O. Box 9106 Norwood, MA 02062-9106, U.S.A.
Tel: 781/329-4700   
 World Wide Web Site: http://www.analog.com
Fax: 781/326-8703        
            © Analog Devices, Inc., 1998
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250–SPECIFICATIONS
ADXL150JQC/AQC
ADXL250JQC/AQC
Parameter
Condition
Min
Typ
Max
Min
Typ
Max
Units
SENSOR
Guaranteed Full-Scale Range
Nonlinearity
Package Alignment Error1
Sensor-to-Sensor Alignment Error
Transverse Sensitivity2
±40
±50
0.2
±1
±2
±40
±50
0.2
±1
±0.1
±2
g
% of FS
Degrees
Degrees
%
SENSITIVITY
Sensitivity (Ratiometric)3
Sensitivity Drift Due to Temperature
Y Channel
X Channel
Delta from 25°C to TMIN or TMAX
33.0
38.0
±0.5
43.0
33.0
33.0
38.0
38.0
±0.5
43.0
43.0
mV/g
mV/g
%
ZERO g BIAS LEVEL
Output Bias voltage4
Zero g Drift Due to Temperature
Delta from 25°C to TMIN or TMAX
VS/2−0.35 VS/2
0.2
VS/2+0.35 VS/2−0.35 VS/2
0.3
VS/2+0.35
V
g
ZERO-g OFFSET ADJUSTMENT
Voltage Gain
Input Impedence
Delta VOUT/Delta VOS PIN
0.45
20
0.50
30
0.55
0.45
20
0.50
30
0.55
V/V
kΩ
NOISE PERFORMANCE
Noise Density5
Clock Noise
1
5
2.5
1
5
2.5
mV p-p
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
−3 dB Bandwidth
Bandwidth Temperature Drift
Sensor Resonant Frequency
TMIN to TMAX
Q = 5
900
1000
50
24
900
1000
50
24
Hz
kHz
kHz
SELF-TEST
Output Change
Logic “1” Voltage
Logic “0” Voltage
Input Resistance
ST Pin from Logic “0” to ‘1”
To Common
0.25
VS−1
30
0.40
50
0.60
1.0
0.25
VS−1
30
0.40
50
0.60
1.0
V
V
V
kΩ
OUTPUT AMPLIFIER
Output Voltage Swing
Capacitive Load Drive
IOUT = ±100 µA
0.25
1000
VS−0.25
0.25
1000
VS−0.25
V
pF
POWER SUPPLY (VS)7
Functional Voltage Range
Quiescent Supply Current
ADXL150
ADXL250 (Total 2 Channels)
4.0
1.8
6.0
3.0
4.0
3.5
6.0
5.0
V
mA
mA
TEMPERATURE RANGE
Operating Range J
Speciﬁed Performance A
0
−40
+70
+85
0
−40
+70
+85
°C
°C
NOTES
1Alignment error is speciﬁed as the scale between the ture axis of sensitivity and the edge of the package.
2Transverse sensitivity is measured with an applied acceleration that is 90 degrees from the indicated axis of sensitivity.
3Ratiometric: VOUT = VS/2 + (Sensitivity × VS/5 V × a) where a = applied acceleration in gs, and VS = supply voltage. See Figure 21. Output scale factor can be 
doubled by connecting VOUT to the offset null pin.
4Ratiometric, proportional to VS/2. See Figure 21.
5See Figure 11 and Device Bandwidth vs. Resolution section.
6Sclf-test output varies with supply voltage.
7When wing ADXL250, both Pins 13 and 14 must be connected to the supply for the device to function.
Speciﬁcations subject to change without notice.
mg/ Hz
(TA = +25°C for J Grade, TA = 40°C to +85°C for A Grade,
VS = +5.00 V, Acceleration = Zero g, unless otherwise noted)
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250
ABSOLUTE MAXIMUM RATINGS*
Acceleration (Any Axis, Unpowered for 0.5 ms) . . . . .2000 g
Acceleration (Any Axis, Powered for 0.5 ms)  . . . . . . . .500 g
+VS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . −0.3 V to −7.0 V
Output Short Circuit Duration
  (VOUT, VREF Terminals to Common)  . . . . . . . . . . . .Indeﬁnite
Operating Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . −55°C to +125ºC
Storage Temperature. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . −65°C to +150°C
*Stresses above those listed under Absolute Maximum Ratings may cause perma-
nent damage to the device. This is a stress rating only; the functional operation of 
the device at these or any other conditions above those indicated in the operational 
sections of this speciﬁcation is not implied. Exposure to absolute maximum rating 
conditions for extended periods may affect device reliability.
Drops onto hard surfaces can cause shocks of greater than 2000 g 
and exceed the absolute maximum rating of the device. Care 
should be exercised in handling to avoid damage.
Figure 1. ADXL150 and ADXL250 Sensitive Axis Orientation
Package Characteristics
Package
θJA
θJC
Device Weight
14-Lead CERPAK
110°C/W
30°C/W
5 Grams
ORDERING GUIDE
Model
Temperature Range
ADXL150JQC
ADXL150AQC
ADXL250JQC
ADXL250AQC
0°C to +70°C
−40°C to +85°C
0°C to +70°C
−40°C to +85°C
PIN CONNECTIONS
NOTE: WHEN USING ADXL250, BOTH PINS 13 AND 14 NEED 
TO BE CONNECTED TO SUPPLY FOR  DEVICE TO FUNCTION
CAUTION
ESD (electrostatic discharge) sensitive device. Electrostatic charges as high as 4000 V readily 
accumulate on the human body and test equipment and can discharge without detection. Although 
the ADXL150/ADXL250 features proprietary ESD protection circuitry, permanent damage may 
occur on devices subjected to high energy electrostatic discharges. Therefore, proper ESD pre-
cautions are recommended to avoid performance degradation or loss of functionality.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
Acceleration: Change in velocity per unit time.
Acceleration Vector: Vector describing the net acceleration 
acting upon the ADXL150/ADXL250.
g: A unit of acceleration equal to the average force of gravity 
occurring at the earth’s surface. A g is approximately equal to 
32.17 feet/s2 or 9.807 meters/s2.
Nonlinearity: The maximum deviation of the ADXL150/ 
ADXL250 output voltage from a best ﬁt straight line ﬁtted to 
a plot of acceleration vs. output voltage, calculated as a % of 
the full-scale output voltage (at 50 g).
Resonant Frequency: The natural frequency of vibration of 
the ADXL150/ADXL250 sensor’s central plate (or “beam”). At 
its resonant frequency of 24 kHz, the ADXL150/ADXL250’s 
moving center plate has a slight peak in its  frequency response.
Sensitivity: The output voltage change per g unit of acceleration 
applied, speciﬁed at the VOUT pin in mV/g.
Total Alignment Error: Net misalignment of the ADXL150/ 
ADXL250’s on-chip sensor and the measurement axis of the 
application. This error includes error due to sensor die alignment 
to the package, and any misalignment due to installation of the 
sensor package in a circuit board or module.
Transverse Acceleration: Any acceleration applied 90° to the 
axis of sensitivity.
Transverse Sensitivity Error: Ile percent of a transverse accel-
eration that appears at VOUT.
Transverse Axis: The axis perpendicular (90°) to the axis of 
sensitivity.
Zero g Bias Level: The output voltage of the ADXL150/ 
ADXL250 when there is no acceleration (or gravity) acting 
upon the axis of sensitivity. The output offset is the difference 
between the actual zero g bias level and (VS/2).
Polarity of the Acceleration Output
The polarity of the ADXL150/ADXL250 output is shown in 
Figure 1. When its sensitive axis is oriented to the earth’s gravity 
(and held in place), it will experience in acceleration of +1 g. 
This corresponds to a change of approximately +38 mV at the 
output pin. Note that the polarity will be reversed if the package 
is rotated 180º. The ﬁgure shows the ADXL250 oriented so that 
its “X” axis measures +1 g. If the package is rotated 90º clock-
wise (Pin 14 up, Pin 1 down), the ADXL250’s “Y” axis will now 
measure +1 g.
Acceleration Vectors
The ADXL150/ADXL250 is a sensor designed to measure 
accelerations that result from an applied force. It responds to 
the component of acceleration on its sensitive X axis 
(ADXL150) or on both the “X” and “Y” axis (ADXL250).
Figure 2. Output Polarity
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250
Typical Characteristics (@+5 V dc, +25°C with a 38 mV/g Scale Factor unless otherwise noted)
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250
THEORY OF OPERATION
The ADXL150 and ADXL250 are fabricated using a proprietary 
surface micromachining process that has been in high volume 
production since 1993. The fabrication technique uses standard 
integrated circuit manufacturing methods enabling all the signal 
processing circuitry to be combined on the same chip with the 
sensor.
The surface micromachined sensor element is made by depos-
iting polysilicon on a sacriﬁcial oxide layer that is then etched 
away leaving the suspended sensor element. Figure 14 is a 
simpliﬁed view of the sensor structure. The actual sensor has 
42 unit cells for sensing acceleration. The differential capacitor 
sensor is composed of ﬁxed plates and moving plates attached 
to the beam that moves in response to acceleration. Movement 
of the beam changes the differential capacitance, which is mea-
sured by the on chip circuitry.
The sensor has 12-unit capacitance cells for electrostatically 
forcing the beam during a self-test. Self-test is activated by the 
user with a logic high on the self-test input pin. During a logic 
high, an electrostatic force acts on the beam equivalent to 
approximately 20% of full-scale acceleration input, and thus a 
proportional voltage change appears on the output pin. When 
activated, the self-test feature exercises both the entire mechan-
ical structure and the electrical circuitry.
All the circuitry needed to drive the sensor and convert the 
capacitance change to voltage is incorporated on the chip requir-
ing no external components except for standard power supply 
decoupling. Both sensitivity and the zero-g value are ratiometric 
to the supply voltage, so that ratiometeric devices following the 
accelerometer (such as an ADC, etc.) will track the accelerom-
eter if the supply voltage changes. The output voltage (VOUT) is 
a function of both the acceleration input (a) and the power 
supply voltage (VS) as follows:
Both the ADXL150 and ADYCL250 have a 2-pole Bessel 
switched-capacitor ﬁlter. Bessel ﬁlters, sometimes called linear 
phase ﬁlters, have a step response with minimal overshoot and 
a maximally ﬂat group delay. The −3 dB frequency of the poles 
is preset at the factory to 1 kHz. These ﬁlters are also completely 
self-contained and buffered, requiring no external components.
MEASURING ACCELERATIONS LESS THAN 50 g
The ADXL150/ADXL250 require only a power supply bypass 
capacitor to measure ±50 g accelerations. For measuring ±50 g 
accelerations, the accelerometer may be directly connected to 
an ADC (see Figure 25). The device may also be easily modiﬁed 
to measure lower g signals by increasing its output wale factor.
The scale factor of an accelerometer speciﬁes the voltage change 
of the output per g of applied acceleration. This should not be 
confused with its resolution. The resolution of the device is the 
lowest g level the accelerometer is capable of measuring. Res-
olution is principally determined by the device noise and the 
measurement bandwidth.
The zero g bias level is simply the dc output Level of the 
accelerometer when it is not in motion or being acted upon by 
the earth’s gravity.
Pin Programmable Scale Factor Option
In its normal state, the ADXL150/ADXL250’s buffer ampliﬁer 
provides in output scale factor of 38 mV/g, which is set by an 
internal voltage divider. This gives a full-scale range of +50 g 
and a nominal bandwidth of 1 kHz.
A factor-of-two increase in sensitivity can be obtained by con-
necting the VOUT pin to the offset null pin, assuming that it is 
not needed for offset adjustment. This connection has the effect 
of reducing the internal feedback by a factor of two, doubling 
the buffer’s gain. This increases the output scale factor to 76 mV/g 
and provides a ±25 g full-scale range.
Simultaneously, connecting these two pins also increases the 
amount of internal post ﬁltering, reducing the noise ﬂoor and 
changing the nominal 3 dB bandwidth of the ADXL150/ 
ADXL250 to 500 Hz. Note that the post ﬁlter’s “Q” will also 
be reduced by a factor of 
from 0.58 (Bessel response) to a 
much gentler “Q” value of 0.41. The primary effect of this 
change in “Q” is only at frequencies within two octaves of the 
corner frequency; above this the two ﬁlter slopes am essentially 
the same. In applications where a ﬂat response up to 500 Hz is 
needed, it is better to operate the device at 38 mV/g and use an 
external post ﬁlter. Note also that connecting VOUT to the offset 
pin adds a 30 kΩ load from VOUT to VS/2. When swinging ±2 V 
at VOUT, this added load will consume ±60 µA of the ADXL150/ 
ADXL250’s 100 µA (typical) output current drive.
Figure 14. Simpliﬁed View of Sensor Under Acceleration
V OUT
V S/2
(Sensitivity
V S
5V
-------
a
×
×
)
–
=
2
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250
Increasing the iMEMS Accelerometer’s Output
Scale Factor
Figure 15 shows the basic connections for using an external 
buffer ampliﬁer to increase die output scale factor.
The output multiplied by the gain of the buffer, which is simply 
the value of resistor R3 divided by RI. Choose a convenient 
scale factor, keeping in mind that the buffer pin not only ampli-
ﬁes the signal, but my noise or drift as well. Too much pin can 
also cause the buffer to saturate and clip the output waveform.
Note that the “+” input of the external op amp uses the offset 
null pin of the ADXL150/ADXL250 as a reference, biasing the 
op amp at midsupply, saving two resistors and reducing power 
consumption. The offset null pin connects to the VS/2 reference 
point inside the accelerometer via 30 kΩ, so it is important not 
to load this pin with more dim a few microamps.
It is important to use a single-supply or “rail-to-rail” op amp 
for the external buffer as it needs to be able to swing close to 
the supply and ground.
The circuit of Figure 15  is entirely adequate for many applica-
tions, but its accuracy is dependent on the pretrimmed accuracy 
of the accelerometer and this will vary by product type and grade.
For the highest possible accuracy, an external trim is mended. 
As shown by Figure 20, this consists of a potentiometer Rla, 
in series with a ﬁxed resistor, Rlb. Another to select resistor 
values after measuring the device’s scale (see Figure 17).
AC Coupling
If a dc (gravity) response is not required—for example ** tion 
measurement applications—ac coupling can be ** between the 
accelerometer’s output and the external op** input as shown in 
Figure 16. The use of ac coupling ** eliminates my zero g drift 
and allows the maximum ** amp gain without clipping.
Resistor R2 and capacitor C3 together form a high ** whose 
corner frequency is 1/(2 x R2 C3). This ﬁlter ** the signal from 
the accelerometer by 3 dB at the **, and it will continue to 
reduce it at a rate of 6 ** (20 dB per decade) for signals below 
the corner frequ ** Capacitor CBS should be a nonpolarized, 
low leakage type **
If ac coupling is used, the self-test feature must be ** the 
accelerometer’s output rather than at the external ** output 
(since the self-test output is a dc voltage).
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250
Adjusting the Zero g Bias Level
When a true dc (gravity) response is needed, the output from 
the accelerometer must be dc coupled to the external ampliﬁer’s 
input. For high gain applications, a zero g offset trim will also 
be needed. The external offset trim permits the user to set the 
zew g offset voltage to exactly +2.5 volts (allowing the maxi-
mum output swing from the external ampliﬁer without clipping 
with a +5 supply).
With a dc coupled connection, any difference between the zero 
g output and +2.5 V will be ampliﬁed along with the signal. To 
obtain the exact zero g output desired or to allow the maximum 
output voltage swing from the external ampliﬁer, the zero g 
offset will need to be externally trimmed using the circuit of 
Figure 20.
The external ampliﬁer’s maximum output swing should be 
limited to ±2 volts, which provides a safety margin of ±0.25 
volts before clipping. With a +2.5 volt zero g level, the maximum 
gain will equal:
The device scale factor and zero g offset levels can be calibrated 
using the earth’s gravity, as explained in the section “calibrating 
the ADXL150/ADXL250.”
Using the Zero g “Quick-Cal” Method
In Figure 18 (accelerometer alone, no external op amp), a trim 
potentiometer connects directly to the accelerometer’s zero g 
null pin. The “quick offset calibration” scheme shown in Figure 
17 is preferred over using a potentiometer, which could change 
its setting over time due to vibration. The “quick offset calibra-
tion” method requires measuring only the output voltage of the 
ADXL150/ADXL250 while it is oriented normal to the earth’s 
gravity. Then, by using the simple equations shown in the ﬁg-
ures, the correct resistance value for R2 can be calculated. In 
Figure 17, an external op amp is used to amplify the signal. A 
resistor, R2, is connected to the op amp’s summing junction. 
The other side of R2 connects to either ground or +VS depending 
on which direction the offset needs to be shifted.
DESIRED
OUTPUT
SCALE FACTOR
76mV/g
100mV/g
200mV/g
400mV/g
(a)
(b)
(c)
NOTES:
0g “QUICK” CALIBRATION METHOD USING RESISTOR R2 AND A +5V SUPPLY.
WITH ACCELEROMETER ORIENTED AWAY FROM EARTH’S
GRAVITY (i.e., SIDEWAYS), MEASURE PIN 10 OF THE ADXL150.
CALCULATE THE OFFSET VOLTAGE THAT NEEDS TO BE NULLED:
Figure 17.  “Quick Zero g Calibration” Connection
VOS = (+2.5V − VPIN(10)(R3/R1).
R2 = 
(d) FOR VPIN 10 > +2.5V, R2 CONNECTS TO GND. 
(e) FOR VPIN 10 < +2.5V, R2 CONNECTS TO +VS. 
2.5 V (R3)
VOS
±25g
±20g
±10g
±5g
2.0
2.6
5.3
10.5
49.9kΩ
38.3kΩ
18.7kΩ
9.53kΩ
FS
RANGE
EXT
AMP
GAIN
R1
VALUE
2 Volts
38 mV /g Times the Max Applied Acceleration in g
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 18. Offset Nulling the ADXL150/ADXL250 Using a Trim Potentiometer
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250
DEVICE BANDWIDTH VS. MEASUREMENT 
RESOLUTION
Although an accelerometer is usually speciﬁed according to its 
full-scale g level, the limiting resolution of the device, i.e., its 
minimum discernible input level, is extremely important when 
measuring low g accelerations.
The limiting resolution is predominantly set by the measure-
ment noise “ﬂoor,” which includes the ambient background 
noise and the noise of the ADXL150/ADXL250 itself. The level 
of the noise ﬂoor varies directly with the bandwidth of the 
measurement. As the measurement bandwidth is reduced, the 
noise ﬂoor drops, improving the signal-to-noise ratio of the 
measurement and increasing its resolution.
The bandwidth of the accelerometer can be easily reduced by 
adding low-pass or bandpass ﬁltering. Figure 19  shows the 
typical noise vs. bandwidth characteristic of the ADXL150/ 
ADXL250.
The output noise of the ADXL150/ADXL250 scales with the 
square root of the measurement bandwidth. With a single pole 
roll-off, the equivalent rms noise bandwidth is π divided by 2 
or approximately 1.6 times the 3 dB bandwidth. For example, 
the typical rms noise of the ADXL150 using a 100 Hz one pole 
post ﬁlter is:
Because the ADXL150/ADXL250’s noise is, for all practical 
purposes, Gaussian in amplitude distribution, the highest noise 
amplitudes have die smallest (yet nonzero) probability. Peak-
to-peak noise is therefore difﬁcult to measure and can only be 
estimated due to its statistical nature. Table I is useful for esti-
mating the probabilities of exceeding various peak values, given 
the rms value.
RMS and peak-to-peak noise (for 0. 1% uncertainty) for various 
bandwidths are estimated in Figure 19. As shown by the ﬁgure, 
device noise drops dramatically as the operating bandwidth is 
reduced. For example, when operated in a 1 kHz bandwidth, 
the ADXL150/ADXL250 typically have an rms noise level of 
32 mg. When the device bandwidth is rolled off to 100 Hz, the 
noise level is reduced to approximately 10 mg.
Alternatively, the signal-to-noise ratio may be improved con-
siderably by using a microprocessor to perform multiple mea-
surements and then to compute the average signal level.
Low-Pass Filtering
The bandwidth of the accelerometer can easily be reduced by using 
post ﬁltering. Figure 20  shows how the buffer ampliﬁer can be 
connected to provide 1-pole post ﬁltering, zero g offset trimming, 
and output scaling. The table provides practical component values
Figure 19. ADXL150/ADXL250 Noise Level vs. 3 dB Band-
width (Using a “Brickwall” Filter)
TABLE I.
Nominal Peak-to-
Peak Value
% of Time that Noise Will Exceed
Nominal Peak-to-Peak Value
2.0 × rms
4.0 × rms
6.0 × rms
6.6 × rms
8.0 × rms
32%
4.6%
0.27%
0.1%
0.006%
Noise rms
(
)
1 mg/ Hz
100 1.6
(
)
×
12.25 mg
=
=
Figure 20. One-Pole Post Filter Circuit with SF and Zero g Offset Trims
DESIRED
OUTPUT
SCALE FACTOR
76m/g
100m/g
200m/g
400m/g
±25g
±20g
±10g
±5g
2.0
2.6
5.3
10.5
200kΩ
261kΩ
536kΩ
1MΩ
0.0082
0.0056
0.0033
0.0015
0.027
0.022
0.010
0.0056
0.082
0.056
0.033
0.015
F.S.
RANGE
EXT
AMP
GAIN
R3
VALUE
Cf (µF)
100Hz
Cf (µF)
30Hz
Cf (µF)
10Hz
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250
for various full-scale g levels and approximate circuit band-
widths. For bandwidths other than those listed, use the 
formula:
or simply scale the value of capacitor Cf accordingly; i.e., for 
an application with a 50 Hz bandwidth, the value of Cf will 
need to be twice as large as its 100 Hz value. If further noise 
reduction is needed while maintaining the maximum possible 
bandwidth, a 2- or 3-pole post ﬁlter is recommended. These 
provide a much steeper roll-off of noise above the pole fre-
quency. Figure 21 shows a circuit that provides 2-pole post 
ﬁltering. Component values for the 2-pole ﬁlter were selected 
to operate the ﬁrst op amp at unity gain. Capacitors C3 and C4 
were chosen to provide 3 dB bandwidths of 10 Hz, 30 Hz, 100 Hz 
and 300 Hz.
The second op amp offsets and scales the output to provide a 
+2.5 V ± 2 V output over a wide range of full-scale g levels.
APPLICATION HINTS
ADXL250 Power Supply Pins
When wiring the ADXL250, be sure to connect BOTH power 
supply terminals, Pins 14 and 13.
Ratiometric Operation
Ratiometric operation means that the circuit uses the power 
supply as its voltage reference. If the supply voltage varies, the 
accelerometer and the other circuit components (such as an 
ADC, etc.) track each other and compensate for the change.
Figure 22 shows how both the zero g offset and output sensi-
tivity of the ADXL150/ADXL250 vary with changes in supply 
voltage. If they are to be used with nonratiometric devices, such 
as an ADC with a built-in 5 V reference, then both components 
should be referenced to the same source, in this case the ADC 
reference. Alternatively, the circuit can be powered from an 
external +5 volt reference.
Since any voltage variation is transferred to the accelerometer’s 
output, it is important to reduce any power supply noise. Simply 
following good engineering practice of bypassing the power 
supply right at Pin 14 of the ADXL150/ADXL250 with a 0.1 µF 
capacitor should be sufﬁcient.
Cf
1
2πR3
(
) Desired 3dB Bandwidth in Hz
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
=
Figure 22. Typical Ratiornetric Operation
Figure 21. Two-Pole Post Filter Circuit
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250
Additional Noise Reduction Techniques
Shielded wire should be used for connecting the accelerometer 
to any circuitry that is more than a few inches away—to avoid 
60 Hz pickup from ac line voltage. Ground the cable’s shield at 
only one end and connect a separate common lead between the 
circuits; this will help to prevent ground loops. Also, if the 
accelerometer is inside a metal enclosure, this should be 
grounded as well.
Mounting Fixture Resonances
A common source of error in acceleration sensing is resonance 
of the mounting ﬁxture. For example, the circuit board that the 
ADXL150/ADXL250 mounts to may have resonant frequencies 
in the same range as the signals of interest. This could cause 
the signals measured to be larger than they really are. A common 
solution to this problem is to damp these resonances by mount-
ing the ADXL150/ADXL250 near a mounting post or by adding 
extra screws to hold the board more securely in place.
When testing the accelerometer in your end application, it is 
recommended that you test the application at a variety of fre-
quencies to ensure that no major resonance problems exist.
REDUCING POWER CONSUMPTION
The use of a simple power cycling circuit provides a dramatic 
reduction in the accelerometer’s average current consumption. 
In low bandwidth applications such as shipping recorders, a 
simple, low cost circuit can provide substantial power reduction.
If a microprocessor is available, it can supply a TTL clock pulse 
to toggle the accelerometer’s power on and off.
A 10% duty cycle, 1 ms on, 9 ms off, reduces the average 
current consumption of the accelerometer from 1.8 mA to 180 
µA, providing a power reduction of 90%.
Figure 23 shows the typical power-on settling time of the 
ADXL150/ADXL250.
CALIBRATING THE ADXL150/ADXL250
If a calibrated shaker is not available, both the zero g level and 
scale factor of the ADXL150/ADXL250 may be easily set to fair 
accuracy by using a self-calibration technique based on the 1 g 
acceleration of the earth’s gravity. Figure 24 shows how gravity 
and package orientation affect the ADXL150/ADXL250’s output. 
With its axis of sensitivity in the vertical plane, the ADXL150/ 
ADXL250 should register a 1 g acceleration, either positive or 
negative, depending on orientation. With the axis of sensitivity 
in the horizontal plane, no acceleration (the zero g bias level) 
should be indicated. The use of an external buffer ampliﬁer may 
invert the polarity of the signal.
Figure 24  shows how to self-calibrate the ADXL150/ADXL250. 
Place the accelerometer on its side with its axis of sensitivity 
oriented as shown in “a.” (For the ADXL250 this would be the 
“X” axis—its “Y” axis is calibrated in the same manner, but the 
part is rotated 90° clockwise.) The zero g offset potentiometer 
RT is then roughly adjusted for midscale: +2.5 V at the external 
amp output (see Figure 20).
Next, the package axis should be oriented as in “c” (pointing 
down) and the output reading noted. The package axis should 
then be rotated 180° to position “d” and the scale factor poten-
tiometer, Rlb, adjusted so that the output voltage indicates a 
change of 2 gs in acceleration. For example, if the circuit scale 
factor at the external buffer’s output is 100 mV per g, the scale 
factor trim should be adjusted so that an output change of 200 
mV is indicated.
Self-Test Function
A Logic “1” applied to the self-test (ST) input will cause an 
electrostatic force to be applied to the sensor that will cause it 
to deﬂect. If the accelerometer is experiencing an acceleration 
when the self-test is initiated, the output will equal the algebraic 
sum of the two inputs. The output will stay at the self-test level 
as long as the ST input remains high, and will return to the 
actual acceleration level when the ST voltage is removed.
Using an external ampliﬁer to increase output scale factor may 
cause the self-test output to overdrive the buffer into saturation. 
The self-test may still be used in this case, but the change in 
the output must then be monitored at the accelerometer’s output 
instead of the external ampliﬁer’s output.
Note that the value of the self-test delta is not an exact indication 
of the sensitivity (mV/g) and therefore may not be used to 
calibrate the device for sensitivity error.
Figure 23. Typical Power-On Settling with Full-Scale Input. 
Time Constant of Post Filter Dominates the Response When 
a Signal Is Present.
Figure 24. Using the Earth’s Gravity to Self-Calibrate the 
ADXL150/ADXL250
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250
MINIMIZING EMI/RFI
The architecture of the ADXL150/ADXL250, and its use of syn-
chronous demodulation, makes the device immune to most elec-
tromagnetic (EMI) and radio frequency (RFI) interference. The 
use of synchronous demodulation allows the circuit to reject all 
signals except those at the frequency of the oscillator driving the 
sensor element. However, the ADXL150/ADXL250 have a sen-
sitivity to noise on the supply lines that is near its internal clock 
frequency (approximately 100 kHz) or its odd harmonics and can 
exhibit baseband errors at the output. These error signals are the 
beat frequency signals between the clock and the supply noise.
Such noise can be generated by digital switching elsewhere in 
the system and must be attenuated by proper bypassing. By insert-
ing a small value resistor between the accelerometer and its power 
supply, an RC ﬁlter is created. This consists of the resistor and 
the accelerometer’s normal 0.1 µF bypass capacitor. For example 
if R = 20 Ω and C = 0.1 µF, a ﬁlter with a pole at 80 kHz is 
created, which is adequate to attenuate noise on the supply from 
most digital circuits, with proper ground and supply layout.
Power supply decoupling, short component leads, physically 
small (surface mount, etc.) components and attention to good 
grounding practices all help to prevent RFI and EMI problems. 
Good grounding practices include having separate analog and 
digital grounds (as well as separate power supplies or very good 
decoupling) on the printed circuit boards.
INTERFACING THE ADXL150/ADXL250 SERIES iMEMS 
ACCELEROMETERS WITH POPULAR ANALOG-TO-
DIGITAL CONVERTERS.
Basic Issues
The ADXL150/ADXL250 Series accelerometers were designed 
to drive popular analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) directly. 
In applications where both a ±50 g full-scale measurement range 
and a 1 kHz bandwidth are needed, the VOUT terminal of the 
accelerometer is simply connected to the VIN terminal of the 
ADC as shown in Figure 25a. The accelerometer provides its 
(nominal) factory preset scale factor of +2.5 V ±38 mV/g which 
drives the ADC input with +2.5 V ±1.9 V when measuring a 50 g 
full-scale signal (38 mV/g × 50 g = 1.9 V).
As stated earlier, the use of post ﬁltering will dramatically 
improve the accelerometer’s low g resolution. Figure 25b  shows 
a simple post ﬁlter connected between the accelerometer and 
the ADC. This connection, although easy to implement, will 
require fairly large values of Cf, and the accelerometer’s signal 
will be loaded down (causing a scale factor error) unless the 
ADC’s input impedance is much greater than the value of Rf. 
ADC input impedance’s range from less than 1.5 kΩ up to 
greater than 15 kΩ with 5 kΩ values being typical. Figure 25c 
is the preferred connection for implementing low-pass ﬁltering 
with the added advantage of providing an increase in scale 
factor, if desired.
Calculating ADC Requirements
The resolution of commercial ADCs is speciﬁed in bits. In an 
ADC, the available resolution equals 2n, where n is the number 
of bits. For example, an 8-bit converter provides a resolution of 
28 which equals 256. So the full-scale input range of the converter 
divided by 256 will equal the smallest signal it can resolve.
In selecting an appropriate ADC to use with our accelerometer 
we need to ﬁnd a device that has a resolution better than the 
measurement resolution but, for economy’s sake, not a great 
deal better.
For most applications, an 8- or 10-bit converter is appropriate. 
The decision to use a 10-bit converter alone, or to use a gain 
stage together with an 8-bit converter, depends on which is more 
important: component cost or parts count and ease of assembly,
Table II shows some of the tradeoffs involved.
Adding ampliﬁcation between the accelerometer and the ADC 
will reduce the circuit’s full-scale input range but will greatly 
reduce the resolution requirements (and therefore the cost) of 
the ADC. For example, using an op amp with a gain of 5.3 
following the accelerometer will increase the input drive to the 
ADC from 38 mV/g to 200 mV/g. Since the signal has been 
gained up, but the maximum full-scale (clipping) level is still 
the same, the dynamic range of the measurement has also been 
reduced by 5.3.
Table III is a chart showing the required ADC resolution vs. the 
scale factor of the accelerometer with or without a gain ampli-
ﬁer. Note that the system resolution speciﬁed in the table refers
Table II.
8-Bit Converter and 
Op Amp Preamp
10-bit (or 12-Bit) 
Converter
Advantages:
Low Cost Converter No Zero g Trim Required
Disadvantages:
Needs Op Amp
Needs Zero g Trim
Higher Cost Converter
Table III. Typical System Resolution Using Some Popular 
ADCs Being Driven with and without an Op Amp Preamp
Converter
Type
2n
Converter
mV/Bit
(5 V/2n)
Preamp
Gain
SF
in
mV/g
FS
Range
in g’s
System
Resolution
in g’s (p-p)
8 Bit
256
19.5 mV
None
38
±50
0.51
256
19.5 mV
2
76
±25
0.26
256
19.5 mV
2.63
100
±20
0.20
256
19.5 mV
5.26
200
±10
0.10
10 Bit
1,024 4.9 mV
None
38
±50
0.13
1,024 4.9 mV
2
76
±25
0.06
1,024 4.9 mV
2.63
100
±20
0.05
1,024 4.9 mV
5.26
200
±10
0.02
12 Bit
4,096 1.2 mV
None
38
±50
0.03
4,096 1.2 mV
2
76
±25
0.02
4,096 1.2 mV
2.63
100
±20
0.01
4,096 1.2 mV
5.26
200
±10
0.006
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ADXL150/ADXL250
to that provided by the converter and preamp (if used). It is 
necessary to use sufﬁcient post ﬁltering with the accelerometer 
to reduce its noise ﬂoor to allow full use of the converter’s 
resolution (see post ﬁltering section).
The use of a pin stage following the accelerometer will normally 
require the user to adjust the zero g offset level (either by 
trimming or by resistor selection—see previous sections).
For many applications, a modern “economy priced” 10-bit 
converter, such as the AD7810 allows you to have high resolu-
tion without using a preamp or adding much to the overall circuit 
cost. In addition to simplicity and cost, it also meets two other 
necessary requirements: it operates from a single +5 V supply 
and is very low power.
OUTLINE DIMENSIONS
Dimensions shows in inches and (mm).
14-Lead Cerpac
(QC-14)
Figure 25. Interfacing the ADXL150/ADXL250 Series Accel-
erometers to an ADC
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

3.2. STRUCTURAL  SYNTHESIS  OF  NANO- AND
MICROELECTROMECHANICAL  ACTUATORS  AND  SENSORS
New advances in micromachining and microstructures, nano- and
microscale electromechanical devices, analog and digital ICs, provide
enabling benefits and capabilities to design and manufacture NEMS and
MEMS. Critical issues are to improve power and thermal management,
circuitry and actuator/sensor integration, as well as embedded electronically
controlled actuator/sensor assemblies. Very large scale integrated circuit and
micromachining silicon, germanium, and gallium arsenic technologies have
been developed and used to manufacture ICs and motion microstructures
(microscale actuators and sensors). While enabling technologies have been
developed to manufacture NEMS and MEMS, a spectrum of challenging
problems 
remains. 
Electromagnetics 
and 
fluid 
dynamic, 
quantum
phenomena, 
electro-thermo-mechanics 
and 
optics, 
biophysics 
and
biochemistry, mechanical and structural synthesis, analysis and optimization,
simulation and virtual prototyping, among other important problems, must be
thoroughly studied in nano- and microscale. There are several key focus
areas to be studied. In particular, structural synthesis and optimization,
fabrication, nonlinear model development and analysis, system design and
simulations.
An important problem addressed and studied in this section is the
structural synthesis of motion nano- and microstructures (shape/geometry
synthesis, optimization, and database developments). The proposed concept
allows the designer to generate optimal structures of actuators and sensors.
Using the proposed concept one can generate and optimize different nano-
and microdevices, perform modeling and simulations, etc. These directly
leverage high-fidelity model development and structural synthesis, allowing
the designer to attain physical and behavioral (steady-state and transient)
analysis, optimization, performance assessment, outcome prediction, etc.
3.2.1. Configurations and Structural Synthesis of Motion Nano- and
Microstructures (Actuators  and Sensors)
Using the structural synthesis concept, nano-, micro-, and miniscale
actuators and sensors can be synthesized, analyzed, and optimized. In
particular, electromechanical/electromagnetic-based motion nano- and
microstructures (actuators and sensors) are classified using the specific
classifiers, and the structural synthesis can be performed based upon different
possible configurations, operating principles, phenomena, and physical laws.
We use the following electromagnetic systems
• 
endless (E),
• 
open-ended (O),
• 
integrated (I),
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

and actuator/sensor geometry
• 
plate (P),
• 
spherical (S),
• 
torroidal (T),
• 
conical (N),
• 
cylindrical (C) and
• 
asymmetrical (A).
Using the possible electromagnetic systems and geometry, actuators and
sensors (motion nano- and microstructures as well as nano- and
microdevices) can be classified. From optimal structural and performance
optimization viewpoints, a great number of factors influence the synthesis.
For example, the designer must decide either rotational or translational
devices (actuators and sensors) should be used. From electromagnetic
standpoints, it is obvious that rotational-type actuators have higher power,
torque and force densities, superior efficiency and performance compared
with translational actuators. However, in many applications the translational
actuators and sensors should be used due to specific kinematics,
requirements, volume available, or size (for example, to measure the loads in
the aircraft structures, the application of the translational-type sensor
obviously is the preferable solution). Different rotational and translational
actuators, as applied to displace the control surfaces and to change the
geometry of flight surfaces, were illustrated in Figure 1.4.3 and 2.1.5.
The structural synthesis (geometrical design) and performance
optimization of actuators and sensors is based on the consideration of the
electromotive and magnetomotive forces, electromagnetic fields and
magnetic structure, excitation, air gap and winding configurations, cooling
and other important quantities. All possible actuator and sensor
configurations can be classified using endless (closed) and open-ended
(open) electromagnetic systems. This idea is extremely useful in studying
existing and synthesizing novel motion structures and devices because an
infinite number of innovative actuators and sensors can be synthesized. The
application of a classifier is a starting point in structural synthesis and
performance optimization. Advanced configurations can be synthesized and
straightforwardly interpreted even without comprehensive analytical and
numerical analysis (thorough analysis is needed as different actuator and
sensor configurations are synthesized, and nonlinear electromagnetic-
mechanical-thermal analysis must be performed and validated). It is evident
that actuator/sensor geometry and electromagnetic systems play a central role
in efficiency and performance. In fact, a motion structure (actuator/sensor)
classifier, which is documented in Table 2.5.1, in addition to being
qualitative, leads to quantitative analysis. Applying the cornerstone laws, the
differential equations to model the actuator/sensor dynamics are
straightforwardly derived, and analysis and simulations can be performed.
The actuators/sensors geometry and electromagnetic systems, as
documented in Table 3.2.1, are partitioned into 3 horizontal and 6 vertical
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

strips, and contains 18 sections, each identified by ordered pairs of
characters, such as (E, P) or (O, C). In each ordered pair, the first entry is a
letter chosen from the bounded electromagnetic system set
M = {E, O, I}.
The second entry is a letter chosen from the geometric set
G = {P, S, T, N, C, A}.
That is, the actuator/sensor set is give as
(
) (
) (
)
(
) (
) (
)
{
}
A
I
C
I
N
I
T
E
S
E
P
E
G
M
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
L
=
×
.
In general, we have
(
)
{
}
G
g
M
m
g
m
G
M
∈
∈
=
×
 
and
:
,
.
However, the geometry-electromagnetic system classifier must be
extended to guarantee completeness in the synthesis of motion structures and
devices. It is well-known that using the basic electromagnetic features, the
following basic types of nano-, micro-, and miniscale actuators and sensors
can be synthesized:
1. direct current;
2. alternating current:
• induction;
• synchronous.
That is, the actuators and sensors are classified using a type classifier
{
}
T
t
t
T
∈
=
:
.
It was emphasized that translational, rotational, and hybrid actuators and
sensors can be synthesized, and a motion classifier is
{
}
ℵ
∈
=
ℵ
n
n:
.
Therefore, we have
(
)
{
}
ℵ
∈
∈
∈
∈
=
ℵ
×
×
×
n
T
t
G
g
M
m
n
t
g
m
T
G
M
 
and
,
,
:
,
,
,
.
Winding and cooling, power and size, torque-speed characteristics,
excitation and bearing, as well as other actuators/sensors distinct features can
be easily distinct and classified using classifiers in order to be integrated into
the synthesis, structural and performance optimization. One concludes that
electromechanical actuators/sensors can be mapped by a Z-tuple as
{electromagnetic system, geometry, type, winding, excitation, cooling, etc}.
Structural Classification Problem Solver
The algorithmic concept in the structural synthesis and performance
optimization starts by selecting an initial set of competing configurations and
solutions (electromagnetic system, geometry, type, et cetera) for a particular
problem using specifications and requirements imposed. The solutions can be
generated randomly from the entire domain, however, as was emphasized
earlier, available information and accessible knowledge can be readily used in
order to formulate the partial domain (classifier subset). The solutions are
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

evaluated for their efficiency and fitness. Performance (regret) functionals can
be designed to integrate weighted cost integrands (terms), and linear and
nonlinear optimization (linear and nonlinear programming) allows one to find
optimal solutions. The maxima or minima can be found using the gradient-
based search. Alternatively, the evolutionary algorithms can be used, and the
performance functional is used to compare and rank the competing solutions.
The analysis and evaluation of candidate solutions are very complex problems
due to infinite number of possible solutions (it is very difficult or impossible to
find solutions randomly from the entire classifier domain of all possible
solutions). Thus, the solutions must be examined in the partial domain (subset)
of most efficient and suitable solutions. This will allow one to define the partial
classifier domain of solutions generation. Hence, the following should be
performed to simplify the search and optimize the algorithm to solve a wide
variety of structural synthesis and optimization problems:
• 
formulate and apply rules and criteria for solution sustaining based upon
performance analysis, assessments, and outcomes;
• 
develop and generate the partial classifier domain (subset), select solution
representations;
• 
initialize solutions;
• 
analyze and compare solutions, find the optimal solution.
Using the classifier developed, the designer can synthesize nano-, micro-
and miniscale actuators and sensors (motion structures and devices which in
conventional 
electromechanical 
systems 
terminology 
are 
called
electromechanical motion devices or transducers). As an example, the
structural synthesis of a two-phase permanent-magnet synchronous
microscale 
actuator 
(motor) 
– 
sensor 
(generator) 
with 
endless
electromagnetic system is performed using the endless magnetic system. The
spherical, 
spherical-conical, 
conical, 
cylindrical, 
and 
asymmetrical
geometries of the synthesized actuator/sensor are documented in Figure
3.2.1.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Table 3.2.1. Classification of nano-, micro-, and mini-scale actuators and
      sensors (motion structures)
Figure 3.2.1. Synthesized microscale actuator/sensor geometry
Geometry
Plate, P
Spherical, S
Torroidal, T
Conical, N
Cylindrical, C
Endless (Closed), E
Open-Ended (Open), O
Asymmetrical,A
Σ
Σ
M
G
Integrated, I
Electromagnetic System
Σ
Σ
Σ
Σ
Σ
Σ
Cylindrical Geometry
Rotor
as
bs
Stator
Rotor
bs
as
Stator
Stator
as
bs
Rotor
as
bs
Stator
Rotor
as
bs
S
N
Rotor
Stator
 Conical Geometry
Spherical Geometry
Stator
as bs
Rotor
N
S
N
S
N
S
Stator
Rotor S
bs
as
N
Stator
Stator
Rotor
S
bs
as
N
Stator
N
N
S
S
Spherical-Conical
Geometry
Endless Magnetic System
Assymetrical Geometry
S
R
S
N
b
R
S
b
N
R
S
S
R
N
S
b
S
R
b
S
R
S
N
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

To solve analysis, prediction, classification, modeling, and optimization
problems, neural networks or genetic algorithms can be efficiently used.
Neural networks and generic algorithms have evolved to the mature concepts
which allow the designer to perform reliable analysis, design, and
optimization. Qualitative reasoning in the structural synthesis and
optimization of NEMS and MEMS is based upon artificial intelligence, and
the ultimate goal is to analyze, model, and optimize qualitative models of
NEMS and MEMS when knowledge, processes, and phenomena are not
precisely known due to uncertainties (for example, micromachined motion
microstructures properties and characteristics, e.g., charge density, thermal
noise and geometry, are not precisely known and varying). It is well known
that qualitative models are more reliable compared with traditional models if
there is a need to perform qualitative analysis, modeling, design,
optimization, and prediction. Quantitative analysis and design use a wide
range of physical laws and mathematical methods to guarantee validity and
robustness using partially available quantitative information.
Structural synthesis and performance optimization can be based on the
knowledge 
domain. 
Qualitative 
representations 
and 
compositional
(geometric) modeling are used to create control knowledge (existing
knowledge, modeling and analysis assumptions, specific plans and
requirements domains, task domain, and preferences) for solving a wide
range of problems. The solving architectures are based upon qualitative
reusable fundamental domains (physical laws). Qualitative reasoning must be
applied to solve complex physics problems in NEMS and MEMS, as well as
to perform engineering analysis and design. Emphasizing the heuristic
concept for choosing the initial domain of solutions, the knowledge domain
is available to efficiently and flexibly map all essential phenomena, effects,
and performances. In fact, Structural Classification Table 3.2.1 ensures
modeling, synthesis, and optimization in qualitative and quantitative
knowledge domains carrying out numerical and analytical analysis of NEMS
and MEMS. To avoid excessive computations, optimal structures can be
found using qualitative analysis and design. That is, qualitative
representations and compositional structural modeling can be used to create
control knowledge in order to solve fundamental and engineering problems
efficiently. The Structural Classification Problem Solver, which gives
knowledge domain using compositional structural modeling, analysis, and
synthesis can be developed applying qualitative representations. This
Structural Classification Problem Solver must integrate modeling and
analysis assumptions, expertise, structures, and preferences that are used in
constraining search (initial structural domain). Structural optimization is
given in terms of qualitative representations and compositional modeling,
making fundamental concepts of the domain explicit. The Structural
Classification Problem Solver can be verified solving problems analytically
and numerically. Heuristic synthesis strategies and knowledge regarding
physical principles must be augmented for designing nano- and
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

microstructures as well as nano- and microdevices. Through qualitative
analysis and design, one constrains the search domain, the solutions are
automatically generated, and the major performance characteristics and end-
to-end behavior are predicted. Existing knowledge, specific plans and
requirements domains, task domain, preferences and logical relations, make
it possible to reason about the modeling and analysis assumptions explicitly,
which is necessary to successfully solve fundamental and engineering
problem.
The Venn diagram provides a way to represent information about NEMS
and MEMS structures and configurations. Once can use regions labeled with
capital letters to represent sets and use lowercase letters to represent
elements. By constructing a diagram that represents some initial sets, the
designer can deduce other important relations. The basic conventional form
of the Venn diagram is three intersecting circles as shown in Figure 3.2.2. In
this diagram, each of the circles represents a set of elements that have some
common property or characteristic. Let A stands for actuators, B stands for
sensors, and C stands for translational motion microstructure. Then, the
region ABC represents actuators and sensors which are synthesized using
translational motion microstructure, while BC is the sensor with translational
motion microstructure (e.g., iMEMS accelerometer studied early).
Figure 3.2.2. Venn diagram, p = 3: The closed curves are circles, and
eight regions are labeled with the interiors that are included
in each intersection. The eighth region is the outside,
corresponding to the empty set
Let A = {a1, a2, ..., ap-1, ap} is the collection of simple closed curves in
the XY plane.
The collection A is said to be an independent family if the intersection of
b1, b2, ..., bp-1, bp is nonempty, where each bi is either int(ai) (the interior of
A
C
B
AB
AC
ABC
BC
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ai) or is ext(ai) (the exterior of ai). If, in addition, each such intersection is
connected, then A is a p-Venn diagram, where p is the number of curves in
the diagram.
3.2.2. Algebra of Sets
A set is a collection of objects (order is not significant and multiplicity is
usually ignored) called the elements of the set. Symbols are used widely in
the algebra of sets.
If a is an element of set A, we have 
A
a∈
, and if a is not an element of
set A, we write 
A
a∉
.
If a set A contains only the single element a, it is denoted as {a}.
The null set (set does not contain any elements) is denoted as ∅.
Two sets, A and B are equal (A = B) if 
A
a∈
 iff 
B
a∈
.
If 
A
a∈
 implies that 
B
a∈
, then A is a subset of B, and 
B
A ⊂
.
The symbols ⊂ and ⊆ are used to describe a proper and an improper
subsets. For example, if 
B
A ⊂
 and 
A
B ⊂
, then A is called an improper
subset of B, A = B (if there exists element b in B which is not in A, then A is a
proper subset of B).
If the set of all elements under consideration make up the universal set
U, then 
U
A ⊂
.
The set A' is the complement of set A, if it is made up of all the elements
of U which are not elements of A. For each set A there exists a unique set A'
such that 
U
A
A
=
'
U
 and 
∅
=
'A
AI
. Furthermore, 
A
A
=
)''
(
.
Two operations on sets are union U  and intersection I . For example,
an element 
B
A
a
U
∈
 iff 
A
a∈
 or 
B
a∈
. In contrast, an element
B
A
a
I
∈
 iff 
A
a∈
 and 
B
a∈
.
Using U  and I  operators we have the following algebra of sets laws:
• 
closure:  there is a unique set 
B
AU
 which is a subset of U, and there is
a unique set 
B
AI
 which is a subset of U;
• 
commutative: 
A
B
B
A
U
U
=
 and 
A
B
B
A
I
I
=
;
• 
associative:
(
)
(
)
C
B
A
C
B
A
U
U
U
U
=
 and (
)
(
)
C
B
A
C
B
A
I
I
I
I
=
;
• 
distributive:
  
(
) (
)
(
)
C
A
B
A
C
B
A
U
I
U
I
U
=
and 
(
) (
)
(
)
C
A
B
A
C
B
A
I
U
I
U
I
=
,
and using the index set 
Λ
∈
Λ λ
,
, one has
(
)
λ
λ
λ
λ
B
A
B
A
U
I
I
U
Λ
∈
Λ
∈
=




 and 
(
)
λ
λ
λ
λ
B
A
B
A
I
U
U
I
Λ
∈
Λ
∈
=




;
• 
idempotent: 
A
A
A
=
U
 and 
A
A
A
=
I
;
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

• 
identity: 
A
A
=
∅
U
 and 
A
U
A
=
I
;
• 
DeMorgan's: (
)
'
'
'
B
A
B
A
I
U
=
 and (
)
'
'
'
B
A
B
A
U
I
=
;
• 
U and ∅ laws: 
U
A
U
=
U
, 
A
A
U
=
I
,
A
A =
∅U
 and 
∅
=
∅
A
I
.
Additional rules and properties of the complement are: 
(
)
B
A
A
U
⊂
, (
)
A
B
A
⊂
I
, 
U
A ⊂
, 
A
⊂
∅
If 
B
A ⊂
 then 
B
B
A
=
U
, and if 
A
B ⊂
 then 
B
B
A
=
I
.
Sets and Lattices
A set is simply a collection of elements. For example, a, b and c can be
grouped together as a set which is expressed as {a, b, c} where the curly
braces are used to enclose the elements that constitute a set. In addition to the
set {a, b, c} we define the sets {a, b} and {d, e, g}. Using the union
operation, we have
}
,
,
{
}
,
{
}
,
,
{
c
b
a
b
a
c
b
a
=
U
 and 
}
,
,
,
,
,
{
}
,
,
{
}
,
,
{
g
e
d
c
b
a
g
e
d
c
b
a
=
U
,
while the intersection operation leads us to
}
,
{
}
,
{
}
,
,
{
b
a
b
a
c
b
a
=
I
 and 
{}
}
,
,
{
}
,
,
{
=
∅
=
g
e
d
c
b
a
I
,
where {} is the empty (or null) set.
The subset relation can be used to partially order a set of sets. If some
set A is a subset of a set B, then these sets are partially ordered with respect
to each other. If a set A is not a subset of set B, and B is not a subset of A,
then these sets are not ordered with respect to each other. This relation can be
used to partially order a set of sets in order to classify NEMS and MEMS.
Sets possess some additional structural, geometrical, as well as other
properties. Additional definitions and properties can be formulated and used
applying lattices.
Using a lattice, we have
• 
A
A ⊆
 (reflexive law);
• 
if 
B
A ⊆
 and 
A
B ⊆
, then A=B (antisymmetric law);
• 
if 
B
A ⊆
 and 
C
B ⊆
, then 
C
A ⊆
 (transitive law);
• 
A and B have a unique greatest bound, 
B
AI
. Furthermore,
B
A
G
I
=
, or G is the greatest lower bound of A and B if: 
G
A ⊆
,
G
B ⊆
, and if W is any lower bound of A and B, then
W
G ⊆
;
• 
A and B have a unique least upper bound, 
B
AU
. Furthermore,
B
A
L
U
=
, or L is the least upper bound of A and B if: 
A
L ⊆
,
B
L ⊆
, and if P is any upper bound of A and B, then
L
P ⊆
.
A lattice is a partially ordered set where for any pair of sets (hypotheses)
there is a least upper bound and greatest lower bound. Let our current
hypothesis is H1 and the current training example is H2. If H2 is a subset of
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

H1, then no change of H1 is required. If H2 is not a subset of H1, then H1
must be changed. The minimal generalization of H1 is the least upper bound
of H2 and H1, and the minimal specialization of H1 is the greatest lower
bound of H2 and H1. Thus, the lattice serves as a map that allows us to locate
out current hypothesis H1 with reference to the new information H2. There
exists the correspondence between the algebra of propositional logic and the
algebra of sets. We refer to a hypotheses as logical expressions, as rules that
define a concept, or as subsets of the possible instances constructible from
some set of dimensions. Furthermore, union and intersection were the
important operators used to define a lattice. In addition, the propositional
logic expressions can also be organized into a corresponding lattice to
implement the artificial learning.
A general structure S is an ordered pair formed by a set object O and a
set of binary relations R such that
U
n
i
iS
R
O
S
1
)
,
(
=
=
=
,
where O = {o1, o2,…, oz-1, oz}, 
O
oi ∈
∀
; R={r1, r2, …, rp-1, rp}, 
R
ri ∈
∀
; Si
is the simple structure.
In the set object O we define the input n, output u, and internal a
variables. We have 
3
1
2
1
),
,
,
(
},
,
,...,
,
{
O
q
a
u
n
q
q
q
q
q
o
i
j
i
j
i
j
i
j
i
j
i
g
i
g
i
i
i
∈
=
=
−
.
Hence, the range of q, as a subset of O, is R(q). Using the input-output
structural function, different NEMS and MEMS can be synthesized. The
documented general theory of structural optimization, which is built using the
algebra of sets, allows the designer to derive relationships, flexibly adapt, fit,
and optimize the nano- and microscale structures within the sets of given
possible solutions.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

3.3. DIRECT-CURRENT  MICROMACHINES
It has been shown that the basic electromagnetic principles and
fundamental physical laws are used to design motion nano- and micro-
structures. Nano- and microengineering leverages from conventional theory
of electromechanical motion devices, electromagnetics, integrated circuits,
and quantum mechanics. The fabrication of motion microstructures is based
upon CMOS (VLSI) technology, and rotational and translational transducers
(actuators and sensors) were manufactured and tested. The major challenge is
the difficulties to fabricate windings for microdevices (micro electric
machines), reliability and ruggedness (due to bearing problems), etc. It
appears that novel fabrication technologies allow one to overcome many
challenges. The most efficient class of micromachines to be used as MEMS
motion microdevices are induction and synchronous. These micromachines
do not have collector, and the stator windings (for induction micromachines)
and permanent-magnet stator (for synchronous micromachines, e.g.,
permanent-magnet synchronous machine and stepper motors) have been
manufactured and tested. Direct-current machines are not the preferable
choice. However, these micromachines will be covered first because students
and engineers are familiar with these electric machines. Furthermore, even
using the conventional manufacturing technology, miniscale DC motors (less
than 2 mm diameter) have been massively manufactured for pagers, phones,
cameras, etc.
The list of basic variables and symbols used in this chapter is given
below:
ia  is the currents in the armature winding;
ua  is the applied voltages to the armature windings;
ω r  and θ r  are the angular velocity and angular displacement of the rotor;
Ea  is the electromotive force;
Te  and T L  are the electromagnetic and load torques;
ra  is the resistances of the armature windings;
La  is the self-inductances of the armature windings;
Bm  is the viscous friction coefficient;
J is the equivalent moment of inertial of the rotor and attached load.
Micro- and miniscale permanent-magnet electric motors and generators
are rotating energy-transfer electromechanical motion devices which convert
energy by means of rotational motions. Electric machines (motion structures
and motion devices) are the major part of MEMS, and therefore they must be
thoroughly studied with the driving ICs. Electric motors convert electrical
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

energy to mechanical energy, while generators convert mechanical energy to
electrical energy. It is worth mentioning that permanent-magnet electric
machines can be used as motors and generators. Hence, the energy
conversion is reversible, and conventional generators can be operated as
motors and vice versa. That is, micro permanent-magnet electric machines
can be used as the actuators and sensors. Electric machines have stationary
and rotating members, separated by an air gap. The armature winding is
placed in the rotor slots and connected to a rotating commutator, which
rectifies the induced voltage, see Figure 3.3.1. One supplies the armature and
excitation voltages or feds the armature and excitation currents to the
armature (rotor) and field (stator) windings. These stator and rotor windings
are coupled magnetically.
Stator
Rotor
.
rotor magnetic axis of armature winding
quadrature axis
Pole
Core
Slip ring
Brush
Air gap
u f
ua
.
.
Pole
Core
stator magnetic axis of field winding
direct axis
direct
axis
quadrature axis
Armature
Field
Figure 3.3.1. Two-pole DC machine with commutator
The brushes, which are connected to the armature windings, ride on the
commutator. The armature winding consists of identical coils carried in slots
uniformly distributed around the periphery of the rotor. The stator has salient
poles, and conventional DC machines are excited by direct current; in
particular, if a voltage-fed converter is used, a dc voltage u f  is supplied to
the stationary field windings. Hence, the excitation magnetic field is
produced by the field coils. It should be emphasized that in the permanent-
magnet machines, the magnetic field is established by permanent magnets.
Due to the commutator (circular conducting segments), armature and field
windings produce stationary magnetomotive forces which are displaced by
90 electrical degrees. The armature magnetic force is along the quadrature
(rotor) magnetic axis, while the direct axis stands for a field magnetic axis.
The electromagnetic torque is produced as a result of the interaction of these
stationary magnetomotive forces.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

From Kirchhoff’s law, one obtains the following steady-state equation
for the armature voltage for electric motors (the armature current opposes the
induced electromotive force)
u
E
i r
a
a
a a
−
=
.
For generators, the armature current is in the same direction as the
generated electromotive force, and we have
u
E
i r
a
a
a a
−
= −
.
The difference between the applied voltage and the induced
electromotive force is the voltage drop across the internal armature resistance
ra . One concludes that electric machines rotate at an angular velocity at
which the electromotive force generated in the armature winding balances the
armature voltage. If an electric machine operates as a motor, the induced
electromotive force is less than the voltage applied to the windings. If an
electric machine operates as a generator, the generated (induced)
electromotive force is greater than the terminal voltage.
The constant magnetic flux in AC and DC machines can be produced by
permanent-magnet poles. Electric machines with permanent-magnet poles are
called permanent-magnet machines. Permanent-magnet DC motor/generator
is illustrated in Figure 3.3.2, and a schematic diagram of permanent-magnet
DC machines is illustrated in Figure 3.3.3.
Stator
Rotor
rotor magnetic axis of armature winding
quadrature axis
Permanent
Magnet
Slip ring
Brush
Air gap
ua
stator magnetic axis
direct axis
Permanent
Magnet
Figure 3.3.2. Permanent-magnet DC machines
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

 
ra
rar
La
ia
ωr
eT
,
TL
ua
Load
E
k
a
a
r
=
ω
direct
axis
quadrature axis
Armature
Field
+
−
−
+
Permanent Magnet
     Figure 3.3.3. Schematic diagram of permanent-magnet electric machines
(current direction corresponds to the motor operation)
By using Kirchhoff’s voltage law and Newton’s second law of motion,
the differential equations for permanent-magnet DC machines can be easily
derived. Assuming that the susceptibility is constant (in reality, Curie’s
constant varies as a function of temperature), one supposes that the flux,
established by the permanent magnet poles, is constant. Then, denoting the
back emf and torque constants as ka , we have the following differential
equations describing the transient behavior of the armature winding and
torsional-mechanical dynamics
di
dt
r
L i
k
L
L u
a
a
a
a
a
a
r
a
a
= −
−
+
ω
1
,
d
dt
k
J i
B
J
J T
r
a
a
m
r
L
ω
ω
=
−
−1
.
           (3.3.1)
From (3.3.1) it is easy to find the model in matrix form. We have
di
dt
d
dt
r
L
k
L
k
J
B
J
i
L
u
J
T
a
r
a
a
a
a
a
m
a
r
a
a
L
ω
ω










=
−
−
−






















+












−












1
0
0
1
.
An s-domain block diagram of permanent-magnet DC motors is
illustrated in Figure 3.3.4.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

+
-
+
-
1
L s
r
a
a
+
ua
ia
ka
Te
TL
ωr
1
Js
Bm
+
ka
Figure 3.3.4. Block diagram of permanent-magnet DC motors:
s-domain block diagram
The angular velocity can be reversed if the polarity of the applied
voltage is changed (the direction of the field flux cannot be changed). The
steady-state torque-speed characteristic curves obey the following equation
ωr
a
a a
a
a
a
a
a
e
u
r i
k
u
k
r
k
T
=
−
=
−
2
,
           (3.3.2)
and a spectrum of the torque-speed characteristic curves is illustrated in
Figure 3.3.5.
Current limit
ωr
ua2
ua3
u
u
u
a
a
a
1
2
3
>
>
ua max
T T
e
L
,
ua1
ωro
a
a
u
k
=
T
f
L
r
=
(
)
ω
0
Figure 3.3.5.Torque-speed characteristics for permanent-magnet motors
If micro permanent-magnet DC machine is used as the generator
(tachogenerator measure the angular velocity), the circuitry dynamics for the
resistive load RL is given as
r
a
a
a
a
L
a
a
L
k
i
L
R
r
dt
di
ω
+
+
−
=
.
That is, in the steady-state, the armature current is proportional to the
angular velocity, and we have
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

r
L
a
a
a
R
r
k
i
ω
+
=
.
As was emphasized in section 1.5, flip-chip MEMS are found wide
application due to low cost and application of well-developed fabrication
processes. For example, monolithic dual power operational amplifiers
(Motorola TCA0372 available in plastic packages 751G, 648, and 626) feeds
DC minimotor to regulate the angular velocity, see Figure 3.3.6.
Figure 3.3.6. Application of a monolithic IC to control DC motor
Motion micro- and ministructures as well as micro- and minidevices
(actuators and sensors) are mounted face down with bumps on the pads that
form electrical and mechanical joints to the ICs substrate. Figure 3.3.7
illustrates a flip-chip MEMS with permanent-magnet micromotor driven by the
MC33030 monolithic servo motor driver. Control algorithms are
implemented to control the angular velocity of electric motors. The
MC33030 integrates on-chip operational amplifier and comparator, driving
and braking logic, PWM four-quadrant converter, etc. The MC33030 data
and complete description are given. As in the conventional configurations,
the difference between the reference (command) and actual angular velocity
or displacement, linear velocity or position, is compared by the error
amplifier, and two comparators are used. A pnp differential output power
stage provides driving and braking capabilities, and the four-quadrant H-
configured power stage guarantees high performance and efficiency. Using
the error between the desired (command) and actual angular velocity or
displacement, the bipolar voltage ua is applied to the armature winding, the
electromagnetic torque is developed due to the current ia, and micro- or
minimotor rotates. A complete description of the MC33030 monolithic
servomotors driver is given below.
+
−
1
R
1
V
+
−
C
2
R
3
R
Motor
  
DC
    
2
V
ICs
  
Monolithic
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

IC
Motor
Micro
Figure 3.3.7. Flip-chip monolithic MEMS: MC33030 ICs and micromotor
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

DC Servo Motor
Controller/Driver
The MC33030 is a monolithic DC servo motor controller providing all
active functions necessary for a complete closed loop system. This device
consists of an on–chip op amp and window comparator with wide input
common–mode range, drive apd brake logic with direction memory, Power
H–Switch driver capable of 1.0 A, independently programmable over–current
monitor and shutdown delay, and over–voltage monitor. This part is ideally
suited for almost any servo positioning application that requires sensing
of temperature, pressure, light, magnetic ﬂux, or any other means that can
be converted to a voltage.
Although this device is primarily intended for servo applications, it can
be used as a switchmode motor controller.
•
On–Chip Error Amp for Feedback Monitoring
•
Window Detector with Deadband and Self Centering Reference Input
•
Drive/Brake Logic with Direction Memory
•
1.0 A Power H–Switch
•
Programmable Over–Current Detector
•
Programmable Over–Current Shutdown Delay
•
Over–Voltage Shutdown
Monolithic ICs: Direct-Current Servo Motors Driver MC33030
(Copyright of Motorola, used with permission)
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

MAXIMUM RATINGS
Rating
Symbol
Value
Unit
Power Supply Voltage
VCC
36
V
Input Voltage Range
Op Amp, Comparator, Current Limit
(Pins 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 15)
VIR
−0.3 to VCC
V
Input Differential Voltage Range
Op Amp, Comparator (Pins 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9)
VIDR
−0.3 to VCC
V
Delay Pin Sink Current (Pin 16)
IDLY (sink)
20
mA
Output Source Current (Op Amp)
Isource
10
mA
Drive Output Voltage Range (Note 1)
VDRV
−0.3 to (VCC + VF)
V
Drive Output Source Current (Note 2)
IDRV(source)
1.0
A
Drive Output Sink Current (Note 2)
IDRV(sink)
1.0
A
Brake Diode Forward Current (Note 2)
IF
1.0
A
Power Dissipation and Thermal
characteristics
P Sufﬁx, Dual In Line Case 648C
Thermal Ressistance, Junction–to–Air
Thermal Ressistance, Junction–to–Case
(Pins 4, 5, 12, 13)
DW Sufﬁx, Dual In Line Case 751G
Thermal Ressistance, Junction–to–Air
Thermal Ressistance, Junction–to–Case
(Pins 4, 5, 12, 13)
RθJA
RθJC
RθJA
RθJC
80
15
94
18
°C/W
Operating Junction Temperature
TJ
+150
°C
Operating Ambient Temperature Range
TA
−40 to +85
°C
Storage Temperature Range
Tstg
−65 to +150
°C
NOTES: 1. The upper voltage level is clamped by the forward drop, VF,of the brake diode.
2. These values are for continuous DC current. Maximum package power dissipation limits must be observed.
ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS (VCC = 14 V, TA = 25°C, unless otherwise noted.)
Characteristic
Symbol
Min
Typ
Max
Unit
ERROR AMP
Input Offset Voltage (−40°C ≤ TA ≤ 85°C)
VPin 6 = 7.0 V, RL = 100 k
VIO
–
1.5
10
mV
Input Offset Current (VPin 6 = 1.0 V, RL = 100 k)
IIO
–
0.7
–
nA
Input Bias current (VPin 6 = 1.0 V, RL = 100 k)
IIB
–
7.0
–
nA
Input Common–Mode Voltage Range
∆VIO = 20 mV, RL = 100 k
VICR
–
0 to (VCC − 1.2)
–
V
Slew Rate, Open Loop (VID = 0.5 V, CL = 15 pF)
SR
–
0.40
–
V/µs
Unity–Gain Crossover Frequency
fC
–
550
–
kHz
Unity–Gain Phase Margin
φm
–
63
–
deg.
Common–mode Rejection Ratio (VPin 6 = 7.0 V, RL = 100 k)
CMRR
50
82
–
dB
Power Supply Rejection Ratio
VCC = 9.0 to 16 V, VPin 6 = 7.0 V, RL = 100 k
PSRR
–
89
–
dB
Output Source Current (VPin 6 = 12 V)
IO +
–
1.8
–
mA
Output Sink Current (VPin 6 = 1.0 V)
IO −
250
–
µA
Output Voltage Swing (RL = 17 k to Ground)
VOH
VOL
12.5
–
13.1
0.02
–
–
V
V
NOTES: 3. The upper or lower hysteresis will be lost when operating the Input, Pin 3, close to the respective rail. Refer to Figure 4.
4. Low duty cycle pulse techniques are used during test to maintain junction temperature as close to ambient temperature as possible.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS (continued) (VCC = 14 V, TA = 25°C, unless otherwise noted.)
Characterstic
Symbol
Min
Typ
Max
Unit
WINDOW DETECTOR
Input Hysteresis Voltage (V1 − V4, V2 − V, Figure 18)
VH
25
35
45
mV
Input Dead Zone Range (V2 − V4, Figure 18)
VIDZ
166
210
254
mV
Input Offset Voltage (|[V2 − VPin 2] − [VPin 2 − V4]| Figure 18)
VIO
–
25
–
mV
Input Functional Common–Mode Range (Note 3)
Upper Threshold
Lower Threshold
VIH
VIL
–
–
(VCC–1.05)
0.24
–
–
V
Reference Input Self Centering Voltage
Pins 1 and 2 Open
VRSC
–
(1/2 VCC)
–
V
Window Detactor Propagation Delay
Comparator Input, Pin 3, to Drive Outputs
VID = 0.5 V, RL(DRV) = 390 Ω
tp(IN/DRV)
–
2.0
–
µs
OVER–CURRENT MONITOR
Over–Current References Resistor Voltage (pin 15)
ROC
3.9
4.3
4.7
V
Delay Pin Source Current
IDLY(SOURCE)
–
5.5
6.9
µA
Delay Pin Sink Current (ROC = 27 k, IDRV = 0 mA)
VDLY = 5.0 V
VDLY = 8.3 V
VDLY = 14 V
IDLY (sink)
–
–
–
0.1
0.7
16.5
–
–
–
mA
Delay Pin voltage, Low State (IDLY = 0 mA)
VOL(DLY)
–
0.3
0.4
V
Over–Current Shutdown Threshold
VCC = 14 V
VCC = 8.0 V
Vth(OC)
6.8
5.5
7.5
6.0
8.2
6.5
V
Over–Current Shutdown Propagation Delay
Delay capacitor Input, Pin 16, to Outputs, VID = 0.5 V
tp(DLY/DRV)
–
1.8
–
µs
POWER H–SWITCH
Drive–Output Saturation (–40°C ≤ TA ≤ +85°C, Note 4)
High–State
(Isource = 100 mA)
Low–State
(Isink = 100 mA)
VOH(DRV)
VOL(DRV)
(VCC – 2)
–
(VCC – 0.85)
0.12
–
1.0
V
Drive–Output Voltage Switiching Time (CL = 15 pF)
Rise Time
Fall Time
tr
tf
–
–
200
200
–
–
ns
Brake Diode Forward Voltage Drop (IF = 200 mA, Note 4)
VF
–
1.04
2.5
V
TOTAL DEVICE
Standby Supply Current
ICC
–
14
25
mA
Over–Voltage Shutdown Threshold
(–40°C ≤ TA ≤ +85°C)
Vth(OV)
16.5
18
20.5
V
Over–Voltage Shutdown Hysteresis (Device “off” to “on”)
VH(OV)
0.3
0.6
1.0
V
Operating Voltage Lower Threshold
(–40°C ≤ TA ≤ +85°C)
VCC
–
7.5
8.0
V
NOTES: 3. The upper or lower hysteresis will be lost when operating the Input, Pin 3, close to the respective rail. Refer to Figure 4.
 
4. Low duty cycle pulse techniques are used during test to maintain junction temperature as close to ambient temperature as possible.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

OPERATING DESCRIPTION
The MC33030 was designed to drive tractional horse-
power DC motors and sense actuator position by voltage
feedback. A typical servo application and representative
internal block diagram are shown in Figure 17. The system
operates by setting a voltage on the reference input of the
Window Detector (Pin 1) which appears on (Pin 2). A DC
motor then drives a position sensor, usually a potentiometer
driven by a gear box, in a corrective fashion so that a voltage
proportional to position is present at Pin 3. The servo motor
will continue to run until the voltage at Pin 3 falls within the
dead zone, which is centered about the reference voltage.
The Window Detector is composed of two comparators,
A and B, each containing hysteresis. The reference input,
common to both comparators, is pre–biased at 1/2 VCC for
simple two position servo systems and can easily be over-
riden by an external voltage divider. The feedback voltage
present at Pin 3 is connected to the center of two resistors
that are driven by an equal magnitude current source and
sink. This generates an offset voltage at the input of each
comparator which is centered about Pin 3 that can ﬂoat
virtually from VCC to ground. The sum of the upper and
lower offset voltages is deﬁned as the window detector input
dead zone range.
To increase system ﬂexibility, an on–chip Error Amp is
provided. It can be used to buffer and/or gain–up the actu-
ator position voltage which has the effect of narrowing the
dead zone range. A PNP differential input stage is provided
so that the input common–mode voltage range will include
ground. The main design goal of the error amp output stage
was to be able to drive the window detector input. It typically
can source 1.8 mA and sink 250 µA. Special design con-
siderations must be made if it is to be used for other appli-
cations.
The Power H–Switch provides a direct means for motor
drive and braking with a maximum source, sink, and brake
current of 1.0 A continuous. Maximum package power dis-
sipation limits must be observed. Refer to Figure 15 for
thermal information. For greater drive current requirements,
a method for buffering that maintains all the system features
is shown in Figure 30.
The Over–Current Monitor is designed to distinguish
between motor start–up or locked rotor conditions that can
occur when the actuator has reached its travel limit. A
fraction of the Power H–Switch source current is internally
fed into one of the two inverting inputs of the current com-
parator, while the non–inverﬁng input is driven by a pro-
grammable current reference. This reference level is con-
trolled by the resistance value selected for ROC, and must
be greater than the required motor run–current with its
mechanical load over temperature; refer to Figure 8. During
an over–current condition, the comparator will turn off and
allow the current source to charge the delay capacitor,
CDLY. When CDLY charges to a level of 7.5 V, the set input
of the over–current latch will go high, disabling the drive
and brake functions of the Power H–Switch. The program-
mable time delay is determined by the capacitance value–
selected for CDLY.
This system allows the Power H–Switch to supply motor
start–up current for a predetermined amount of time. If the
rotor is locked, the system will time–out and shut–down. This
feature eliminates the need for servo end–of–travel or limit
switches. Care must be taken so as not to select too large of
a capacitance value for CDLY. An over–current condition for
an excessively long time–out period can cause the integrated
circuit to overheat and eventually fail. Again, the maximum
package power dissipation limits must be observed. The
over–current latch is reset upon power–up or by readjusting
VPin 2 as to cause VPin 3 to enter or pass through the dead
zone. This can be achieved by requesting the motor to
reverse direction.
An Over–Voltage Monitor circuit provides protection for
the integrated circuit and motor by disabling the Power
H–Switch functions if VCC should exceed 18 V. Resumption
of normal operation will commence when VCC falls below
17.4 V.
A timing diagram that depicts the operation of the
Drive/Brake Logic section is shown in Figure 18. The wave-
forms grouped in [1] show a reference voltage that was
preset, appearing on Pin 2, which corresponds to the
desired actuator position. The true actuator position is rep-
resented by the voltage on Pin 3. The points V1 through V4
represent the input voltage thresholds of comparators A and
B that cause a change in their respective output state. They
are deﬁned as follows:
V1 = Comparator B turn–off threshold
V2 = Comparator A turn–on threshold
V3 = Comparator A turn–off threshold
V4 = Comparator B turn–on threshold
V1−V4 = Comparator B input hysteresis voltage
V2−V3 = Comparator A input hysteresis voltage
V2−V4 = Window detector input dead zone range
|(V2−VPin2) − (VPin2 − V4)| = Window detector input 
voltage
It must be remembered that points V1 through V4 always
try to follow and center about the reference voltage setting
if it is within the input common–mode voltage range of Pin 3;
Figures 4 and 5. Initially consider that the feedback input
voltage level is somewhere on the dashed line between V2
and V4 in [1]. This is within the dead zone range as deﬁned
above and the motor will be off. Now if the reference voltage
is raised so that VPin 3 is less than V4, comparator B will
turn–on [3] enabling 
Drive, causing Drive Output A to
sink and B to source motor current [8]. The actuator will
move in Direction B until VPin 3 becomes greater than V1.
Comparator B will turn–off, activating the brake enable [4]
and 
Brake [6] causing Drive Output A to go high and B
to go into a high impedance state. The inertia of the
mechanical system will drive the motor as a generator cre-
ating a positive voltage on Pin 10 with respect to Pin 14.
The servo system can be stopped quickly, so as not to
over–shoot through the dead zone range, by braking. This
is accomplished by shorting the motor/generator terminals
together. Brake current will ﬂow into the diode at Drive
Output B, through the internal VCC rail, and out the emitter
of the sourcing transistor at Drive Output A. The end of the
solid line and beginning of the dashed for VPin 3 [1] indi-
cates the possible resting position of the actuator after
braking.
tDLY
vrefCDLY
IDLY(source)
------------------------------------
7.5 CDLY
5.5 µA
--------------------------
1.36 CDLY in µF
=
=
=
Q
Q
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 17. Representative Block Diagram and Typical Servo Application
If VPin 3 should continue to rise and become greater
than V2, the actuator will have over shot the dead zone
range and cause the motor to run in Direction A until VPin 3
is equal to V3. The Drive/Brake behavior for Direction A is
Identical to that of B. Overshooting the dead zone range in
both directions can cause the servo system to continuously
hunt or oscillate. Notice that the last motor run–direction is
stored in the direction latch. This information is needed to
determine whether Q or 
Brake is to be enabled when
VPin 3 enters the dead zone range. The dashed lines in
[8,9] indicate the resulting waveforms of an over–current
condition that has exceeded the programmed time delay.
Notice that both Drive Outputs go into a high impedance
state until VPin 2 is readjusted so that VPin 3 enters or
crosses through the dead [7,4].
The inputs of the Error Amp and Window Detector can
be susceptible to the noise created by the brushes of the
DC motor and cause the servo to hunt. Therefore, each of
these inputs are provided with an internal series resistor
and are pinned out for an external bypass capacitor. It has
been found that placing a capacitor with short leads directly
across the brushes will signiﬁcantly reduce noise problems.
Good quality RF bypass capacitors in the range of 0.001
to 0.1 µF may be required. Many of the more economical
motors will generate signiﬁcant levels of RF energy over a
spectrum that extends from DC to beyond 200 MHz. The
capacitance value and method of noise ﬁltering must be
determined on a system by system basis.
Thus far, the operating description has been limited to
servo systems in which the motor mechanically drives a
potentiometer for position sensing. Figures 19, 20, 27, and
31 show examples that use light, magnetic ﬂux, tempera-
ture, and pressure as a means to drive the feedback ele-
ment. Figures 21, 22 and 23 are examples of two position,
open loop servo systems. In these systems, the motor runs
the actuator to each end of its travel limit where the
Over–Current Monitor detects a locked rotor condition and
shuts down the drive. Figures 32 and 33 show two possible
methods of using the MC33030 as a switching motor con-
troller. In each example a ﬁxed reference voltage is applied
to Pin 2. This causes VPin 3 to be less than V4 and Drive
Output A, Pin 14, to be in a low state saturating the TIP42
transistor. In Figure 32, the motor drives a tachometer that
generates an ac voltage proportional to RPM. This voltage
is rectiﬁed, ﬁltered, divided down by the speed set potenti-
ometer, and applied to Pin 8. The motor will accelerate until
VPin 3 is equal to V1 at which time Pin 14 will go to a high
state and terminate the motor drive. The motor will now
coast until VPin 3 is less than V4 where upon drive is then
reapplied. The system operation of Figure 31 is identical to
that of 32 except the signal at Pin 3 is an ampliﬁed average
of the motors drive and back EMF voltages. Both systems
exhibit excellent control of RPM with variations of VCC;
however, Figure 32 has somewhat better torque character-
istics at low RPM.
Q
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 18. Timing Diagram
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

CHAPTER 4
CONTROL OF NANO- AND MICROELECTROMECHANICAL
SYSTEMS
4.1. FUNDAMENTALS OF ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION AND
ANTENNAS  IN NANO- AND MICROSCALE
ELECTROMECHANICAL  SYSTEMS
The electromagnetic power is generated and radiated by antennas. Time-
varying current radiates electromagnetic waves (radiated electromagnetic
fields). Radiation pattern, beam width, directivity, and other major
characteristics can be studied using Maxwell’s equations, see Section 2.2. We
use the vectors of the electric field intensity E, electric flux density D,
magnetic field intensity H, and magnetic flux density B. The constitutive
equations are
E
D
ε
=
 and 
H
B
µ
=
where ε  is the permittivity; µ  is the permiability.
It was shown in Section 2.2 that in the static (time-invariant) fields,
electric and magnetic field vectors form separate and independent pairs. That
is, E and D are not related to H and B, and vice versa. However, for time-
varying electric and magnetic fields, we have the following fundamental
electromagnetic equations
t
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
∂
∂
µ
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
H
E
−
=
×
∇
,
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
t
z
y
x
t
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
J
E
E
H
+
+
=
×
∇
∂
∂
ε
σ
,
ε
ρ
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
v
=
⋅
∇E
,
0
)
,
,
,
(
=
⋅
∇
t
z
y
x
H
,
where J is the current density, and using the conductivity σ , we have
E
J
σ
=
; 
v
ρ  is the volume charge density.
The total current density is the sum of the source current JS and the
conduction current density 
E
σ
 (due to the field created by the source JS).
Thus,
E
J
J
σ
+
=
Σ
S
.
The equation of conservation of charge (continuity equation) is
∫
∫
−
=
⋅
v
v
s
dv
dt
d
d
ρ
s
J
,
and in the point form one obtains
t
t
z
y
x
t
z
y
x
v
∂
∂
−
=
⋅
∇
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
,
(
ρ
J
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Therefore, the net outflow of current from a closed surface results in
decrease of the charge enclosed by the surface.
The electromagnetic waves transfer the electromagnetic power. That is,
the energy is delivered by means of electromagnetic waves. Using equations
t∂
∂
µ H
E
−
=
×
∇
 and 
J
E
H
+
=
×
∇
t∂
∂
ε
,
we have






+
⋅
−
⋅
−
=
×
∇
⋅
−
×
∇
⋅
=
×
⋅
∇
J
E
E
H
H
H
E
E
H
H
E
t
t
∂
∂
ε
∂
∂
µ
)
(
)
(
)
(
.
In a media, where the constitute parameters are constant (time-invariant),
we have the so-called point-function relationship
(
)
2
2
2
1
2
2
1
)
(
E
H
E
t
σ
µ
ε
∂
∂
−
+
−
=
×
⋅
∇
H
E
.
In integral form one obtains
(
)
E
H
E
s
H
E
  
of
  
presence
  
in  the
  
dissipated
power  
  
ohmic
2
  
field
  
magnetic
  
and
  
  
field
  
electric
  
the
in
  
stored
energy  
  
of
  
change
  
of
  
rate
time
2
2
1
2
2
1
.
)
(
∫
∫
∫
−
+
−
=
⋅
×
−
v
v
s
dv
E
dv
H
E
t
d
σ
µ
ε
∂
∂
The right side of the equation derived gives the rate of decrease of the
electric and magnetic energies stored minus the ohmic power dissipated as heat
in the volume v. The pointing vector, which is a power density vector,
represents the power flows per unit area, and
H
E
P
×
=
.
Furthermore,
(
)
∫
∫
∫
∫
+
+
=
⋅
=
⋅
×
v
v
H
E
s
s
dv
dv
w
w
t
d
d
σ
ρ
∂
∂
  volume
enclosed
  
  the
leaving
power  
)
(
s
P
s
H
E
,
where 
2
2
1 E
wE
ε
=
 and 
2
2
1 H
wH
µ
=
 are the electric and magnetic energy
densities; 
2
2
1 J
E
σ
σ
ρσ
=
=
 is the ohmic power density.
The important conclusion is that the total power transferred into a closed
surface s at any instant equals the sum of the rate of increase of the stored
electric and magnetic energies and the ohmic power dissipated within the
enclosed volume v.
If the source charge density
)
,
,
,
(
t
z
y
x
v
ρ
 and the source current density
)
,
,
,
(
t
z
y
x
J
 vary sinusoidally, the electromagnetic field also vary
sinusoidally. Hence, we have deal with the so-called time-harmonic
electromagnetic fields. The sinusoidal time-varying electromagnetic fields will
be studied. Hence, the phasor analysis is applied. For example,
z
z
y
y
x
x
E
E
E
a
r
a
r
a
r
r
E
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
+
+
=
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

The electric field intensity components are the complex functions. In
particular,
Im
Re
)
(
x
x
x
jE
E
E
+
=
r
, 
Im
Re
)
(
y
y
y
jE
E
E
+
=
r
, 
Im
Re
)
(
z
z
z
jE
E
E
+
=
r
.
For the real electromagnetic field, we have
t
E
t
E
t
E
x
x
x
ω
ω
sin
)
(
cos
)
(
)
,
(
Im
Re
r
r
r
−
=
.
One obtains the time-harmonic electromagnetic field equations. In
particular,
• Faraday’s law
      
H
E
ωµ
j
−
=
×
∇
,
• generalized Amphere’s law 
J
E
J
E
E
H
+






+
=
+
+
=
×
∇
ε
ω
σ
ω
ωε
σ
j
j
j
,
• Gauss’s law
      
ε
ω
σ
ρ
+
=
⋅
∇
j
v
E
,
• Continuity of magnetic flux  
0
=
⋅
∇H
,
• Continuity law
       
v
jωρ
−
=
⋅
∇J
,
            (4.1.1)
where 






+ε
ω
σ
j
 is the complex permittivity. However, for simplicity we will
use ε  keeping in mind that the expression for the complex permittivity
ε
ω
σ +
j
 must be applied.
The electric field intensity E, electric flux density D, magnetic field
intensity H, magnetic flux density B, and current density J are complex-valued
functions of spatial coordinates.
From the equation (4.1.1) taking the curl of 
H
E
ωµ
j
−
=
×
∇
, which is
rewritten as 
B
E
ω
j
−
=
×
∇
, and using 
J
D
H
+
=
×
∇
ω
j
, one obtains
J
E
E
E
ωµ
µε
ω
j
kv
−
=
=
=
×
∇
×
∇
2
2
,
where kv is the wave constant 
µε
ω
=
vk
, and in free space
c
kv
ω
ε
µ
ω
=
=
0
0
0
 because the speed of light is 
0
0
1
ε
µ
=
c
,
sec
m
8 
10
3×
=
c
.
The wavelength is found as
µε
ω
π
π
λ
2
2
=
=
v
v
k
,
and in free space 
ω
π
π
λ
c
kv
v
2
2
0
0
=
=
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Using the magnetic vector potential A, we have 
A
B
×
∇
=
.
Hence,
0
)
(
=
+
×
∇
A
E
ω
j
,
and thus
Ë
A
E
−∇
=
+ ω
j
,
where Ë  is the scalar potential.
To guarantee that 
J
D
H
+
=
×
∇
ω
j
 holds, it is required that
J
E
A
A
A
H
µ
ωµε
µ
+
=
∇
−
⋅
∇∇
=
×
∇
×
∇
=
×
∇
j
2
.
Therefore, one finally finds the equation needed to be solved
J
Ë
A
A
A
µ
ωµε
−
+
⋅
∇
∇
=
+
∇
)
(
2
2
j
kv
.
Taking note of the Lorentz condition 
Ë
A
ωµε
j
−
=
⋅
∇
, one obtains.
J
A
A
µ
−
=
+
∇
2
2
vk
.
Thus, the equation for Ë  is found. In particular,
ε
ρv
vk
−
=
+
∇
Ë
Ë
2
2
.
The equation for the magnetic vector potential is found solving the
following inhomogeneous Helmholtz equation
J
A
A
µ
−
=
+
∇
2
2
vk
.
The expression for the electromagnetic field intensity, in terms of the
vector potential, is
ωµε
ω
j
j
A
A
E
⋅
∇∇
+
−
=
.
To derive E, one must have A. The Laplacian for A in different coordinate
systems can be found. For example, we have
x
x
v
x
J
A
k
A
µ
−
=
+
∇
2
2
,
y
y
v
y
J
A
k
A
µ
−
=
+
∇
2
2
,
z
z
v
z
J
A
k
A
µ
−
=
+
∇
2
2
.
It was shown that the magnetic vector potential and the scalar potential
obey the time-dependent inhomogeneous wave equation
)
,
(
)
,
(
2
2
2
t
F
t
t
k
r
r
−
=
Ω






∂
∂
−
∇
.
The solution of this equation is found using Green’s function as
∫∫∫∫
−
−
−
=
Ω
'
'
)'
;'
(
)'
,'
(
)
,
(
τ
d
dt
t
t
G
t
F
t
r
r
r
r
,
where 
(
)'
'
'
4
1
)'
;'
(
r
r
r
r
r
r
−
−
−
−
−
=
−
−
k
t
t
t
t
G
δ
π
.
The so-called retarded solution is
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

∫∫∫
−
−
−
−
=
Ω
'
'
)'
'
,'
(
)
,
(
τ
d
k
t
F
t
r
r
r
r
r
r
.
For sinusoidal electromagnetic fields, we apply the Fourier analysis to
obtain
∫∫∫
−
−
=
Ω
−
−
'
)'
(
'
4
1
)
(
'
τ
π
d
F
e
v
jk
r
r
r
r
r
r
.
Thus, we have the expressions for the phasor retarded potentials
dv
e
v
jkv
∫
−
=
−
−
)'
(
'
4
)
(
'
r
J
r
r
A
r
r
r
π
µ
,
dv
e
v
jkv
∫
−
=
−
−
)'
(
'
4
1
)
(
'
r
r
r
Ë
r
r
r
ρ
πε
.
Example 4.1.1.
Consider a short (dl) thin filament of current located in the origin, see
Figure 4.1.1. Derive the expressions for magnetic vector potential and
electromagnetic field intensities.
Figure 4.1.1. Current filament in the spherical coordinate system
Solution.
The magnetic vector potential has only a z component, and thus, from
J
A
A
µ
−
=
+
∇
2
2
vk
,
we have
ds
i
J
A
k
A
z
z
v
z
µ
µ
−
=
−
=
+
∇
2
2
,
where ds is the cross-sectional area of the filament.
x
y
z
idl
θ
φ
r
φ
a
r
a
θ
a
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Taking note of the spherical symmetry, we conclude that the magnetic
vector potential Az is not a function of the polar and azimuth angles 
φ
θ
 
and
 
. In
particular, the following equation results
0
1
2
2
2
=
+
∂
∂
∂
∂
z
v
z
A
k
r
A
r
r
r
.
It is well-known that the solution of equation 
0
2
2
2
=
+
ψ
ψ
ψ
vk
d
d
 has two
components. In particular, 
r
jkv
e
 (outward propagation) and 
r
jkv
e−
 (inward
propagation). The inward propagation is not a part of solution for the filament
located in the origin. Thus, we have
r
jk
t
j
v
ae
r
t
−
=
ω
ψ
)
,
(
 (outward propagating spherical wave).
In free space, we have
)
/
(
)
,
(
c
r
t
j
ae
r
t
−
=
ω
ψ
.
Substituting 
r
Az
ψ
=
, one obtains 
c
r
j
z
e
r
a
r
A
ω
−
=
)
(
.
To find the constant a, we use the volume integral
∫
∫
∫
∫
−
−
=
⋅
∇
=
∇
v
z
v
z
s
d
r
z
v
z
dv
J
dv
A
c
d
d
r
A
dv
A
0
2
2
2
2
sin
µ
ω
φ
θ
θ
a
,
where the differential spherical volume is 
dr
d
d
r
dv
d
φ
θ
θ
sin
2
=
; rd  is the
differential radius.
Making use of
r
c
j
z
r
z
e
r
a
r
c
j
r
A
A
ω
ω
−





+
−
=
∂
∂
=
⋅
∇
2
1
a
,
we have
idl
a
d
d
ae
r
c
j
d
d
r
c
j
d
r
0
2
0 0
0
4
sin
1
lim
µ
π
φ
θ
θ
ω
ππ
ω
−
=
−
=





+
−
∫∫
−
→
,
one has 
π
µ
4
0idl
a =
.
Thus, the following expression results
c
r
j
z
e
r
idl
r
A
ω
π
µ
−
= 4
)
(
0
.
Therefore, the final equation for the magnetic vector potential (outward
propagating spherical wave) is
z
c
r
j
e
r
idl
r
a
A
ω
π
µ
−
= 4
)
(
0
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

From 
θ
θ
θ sin
cos
a
a
a
−
=
r
z
, we have
)
sin
cos
(
4
)
(
0
θ
θ
π
µ
θ
ω
a
a
A
−
=
−
r
c
r
j
e
r
idl
r
The magnetic and electric field intensities are found using
A
B
×
∇
=
 and 
ωµε
ω
j
j
A
A
E
⋅
∇∇
+
−
=
.
Then, one finds
φ
ω
ω
π
θ
µ
a
A
H
c
r
j
e
r
cr
j
r
idl
r
r
−






+
=
×
∇
=
2
0
1
4
sin
)
(
1
)
(
,
.
1
sin
4
1
cos
4
)
(
3
2
2
2
0
0
3
2
0
0
θ
ω
ω
ω
ω
θ
πω
ε
µ
ω
θ
πω
ε
µ
a
a
E
c
r
j
r
c
r
j
e
r
cr
j
r
c
cidl
j
e
r
cr
j
cidl
j
r
−
−






+
+
−
−






+
=
The intrinsic impedance is given as
0
0
0
ε
µ
=
Z
, and 
0
0
0
0
1
µ
ε
=
= Z
Y
.
Near-field and far-field electromagnetic radiation fields can be found,
simplifying the expressions for H(r) and E(r).
For near-field, we have
φ
ω
π
θω
µ
a
A
H
c
r
j
e
cr
idl
j
r
r
−
=
×
∇
=
2
0
4
sin
)
(
1
)
(
and 
.
sin
4
)
(
2
0
0
θ
θ
π
ω
ε
µ
a
E
r
c
cidl
j
r =
The complex Pointing vector can be found as
)
(
)
(
*
2
1
r
r
H
E
×
.
The following expression for the complex power flowing out of a sphere
of radius r results
(
)
π
ωµ
π
ε
µ
µ
ω
12
12
)
(
)
(
2
2
0
2
2
0
0
0
2
*
2
1
dl
i
k
dl
i
d
r
r
v
s
=
=
⋅
×
∫
s
H
E
.
The real quality is found, and the power dissipated in the sense that it
travels away from source and cannot be recovered.
    
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Example 4.1.2.
Derive the expressions for the magnetic vector potential and
electromagnetic field intensities for a magnetic dipole (small current loop)
which is shown in Figure 4.1.2.
Figure 4.1.2. Current loop in the xy plane
Solution.
The magnetic dipole moment is equal to the current loop are times current.
That is,
z
z
M
i
r
a
a
M
=
=
2
0
π
.
For the short current filament, it was derived in Example 4.1.1 that
z
c
r
j
e
r
idl
r
a
A
ω
π
µ
−
= 4
)
(
0
.
In contrast, we have
∫
=
l
dl
r
i
'
1
4
0
π
µ
A
.
The distance between the source element dl and point 
)
,
,
(
2
π
θ
r
O
 is
denoted as r’. It should be emphasized that the current filament is lies in the xy
plane, and
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
d
r
d
r
dl
y
x
0
0
)
cos
sin
(
a
a
a
+
−
=
=
.
Thus, due to the symmetry
∫
−
=
2
/
2
/
0
0
'
sin
2
π
π
φ
φ
φ
π
µ
d
r
ir
a
A
,
where using the trigonometric identities one finds
φ
θ sin
sin
2
'
0
2
0
2
2
rr
r
r
r
−
+
=
.
Assuming that 
2
0
2
r
r >>
, we have 





+
≈
φ
θ sin
sin
1
1
'
1
0
r
r
r
r
.
x
y
z
θ
r
'r
0r
φ
d
ir0
φ
)
,
,
(
2
π
θ
r
O
dl
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Therefore
.
sin
4
sin
sin
sin
1
2
'
sin
2
2
2
0
0
2
/
2
/
0
0
0
2
/
2
/
0
0
θ
µ
φ
φ
φ
θ
π
µ
φ
φ
π
µ
φ
π
π
φ
π
π
φ
r
ir
d
r
r
r
ir
d
r
ir
a
a
a
A
=





+
=
=
∫
∫
−
−
Having obtained the explicit expression for the vector potential, the
magnetic flux density is found. In particular,
 
)
sin
cos
2
(
4
sin
4
3
2
0
0
2
2
0
0
θ
θ
µ
θ
µ
θ
φ
a
a
a
A
B
+
=
×
∇
=
×
∇
=
r
r
ir
r
ir
.
Taking note of the expression for the magnetic dipole moment
z
i
r a
M
2
0
π
=
, one has
r
r
r
ir
a
M
a
A
×
=
=
2
0
2
2
0
0
4
sin
4
π
µ
θ
µ
φ
.
It was shown that using 
∫
=
l
dl
r
i
'
1
4
0
π
µ
A
, the desired results are obtained.
Let us apply 
∫
−
=
l
r
c
j
dl
r
e
i
'
4
'
0
ω
π
µ
A
.
From 
r
c
j
r
c
j
e
r
r
c
j
e
ω
ω
ω
−
−




−
−
≈
)
'
(
1
'
, we have
(
)
θ
π
µ
π
µ
ω
ω
φ
ω
ω
sin
1
4
'
)]
'
(
1[
4
2
0
0
r
c
j
c
l
r
c
j
c
e
r
j
r
M
dl
r
e
r
r
j
i
−
−
+
=
−
−
=
∫
a
A
.
Therefore, one finds
θ
π
ω
µ
ω
ω
ω
φ
sin
1
1
4
2
2
3
0
2
2
r
c
j
c
c
e
r
r
j
c
M
j
E
−








−
=
,
θ
π
ε
µ
ω
µ
ω
ω
ω
cos
1
1
4
2
3
2
0
0
2
3
0
3
3
2
2
r
c
j
c
c
r
e
r
j
r
c
M
j
H
−








+
=
,
θ
π
ε
µ
ω
µ
ω
ω
ω
ω
θ
sin
1
1
1
4
3
2
0
0
2
3
0
3
3
2
2
r
c
j
c
c
c
e
r
j
r
r
j
c
M
j
H
−








−
−
−
=
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

The electromagnetic fields in near- and far-fields can be straightforwardly
derived, and thus, the corresponding approximations for  the
φ
E , 
r
H  and 
θ
H
can be obtained.
   
Let the current density distribution in the volume is given as 
)
( 0r
J
, and
for far-field from Figure 4.1.3 one has 
0
' r
r
r
−
≈
.
Figure 4.1.3. Radiation from volume current distribution
The formula to calculate far-field magnetic vector potential is
dv
e
e
r
v
jk
r
jk
v
v ∫
−
−
=
0
)
(
4
)
(
0
r
r
J
A r
π
µ
,
and the electric and magnetic field intensities are found using
ωµε
ω
j
j
A
A
E
⋅
∇∇
+
−
=
and
A
B
×
∇
=
.
We have
[
]
dv
e
e
r
Z
jk
v
jk
r
r
r
jk
v
v
v
v ∫
−
−
−
⋅
=
0
)
(
)
(
4
)
(
0
0
r
r
J
a
r
J
a
E r
π
,
)
(
)
(
r
E
a
H r
×
=
r
vY
.
Example 4.1.3.
Consider the half-wave dipole antenna fed from a two-wire transmission
line, as shown in Figure 4.1.4 The antenna is one-quarter wavelength; that is,
v
v
z
λ
λ
4
1
4
1
≤
≤
−
. The current distribution is 
z
k
i
z
i
v
cos
)
(
0
=
. Obtain the
equations for electromagnetic field intensities and radiated power.
x
z
0r
r
r
a
y
'r
J
Source
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 4.1.4. Half-wave dipole antenna
Solution.
The wavelength is given as 
µε
ω
π
π
λ
2
2
=
=
v
v
k
, and in free space we
have 
ω
π
π
λ
c
kv
v
2
2
0
0
=
=
.
It was emphasized that  and 
0
0
0
ε
µ
ω
=
vk
.
Making use of
[
]
dv
e
e
r
Z
jk
v
jk
r
r
r
jk
v
v
v
v ∫
−
−
−
⋅
=
0
)
(
)
(
4
)
(
0
0
r
r
J
a
r
J
a
E r
π
,
we have the following line integral
[
]
∫
−
−
−
⋅
=
l
jk
l
r
l
r
r
jk
v
v
dl
e
l
i
e
r
Z
jk
v
v
0
)
(
)
(
4
)
(
r
a
a
a
a
E r
π
,
where 
la  is the unit vector in the current direction.
Then,
.
sin
2
)
cos
cos(
cos
)
cos
(
4
)
(
2
1
0
cos
0
4
1
4
1
θ
θ
λ
λ
θ
π
θ
π
θ
π
a
a
a
E r
r
jk
v
z
jk
v
z
r
r
jk
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
e
r
i
jZ
dz
ze
k
e
r
i
Z
jk
−
−
−
−
=
−
=
∫
Having found the magnetic field intensity as
φ
φ
φ
θ
π
θ
π
a
a
r
E
a
H r
r
jk
r
v
v
e
r
ji
H
Y
−
=
=
×
=
sin
2
)
cos
cos(
)
(
)
(
2
1
0
,
the power flux per unit area is
(
)
θ
π
θ
π
φ
φ
2
2
2
2
1
2
0
2
0
*
2
1
*
2
1
sin
8
)
cos
(
cos
)
(
)
(
Re
r
Z
i
H
E
r
=
=
⋅
×
a
H
E
r
r
,
x
y
z
v
λ
4
1
r
r
a
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

and 
integrating 
the 
derived 
expression 
over 
the 
surface
φ
θ
θ
θ
θ
π
π
ππ
d
d
Z
i
sin
sin
)
cos
(
cos
8
2
0 0
2
2
1
2
2
0
2
0
∫∫
, the total radiated power is found to
be 
2
0
6.
36
i
.
   
If the current density distribution is known, the radiation field can be
found. Using Maxwell’s equations, using the electric and magnetic vector
potentials AE and AH, we have the following equations
(
)
E
E
vk
J
A
µ
−
=
+
∇
2
2
,
(
)
H
H
vk
J
A
ε
−
=
+
∇
2
2
,
H
E
E
j
j
A
A
A
E
×
∇
−
⋅
∇∇
+
−
=
ε
ωµε
ω
1
1
,
E
H
H
j
j
A
A
A
H
×
∇
−
⋅
∇∇
+
−
=
µ
ωµε
ω
1
1
.
The solutions are
r
r
J
A
r
r
d
e
e
r
v
E
jk
r
jk
E
v
v ∫
−
=
)
(
4
)
(
π
µ
,
r
r
J
A
r
r
d
e
e
r
v
H
jk
r
jk
H
v
v ∫
−
=
)
(
4
)
(
π
ε
.
Example 4.1.4.
Consider the slot (one-half wavelength long slot is dual to the half-wave
dipole antenna studied in Example 4.1.3), which is exited from the coaxial
line, see Figure 4.1.5. The electric field intensity in the z-direction is
(
)
z
l
k
E
E
v
−
=
sin
0
. Derive the expressions for the magnetic vector potential
and electromagnetic field intensities.
Figure 4.1.5. Slot antenna
x
y
z
Slot
r
(
)
z
l
k
E
v
−
sin
2
 :
Field
        
0
l
Slot
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Solution.
Using the magnetic current density JH, from
∫
∫
∫
∫
⋅
−
⋅
−
=
⋅
=
⋅
×
∇
s
H
s
l
s
d
d
j
dl
d
s
J
s
B
E
s
E
ω
,
the boundary conditions for the magnetic current sheet are found as
H
n
n
J
E
a
E
a
−
=
×
−
×
2
1
.
The slot antenna is exited by the magnetic current with strength
(
)
z
l
k
E
v
−
sin
2
0
 
in 
the 
z 
axis. 
For 
half-wave 
slot 
we 
have
(
)
z
l
k
i
i
v
H
−
=
sin
0
, and
(
)
H
H
vk
J
A
ε
−
=
+
∇
2
2
,
θ
θ
π
θ
π
ωµε
ω
a
A
A
H
r
jk
H
H
v
e
r
Y
ij
j
j
−
=
⋅
∇∇
+
−
=
sin
2
)
cos
cos(2
1
0
0
,
.
sin
2
)
cos
cos(2
1
0
φ
θ
π
θ
π
ε
a
A
E
r
jk
H
v
e
r
ij
−
−
=
×
∇
−
=
,
s
r
J
A
r
r
d
e
e
s
jk
r
jk
H
v
v ∫
−
=
)
(
16
)
(
π
ε
.
The boundary condition 
(
)
z
l
k
E
v
x
n
H
n
−
×
=
−
=
×
sin
0
2
1
a
a
J
E
a
 is
satisfied by the radiated electromagnetic field.
The radiation pattern of the slot antenna is the same as for the dipole
antenna.
   
References
1. Hayt W. H., Engineering Electromagnetics, McGraw-Hill, New York,
1989.
2. Collin R. E., Antennas and Radiowave propagation,” McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1985.
3. Paul C. R., Whites K. W., and Nasar S. A., Introduction to
Electromagnetic Fields, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1998.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

4.2. DESIGN  OF  CLOSED-LOOP  NANO-  AND
MICROELECTROMECHANICAL  SYSTEMS  USING  THE
LYAPUNOV  STABILITY  THEORY
The solution of a spectrum of problems in nonlinear analysis, structural
synthesis, modeling, and optimization of NEMS and MEMS lead to the
development of superior high-performance NEMS and MEMS. In this section,
we address introductory control issues. Mathematical models of NEMS and
MEMS were derived, and the application of the Lyapunov theory is studied as
applied to solve the motion control problem.
It was illustrated that NEMS and MEMS must be controlled. Nano- and
microelectromechanical systems augment a great number of subsystems, and to
control microscale electric motors, as discussed in previous chapters, power
amplifiers (ICs) regulate the voltage or current fed to the motor windings.
These power amplifiers are controlled based upon the reference (command),
output, decision making, and other variables. Studying the end-to-end NEMS
and MEMS behavior, usually the output is the nano- or microactuator linear
and angular displacements. There exist infinite number of possible NEMS and
MEMS configurations, and it is impossible to cover all possible scenarios.
Therefore, our efforts will be concentrated on the generic results which can be
obtained describing NEMS and MEMS by differential equations. That is, using
the mathematical model, as given by differential equations, our goal is develop
control algorithms to guarantee the desired performance characteristics
addressing the motion control problem (settling time, accuracy, overshoot,
controllability, stability, disturbance attenuation, et cetera).
Several methods have been developed to address and solve nonlinear
design and motion control problems for multi-input/multi-output dynamic
systems. In particular, the Hamilton-Jacobi and Lyapunov theories are found to
be the most straightforward in the design of control laws.
The NEMS and MEMS dynamics is described as
u
x
B
d
r
x
F
t
x
)
(
)
,
,
(
)
(
+
=
&
,
)
(x
H
y =
,u
u
u
x t
x
min
max , (
)
≤
≤
=
0
0 ,
           (4.2.1)
where x∈X⊂c is the state vector; u∈U⊂m is the bounded control vector;
r∈R⊂b and y∈Y⊂b are the measured reference and output vectors; d∈D⊂s
is the disturbance vector; F(⋅):c×b×s→c and B(⋅):c→ c×m are jointly
continuous and Lipschitz; H(⋅):c→b is the smooth map defined in the
neighborhood of the origin, H(0) = 0.
Before engaged in the design of closed-loop systems, which will be based
upon the Lyapunov stability theory, let us study stability of time-varying
nonlinear dynamic systems described by
)
,
(
)
(
x
t
F
t
x
=
&
, 
0
0 )
(
x
t
x
=
, 
0
≥
t
.
The following Theorem is formulated.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Theorem.
Consider the system described by nonlinear differential equations
)
,
(
)
(
x
t
F
t
x
=
&
, 
0
0 )
(
x
t
x
=
, 
0
≥
t
.
 If there exists a positive-definite scalar function 
)
,
(
x
t
V
(called
Lyapunov function) with continuous first-order partial derivatives with respect
to t and x
)
,
(
x
t
F
x
V
t
V
dt
dx
x
V
t
V
dt
dV
T
T






∂
∂
+
∂
∂
=






∂
∂
+
∂
∂
=
,
then
• 
the equilibrium state is stable if the total derivative of the positive-definite
function 
0
)
,
(
>
x
t
V
 is 
0
≤
dt
dV
;
• 
the equilibrium state is uniformly stable if the total derivative of the
positive-definite decreasing function 
0
)
,
(
>
x
t
V
 is 
0
≤
dt
dV
;
• 
the equilibrium state is uniformly asymptotically stable in the large if the
total derivative of 
0
)
,
(
>
x
t
V
 is negative definite; that is, 
0
<
dt
dV
;
• 
the equilibrium state is exponentially stable in the large if the exist the
∞
K
-functions 
)
(
1 ⋅
ρ
 and 
)
(
2 ⋅
ρ
, and K-function 
)
(
3 ⋅
ρ
 such that
(
)
(
)
x
x
t
V
x
2
1
)
,
(
ρ
ρ
≤
≤
 and 
(
)
x
dt
x
dV
3
)
(
ρ
−
≤
.             n
Examples are studied to illustrate how this Theorem can be
straightforwardly applied.
Example 4.2.1.
Study stability of the following nonlinear system
2
2
1
3
1
1
)
(
x
x
x
t
x
−
−
=
&
,
7
2
2
)
(
x
t
x
−
=
&
, 
0
≥
t
.
Solution.
A scalar positive-definite function is expressed in the quadratic form as
(
)
(
)
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
1,
x
x
x
x
V
+
=
.
The total derivative is found to be
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

(
)
(
)
(
)
.
)
(
,
8
2
2
2
2
1
4
1
7
2
2
2
2
1
3
1
1
2
1
x
x
x
x
x
x
V
x
x
x
x
V
x
F
x
V
dt
dx
x
V
dt
x
x
dV
T
T
−
−
−
=
−
∂
∂
+
−
−
∂
∂
=






∂
∂
=






∂
∂
=
.
Thus, we have 
(
)
0
,
2
1
<
dt
x
x
dV
.
The total derivative of (
)
0
,
2
1
>
x
x
V
 is negative definite.
Therefore, the equilibrium state is uniformly asymptotically stable.     
Example 4.2.2.
Study stability of the time-varying nonlinear system modeled by the
following differential equations
3
2
1
1
)
(
x
x
t
x
+
−
=
&
,
3
2
2
2
2
1
10
2
5
)
(
x
x
x
x
e
t
x
t
−
−
−
=
−
&
, 
0
≥
t
.
Solution.
A scalar positive-definite function is
(
)
(
)
2
2
10
2
1
2
1
2
1,
,
x
e
x
x
x
t
V
t
+
=
, (
)
0
,
,
2
1
>
x
x
t
V
.
Then, the total derivative, which is expressed as
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
5
,
,
4
2
10
2
1
3
2
2
2
2
1
10
2
3
2
1
1
2
1
x
e
x
x
x
x
x
e
x
V
x
x
x
V
t
V
dt
x
x
t
dV
t
t
−
−
=
−
−
−
∂
∂
+
+
−
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
==
−
is negative definite. In particular, 
(
)
0
,
2
1
<
dt
x
x
dV
.
Hence, the equilibrium state is uniformly asymptotically stable.          
Example 4.2.3.
Study stability of the systems
& ( )
x
t
x
x
1
1
2
= −
+
,
& ( )
x
t
x
x
x x
2
1
2
2
2
= −
−
−
, 
0
≥
t
.
Solution.
The positive-definite scalar Lyapunov candidate is chosen as
(
)
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
1
)
,
(
x
x
x
x
V
+
=
.
Thus, 
0
)
,
(
2
1
>
x
x
V
.
The total derivative is
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

(
)
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
1
1
)
,
(
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
dt
x
x
dV
+
−
−
=
+
=
&
&
.
Therefore, 
0
)
,
(
2
1
<
dt
x
x
dV
. Hence, the equilibrium state is uniformly
asymptotically stable, and the quadratic function 
(
)
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
1
)
,
(
x
x
x
x
V
+
=
 is
the Lyapunov function which can be used to study stability.
                 
Example 4.2.4.
Consider a microdrive actuated by permanent-magnet synchronous motor
if TL=0. In drive applications, using equations (3.5.12), three nonlinear
differential equations in the rotor reference frame are
di
dt
r
L
L i
L
L
i
L
L u
qs
r
s
ls
m
qs
r
m
ls
m
r
ds
r
r
ls
m
qs
r
= −
+
−
+
−
+
+
3
2
3
2
3
2
1
ψ
ω
ω
,
di
dt
r
L
L i
i
L
L u
ds
r
s
ls
m
ds
r
qs
r
r
ls
m
ds
r
= −
+
+
+
+
3
2
3
2
1
ω
,
r
m
r
qs
m
r
J
B
i
J
P
dt
d
ω
ψ
ω
−
=
8
3
2
.
Study the stability letting
1. 
0
=
r
qs
u
 and uds
r = 0  (open-loop system),
2. 
0
≠
r
qs
u
, 
r
r
qs
k
u
ω
ω
−
=
 and uds
r = 0  (closed-loop system).
Solution.
For open-loop system we have 
0
=
r
qs
u
 and uds
r = 0 . Hence,
r
r
ds
r
m
ls
m
r
qs
m
ls
s
r
qs
i
L
L
i
L
L
r
dt
di
ω
ω
ψ
−
+
−
+
−
=
2
3
2
3
,
r
r
qs
r
ds
m
ls
s
r
ds
i
i
L
L
r
dt
di
ω
+
+
−
=
2
3
,
r
m
r
qs
m
r
J
B
i
J
P
dt
d
ω
ψ
ω
−
=
8
3
2
.
In matrix form, one obtains
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

        













−
+
































−
+
−
+
−
+
−
=
0
0
8
3
0
0
0
)
(
2
2
3
2
3
2
3
r
r
qs
r
r
ds
r
r
ds
r
qs
m
m
m
ls
s
m
ls
m
m
ls
s
i
i
i
i
J
B
J
P
L
L
r
L
L
L
L
r
t
x
ω
ω
ω
ψ
ψ
&
.
Using the quadratic positive-definite Lyapunov function
V i
i
i
i
qs
r
ds
r
r
qs
r
ds
r
r
(
,
,
)
(
)
ω
ω
=
+
+
1
2
2
2
2 ,
the expression for the total derivative is found to be
.
8
3
8
)
,
,
(
2
2
2
2
r
r
qs
ss
m
ss
m
r
m
r
ds
r
qs
ss
s
r
r
ds
r
qs
i
JL
L
P
J
J
B
i
i
L
r
dt
i
i
dV
ω
ψ
ψ
ω
ω
−
−
−




+
−
=
Thus,
(
)
0
,
,
<
dt
i
i
dV
r
r
ds
r
qs
ω
.
One concludes that the equilibrium state of a microdrive is uniformly
asymptotically stable.
 
Consider the closed-loop system.
To guarantee the balanced operation we let
r
r
qs
k
u
ω
ω
−
=
 and uds
r = 0 .
Therefore, the following differential equations result
r
m
ls
r
r
ds
r
m
ls
m
r
qs
m
ls
s
r
qs
k
L
L
i
L
L
i
L
L
r
dt
di
ω
ω
ω
ψ
ω
2
3
2
3
2
3
1
+
−
−
+
−
+
−
=
,
r
r
qs
r
ds
m
ls
s
r
ds
i
i
L
L
r
dt
di
ω
+
+
−
=
2
3
,
r
m
r
qs
m
r
J
B
i
J
P
dt
d
ω
ψ
ω
−
=
8
3
2
,
or













−
+
































−
+
−
+
+
−
+
−
=
0
0
8
3
0
0
0
)
(
2
2
3
2
3
2
3
r
r
qs
r
r
ds
r
r
ds
r
qs
m
m
m
ls
s
m
ls
m
m
ls
s
i
i
i
i
J
B
J
P
L
L
r
L
L
k
L
L
r
t
x
ω
ω
ω
ψ
ψ
ω
&
.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Taking note of the quadratic positive-definite Lyapunov function
V i
i
i
i
qs
r
ds
r
r
qs
r
ds
r
r
(
,
,
)
(
)
ω
ω
=
+
+
1
2
2
2
2 ,
one has
(
)
.
8
3
8
)
,
,
(
2
2
2
2
r
r
qs
ss
m
ss
m
r
m
r
ds
r
qs
ss
s
r
r
ds
r
qs
i
JL
L
P
k
J
J
B
i
i
L
r
dt
i
i
dV
ω
ψ
ψ
ω
ω
ω −
+
−
−




+
−
=
Hence, (
)
0
,
,
>
r
r
ds
r
qs i
i
V
ω
 and 
(
)
0
,
,
<
dt
i
i
dV
r
r
ds
r
qs
ω
.
Therefore, the conditions for asymptotic stability are guaranteed.       
In Example 4.2.4 it was shown that dynamic systems can be controlled to
attain the desired transient dynamics, stability margins, etc. Let us study how
to solve the motion control problem with the ultimate goal to synthesize
tracking controllers applying Lyapunov’s stability theory.
Using the reference (command) vector r(t) and the system output y(t), the
tracking error (which ideally must be zero) is
)
(
)
(
)
(
t
y
t
Nr
t
e
−
=
.
           (4.2.2)
The Lyapunov theory is applied to derive the admissible control laws
(voltages and currents are bounded, and therefore the saturation effect is always
the reality). That is, the admissible bounded controller should be designed as
continuous function within the constrained rectangular control set
U={u∈m : u min ≤ u ≤ umax, umin < 0, umax > 0}⊂m.
Making use of the Lyapunov candidate 
)
,
,
(
e
x
t
V
, the bounded
proportional-integral controller with the state feedback extension is expressed
as






+
+
=
e
e
x
t
V
s
B
t
G
e
e
x
t
V
B
t
G
x
e
x
t
V
x
B
t
G
u
T
e
i
T
e
e
T
x
u
u
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
)
,
,
(
1
)
(
)
,
,
(
)
(
)
,
,
(
)
(
)
(
sat
max
min
           (4.2.3)
where Gx(⋅):≥0→m×m, Ge(⋅):≥0→m×m and Gi(⋅):≥0→m×m are the bounded
symmetric 
matrix-functions 
defined 
on 
[t0,∞), 
Gx>0, 
Ge>0, 
Gi>0;
V(⋅):≥0×c×b→≥0 is the continuously differentiable real-analytic Cκ (κ≥1)
function with respect to x∈X and e∈E on [t0,∞).
It was emphasized that the control signal is saturated as documented in
Figure 4.2.1.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

u
u
u
u
min
max
≤
≤
umax
0
Saturation
)
(
sat
max
min ⋅
=
u
u
u
umin
Saturation
Figure 4.2.1. Bounded control, u
u
u
min
max
≤
≤
For 
closed-loop 
NEMS 
and 
MEMS 
(4.2.1)–(4.2.3) 
with
X 0={x0∈c}φX⊂c,u∈U⊂m, r∈R⊂b and d∈D⊂s, it is straightforward to
find the evolution set X(X0, U, R, D)⊂c. Furthermore, using the output
equation, one has 
Y
X
H→

. Thus, the system (4.2.1)-(4.2.3) evolves in
       XY(X0,U, R, D)={(x,y)∈X × Y: x0∈X0, u∈U, r∈R, d∈D, t∈[t0,∞)}⊂c × b.
The tracking error
)
(
)
(
)
(
t
y
t
Nr
t
e
−
=
, e(⋅):[t0,∞)→b
gives the difference between the reference input r(⋅):[t0,∞)→b and system
output y(⋅):[t0,∞) →b. Our goal is to find the feedback coefficients of
controller (4.2.3) to guarantee that the closed-loop NEMS and MEMS will
evolve in the desired manner. The following Lyapunov-based Lemma is
formulated to study the stability of closed-loop dynamic systems as well as to
find the feedback coefficients to guarantee the criteria imposed on the
Lyapunov pair.
Lemma.
Consider the closed-loop systems (4.2.1) – (4.2.3).
1. Solutions of system are uniformly ultimately bounded;
2. equilibrium point is exponentially stable in the convex and compact state
evolution set X(X0, U, R, D)⊂c;
3. tracking is ensured and disturbance attenuation is guaranteed in the state-
error evolution set XE(X0, E0, U, R, D)⊂c × b,
if there exists a Cκ function V(t,x,e) in XE such that for all x∈X, e∈E, u∈U,
r∈R and d∈D on [t0,∞)
(i) ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ
1
2
3
4
x
e
V t x e
x
e
+
≤
≤
+
( , , )
,
           (4.2.4)
(ii) along (4.2.1) with (4.2.3), the following  inequality holds
dV t x e
dt
x
e
( , , ) ≤−
−
ρ
ρ
5
6
.
             (4.2.5)
Here, ρ1(⋅):≥0→≥0, ρ2(⋅):≥0→≥0, ρ3(⋅):≥0→≥0 and ρ4(⋅):≥0→≥0 are the
K∞-functions; ρ5(⋅):≥0→≥0 and ρ6(⋅):≥0→≥0 are the K-functions. 
   
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

The major problem is to design the Lyapunov candidate functions.
Let us apply a family of nonquadratic Lyapunov candidates
.
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
,
(
0
)1
(
2
1
2
0
)
1
(
2
1
2
0
)1
(
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
∑
∑
∑
=
+
+
+
=
+
+
+
=
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+






+






+






=
σ
µ
µ
ς
β
β
η
γ
γ
µ
µ
µ
µ
β
β
β
β
γ
γ
γ
γ
i
si
T
i
i
ei
T
i
xi
T
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
e
t
K
e
e
t
K
e
x
t
K
x
e
x
t
V
(4.2.6)
To design the Lyapunov functions, the nonnegative integers were used.
In particular, 
,...,
2,1,0
,...,
2,1,0
=
=
γ
η
 
...
2,1,0
,...,
2,1,0
=
=
β
ς
,
,...
2,1,0
=
σ
, and 
,...
2,1,0
=
µ
.
From (4.2.3) and (4.2.6), one obtains a bounded admissible controller as
.
)
(
diag
1
)
(
)
(
diag
)
(
)
(
diag
)
(
)
(
0
0
0
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
max
min







+




+







=
∑
∑
∑
=
=
=
+
+
+
+
−
+
+
+
+
−
+
+
+
+
−
σ
ς
η
µ
µ
µ
µ
β
β
β
β
γ
γ
γ
γ
i
si
T
e
i
i
ei
T
e
e
i
xi
T
x
u
u
i
i
i
i
i
i
e
t
K
e
s
B
t
G
e
t
K
e
B
t
G
x
t
K
x
x
B
t
G
u
sat
          (4.2.7)
Here, Kxi(⋅):≥0→c×c, Kei(⋅):≥0→b×b and Ksi(⋅):≥0→b×b are the matrix-
functions.
It is evident that assigning the integers to be zero, the well-known
quadratic Lyapunov candidate results, and
.
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
,
(
0
2
1
0
2
1
0
2
1
e
t
K
e
e
t
K
e
x
t
K
x
e
x
t
V
s
T
e
T
x
T
+
+
=
The bounded controller is found to be
(
.
1
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
0
0
0
max
min



+
+
=
e
s
t
K
B
t
G
e
t
K
B
t
G
x
t
K
x
B
t
G
u
s
T
e
i
e
T
e
e
x
T
x
u
u
sat
Substituting (4.2.7) into (4.2.1), the total derivative of the Lyapunov
candidate 
)
,
,
(
e
x
t
V
 is obtained. Solving (4.2.5), the feedback coefficients are
obtained.
Example 4.2.5.
Consider a micro-electric drive actuated by a permanent-magnet DC motor
with step-down converter, see Figure 4.2.2. Find the control algorithm.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

LL
ra
La
+
Permanent magnet
ω r
e
T
,
TL
Load
+
−
CL
−
+
ia
iL
+
-
uc
ut
T
rd
id
+
−
Vd
D
us
E
k
a
a
r
=
ω
−
Figure 4.2.2. Permanent-magnet DC motor with step-down converter
Solution.
Using the Kirchhoff laws and the averaging concept, we have the
following nonlinear state-space model with bounded control
L
c
L
t
L
d
t
L
d
r
a
L
a
m
a
a
a
a
a
a
L
L
L
r
a
L
a
T
J
u
i
u
L
r
u
L
V
i
i
u
J
B
J
k
L
k
L
r
L
L
C
C
dt
d
dt
di
dt
di
dt
du
























−






























−
+












































−
−
−
−
−
=




















1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
max
max
ω
ω
,
uc ∈[
]
0
10  V.
A bounded control law should be synthesized.
From (4.2.6), letting ς
σ
=
= 1 and β
µ
η
γ
=
=
=
= 0 , one finds the
nonquadratic function 
)
,
(
x
e
V
. In particular, we apply the following
Lyapunov candidate
,
]
[
)
,
(
0
2
1
4
1
4
1
2
0
2
1
4
1
4
1
2
0
2
1












+
+
+
+
=
r
a
L
a
x
r
a
L
a
ei
ei
e
e
i
i
u
K
i
i
u
e
k
e
k
e
k
e
k
x
e
V
ω
ω
where Kx0 ∈4×4.
Therefore, from (4.2.7), one obtains
.
,0
for  
  
0
,
10
0
for  
  
,
10
for  
  
10
8
7
6
5
3
4
3
3
2
1
r
a
L
a
c
k
i
k
i
k
u
k
dt
e
k
edt
k
e
k
e
k
u
u
u
u
u
u
ω
−
−
−
−
+
+
+
=



≤
<
<
≥
=
∫
∫
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

If the criteria, imposed on the Lyapunov pair are guaranteed, one
concludes that the stability conditions are satisfied. The positive-definite
nonquadratic function 
)
,
(
x
e
V
 was used.  The feedback gains must be found
by solving inequality 
0
)
,
(
<
dt
x
e
dV
. For example, the following inequality
can be solved
2
2
1
4
4
1
2
2
1
)
,
(
x
e
e
dt
x
e
dV
−
−
−
≤
.
Thus, from 
0
)
,
(
>
x
e
V
 and 
0
)
,
(
<
dt
x
e
dV
, one concludes that stability
is guaranteed. 
    
It must be emphasized that a great number of examples in design of
tracking controllers for electromechanical systems are reported in the
references cited below.
Example 4.2.6.
Study the flip-chip MEMS: eight-layered lead magnesium niobate actuator
(3 mm diameter, 0.25 mm thickness), actuated by a monolithic high-voltage
switching regulator, 
1
1
≤
≤
−
u
 A. A set of differential equations to model the
microactuator dynamics is
u
u
F
F
dt
dF
y
y
y
48593
13740
9472
+
+
−
=
,
y
y
y
y
y
x
v
v
F
dt
dv
2750
2609
94100
947
3
/1
−
−
−
=
,
dx
dt
v
y
y
=
.
Solution.
The control authority is bounded, and hence, the control is constrained.
In particular, 
1
1
≤
≤
−
u
.
The error is the difference between the reference and microactuator
position. That is,
e t
r t
y t
( )
( )
( )
=
−
,
where y t
xy
( ) =
 and r t
r
t
y
( )
( )
=
.
Using (4.2.6) setting the nonnegative integers to be ς
σ
=
= 1 and
β
µ
η
γ
=
=
=
= 0 , we have
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC











+
+
+
+
=
y
y
y
xo
y
y
y
ei
ei
e
e
x
v
F
K
x
v
F
e
k
e
k
e
k
e
k
x
e
V
]
[
)
,
(
2
1
4
1
4
1
2
0
2
1
4
1
4
1
2
0
2
1
.
Applying the design procedure, a bounded control law is synthesized, and
making use of (4.2.7), one has.
(
)
∫
∫
+
+
+
=
+
−
dt
e
edt
e
e
u
3
3
1
1
817
4458
2614
94827
sat
.
The feedback gains were found by solving inequality
2
4
2
)
,
(
x
e
e
dt
x
e
dV
−
−
−
≤
.
The criteria imposed on the Lyapunov pair are satisfied. In fact,
0
)
,
(
>
x
e
V
 and 
0
)
,
(
≤
dt
x
e
dV
.
Hence, the bounded control law guarantees stability and ensures tracking.
The experimental validation of stability and tracking is important. The
controller is tested, and Figure 4.2.3 illustrates the transient dynamics for the
position for a reference signal (desired position) 
t
t
ry
1000
sin
10
4
)
(
6
−
×
=
.
Figure 4.2.4 illustrates the actuator position if 
6
10
4
)
(
−
×
=
= const
t
ry
.
From these end-to-end transient dynamics it is evident that the desired
performance has been achieved, and the output precisely follows the
reference position r t
y( ) .
Figure 4.2.3. Transient output dynamics if 
t
t
ry
1000
sin
10
4
)
(
6
−
×
=
Time (seconds)
Micro
actuator position and reference x and r
m
y
y
−
,
[
]
µ
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
r t
y( )
x
t
y ( )
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 4.2.4. Actuator position, 
6
10
4
)
(
−
×
=
= const
t
ry
   
Example 2.4.7.
Consider a flip-chip MEMS with permanent-magnet stepper motor
controlled by ICs. The mathematical model in the ab variables, in the form of
nonlinear differential equations (see section 3.6), is given as
di
dt
r
L
i
RT
L
RT
L
u
as
s
ss
as
m
ss
rm
rm
ss
as
= −
+
+
ψ
ω
θ
sin(
)
1
,
di
dt
r
L
i
RT
L
RT
L
u
bs
s
ss
bs
m
ss
rm
rm
ss
bs
= −
−
+
ψ
ω
θ
cos(
)
1
,
(
)
(
)
[
]
,
1
cos
sin
L
rm
m
rm
bs
rm
as
m
rm
T
J
J
B
RT
i
RT
i
J
RT
dt
d
−
−
+
−
=
ω
θ
θ
ψ
ω
d
dt
rm
rm
θ
ω
=
.
The two-phase micro-stepper motor parameters are:
RT = 6, 
60
=
sr
 ohm, 
0064
.0
=
m
ψ
 N-m/A, 
ss
L = 0.05 H, 
7
10
3.1
−
×
=
m
B
N-m-sec/rad, and the equivalent moment of inertia is 
8
10
8.1
−
×
=
J
 kg-m2.
The phase voltages are bounded. In particular,
max
min
u
u
u
as ≤
≤
 and 
max
min
u
u
u
bs ≤
≤
,
where 
min
u
= - 12 V and 
max
u
 = 12 V.
Design the tracking control algorithm.
Time (seconds)
]
[
,
m
x
position
actuator
Micro
y µ
−
0
0.001
0.002
0
1
2
3
4
x
t
y( )
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Solution.
The nonlinear controller is given as
.
)
,
,
(
)
(
1
)
,
,
(
)
(
)
,
,
(
)
(
)
cos(
0
0
)
sin(
max
min






+
+
×



−
=




=
e
e
x
t
V
B
t
G
s
e
e
x
t
V
B
t
G
x
e
x
t
V
B
t
G
RT
RT
u
u
u
T
e
i
T
e
e
T
x
u
u
rm
rm
bs
as
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
θ
θ
sat
The rotor displacement is denoted as θ rm t( ) , and the output is
)
(
)
(
t
t
y
rm
θ
=
.  The tracking error is
)
(
)
(
)
(
t
y
t
r
t
e
−
=
The Lyapunov candidate is found using (4.2.6).
Choosing a candidate Lyapunov function to be (letting 
0
=
= γ
η
 and
1
=
=
=
=
µ
σ
β
ς
)
[
]
,
)
,
(
0
2
1
2
1
2
1
3
/
4
0
4
3
2
1
2
1
3
/
4
0
4
3












+
+
+
+
=
rm
rm
bs
as
x
rm
rm
bs
as
ei
ei
e
e
i
i
K
i
i
e
K
e
K
e
K
e
K
x
e
V
θ
ω
θ
ω
and solving
2
2
3
/
4
)
,
(
x
e
e
dt
x
e
dV
−
−
−
≤
,
a bounded controller is found as
,
3.4
1
1.6
1
9.2
14
sat
)
sin(
3
/
1
3
/
1
12
12






+
+
+
−
=
+
−
e
s
e
s
e
e
RT
u
rm
as
θ
.
3.4
1
1.6
1
9.2
14
sat
)
cos(
3
/
1
3
/
1
12
12






+
+
+
=
+
−
e
s
e
s
e
e
RT
u
rm
bs
θ
The sufficient conditions for robust stability are satisfied because
V e x
( , ) > 0  and 
0
)
,
(
<
dt
x
e
dV
.
Figures 4.2.5 and 4.2.6 document the dynamic if the reference (cammand)
displacement was assigned 0.5 and 1 radians, respectively. From analytical and
experimental results one concludes that the robust stability and tracking are
guaranteed.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 4.2.5. Transient output dynamics of microservo
0
0.01
0.02
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Time, [seconds]
0
0.01
0.02
-4.5
-4
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
Time, [seconds]
0
0.01
0.02
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Time, [seconds]
0
0.01
0.02
-0.035
-0.03
-0.025
-0.02
-0.015
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
Time, [seconds]
0
0.01
0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
Time, [seconds]
0
0.01
0.02
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Time, [seconds]
]
[
,
V
u
voltage
Phase
as
]
[
,
V
u
voltage
Phase
bs
]
[
,
A
i
current
Phase
bs
]
[
,
A
i
current
Phase
as
]
[
,
sec
rad
rm
velocity
Angular
ω
]
[
,
rad
t
displaceme
Angular
rm
θ
)
(t
rm
θ
rad
ref
5.0
=
θ
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Figure 4.2.6. Transient output dynamics of microservo
     
References
[1] P. A. Ioannou and J. Sun, Robust Adaptive Control, Prentice Hall, Upper
Saddle River, NJ, 1996.
[2] H. K. Khalil, Nonlinear Systems, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ,
1996.
[3] S. E. Lyshevski, Electromechanical Systems, Electric Machines, and
Applied Mechatronics, CRC Press, FL, 1999.
[4] S. E. Lyshevski, Control Systems Theory With Engineering Applications,
Birkh≅user, Boston, MA, 2001.
[5] M. Vidyasagar, Nonlinear System Analysis, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle
River, NJ, 1993.
0
0.01
0.02
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
Time, [seconds]
0
0.01
0.02
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Time, [seconds]
0
0.01
0.02
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
Time, [seconds]
0
0.01
0.02
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Time, [seconds]
0
0.01
0.02
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time, [seconds]
0
0.01
0.02
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Time, [seconds]
]
[
,
V
u
voltage
Phase
as
]
[
,
A
i
current
Phase
bs
]
[
,
V
u
voltage
Phase
bs
]
[
,
A
i
current
Phase
as
]
[
,
sec
rad
rm
velocity
Angular
ω
]
[
,
rad
t
displaceme
Angular
rm
θ
rad
ref
1
=
θ
)
(t
rm
θ
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

4.3. INTRODUCTION  TO  INTELLIGENT  CONTROL  OF  NANO-
AND  MICROELECTROMECHANICAL  SYSTEMS
Hierarchical distributed closed-loop systems must be designed for large-
scale multi-node NEMS and MEMS in order to perform a number of complex
functions and tasks in dynamic and uncertain environments. In particular, the
goal is the synthesis of control algorithms and architectures which maximize
performance and efficiency minimizing system complexity through
• 
intelligence, learning, evolution, and organization;
• 
adaptive decision making,
• 
coordination and autonomy of multi-node NEMS and MEMS through
tasks and functions generation, organization and decomposition,
• 
performance analysis with outcomes prediction and assessment,
• 
real-time diagnostics, health monitoring, and estimation,
• 
real-time adaptation and reconfiguration,
• 
fault tolerance and robustness,
• 
etc.
Control theory and engineering practice in the design and implementation
of hierarchical hybrid (digital- and continuous-time subsystems are integrated,
discrete and continuous events are augmented) real-time large-scale closed-loop
systems have not matured. Synthesis of optimal controllers for elementary
(single-input/single-output) single node NEMS and MEMS can be performed
using conventional methods such as the Hamilton-Jacobi theory, Lyapunov’s
concept, maximum principle, dynamic programming, etc. However, these
methods do not allow the designer to attain the desired features for complex
multi-node NEMS and MEMS even though some methods (e.g., adaptive
control, fuzzy logic, and neural networks) ensure performance assessment,
diagnostics, adaptation, and reconfiguration. In fact, hierarchical architectures
are needed to be designed and optimized to achieve intelligence, evolution,
adaptive decision making, and performance analysis with outcome prediction.
The design of intelligent systems can be mathematically formulated as a search
problem in high-dimensional space, and the performance criteria form
hypersurfaces. Efficient and robust search algorithms are used to perform
optimization. Due to the complexity of large-scale systems and uncertainties, it
is difficult to develop accurate analytic models, explicitly formulate
performance specifications, derive regret functionals and performance indexes,
design optimal architectures, synthesize hierarchical structures, as well as
design control algorithms. The situation much more complex in the synthesis of
robust closed-loop systems under uncertainties in dynamic environments.
Intelligence can be defined as the ability of closed-loop NEMS and MEMS
achieve the desired goals (for example, maximize safety, stability, robustness,
controllability, efficiency, reliability, and survivability, while minimizing
failures, electromagnetic interference, and losses) in dynamic and uncertain
environments through the NEMS and MEMS abilities to sense the
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

environment, learn and evolve, perform adaptive decision making with
performance analysis and outcome prediction, and control.
Let us discuss the design of a control algorithms for jth level of k-level
hierarchical NEMS and MEMS. The control law at jth level can be expressed
as






=
∑
∑
∑
=
=
=
)
(
,)
(
,)
(
,)
(
,
)
(
0
0
0
t
p
t
s
t
x
t
e
P
f
t
u
j
j
i
i
j
i
i
j
i
i
j
,
where
• 
)
(t
u j
 is the control vector (output);
• 
f is the nonlinear map;
• 
P is the system performance (stability, robustness, controllability,
efficiency, reliability, losses, et cetera);
• ∑
=
j
i
i t
e
0
)
(
 is the error vector which represents the difference between the
assigned command and events ri(t) and system outputs yi(t), and the end-to-
end error vector is e t
r t
y t
( )
( )
( )
=
−
;
• ∑
=
j
i
i t
x
0
)
(
 is the state, event, and decision variable vector;
• ∑
=
j
i
i t
s
0
)
(
 is the sensed information (inputs, outputs, state and decision
variables, events, disturbances, noise, parameters, et cetera) measured by
jth and lower level sensors, and, in general, one can use ∑
=
k
i
i t
s
0
)
(
;
• 
)
(t
p j
 is the parameter vector (for example, time-varying parameters as
well as adjustable feedback coefficients which can be changed through the
decision making, learning, evolution, intelligence, control, adaptation, and
reconfiguration processes).
The simplest control algorithms are the proportional-integral-derivative
(PID) controllers with state/event/decision feedback extension. For example,
the linear analog PID control law is given by
dt
t
de
k
dt
t
e
k
t
e
k
t
se
k
s
t
e
k
t
e
k
t
u
d
i
p
derivative
d
tegral
in
i
al
proportion
p
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
+
+
=
+
+
=
∫
,
where k p , ki  and kd  are the proportional, integral and derivative feedback
gains.
Nonlinear PID controllers can be designed as
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

   
derivative
N
j
j
j
j
d
tegral
in
N
j
j
j
i
al
proportion
N
j
j
j
p
d
i
p
dt
t
e
d
k
s
t
e
k
t
e
k
t
u
∑
∑
∑
−
=
−
−
−
−
=
−
−
−
=
−
−
+
+
=
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
)
1
2
(
1
2
1
1
2
)1
2
(
1
2
1
1
2
)
1
2
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
,
where 
i
p N
N
,
 and Nd  are the positive assigned integers; k
k
p
j
i
j
(
)
(
)
,
2
1
2
1
−
−
and kd
j
(
)
2
1
− are the proportional, integral, and derivative feedback
coefficients.
For N p = 1, Ni = 1 and Nd = 1, one has
dt
t
de
k
dt
t
e
k
t
e
k
t
u
d
i
p
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
+
+
=
∫
.
Assigning 
2
=
p
N
, Ni = 2  and 
1
=
d
N
, the PID-type controller is
expressed as
dt
t
de
k
s
t
e
k
s
t
e
k
s
t
e
k
t
e
k
t
e
k
t
e
k
t
u
d
i
i
i
p
p
p
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
1
5
5
3
3
1
5
5
3
3
1
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
.
The feedback gains k p , ki  and kd  can be time-varying.
In addition, k p , ki  and kd  can be nonlinear functions of the state, event,
and decision variables, error, disturbances, etc. For example,
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
)
(
)
(
tanh
4
3
)
(
2
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
20
10
∫
∫
−
−
+
−
+
−
=
+
=
dt
t
e
t
e
e
t
e
e
dt
t
e
t
e
k
t
e
t
k
t
u
t
t
i
p
where 
t
p
e
t
k
10
2
)
(
−
−
−
=
 and 
(
)
(
)
(
)
)
(
tanh
4
3
)
(
20
t
e
e
t
e
k
t
i
−
+
−
=
.
Assume that in large-scale multi-node NEMS/MEMS, which have
thousands of nodes (NEMS/MEMS with subsystems – sensors, actuators, and
ICs), one sensor and actuator were failed. These types of failures must be
identified in real-time (through diagnostics and health monitoring), and closed-
loop NEMS/MEMS must be reconfigurated through intelligence and adaptive
decision making with performance analysis with outcome prediction and
assessment. Hierarchically distributed closed-loop systems must be designed
for large-scale multi-node NEMS and MEMS using hierarchical layers. For
example, for three-layer configuration, the possible architecture consists of
• 
high-level 
layer 
(intelligent 
augmented/coordinated 
control 
with
intelligence and adaptive decision making with performance analysis and
outcome prediction and assessment),
• 
medium-level layer (intelligent coordinated or autonomous control),
• 
low-level layer (sensor processing, data acquisition, simple feedback, e.g.,
single-input/single-output system for single node with many the state,
event, and decision variables).
Thus, the problem can be decomposed into sub-problems performed at
different layers (which can operate at different sampling rates) with synthesized
layouts and decomposed tasks and functions. The system architecture must be
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

synthesized, and the tasks are decomposed by the high-level layer into narrow
tasks/functions and fed (with or without defined adaptation, decision making,
diagnostics, estimation, implementation, performance analysis, realization, as
well as other details) to the medium-level layer, which further decomposes the
tasks and supervises the low-level layer. This hierarchically distributed
standardized control architecture is shown in Figure 4.3.1.
High-Level
Layer
Medium-Level
Layer
Low-Level
Layer
NEMS
MEMS
Figure 4.3.1 Three-layer hierarchically distributed architecture for
             large-scale multi-node NEMS and MEMS
Different operating systems, interfaces, and platforms should be supported
by advanced software, and there is a critical need for novel high-performance
robust software. The designer can
• 
lay out and support hierarchical controllers in if-then-else execution
format,
• 
generate codes for different platforms,
• 
add and remove layers,
• 
set up communication and networks based upon timing requirements (write
data to the shared memory buffers and read data from the buffers,
protocols development, code and encode data from the buffers using
different file formats),
• 
perform diagnostics,
• 
etc.
To perform these tasks, novel design tools are needed. At high-level,
intelligence, 
evolution, 
coordination 
and 
autonomy 
through 
tasks
generation/organization and decomposition, adaptive decision making with
performance analysis and outcome prediction, diagnostics and estimation,
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

adaptation and reconfiguration, fault tolerance and robustness, as well as other
functions must be performed through sensing-actuation, learning, evolution,
analysis, evaluation, behavioral (dynamic and steady-state performance)
optimization and adaptation, etc.
Architectures for hierarchically distributed complex closed-loop systems
can be synthesized based upon the decomposition of tasks and functions. The
analysis of complexity, hierarchy, data flow (sensing and actuation), and
controllers design, allows the designer to synthesize architectures starting from
lowest structural level and then governing and augmenting lower levels to
upper levels based on physical relationships, functional correlation, order,
sequence, and arrays to attain the desired performance, capability, and
efficiency.
Consider the closed-loop system to displace (move) the flight control
surfaces as shown in Figure 4.3.2. Ailerons, elevators, canards, flaps, rudders,
stabilizers and tips are controlled by MEMS-based microactuators.
Figure 4.3.2. Aircraft with MEMS-based translational and rotational
              flight microactuators
Three-layer architecture of the hierarchically distributed flight management
system can integrate three layers: high, medium, and low. At the low level, the
single MEMS-based node (actuator/sensor) is controlled using sensing data.
The control can be generated using the PID or fuzzy logic control laws (single-
input/single-output system) which are based on mathematical and logical
(linguistic rules to describe the system operation) reasoning. The simple tasks
that can be performed by a low-level layer are:
• 
"displace" in the clockwise or counterclockwise directions (microactuator
is actuated by supplying the voltage which is controlled by microICs, and
ψ
φ
θ
,
,
:
Angles
Euler
Actuators
Flight
Based
MEMS −
Sensor
Actuator −
Sensor
Actuator −
Geometry
Wing
Geometry
Surface
nt
Displaceme
Surface
Control :
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

the duty ratio of high-frequency transistors is controlled using the tracking
error, decision variables, and events);
• 
"measure the displacement",
• 
"compare the command and actual displacements" (obtain the tracking
error),
• 
"diagnose and detect failures" (For example, positive or negative values of
the duty ratio, which is bounded by 
1
±
, correspond to the clockwise or
counterclockwise angular deflections, respectively; an increase of the duty
ratio must lead to an increase of the current and electromagnetic field
intensity).
Thus, we have a set of commands to attain the desired tasks and
functions. The low-level layer is primarily responsible for actuation, sensing,
simple analysis, diagnostics, and decision making. It is evident that the
internal decision making mechanism and local diagnostics can be performed
at a low level. The medium-level layer (which controls all control surfaces,
e.g., left and right horizontal stabilizers, right and left leading and trailing
flaps, et cetera) coordinate the actions of hundreds of MEMS-based nodes
(actuators/sensors). Aircraft control is performed by a supervisory flight
management system (high-level layer), which, in addition to microactuators
management, integrates many other functions (e.g., mission, path, position,
propulsion control, et cetera), and the task analysis is accomplished by the
high-level layer. In particular, based upon the information obtained from
medium- and low-level layers, the high-level layer defines tasks (through
intelligence, 
learning, 
evolution, 
analysis, 
adaptation, 
coordination,
organization, decomposition, adaptive decision making with performance
analysis and outcome prediction, diagnostics, et cetera) to guarantee safety,
flying and handling requirements, mission effectiveness, etc. The commands
to displace the control surfaces are generated by the high-level layer based
upon the overall analysis and high-level decision making. It must be
emphasized that high-, medium-, and low-level layers communicate with
each other, and the high-level layer possesses a key role.
Decision-making theory must be applied to develop and integrate key
enabling methods, algorithms, and tools for the use in intelligent large-scale
multi-node NEMS and MEMS. These intelligent systems must make optimal
(robust) decision based upon the evolution strategies using specified
requirements and priorities, monitoring (sensing) the external environment for
entities of interest, recognizing those entities and then infer high-level attributes
about those entities, etc. The closed-loop systems use the data from different
sensors, feedback commands (controls) are generated and executed, and
intelligent updates and evolution are performed. The feedback for sensor and
control mechanisms are integrated, and particular emphasis is concentrated to
gather the critical and essential data from the agents (nodes) of a greatest
interest. Extensive information data must be constantly updated to guarantee a
complete situation awareness, graduate evolution, and intelligence using
performance analysis, outcome evaluation, prediction, and assessment. Thus,
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

qualitative and quantitative analysis is performed to study the overall system
evolution. To perform the inferences required, to develop an assessment of the
current situation, and to predict performance and outcomes, extensive
knowledge and information about NEMS, MEMS, and environment are
needed.
A multiple learning concept can be implemented to design high-, medium-,
and low-level closed-loop systems. Agents (nodes) exhibit complex behavior
which can be optimized using low-level evolutionary decision-making
subsystems which use learning algorithms. Reinforcement learning can be
performed based upon the prioritized objectives through upper level decision-
making. The agents behavior and performance are analyzed by the high-level
layer to collect and assess the evidence data. Decision trees are commonly used
to provide a comprehensive set of strategies, simplify and improve (optimize)
them, attain robustness and comprehensibility, and make the final decision. The
low-level subsystems can perform the following functions: sensing, actuation,
recognition, local diagnostics, local assessment, and local prediction with
decision making.
Hierarchical distributed closed-loop systems can have different
organization (architecture), and the number of layers is based upon the
complexity of multi-node NEMS and MEMS to be controlled, e.g., the
number of nodes their complexity. The level of control hierarchy is defined
by hardware and software complexity (rate of tasks completion, rate of
continuous/discrete events, bandwidth, sampling time, update rate, et cetera),
as well as by the overall specifications and requirements imposed. Complex
problems and tasks can be logically decomposed into simpler subproblems
and subtasks which are easy to understand, support, and implement using the
state table of rules (for each rule, the actuator or sensor action and operation
are determined using the system state, decision, event, and performance
variables). These subtasks must be performed in the defined sequence
scenarios that lead to the desired operation, and the architecture is
synthesized. Usually, low-level subsystem is designed for each NEMS and
MEMS node (actuator/sensor) at the lower level of the hierarchy, and the
layer level is defined based upon the overall objectives, analytical and
numerical complexity of problems, information flow, etc. Thus, the
complexity gradually arises form subsystems design (to control single node),
to the synthesis of closed-loop architecture (layers).
Different intelligent concepts can be applied. For example, neural
networks allow the designer to
• 
approximate unknown functions (function approximator neural networks);
• 
generalize control vector (control neural networks).
The backpropagation method is applied for training multilayer perceptron
neural networks.
The multi-input/single-output neuron output is given by
(
)
1
B
Wv
f
u
+
=
,
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

where u is the neuron output, u∈1; f is the nonlinear function (transfer
function); W is the weighting matrix, 
[
]
k
k
w
w
w
w
W
1
1
1
12
11
,
,
,
,
−
=
K 
, W∈1×k;
v is the input vector (performance variables), v∈k; B 1 is the bias variable.
It should be emphasized that W and B1 are adjusted through the training
(learning) mechanism.
For a single-layer neural network of z neurons, one has
(
)
B
Wv
f
u
+
=
,
where the weighting matrix and bias vector are W∈z × k and B∈z.
For multi-layer neural network of z neurons, one can find the following
expression for the (i + 1) network outputs
(
)
1
,2
,
,1
,0
,
1
1
1
1
−
−
=
+
=
+
+
+
+
M
M
i
B
u
W
f
u
i
i
i
i
i
K
,
where M is the number of layers in the neural network.
For example, for three-layer network, we have
(
)
2
,
3
2
3
3
3
=
+
=
i
B
u
W
f
u
, 
(
)
1
,
2
1
2
2
2
=
+
=
i
B
u
W
f
u
,
and 
(
)
0
,
1
1
1
1
=
+
=
i
B
v
W
f
u
.
Hence, one obtains
(
)
(
)
(
)
[
]
3
2
1
1
1
2
2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
B
B
B
v
W
f
W
f
W
f
B
u
W
f
u
+
+
+
=
+
=
,
where the corresponding subscripts 1, 2 and 3 are used to denote the layer
variables.
To approximate the unknown functions, weighting matrix W and the bias
vector B must be determined, and the procedure for selecting W and B is called
the network training. Many concepts are available to attain training, and the
backpropagation, which is based upon the gradient descent optimization
methods, are commonly used. Applying the gradient descent optimization
procedure, one minimizes a mean square error performance index using the
end-to-end neural network behavior. That is, using the inputs vector v and the
output vector c, c∈k, the quadratic performance functional is given as
(
)
(
)
j
p
j
T
j
p
j
j
j
T
j
j
Qe
e
u
c
Q
u
c
J
∑
∑
=
=
=
−
−
=
1
1
,
where 
j
j
j
u
c
e
−
=
 is the error vector; Q∈p × p is the diagonal weighting
matrix.
The steepest descent algorithm is applied to approximate the mean squire
errors, and the learning rate and sensitivity have been widely studied for the
quadratic performance indexes.
References
[1] P. J. Antsaklis and K. M. Passion (eds.), An Introduction to Intelligent and
Autonomous Control, Kluwer Academic Press, MA, 1993.
[2] S. Haykin, Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation, Prentice Hall,
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1999.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

