
nanoweapons


NANOWEAPONS
A GROWING THREAT TO HUMANITY
louis a. del monte
Potomac Books
an imprint of the university of nebraska press

© 2017 by Louis A. Del Monte
All rights reserved. Potomac Books is an imprint of the 
University of Nebraska Press.
Manufactured in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data
Names: Del Monte, Louis A., author. Title: Nanoweap-
ons: a growing threat to humanity / Louis A. Del 
Monte. Description: Lincoln, NB: Potomac Books, an 
imprint of the University of Nebraska Press, [2017] | 
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: lccn 2016043320 (print) | lccn 
2016043925 (ebook) 
isbn 9781612348964 (cloth: alk. paper) 
isbn 9781612349121 (epub) 
isbn 9781612349138 (mobi) 
isbn 9781612349145 ( pdf) Subjects: lcsh: Mil-
itary art and science—Technological innovations. 
| Military weapons—Technological innovations. | 
Nanotechnology— Risk assessment. Classification: 
lcc u39 .d447 2017 (print) | lcc u39 (ebook) | ddc 
355.8/2— dc23 lc record available at https://lccn.loc.
gov/2016043320
Set in Scala OT by John Klopping.

To my loving wife and lifelong partner, Diane Cuidera Del Monte


contents
Acknowledgments . . ix
Introduction . . xi
Part 1. The First Generation of Nanoweapons
 1. What You Don’t Know Can Kill You . . 3
 2. Playing legos with Atoms . . 17
 3. I Come in Peace . . 29
 4. The Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing . . 45
 5. The Rise of the Nanobots . . 79
 6. The “Swarm” . . 91
Part 2. The Game Changers
 7. The “Smart” Nanoweapons . . 101
 8. The Genie Is Loose . . 111
 9. Fighting Fire with Fire . . 123
Part 3. The Tipping Point
 10. The Nanoweapons Superpowers . . 139
 11. The Nano Wars . . 153
 12. Humanity on the Brink . . 169
Epilogue . . 181
Appendixes . . 189
 1. Institute for Soldier Nanotechnologies
 2. Nanoweapons Offensive Capability of Nations
 3. The Events Leading to the Chernobyl Disaster
Notes . . 211
Glossary . . 225
Index . . 235


acknowledgments
I want to recognize the contributions of Diane Cuidera Del Monte. 
As a Renaissance woman, teacher, editor, and writer in her own 
right, Diane is capable of performing in numerous Arts medi-
ums. As an intelligent wordsmith and art historian, she suggested 
editorial and structural changes to the book. She freely shared 
her talents, education, and insights on psychology, history, and 
human nature, which helped guide the completion of this work. 
She has always helped me dream larger and achieve greater. She 
thinks outside the box, outside the room that holds the box, and 
outside the house, which includes the room. She always refuses to 
be constrained by “artificial boundaries” and continually encour-
ages our family and extended family to follow her lead.
I also want to thank my closest friend, Nick McGuinness, whose 
knowledge of history and the “real world” we live in astounds me. 
Finding a good friend is difficult. Finding a friend with knowl-
edge and talent honed through “real- life” experience is extremely 
difficult. I believe it is rare to have a friend, like Nick, who will 
donate his time and talents to provide chapter- by- chapter edito-
rial guidance, and I will forever be in his debt.
This book would never have found a publisher without the 
hard work and dedication of my agent, Jill Marsal, who is a found-
ing partner of the Marsal Lyon Literary Agency. With her skillful 
guidance, we were able to construct a proposal that attracted the 
interest of several publishers. I found working with her a plea-
sure and an educational experience.
Lastly, I want to thank the excellent team at Potomac Books 
that worked to make this book available to the public, including 
Elaine Durham Otto, the freelance copyeditor.


introduction
Nanoweapons are the most likely military weapons to render 
humanity extinct in this century. This is not a philosophical issue. 
This is about whether you and yours will survive through this 
century. Having made such a dire assertion, you may wonder if 
I am being an alarmist. Consider this. The events that most peo-
ple consider likely to cause humanity’s extinction, such as a large 
asteroid impact or a super- volcanic eruption, actually have a rela-
tively low probability of occurring, in the order of 1 in 50,000 or 
less. In 2008 experts surveyed at the Global Catastrophic Risk 
Conference at the University of Oxford suggested a 19 percent 
chance of human extinction by the end of this century, citing the 
top four most probable causes:
1. Molecular nanotechnology weapons: 5 percent probability
2. Superintelligent ai: 5 percent probability
3. Wars: 4 percent probability
4. Engineered pandemic: 2 percent probability
Obviously nanoweapons are at the top of the list, having a 1 in 20 
probability of causing human extinction by the end of this cen-
tury. Notice that biological weapons (item 4), which have been a 
mainstay apocalyptic theme in both fiction and nonfiction, come 
in as a distant fourth, with only a 1 in 50 probability of causing 
human extinction.
Almost every book on nanotechnology speaks to the enormous 
benefits it will yield. Few mention the inherent risks associated 
with nanotechnology. Even fewer mention nanoweapons. You 

xii 
introduction
may ask, Why do books on nanotechnology rarely ever mention 
nanoweapons? The answer is that nanoweapons are “classified,” 
meaning the technology and its military applications are either 
“Secret” or “Top Secret.” The technologists involved in their devel-
opment cannot publish their research in scientific journals, speak 
about it at scientific conferences, or give media interviews about it.
It is one thing to read a scholarly Oxford study that proclaims 
nanoweapons threaten human extinction. Philosophers often 
ponder esoteric issues that never come to fruition. Thus it is rea-
sonable to ask, Just how real are nanoweapons? Let us address 
this question using a time- tested technique, namely, “follow the 
money.” In 2000, under President Bill Clinton, the U.S. govern-
ment launched the National Nanotechnology Initiative (nni), a 
research and development initiative involving the nanotechnology- 
related activities of twenty- five federal agencies with a range of 
research and regulatory roles and responsibilities. Since its incep-
tion, the government has allocated over $20 billion to developing 
nanotechnology. The actual amount that is spent on nanoweap-
ons remains Top Secret. However, based on publicly published 
budget allocations, it is reasonable to estimate that anywhere 
between a third to half of all nanotechnology- based materials 
and systems under nni are destined for military application. 
Indeed, several are already deployed and deemed combat ready. 
The initial examples I provide in chapter 1 will sound like they 
are right out of Star Trek. Factually, a new arms race is under 
way. Nanowerk.com, the leading nanotechnology portal, reports, 
“All major powers are making efforts to research and develop 
nanotechnology- based materials and systems for military use.” 
Based on publicly available information, China, Russia, and the 
United States are competing in a multibillion dollar nanoweap-
ons arms race. Other nations, like Germany, are close on their 
heels. A new paradigm fuels this race. The superpowers of the 
future will be those nations with the most capable nanoweap-
ons. Given the above facts, the existence of nanoweapon devel-
opment and deployment is beyond dispute, but it is appropriate 

introduction 
xiii
to ask, Why do nanoweapons threaten the survival of humanity? 
The simple answer is “control.” Controlling nanoweapons is as 
problematic as controlling biological weapons.
Let us understand the control issue using an example. Assume 
one nation develops artificially intelligent nanobots, tiny robots 
about the size of insects, capable of numerous military missions 
from surveillance to assassination. The size of nanobots makes 
them easy to transport and difficult to detect. In addition, by mid-
century, current nanotechnology projections suggest artificially 
intelligent self- replicating nanobots will become a reality. These 
nanobots are capable of replicating themselves by literally seek-
ing the right atoms and assembling a clone. In effect, they are 
the technological equivalent of biological weapons. Imagine such 
technology in the hands of a rogue state or terrorist group. Wea-
ponized self- replicating smart nanobots would represent the ulti-
mate doomsday device. Once released, their mission would be 
twofold: kill humans and replicate. Assuming the self- replicating 
smart nanobots are equivalent to a deadly biological pandemic, 
90 percent of the human race could fall victim to their attack in 
a matter of weeks. All this may sound like science fiction, but it 
is not. This will become evident in the chapters that follow.
Nanoweapons will describe this new class of military weapons 
in layperson prose. Assertions are annotated, making their source 
apparent. To assist comprehension, please consult the glossary. 
This book will enable you to trace the emergence of nanoweapons 
from concept to current deployment. It will discuss the nanoweap-
ons in development and close to deployment. It will project the 
nanoweapons most likely to dominate the future battlefield in 
the second half of this century. Most important, it will raise the 
control issue by addressing the question, Will it be possible to 
develop, deploy, and use nanoweapons in warfare without ren-
dering humanity extinct?
Many books offer concerns about technology, but provide no 
actionable plan. This book will propose strategies that could form 
the basis to ensure nanoweapons do not render humanity extinct. 

xiv 
introduction
I do not claim to have all the answers. But the pages that follow 
will clearly define the threat. I also believe the proposed strate-
gies to address the threat are worthy of consideration.
I admit my forecasts on nanoweapon timing may be off, per-
haps by as much as a decade. The development of nanoweap-
ons continues under a cloak of secrecy by every nation involved. 
This makes delineating an exact timeline challenging. However, 
by researching the available information, it is possible to con-
nect the dots to make an educated guess regarding when specific 
classes of nanoweapons will become available. Let me provide an 
example. When I was a boy, I enjoyed building small plastic mod-
els, especially military models. In 1954 the U.S. Navy launched 
the uss Nautilus (ssn- 571), the world’s first atomic submarine. 
Because it made headlines, it became a common topic of conver-
sation. As a model builder, I wanted to build it, as did many other 
hobbyists. Revell Hobby Kits was aware of the demand for a plas-
tic model build kit and quickly offered one. The Revell model of 
the uss Nautilus was apparently accurate, pinpointing the almost 
exact location of the atomic reactors on the Nautilus, which at the 
time was classified Top Secret. This started some people spec-
ulating that Revell had the Navy’s secret plans. Apparently the 
Revell’s model engineers knew how to piece various elements 
of their research together even without the Internet. This child-
hood memory impressed me so deeply that it is still with me to 
this day. My friends and I thought it a joke. Obviously the U.S. 
Navy likely found it frustrating at the very least. My point is sim-
ple. Collating available information can yield surprisingly accu-
rate insight into classified information. Using this approach, let 
us peek under the cloak of secrecy to see the nanoweapons that 
currently exist and those likely to exist in the coming decades. 
Let us understand how they threaten humanity’s survival. Most 
important, let us consider what strategies are necessary to ensure 
they do not become our undoing.

nanoweapons


Part 1
THE FIRST GENERATION OF NANOWEAPONS


1
What You Don’t Know Can Kill You
Reports that say that something hasn’t happened are always interest-
ing to me, because as we know, there are known knowns; there are 
things we know we know. We also know there are known unknowns; 
that is to say we know there are some things we do not know. But there 
are also unknown unknowns— the ones we don’t know we don’t know. 
And if one looks throughout the history of our country and other free 
countries, it is the latter category that tend to be the difﬁcult ones.
— donald rumsfeld
Scenario of a Nanoweapons Attack— An enemy could kill you 
before you finish this sentence. The enemy need not be present 
nor the killer human. You are a civilian, not a military combat-
ant. You are not associated with any political action group. In fact, 
you cracked open this book for a quick read while finishing your 
morning coffee and getting ready for work. You’re employed as a 
chef for a nursing home, nothing strategic to the national defense. 
Your political beliefs are a conglomeration of the previous week’s 
news cycles. Friends say you are easygoing and likable. You have 
a loving fiancée whom you are marrying next month. The calen-
dar on your refrigerator is your “to do” list, surrounded by busi-
ness cards from the wedding photographer, florist, caterer, and 
such. You have plans for a honeymoon and a family. Yet for some 
unknown reason you are one of the first victims of a nanoweap-
ons attack. There will be no way to see it coming and no way to 
escape. Your autopsy will show that you died from an “unknown 
cause.” Some at your funeral will mourn and openly ask, Why?

4 
what you don’t know can kill you
Their grief will be short- lived and their question quickly 
answered. Many of them will meet the same fate within days. 
Your death was only the beginning. In fact, numerous people 
like you are dying in major cities around the world. If you live in 
the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion may just be beginning to understand the nature of the attack. 
Some high- ranking government officials know the United States 
is under attack. They and their families are at secure locations 
to ensure continuity of government. The president and his fam-
ily have been in the White House bunker for several days. The 
enemy responsible for the attack remains unknown. All national 
resources are working to find a way to neutralize the nanoweap-
ons attack. The president is getting ready to address the nation 
and launch a counterattack. Every branch of the U.S. military 
is at defcon 2, signaling that a nuclear counterattack is immi-
nent. U.S. submarines are strategically scattered throughout the 
world’s oceans. A third of all U.S. strategic bombers are airborne 
24/7. Every missile silo stands ready to launch. norad is sealed.
While Americans await the president’s address, the chill of 
dread is in the air. Schools close, and the streets are empty. Tele-
vision news coverage has devoted more airtime to the “mysterious 
deaths” than to any news story in tv history, with a bombardment 
of cold statistics and “expert” commentary from every major net-
work for the past four days. The Emergency Broadcast System 
interrupts repeatedly to advise all citizens to stay indoors and 
avoid contact with others to whatever extent possible. The shelves 
of food markets and gun shops are bare, victims of hoarding and 
looting. Three days ago, the president suspended all unnecessary 
government services, like the U.S. Post Office and the Internal 
Revenue Service. The National Guard is maintaining order and 
keeping hospitals operational as daily tides of new victims arrive 
who often die before a bed becomes available. Finally, from the 
White House bunker, the president addresses the nation.
“My fellow Americans,” he begins with a solemn demeanor, “I 
regret to report that nine days ago the United States and many of 

what you don’t know can kill you 
5
its nato allies, as well as Russia and China, suffered attacks from 
unknown forces using a new type of weapon. This new weapon 
is similar to a biological weapon, but it is not biological. It is tech-
nological. We describe it as a ‘nanoweapon.’ Our best scientists 
are working to put an end to the mysterious deaths. I am confi-
dent we will do so, and those responsible for the attacks will face 
justice. As I speak, the combined forces of the United States and 
its nato allies, along with Russia and China, are launching a full 
counteroffensive against all nations and terrorist groups we deem 
enemies of humanity. We act with resolve that our nations will 
not perish from the Earth.”
The president pauses, taking a deep breath, looks directly into 
the camera, and continues: “In this time of emergency, I urge all 
to remain calm, with goodwill toward each other. Let those who 
can help reach out to those less fortunate. I pledge that our offen-
sive will mete justice and cripple any adversary’s ability to con-
tinue their attacks. We are past the point of diplomacy. Those we 
deem enemies of humanity and responsible for, or in support 
of, these attacks forfeit their right to share planet Earth. Tomor-
row they will be gone. Tomorrow we will prevail. God bless the 
United States of America.”
Concurrent with the president’s two- minute national television 
address, the most devastating counterattack in history begins. 
Unfortunately, the counterattack has to target all possible per-
petrators, in other words, a broad- spectrum attack against every 
suspected adversary in an effort to thwart the release of more 
nanoweapons on the United States and its allies. For the first 
time in nearly a century, nuclear weapons have unleased, as the 
book of Revelation put it, “the lake of fire” on Earth. Countless 
millions die, the innocent along with the guilty. Tomorrow and 
the future of humanity have become questionable. 
Although the preceding scenario is fictitious, it is entirely plau-
sible. Nanoweapons are real and a new arms race is under way. 
Based on publicly available information, China, Russia, and the 
United States are competing in a multibillion dollar nanoweap-

6 
what you don’t know can kill you
ons arms race. Other nations, like Germany, are close on their 
heels. A new paradigm fuels this race. The superpowers of the 
future will be those nations with the most capable nanoweapons. 
This is easy to illustrate. Recall the first sentence of this chapter: 
“An enemy could kill you before you finish this sentence.” Here 
is how such a nanoweapons attack could happen. Assume one 
nation develops artificially intelligent nanobots, with function-
ality similar to mosquitos. Also, assume the nanobots are capa-
ble of seeking and injecting toxin into another nation’s humans. 
The smallest known flying insects are fairyflies, belonging to the 
family of chalcid wasps. Fairyflies are approximately 139 microns 
long (139 millionths of a meter). This suggests a plausible size for 
a lethal nanobot. If the toxin is botulism, the human lethal dose 
is 100 nanograms. If we assume the toxin payload each nanobot 
carries is 1,000 nanograms, similar to the weight ratio of a fighter 
aircraft to its ordinance payload, each nanobot could theoretically 
kill ten humans. An autopsy will reveal the presence of botulism 
and may attribute the death to food poisoning, not foul play. Even 
worse, if it is botulinum toxin type H, the most deadly in exis-
tence, there is no known antidote. Once injected, it becomes only 
a matter of days before your brain shuts down and you die. Most 
medical examiner labs are unfamiliar with botulinum toxin type 
H and not able to detect it. The injection point would be invisible 
to conventional autopsy techniques. This means that it is entirely 
possible that the medical examiner will attribute your death to 
an unknown cause, but not suggest foul play. The actual injec-
tion could take place within seconds. You may not be aware of it. 
You may never have heard of nanoweapons and botulinum toxin 
type H. It does not matter. Once injected, you are going to die.
Above, we discussed mosquito- like nanobots. They do not exist 
now, but the technology to build such a nanoweapon is only one 
or two decades away. No nation has a defense against such a 
nanoweapon. You may think this is far- fetched, but the idea of 
poisoning someone with a nearly imperceptible device is not 
new. A well- documented case involves Georgi Markov, novelist, 

what you don’t know can kill you 
7
playwright, and broadcast journalist for the bbc World Service. 
As a Bulgarian dissident, Markov was critical of the incumbent 
Bulgarian communist regime under Chairman Todor Zhivkov. 
Because of his criticism, many speculate that the Bulgarian gov-
ernment decided to silence him. On September 7, 1978, Markov 
walked across Waterloo Bridge spanning the river Thames. While 
waiting to take a bus to his job at the bbc, he felt a sharp pain in 
the back of his right thigh. He described the pain as a bug bite or 
sting. The pain caused Markov to look behind him. He saw a man 
picking up an umbrella and hurriedly crossing the street, where 
he got into a taxi and sped away. After arriving at the bbc World 
Service offices, Markov noticed a small red pimple had formed at 
the site of the sting, which continued to cause pain. He told one 
of his colleagues at the bbc about this incident. That evening he 
developed a fever and sought treatment at St. James’ Hospital in 
Balham. He died on September 11 at the age of forty- nine. Due to 
the suspicious circumstances, the Metropolitan Police ordered an 
autopsy, which revealed a spherical metal pellet the size of a pin-
head embedded in Markov’s leg. The pellet had two holes drilled 
through it, producing an X- shaped cavity, which showed traces 
of ricin. A sugary substance coated the tiny holes, trapping the 
ricin inside. Once the pellet was injected into Markov’s body, the 
sugary coating melted and the ricin found its way into his blood-
stream. At the time, there was no known antidote to ricin. The 
intelligence communities term this event the “Umbrella Murder.” 
In this case, a tiny pellet carried the toxin. Although this is argu-
ably much larger than mosquito- like nanobots, it demonstrates 
a significant point. Something extremely small, with an almost 
miniscule amount of toxin, can kill a human.
If you imagine 50 billion mosquito- like nanobots, each carrying 
1,000 nanograms of botulinum toxin H, released into the world’s 
population, it is easy to understand that nanoweapons could rep-
resent a threat capable of rendering humanity extinct. Even more 
frightening, these nanobots could be carried in a suitcase.
Current nanotechnology projections suggest that by 2050 arti-

8 
what you don’t know can kill you
ficially intelligent self- replicating nanobots will become a reality, 
designed and manufactured by superintelligent computers. We 
will discuss this further in a later chapter. However, at this point, it 
is important to understand that nanoweapons are not science fic-
tion. In fact, the United States is already deploying nanoweapons, 
and their use in warfare is only a matter of time. However, we may 
be getting a bit ahead of ourselves. Let us start at the beginning.
If you have never heard of nanoweapons, you are in the major-
ity. Most people have never heard the words “nanotechnology” or 
“nanoweapons.” Even in technically advanced countries, like the 
United States, the majority of adults are unaware that nanoweap-
ons even exist. Is this an exaggeration? No! Just look at the facts.
Fact 1: The National Nanotechnology Initiative intentionally 
omits any mention of nanoweapons in its mission and goals, but 
it allocates a significant portion of its budget to their development.
In 2000, under President Bill Clinton, the U.S. government 
launched the National Nanotechnology Initiative (nni), a research 
and development initiative involving twenty- five federal agencies 
with a range of research and regulatory roles and responsibilities. 
Its mission and goals suggest no role in developing nanoweap-
ons, but its budget allocations tell a different story. According to 
public records, in 2015 Department of Defense (DoD) programs 
accounted for more than 11 percent of the nni budget. However, 
this excluded funding to agencies like the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency, which also develops nanoweapons. In 
my judgment, the actual funding into nanoweapons is likely Top 
Secret or, at a minimum, Secret.
Let us be clear on what it means when information is classified. 
Generally, Top Secret applies to information that, in the wrong 
hands, could cause grave damage to national security. An exam-
ple would be our nuclear launch codes. Secret applies to infor-
mation that could cause serious damage to national security. An 
example would be fabrication techniques used to make radiation- 
hardened integrated circuits. These are circuits able to withstand 
high radiation, typically associated with a nuclear explosion. DoD 

what you don’t know can kill you 
9
applications include communication satellites and strategic mis-
siles, since both are likely to experience high radiation exposure 
during a nuclear war.
I held a Secret clearance during my work on DoD programs at 
Honeywell. This meant that I could have access to information 
classified as Secret, but only if I had a “need to know.” Having a 
Secret clearance did not allow me open access to all information 
classified Secret. I had to have a need to know the information 
in order to perform my work. This may mean that even the pres-
ident of the United States and members of Congress may not 
know how much money is going into nanoweapons. It is also 
likely that technologists working on nanoweapons have at least a 
Secret clearance. This means they cannot publish their research 
on nanoweapons in a scientific journal, speak about it at confer-
ences, or give media interviews. Given all the secrecy that sur-
rounds nanoweapons, it is not surprising that most people have 
never heard of them.
If you recall, early combat use of modern stealth aircraft only 
came to the public’s attention in December 1989 during Opera-
tion Just Cause in Panama and later in 1990 during Operation 
Desert Shield to liberate Kuwait. However, the actual engineer-
ing to create stealth aircraft started in 1975, when engineers at 
Lockheed Skunk Works found that an aircraft made with fac-
eted surfaces could have a very low radar signature because the 
surfaces would radiate almost all of the radar energy away from 
the receiver. Their inception to deployment spanned about fif-
teen years. If the need to deploy stealth aircraft had not emerged, 
their existence would still be classified Top Secret and the pub-
lic would be in the dark.
Fact 2: There is little to no public information regarding 
nanoweapons. For example, the 2007 New York Times Almanac, 
claiming to be “the world’s most comprehensive and authorita-
tive almanac,” did not include the word “nano” in its thirty- page 
index. A Google search on March 24, 2016, using the keyword 
“nanoweapons” yielded 10,800 search returns. That may seem like 

10 
what you don’t know can kill you
a lot of information, but in the larger scheme, it suggests there is 
scant information available. A second Google search using the key-
word “nuclear weapons” yielded over 14,000,000 search returns. 
The amount of information on nanoweapons is .07 percent that 
of nuclear weapons. Many may attribute this difference to the rel-
atively recent emergence of nanoweapons. To some extent, that is 
true. However, the U.S. government has been pursuing nanoweap-
ons since 2000. Clearly it is not only the age of the technology 
causing the disparity of information. It is the secrecy. Unlike 
nuclear weapons or even stealth aircraft, the United States has 
not deployed nanoweapons in combat. As a result, they remain 
secret and garner little press coverage.
Given these facts, it is not surprising that a national poll of U.S. 
citizens in 2007 revealed 79 percent had not heard about nano-
technology. A Harris Poll of 2,467 U.S. adults in 2012 found over 
60 percent had never heard of nanotechnology. The simple fact 
is that even today it is likely that most Americans are not aware 
of nanotechnology, let alone nanoweapons.
At this point you may wonder, What started the nanoweapons 
arms race? Like most things in science, nanoweapons started with 
a concept. Physicist and Nobel laureate Richard Feynman’s talk 
“There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom” introduced the concept 
at the American Physical Society meeting at the California Insti-
tute of Technology on December 29, 1959. Although Feynman 
never used the words “nanotechnology” or “nanoweapons,” he 
described a process in which scientists would be able to manip-
ulate individual atoms and molecules. At the time, no such pro-
cess existed.
Inspired by Feynman’s talk, engineer Kim Eric Drexler popu-
larized the term “nanotechnology” in his 1986 landmark book, 
Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology. In 1991, 
while Drexler was at mit, his doctoral thesis became the founda-
tion for another book, Nanosystems: Molecular Machinery, Manu-
facturing, and Computation.
It is fair to argue that Feynman and Drexler are the fathers of 

what you don’t know can kill you 
11
nanotechnology. In many ways, though, their prophetic visions 
were ahead of the prevailing scientific dogma. In 2001 Nobel lau-
reate Richard Smalley criticized Drexler’s work as naïve in a Sci-
entific American article, “Of Chemistry, Love, and Nanobots,” and 
subtitled “How soon will we see the nanometer- scale robots envis-
aged by K. Eric Drexler and other molecular nanotechnologists? 
The simple answer is never.” Smalley made several technical argu-
ments that Drexler refuted point by point as a “straw- man attack.” 
Unfortunately, this is normal in the scientific community, when 
the proposed science stretches beyond the limits of the known 
science. Details aside, history favors Drexler. Point of fact, nan-
otechnology exists. Unfortunately, nanoweapons also exist, and 
even more are under development.
What do we really know about nanoweapons? Surprisingly, 
from the mountain of information on nanotechnology, one in 
every 2,500 pages describes the use of nanotechnology for mil-
itary applications. However, be advised. The information in the 
public domain is likely one to two decades old. In the interest of 
clarity, let us examine several examples.
In 2007 the Russian military successfully tested the world’s 
most powerful nonnuclear air- delivered bomb, nicknamed the 
“father of all bombs.” Even though it only carries about seven tons 
of explosives compared with more than eight tons of explosives 
carried by the U.S. Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb, nicknamed 
the “mother of all bombs,” the Russian bomb is four times more 
powerful because it uses nanotechnology- enhanced explosives. In 
a counterpunch, the U.S. Department of Defense demonstrated 
the feasibility of creating compact bombs that use nanometals, 
such as nanoaluminum, to create explosives more powerful than 
conventional bombs. Since the deployment of such bombs is clas-
sified, we do not know if the United States has a bomb equal to or 
even greater than Russia’s. However, the probability of the United 
States having such a bomb is a near certainty.
In 2013, the U.S. Navy announced the deployment of a laser 
weapon on the uss Ponce. While laser weapons are not a new con-

12 
what you don’t know can kill you
cept, since their pursuit traces back to the 1950s Cold War, this 
one ignited the public’s imagination, especially Trekkies, familiar 
with futuristic weapons like phasers. Similar to Star Trek’s phasers, 
the new laser weapon is being refined to provide a wider range of 
tactical options, such as limiting the damage to a targeted aircraft 
and stunning an enemy combatant versus destroying the enemy 
aircraft and killing an enemy combatant. Although the laser weap-
on’s technology is secret, numerous articles argue that the rapid 
development of nanotechnologies over the last decade enabled 
significant internal component improvements of the solid- state 
laser system, making it deployable as a weapon. Figure 1, released 
by the U.S. Navy, shows the laser weapon on the uss Ponce.
To my mind, the most horrific near- term nanoweapons are 
mini- nukes. These nanoweapons are in the development phase 
by Russia, Germany, and the United States. While the exact tech-
nology is secret, much of the science that underpins mini- nukes 
is in the public domain. For example, a high- power laser could 
1. Nanotechnology- based laser weapon. America’s Navy. U.S. Navy photo 
by John F. Williams.

what you don’t know can kill you 
13
trigger a small thermonuclear fusion explosion, using a mix-
ture of tritium and deuterium. Nanotechnology could make the 
laser and fusion materials extremely small, able to fit easily into 
a jacket pocket, and weigh only five pounds. The blast from such 
a bomb would range from one ton to a hundred tons of conven-
tional explosives. The nuclear fallout would be negligible. Tech-
nically these are not weapons of mass destruction but an entirely 
new category. The amount of fissionable material is minuscule, so 
the detection of a mini- nuke would be extremely difficult. Since 
their blast is limited and the radioactive fallout negligible, their 
use on the modern battlefield would be compelling. In theory, 
their delivery could be accomplished via the delivery systems we 
currently deploy, such as cruise missiles. The mini- nukes are 
likely to make using nuclear- type weapons in warfare a reality.
The above represents just a few recent examples of nanoweap-
ons. We will cover more throughout this book. However, ask your-
self this question, Have you ever heard of Russia’s “father of all 
bombs,” nanoweapon lasers, and mini- nukes? I suspect, based 
on previous polls, that most people have not, but make no mis-
take about their lethality. The almost 250,000 Japanese who died 
when atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki never 
heard the phrase “atomic bomb.” Their best scientists did not 
know that the energy of atoms could be unleashed to cause such 
devastating destruction. Factually, history teaches us that igno-
rance is not a shield against horrific weapons.
How horrific are nanoweapons? Consider the simplest of all, 
the nanoparticle. This is an object, between 1 and 100 nanome-
ters in diameter, that behaves as a single entity with respect to 
its properties. Nanoparticles are widely used in detergents, cos-
metics, electronics, optical devices, medicine, and food pack-
aging materials. How can they become a weapon? The simple 
answer is some nanoparticles are highly toxic. We do not fully 
understand the full effect of nanoparticle exposure on people and 
animals, but we do know that the size of nanoparticles allows liv-
ing tissue to absorb them more readily than other known toxins. 

14 
what you don’t know can kill you
Nanoparticles are able to cross biological membranes and access 
cells, tissues, and organs that their larger counterparts cannot. 
Alarmingly, there is no authority to regulate nanotechnology- 
based products, including nanoparticles, but there is signifi-
cant scientific evidence that some may be usable as weapons. 
Clearly a nation intent on developing nanoweapons could turn 
its attention to developing highly toxic nanoparticles. Depend-
ing on the properties of the toxic nanoparticles, they may cause 
irreparable harm when inhaled or eaten. This means an enemy 
could potentially kill millions of people and animals by releasing 
toxic nanoparticles into a nation’s reservoirs, its environment, 
or somewhere along a nation’s bio food chain. Unfortunately, 
some toxicity studies indicate that considerable exposure is nec-
essary before the onset of symptoms. Thus it might take weeks 
or months for the first toxic nanoparticle symptoms to surface. 
To make matters worse, the current detection of nanoparticles 
requires expensive and complex analytical instruments. Even 
when the first symptoms surface, it might take days, weeks, or 
even months to determine that the culprit is a toxic nanopar-
ticle. By the time initial symptoms appear and the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention or the World Health Organiza-
tion makes a definitive diagnosis, the bulk of a nation’s popu-
lation could already have absorbed a lethal dose and be beyond 
treatment.
In later chapters, we will discuss complex nanoweapons. How-
ever, I thought it instructive to discuss toxic nanoparticles here 
for four reasons:
1. Exposure to nanoparticles is already occurring, resulting 
from their widespread commercial use. Similar to asbestos 
and mercury poisoning, the toxicity of some nanoparticles over 
time could produce irreparable harm to humans and animals.
2. It demonstrates the ease of producing a nanoweapon. This 
nanoweapon does not require a complex molecular system. It 

what you don’t know can kill you 
15
simply requires toxic nanoparticles, which some nations already 
know how to produce.
3. It demonstrates the ease of delivering the nanoweapon to 
the intended target. One suitcase filled with toxic nanoparti-
cles could be sufficient to wipe out a major city.
4. It makes the point that the horrific effects of toxic nanopar-
ticles are largely unknown and specific to the toxic nanoparti-
cle. However, the highly concerning part is that nanoparticles 
do not have to be lethal to cause irreparable harm. One study 
suggests nanoparticles may be able to suppress a person’s appe-
tite to the point where they stop eating altogether. In humans, 
this could manifest itself as malnutrition. The symptoms of 
malnutrition are numerous, but most worrying are the mental 
effects, such as depression, irritability, and dizziness. A nation’s 
military with these symptoms could become dysfunctional.
Ironically, the next big things in advanced military weapons 
will be small, essentially invisible. Their development proceeds 
under the premise of making us more secure. However, the real-
ity is just the opposite. Their emergence threatens human extinc-
tion. As we witness the emergence of nanoweapons, I consider 
what American physicist and the scientific director of the Man-
hattan Project, Robert Oppenheimer, said in an interview about 
the Trinity atom bomb test:
We knew the world would not be the same. A few people laughed, 
a few people cried, most people were silent. I remembered the line 
from the Hindu scripture, the Bhagavad- Gita. Vishnu is trying to per-
suade the Prince that he should do his duty and, to impress him, takes 
on his multi- armed form and says, “Now I am become Death, the 
destroyer of worlds.” I suppose we all thought that, one way or another.
Nanoweapons, similar to nuclear weapons, are game changers. 
However, they promise to be even harder to control and more 
lethal than nuclear weapons.


2
Playing legos with Atoms
The principles of physics, as far as I can see, do not speak against the 
possibility of maneuvering things atom by atom.
— richard feynman
Manipulating atoms and molecules like lego blocks may sound 
playful, but that is what nanotechnology engineering is about. 
How is this even possible? Well, to be honest, it was not possible 
until relatively recently. However, nature has been doing nanotech-
nology engineering for billions of years. In her slow evolutionary 
way, Mother Nature was the first “scientist” to use nano processes 
to manufacture nanoparticles, nanostructures, and nanosystems. 
Let us consider some simple examples.
If you stand on the beach of the Atlantic Ocean, you can smell 
the ocean. Natural processes, like sea spray, create salt nanoparti-
cles that enter our nostrils, and we are able to smell them. If you 
walk along the beach and find an abalone shell, you will have dis-
covered another of Mother Nature’s engineering marvels. Even 
though the abalone shell is 98 percent calcium carbonate, its 
nanostructure makes it 3,000 times stronger than rocks with the 
same chemical composition. The shell was created layer by layer 
in sheets about 50 to 200 nanometers thick.
Consider the mussels that cling to rocks. When I was a young-
ster living in New Jersey, my grandparents would often take 
me to the beach, and there they would harvest mussels from 
the man- made rock jetties projecting into the ocean. Have you 
ever tried to pull a mussel from a rock? They are essentially 

18 
playing legos with atoms
“superglued” in place and difficult to pry loose. My grandpar-
ents did it with a screwdriver and a lot of muscle. Riding home 
on the train with a paper bag filled with mussels, my mind only 
focused on the spaghetti with mussels we would have for din-
ner. I never thought about how the mussels were able to glue 
themselves to submerged rocks. But now I know that the glue 
used by the mussel is another one of nature’s nanotechnolo-
gies. In effect, when a mussel uses its foot to attach to a rock, 
it releases molecular bubbles, which we could term “nanobub-
bles,” that have an even smaller amount of adhesive in the cen-
ter of each bubble. A shell of hydrophilic (water- loving) atoms 
called a micelle surrounds each nanobubble. The nanobubble 
protects the adhesive until it reaches the rock. When it reaches 
the rock, the bubble pops, deposits the adhesive on the rock, 
and glues the mussel in place.
Nature’s nanotechnology engineering goes well beyond the 
ocean. For those that live inland and have never had the oppor-
tunity to explore an ocean beach, the marvels of nanotechnology 
engineering are all around you. For example, if you live in a rural 
area and walk through a pine forest during the summer, you will 
experience a fresh evergreen scent. The trees’ resins create ter-
pene, which is a natural nanoscale hydrocarbon (an organic com-
pound consisting entirely of hydrogen and carbon). Remarkably, 
our noses are sufficiently sensitive to smell these nanoscale mol-
ecules, and most people even like the scent.
As you approach a pond, you are likely to see frogs jumping 
from the foliage into the water. How did they know you were 
coming? This is another one of nature’s most marvelous nano-
systems. If you have ever been on a freestanding balcony, you 
were on a structure known as a cantilever. A cantilever is sim-
ply a rigid structural element anchored at only one end. The 
freestanding balcony is a protruding cantilever. An important 
mechanical property of a protruding cantilever is that when sub-
jected to a structural load, such as a person on a balcony, all the 
stress transmits to its anchor point. This makes the anchor point 

playing legos with atoms 
19
highly sensitive to the structural load. This is what is going on 
inside the frog’s ear. The frog’s inner ear has nanomechanical 
cantilevers, each known as a “haircell sacculus,” that move as 
little as 3 nanometers in reaction to the sound of our footsteps 
as we approach them.
Even if you live in a big city like Chicago, you will still expe-
rience nature’s nanotechnology. For example, there are butter-
flies. The intricately colorful wings of a butterfly are the result 
of nanoparticles that act as a photonic crystal, an optical nano-
structure fine enough to interfere with visible light and produce 
a color related to its surface property. If you take a walk through 
a city park, you will experience another of Mother Nature’s nan-
otechnology engineering feats, namely flowers. For example, let 
us say the park contains nasturtium flowers.
The leaves of the nasturtium flower, like the lotus flower, have a 
nanostructured surface. It is like closely packed microscopic fuzz. 
It acts to keep water droplets from adhering to the surface. As a 
result, the water droplets run off, taking surface dirt with them. 
This process is termed the “lotus effect.” The purpose in keeping 
the nasturtium leaves clean is to enable the plant to carry on the 
process of photosynthesis efficiently. Photosynthesis is nano pro-
cess, meaning it occurs at the atomic and molecular level. Photo-
synthesis allows green plants and some microorganisms to use 
sunlight as a power source to extract carbon dioxide and water 
and then rearrange the atoms to form oxygen and carbohydrates. 
Without the nano process of photosynthesis and the oxygen it cre-
ates, no animal life would have evolved on Earth.
We humans also operate using nano processes. A strand of 
dna that is found in every cell of our bodies is only 2 nanome-
ters in diameter. Yet it carries the genetic instructions for the 
development, function, and reproduction of our bodies. In fact, 
all living organisms, with the exception of some viruses, rely on 
dna for their genetic code. However, nature goes far beyond the 
use of nanoscale dna molecules when it comes to engineering 
humans. For example, nanoscale proteins form a large part of the 

20 
playing legos with atoms
structure of the human body and numerous other animals, from 
muscle tissues to antibodies.
When Mother Nature develops a successful nano process, she 
tends to use it widely. For example, micelles are found inside our 
bodies. In order for our bodies to absorb vitamins like D and E, 
they must travel in micelles, similar to how mussel nanobubbles 
travel in water. Nano processes within our bodies do not stop 
with the delivery of vitamins. The most critical element our bod-
ies need is oxygen. Without oxygen, we would die within three 
minutes. Every human knows, even in the most primitive soci-
eties, that breathing is critical to staying alive. This is how we 
get oxygen into our bodies, but it is not the whole story. Once 
inside our bodies, hemoglobin (a red protein less than 10 nano-
meters in size) carries the oxygen to every cell in our bodies via 
our bloodstream. Without this nano process, we and other verte-
brates would cease to exist.
There is little doubt that Mother Nature is unrivaled when it 
comes to nanotechnology engineering. She had a three billion 
year head start on human scientists, and even today our best nan-
otechnology engineering is still unable to equal her numerous 
accomplishments. This is not for lack of trying. One approach to 
nanotechnology engineering is to attempt to duplicate the nano 
processes we see in nature. For example, we have tried to arrange 
the atoms of calcium carbonate to duplicate the strength found 
in abalone shells, but with little success. We have made remark-
able progress in this area. However, we have only achieved one- 
tenth of its strength.
These examples are just a small sample of the nanoparticles, 
nanostructures, and nanosystems found in nature. I offer them 
to make a significant point. Nanotechnology engineering is real. 
It existed long before the evolution of humans. It is the founda-
tion for all life on Earth.
At this point, it is obvious that nature has mastered the abil-
ity to play legos with atoms. However, it is fair to ask, How do 
humans create nanoparticles, nanostructures, and nanosystems?

playing legos with atoms 
21
You can visualize our development of nanotechnology as the 
result of a “perfect storm” in science. Three critical events came 
together in a relatively short period, 1981– 89. When the storm 
cleared, the research fields of nanotechnology emerged. These 
are the three events:
1. The scanning tunneling microscope (stm) was invented in 
1981. This allowed individual atoms to be “seen” for the first 
time in history. Work in the early twentieth century, especially 
in the field of quantum mechanics, made a convincing case 
that atoms existed and provided insight into their behavior. 
However, the stm provided an unprecedented visualization 
of their existence. Its developers, Gerd Binnig and Heinrich 
Rohrer at ibm Zurich Research Laboratory, received a Nobel 
Prize in physics in 1986.
2. In 1986 K. Eric Drexler published his landmark book, Engines 
of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology. In it Drexler 
suggested controlling atoms to build nanoscale machines. 
Sparked by Drexler’s conceptual framework and the inven-
tion of the stm, the prospect of atomic control gleaned seri-
ous widespread attention.
3. In 1989 Don Eigler, an ibm physicist, used the stm tip to 
manipulate individual atoms. This was a historic first. It demon-
strated that it was possible to use the stm not only to visualize 
atoms but to move and place them. He spelled out the letters 
“ibm” using 35 Xenon atoms on a nickel surface.
Beginning in the early 2000s, the fields of nanotechnology 
began to emerge. Notice that I use the plural “fields.” That is 
intentional. Recall the National Nanotechnology Initiative defi-
nition we discussed in chapter 1: “Nanotechnology is science, 
engineering, and technology conducted at the nanoscale, which 
is about 1 to 100 nanometers.” This definition finds wide accep-
tance within the scientific community, but let me clarify one point. 
This definition does not require that macroscale products (the 

22 
playing legos with atoms
typical size of everyday products) only be produced by a gradual 
buildup, atom by atom or layer by layer, from the nanoscale, sim-
ilar to the way nature builds the abalone shell. The nni requires 
only one dimension of the macroscale product to be in nanoscale, 
1 to 100 nanometers, for the product to fit within the category of 
nanotechnology. This interpretation opens the door for numerous 
scientific fields to engage in nanotechnology research and appli-
cation, including the fields of surface science, organic chemistry, 
molecular biology, semiconductor physics, and microfabrication. 
It is common to see the plural “nanotechnologies,” referring to 
the broad range of research and applications that share only one 
commonality: size.
If you look closely at the emergence of nanotechnology in the 
2000s, numerous events demonstrate how seriously some mem-
bers of the scientific community took this new research category. 
In addition to an increase in scientific interest, there was consid-
erable political and commercial interest. Here are some of the 
key events:
Scientifically: In the early 2000s, a number of heavy hitters in 
the scientific community, including Drexler, Nobel laureate 
Richard Smalley, chemist George M. Whitesides, and computer 
scientist Ray Kurzweil, began to debate the viability of nano-
technology to achieve the vision forwarded by Drexler. In his 
book Engines of Creation, Drexler argued that nanotechnology 
would eventually fuel the ability to build a nanoscale “assem-
bler” that would be capable of building a copy of itself or any 
complex system via an atom- by- atom approach. Many refer to 
this approach as “molecular manufacturing.” The debate was 
theoretical and mainly increased scientific interest in nanotech-
nology. In 2004 Britain’s Royal Society and the Royal Academy 
of Engineering published “Nanoscience and Nanotechnolo-
gies: Opportunities and Uncertainties.” The report listed both 
the opportunities and potential risks associated with nanotech-
nology. In particular, it singled out nanoparticles as a potential 

playing legos with atoms 
23
health hazard and called for regulation. The theoretical nan-
otechnology debate and the Royal Society’s report had little 
impact on slowing the progress of nanotechnology. Govern-
ments and industries quickly realized the potential of nano-
technology and acted accordingly.
Politically: Governments began to fund and direct research in 
nanotechnology. In 2000 the United States formed the National 
Nanotechnology Initiative and began spending billions of dol-
lars on research. Europe pursued nanotechnology research 
through their European Framework Programmes for Research 
and Technological Development (Framework Programmes), a 
collaborative organization made up of European Union mem-
ber nations. China began pursuing nanotechnology in 2000 
and funded its development second only to the United States. 
Similar to the United States, a significant portion of their fund-
ing focuses on weapons. In 2007 Russia officially began nano-
technology research with the passage of a law that resulted in 
the creation of the Russian Corporation of Nanotechnologies. 
Russia’s efforts in nanotechnology have been rocky at best, due 
to financial constraints and corruption.
Commercially: A large number of nanotechnology- based com-
mercial products began to emerge in the early 2000s, from 
lightweight nanotechnology- enabled automobile bumpers to 
deep- penetrating therapeutic cosmetics. Almost everyone in 
technically advanced countries has used a product incorporat-
ing nanotechnology. However, almost no one knew that nan-
otechnology enabled the product. That remains true today.
It is fair to argue that nanotechnology research and application is 
a multidisciplinary research category that brought with it unprec-
edented optimism and serious concerns. It is interesting to note 
that concerns surrounding the health- related issues of nanopar-
ticles were on the radar screen early on, long before significant 
data surfaced on their effectiveness as a nanoweapon.
I provided this background to make three points clear.

24 
playing legos with atoms
1. Nanotechnology is real.
2. Nanotechnology is a multidiscipline research category, with 
serious research beginning in 2000.
3. Even from its modest beginning, nations recognized nano-
technology’s commercial and military value.
There are only two fundamental approaches to building nano-
technology. The first is “bottom- up,” often referring to the method 
of using atoms and molecules to assemble a nanostructure. In 
some cases, the molecular components assemble themselves chem-
ically by using the principles of molecular recognition (the chemi-
cal bonding of two or more molecules) to build nanomaterials and 
devices. The bottom- up approach implies atomic control. The sec-
ond approach is “top- down,” in which nanoscale objects result from 
larger entities, typically by removing material without atomic con-
trol during their construction. We will briefly explore each below.
1. Bottom- up approaches— This includes methods that seek to 
arrange smaller components into larger complex assemblies. We 
already discussed one popular method above, using the tip of a 
scanning tunneling microscope to touch the atoms and move 
them. More often, the atomic force microscope (AFM) is used 
by technologists to move atoms. The difference between the 
scanning tunneling microscope and the atomic force microscope 
is that the AFM gently touches the surface to derive an image 
and the stm does not. In the example above, Eigler arranged 
Xenon atoms on a nickel surface to spell the acronym ibm. 
A similar method, dip pen nanolithography (dpn), is used to 
create patterns directly on a range of substances with a variety 
of “inks.” In many ways, dpn is similar to using a quill pen to 
write on paper. In this case, the technologist coats the dpn tip 
with a chemical compound or mixture acting as ink and brings 
it into contact with a surface acting as paper. One of the most 
important applications of dpn is to deposit biological materi-
als to fabricate biosensors.

playing legos with atoms 
25
Synthetic chemistry is another bottom- up method to form 
molecules with a specific structure. In synthetic chemistry, 
specific chemicals interact to obtain a product. This technique 
relies on molecular self- assembly, where the molecules automat-
ically arrange themselves into a useful structure. One import-
ant application of synthetic chemistry is to form nanomaterials, 
such as nanoparticles.
2. Top- down approaches— These approaches start with an ele-
ment at the macro- micro level and remove material to produce 
an element at the nano level. You can envision this by consid-
ering the way an artist sculpts a figure from stone by using a 
chisel to remove material. Some of the best examples of this 
are in the integrated circuit industry. For example, technolo-
gists use dpn to deposit a resist, a type of chemical mask that 
is definable by light or electrons. Once the resist defines the 
circuit pattern, an etching process follows to remove mate-
rial and result in a nano- level electronic transistor. This top- 
down fabrication methodology is termed “nanolithography.” 
Nanolithography is also a technique used to create nanoelec-
tromechanical systems, as demonstrated by ibm in 2000. Nano-
electromechanical systems integrate mechanical and electrical 
functionality at the nanoscale.
Although all nanotechnology fabrication will fall under the bot-
tom- up or top- down approaches, the multidisciplinary approach 
to nanotechnology has significantly expanded the way in which 
nanotechnology- based products are built. For example, “nano-
biotechnology,” which is a blanket term that refers to the blend 
of biology and nanotechnology, uses biology- inspired approaches 
to develop nanotechnology. One recent approach in nanobiotech-
nology is to use microorganisms to synthesize nanoparticles. The 
list of new processes is growing rapidly.
This chapter would not be complete without discussing the 
unusual quantum mechanical effects that occur at the nanoscale. 
Quantum mechanics is the physics that explains the behavior of 

26 
playing legos with atoms
mass and energy at the level of atoms and subatomic particles, 
the nanoscale. In general, the bulk properties of a material are 
significantly different at the nanoscale. Quantum mechanics dic-
tates the properties of nanoscale materials, including melting 
point, fluorescence, electrical conductivity, magnetic permeability, 
and chemical reactivity. In addition, a specific property becomes 
size dependent at the nanoscale. For example, a large nanoscale 
material will generally be more conductive than a small nanoscale 
material, even when the material is the same. This occurs because 
the “mean free path” of electrons is greater in a larger nanoma-
terial than it is in a smaller nanomaterial. Even a highly conduc-
tive metal will become less conductive, more resistive, as its size 
enters the nanoscale. Let us examine the properties of gold at the 
nanoscale to understand more about the quantum mechanical 
effects at the nanoscale level.
If we had two vials of gold, each holding specific diameter 
nanoparticles of gold in a colloidal suspension, the visible color 
(fluorescence) of one might appear red and the other blue. The 
red color emits from the vial with gold nanoparticles in the range 
of 30 nanometers in diameter. As the gold nanoparticles increase 
in size to about 90 nanometers, the color changes to blue. Noth-
ing is yellow, the color of the bulk material. The reason for this 
is that the size of the nanoparticle will confine the motion of the 
gold’s electrons and, as a result, interact with light differently.
The quantum effects at the nanoscale are critical. They enable 
a wide range of applications. There is even a research category, 
quantum nanoscience, devoted to understanding the quantum 
mechanical effects at the nanoscale. Quantum nanoscience seeks 
to develop new types of nanodevices and nanoscale materials, 
based on their quantum mechanical behavior.
This chapter’s objective is to provide a foundation to under-
stand the fundamental techniques that nanotechnology research-
ers employ to build nanotechnology structures and the quantum 
mechanical challenges they face. We have learned that nanotech-
nology is not new. Indeed, nature has been using nano processes 

playing legos with atoms 
27
to build nanostructures for billions of years. In 2000 humans 
began to fabricate nanostructures, and it emerged as a research 
field. Since then, nanotechnology researchers have been making 
remarkable strides in fabricating products. These products influ-
ence the lives of most of us, even though we are unaware that 
nanotechnology enables them. Unfortunately, looming among 
the remarkable nanotechnology- based products, and typically 
hidden from public view, are nanoweapons.


3
I Come in Peace
If technology is the engine of change, then nanotechnology is the fuel 
for humanity’s future. Like any fuel, we must understand its usable 
capacity for doing work and apply that knowledge toward address-
ing humanity’s needs.
— natasha vita- more
The commercial applications of nanotechnology are ubiquitous. 
Almost every high- tech company is using nanotechnology to fab-
ricate products or incorporating nanoscale structures in their 
products. This raises a serious question, When is a product cat-
egorized as nanotechnology?
Defining a nanotechnology product is challenging. For example, 
let’s consider the definition for a nanomaterial, European Com-
mission versus International Council of Chemical Association:
ec: Nanomaterials contain 50 percent or more particles with 
nanoscale features.
icca: Nanomaterial contain a certain percentage weight of 
nanoparticles with nanoscale features.
Although the definitions are similar, they are also significantly dif-
ferent. Both are difficult to quantify. Currently there is no inter-
nationally recognized definition of a nanotechnology product.
Categorizing nanotechnology products turns out to be equally 
difficult. The 2012 International Symposium on Assessing the 
Economic Impact of Nanotechnology delineated six distinct nan-
otechnology categories: transportation and aerospace, nanomed-

30 
i come in peace
icine, electronics, energy, advanced materials, and food and food 
packaging.
Organizing a symposium by the above categories is appropri-
ate for technologists, but it makes it difficult to ascertain which 
technologies within a category have a consumer, industrial, medi-
cal, or military application. For example, the category of advanced 
materials is likely to include nanotechnology with multiple appli-
cations, from consumer to military. In the interest of clarity, I am 
going to categorize nanotechnology products into four categories: 
consumer, industrial, medical, and military.
In general, the products in each category will be different, but 
there are likely to be overlaps in technology. This happens in the 
real world with numerous technologies. For example, the tech-
nology to make rifle barrels is in many cases identical for con-
sumer hunting rifles as for military assault rifles. The steel used 
in industrial bridge construction can be identical to the steel used 
in military armor plating. The main point is that nanotechnolo-
gies are enablers. Although the nanotechnology may be identi-
cal, the applications may vary widely.
To be consistent, I will define a product to be nanotechnology 
if it is man- made and physically fits one of the following criteria:
Has at least one nanoscale dimension, 1– 100 nanometers, or
Is constructed atom by atom or nanoscale layer by layer
Under this definition some sunscreens would be nanotechnology 
products, since they are man- made and contain nanoparticles. 
However, the abalone shell would not be a nanotechnology prod-
uct, since Mother Nature makes it, even though it is constructed 
layer by layer, with each layer being 50 to 200 nanometers thick.
Another important concept to understand is the revolution-
ary nature of nanotechnology. Such products offer new prop-
erties related to the size of the nanostructures they contain. 
Reducing the size of a material can change its properties. For 
example, when I began my career in integrated circuit devel-

i come in peace 
31
opment and manufacture, device dimensions were in microns 
(a unit of length equal to one- millionth of a meter). At those 
dimensions, we did not find quantum mechanical effects, but 
we still encountered difficulties related to size, such as electro-
migration. Electromigration is the movement of metal ions in a 
conductor due to the momentum transfer between conducting 
electrons and the metal atoms. The electron current acted like 
a river that pushed the metal atoms downstream to the point 
where a gap appeared in the metal conductor. This resulted in 
open circuit failures. Electricians wiring a house, using large 
copper wires, do not experience this phenomenon. It surfaced 
in integrated circuits because the interconnecting metallurgy 
was in the micron range. Its emergence was unexpected. While 
I was employed by ibm, we worked day and night to develop a 
new interconnection metallurgy that was resistant to electro-
migration. I relate this to point out that new technology often 
presents new challenges related to size. Nanotechnology pres-
ents numerous and exceptional new challenges related to size, 
including quantum mechanical effects and surface area effects. 
In general, the surface area to volume of nanoscale structures 
has pronounced effects on how the nanoscale structures physi-
cally interact with their environment. Because of the nanoscale 
surface area and quantum mechanical effects, it is fair to assert 
that nanoscale structures exhibit revolutionary properties. In 
fact, many consider nanotechnology to be ushering in the sixth 
technology revolution.
Let’s start our classification of products with some generalities. 
From approximately 2000 through 2004, nanotechnology prod-
ucts relied on the nanoscale properties of materials. These first- 
generation products incorporate passive nanostructures. Examples 
include coatings, nanostructures, and nanoparticles. In 2005 
we began to see the emergence of active nanostructures. Exam-
ples include three- dimensional transistors and associated elec-
tronic circuits. By 2010 nanosystems began to emerge. Examples 
include Zettl’s machines, like the nanoradio and the nanoelectro-

32 
i come in peace
mechanical systems. From 2015 through 2025, we expect to see 
the emergence of molecular nanosystems, where each individual 
molecule, with a specific structure, plays a specific role similar 
to a biological system. Applications for molecular nanosystems 
include nanoscale genetic therapies and cell aging therapies.
These product examples are not pipe dreams. Some estimates 
place the worldwide market for nanotechnology products at $1 tril-
lion in 2015. The same forecasters expect this to grow to $3 trillion 
in 2020. If it continues to grow at the present rate, I estimate the 
worldwide market for nanotechnology products will be $6 trillion 
in 2025. An estimate of the worldwide economy in 2020 is $90 
trillion, which suggests nanotechnology products will account 
for almost 7 percent of the worldwide economy. This excludes 
nanoweapons as products, which would obviously increase the 
worldwide market for nanotechnology products. One word of 
caution regarding these forecasts: there are differences of opin-
ion. However, almost all agree that nanotechnology- based prod-
ucts are becoming mainstream and a noticeable portion of the 
gross domestic product of the larger players, such as the United 
States and Japan. Given the stakes, economically and militarily, 
it is no surprise that the number of worldwide nanotechnology 
patent applications grew 34.5 percent between 2000 (1,197) and 
2008 (12,776).
In the first three categories (consumer, industrial, medical), I 
list nanotechnology products that are typical of the category. The 
list is not inclusive of all products. New nanotechnology products 
are hitting the market weekly, making it impossible to create a 
comprehensive list. I will introduce the category of “military” in 
this chapter and discuss it fully in the next.
1. Consumer Nanotechnology Products
In 2005 the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars 
and the Project on Emerging Nanotechnologies established the 
Nanotechnology Consumer Products Inventory. The cpi is not 
comprehensive, since new nanotechnology consumer products 

i come in peace 
33
appear weekly. It does, however, list over 1,800 nanotechnology- 
based consumer products, along with the company that produces 
the product. The CPI has eight major categories: Appliances, 
Automotive, Cross Cutting, Electronics and Computers, Food 
and Beverage, Goods for Children, Health and Fitness, Home 
and Garden, it also lists the country of origin, the product’s nano-
material, and “How much we know.” Often the cpi will omit 
information when the information is unknown. For example, 
they may omit the product’s nanomaterial. Each product they 
list includes a link to a page with more information. The cpi was 
updated in 2013, based on the work of research team Marina E. 
Vance, Todd Kuiken, Eric P. Vejerano, Sean P. McGinnis, Michael 
F. Hochella Jr., David Rejeski, and Matthew S. Hull, which inter-
viewed sixty- eight nanotechnology experts. After revising the cpi 
in 2013, the research team published an article in 2015, “Nano-
technology in the Real World: Redeveloping the Nanomaterial 
Consumer Products Inventory.” I will briefly summarize the 
results of their work:
cpi was updated to include 1,814 consumer products from 622 
companies in 32 countries.
The Health and Fitness category contains the most products 
(762, or 42 percent of the total).
Silver is the most frequently used nanomaterial (435 products, 
or 24 percent).
A full 49 percent of the products (889) included in the cpi do 
not provide the composition of the nanomaterial used in them.
About 29 percent of the cpi (528 products) contain nanoma-
terials suspended in a variety of liquid media and dermal con-
tact is the most likely exposure scenario from their use.
The majority (1,288 products, or 71 percent) of the products 
do not present enough supporting information to corroborate 
the claim that nanomaterials are used.

34 
i come in peace
Let us examine a sample of products that are likely to influ-
ence how you work and play. For example, if you peruse the 
category Health and Fitness, you will find a number of subcate-
gories. Among them is sporting goods. In this subcategory are 
131 nanotechnology- based products, including golf clubs, golf 
balls, skis, snowboards, bowling balls, tennis rackets, badmin-
ton rackets, bicycles, and even swimsuits. Manufacturers of such 
products claim the products are significantly better than a compet-
itor’s product. Typical claims range from “stronger” to “lighter” 
and everything in between. The list of sporting goods products 
makes it likely that many sport enthusiasts use nanotechnology- 
based products. I suspect few know that nanotechnology enables 
their products.
Another category that finds high usage among consumers is 
Electronics and Computers. For example, if you recently pur-
chased a new computer with an Intel® Core™ M processor, you 
are using nanotechnology. Intel states on their website:
Thin, light, quiet, and versatile. The new 6th Generation Intel® 
Core™ processors built on 14 nm manufacturing process technology 
deliver great mobile performance, blazing- fast responsiveness, and 
amazing battery life. This feature- packed processor with built- in secu-
rity is ready to take your productivity, creativity, and entertainment to 
the next level. And, by enabling the exciting Windows® 10 features, 
6th Generation Intel® Core™ m3/m5/m7 processors empower you 
to unleash your imagination and explore the possibilities.
Although we should take manufactures’ sales collateral with the 
proverbial grain of salt, I judge that many of the properties claimed 
by the manufacturers of nanotechnology- based products have a 
strong element of truth associated with them. Nanotechnology is 
a game changer, and it is likely that some manufacturers based 
their claims on empirical data.
The most popular category is Health and Fitness, accounting 
for half of all nanotechnology- based products. The Health and 
Fitness subcategory of cosmetics appears extremely popular and 

i come in peace 
35
includes sunscreens, skin moisturizers, antiwrinkle products, 
hair care, and skin cleansers.
Currently manufacturers are not required to disclose that their 
products are based on nanotechnology. For example, did you know 
that some plastic beer bottles use clay nanoparticles to keep oxygen 
out and the carbon dioxide in, which keeps the beer from spoil-
ing? In addition, some manufacturers will use the word “nano” 
improperly. For example, Beretta, the world’s oldest gun manu-
facturer, labels its smallest automatic pistol as nano.
One thing is certain, the world around you has an abundance 
of consumer nanotechnology- based products, and the number is 
growing daily. You may be wearing nanotechnology- based socks, 
playing golf with nanotechnology- based golf clubs, while using a 
nanotechnology- based sunscreen to protect your skin from sun-
burn. At this point, that may seem fine, even desirable. However, 
large concerns are looming. Some nanotechnology- based prod-
ucts may be toxic. The reason is that many contain nanoparti-
cles, including carbon nanotubes, nanosilver, nanometal oxides, 
and carbon fullerenes.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Food and 
Drug Administration are beginning to grapple with the issue, 
debating whether nanotechnology- based products merit special 
government regulation. In Europe, the Health and Consumer Pro-
tection Directorate is following suit. I mentioned earlier that there 
is no regulation on nanotechnology- based products or nanopar-
ticles. It is fair to raise the question, If our bodies can absorb the 
product’s nanomaterial, as is the case with cosmetics, should it 
be classified as a drug and regulated accordingly?
The environmental impact and the potential hazard that 
nanoparticles pose to living organisms is mostly unknown. We 
do know that the National Nanotechnology Initiative (nni) fund-
ing for risk research between 2000 and 2010 was only 4 percent 
of the total nni budget. The 2016 nni budget proposes that 7 
percent be focused on Environment, Health, and Safety (ehs). 
We will also see in the next chapter that nanoparticles play an 

36 
i come in peace
important role in nanoweapons. This suggests that more research 
regarding the potential hazard they pose in consumer products 
warrants attention.
2. Industrial Nanotechnology Products
Our primary focus in this section will be the use of nanotechnol-
ogy in construction and manufacturing.
Construction is already benefiting from the use of nanotech-
nology in the fields of concrete and steel. Concrete and steel form 
the foundation of modern society from single- family dwellings 
to the largest urban skyscrapers.
The use of concrete- like materials dates back to 6500 bc by the 
Nabataea traders or Bedouins in the regions of southern Syria and 
northern Jordan. The ancient Greeks used concrete- like materi-
als in the period 1400 to 1200 bc. The ancient Romans used con-
crete extensively from 300 bc to 476 ad, including concrete that 
would set underwater. There is wide agreement that concrete is 
the most ubiquitous material in the world.
Nanotechnology is finding wide application to improve con-
crete. For example, carbon nanotubes (cnts) are commonly used 
to strengthen concrete. Adding titanium dioxide nanoparticles to 
concrete enables it to break down dirt and pollution, which allows 
it to wash off with rainwater. This makes buildings self- cleaning, 
significantly reducing maintenance costs.
Steel has been used in construction since the 1870s. How-
ever, steel can suffer fatigue, a structural failure that can shorten 
the useful life of structures, especially bridges. The fatigue issue 
requires limiting the allowable stresses and implementing fre-
quent inspections. But this does not eliminate the issue. In fact, 
according to a forecast by Utah State University graduate stu-
dent Wesley Cook, “Based on the data extrapolation and 95 per-
cent confidence interval, the estimated average annual bridge 
collapse rate in the United States is between 87 and 222 with an 
expected value of 128.” In Minnesota, not far from my home, the 
Interstate Highway 35w Bridge in Minneapolis collapsed without 

i come in peace 
37
warning on August 1, 2007. For me, this was a shocking revela-
tion, not another statistic. It collapsed during the evening rush 
hour, killing 13 people and injuring 145 others. Although bridges 
collapse at about the rate of one every three days in the United 
States, this bridge was within a short driving distance of my home 
and used by family, friends, and employees. Although this col-
lapse was due to a design flaw, according to the National Trans-
portation Safety Board, some consultants suspect that steel metal 
fatigue also played a role.
According to structural engineer Surinder Mann, “Stress ris-
ers are responsible for initiating cracks from which fatigue fail-
ure results and research has shown that the addition of copper 
nanoparticles reduces the surface unevenness of steel which then 
limits the number of stress risers and hence fatigue cracking.” In 
general, there are two ways to improve the strength and fatigue 
resistance of steel.
1. Eliminate defects by reducing the size of each crystal, within 
the bulk material, to the point that there is literally no room 
for defects
2. Introduce a large density of defects that act as an obstacle to 
block the motion of dislocations.
To achieve these desirable properties, the steel industry is turn-
ing to nanotechnology. The addition of various nanoparticles, 
such as copper, carbon nanotubes, vanadium, molybdenum, 
magnesium, and calcium, is making steel stronger and fatigue- 
resistant. The challenge is to manufacture large components 
of bulk nanotechnology- enhanced steel at a reasonable cost. To 
date, the steel industry has developed over a dozen processing 
strategies, and companies in the United States, Japan, and else-
where are filing patents to protect their developments. Applica-
tions in construction are numerous, ranging from steel cables 
to bolts. Especially interesting are the nanotechnology coatings 
in development to enhance both the strength and corrosion 

38 
i come in peace
resistance of steel. In 2015 mit Technology Review reported, 
“An inexpensive new process can increase the strength of met-
als such as steel by as much as 10 times and make them much 
more resistant to corrosion.” The new nanocoating is the result 
of “an advanced form of electroplating” that offers “precise con-
trol over the structure of metals.” It is evident that the use of 
nanotechnology in concrete and steel offers the potential to rev-
olutionize construction.
Let us now discuss the use of nanotechnology in manufactur-
ing. All nanomanufacturing relies on top- down or bottom- up 
approaches. Within those approaches, many new methodolo-
gies are enabling nanomanufacturing. According to nni, exam-
ples include:
Chemical vapor deposition— a chemical reaction that produces 
pure, high- performance films.
Molecular beam epitaxy— a method for depositing precise thin 
films.
Atomic layer epitaxy— a method that deposits one- atom- thick 
layers on a surface.
Nanoimprint lithography— in this process nanoscale features 
result by “stamping” or “printing” them onto a surface.
Roll- to- roll processing— a high- volume process that produces 
nanoscale devices on a roll of ultrathin metal or plastic.
Self- assembly— a process in which components come together 
to form an ordered structure on their own.
Let me give you an example of top- down nanomanufacturing 
from personal experience. During my career in the integrated cir-
cuit industry, we manufactured integrated circuits with submi-
cron geometries, approaching the nanoscale using electron beam 
lithography. In essence, we would first deposit a thin electron- 
sensitive resist material on a silicon integrated circuit substrate, 
which is the structure that embodies the individual silicon chips 

i come in peace 
39
before they are diced (cut apart). We then would expose the resist 
by scanning an electron beam in a desired pattern across a resist- 
coated substrate. The equipment to do this is commercially avail-
able. This is similar to photolithography but uses electrons instead 
of photons. It also eliminates the need for a conventional photo-
mask. The electron beam lithography is a direct write method-
ology, meaning the electron pattern was computer- controlled to 
result in the desired device feature. The elimination of a photo-
mask removes one process step, which offers the potential to lower 
costs and eliminate defects. Electron beam lithography enables 
nanotechnology manufacturing because electrons are extremely 
small elementary particles with a negative charge. Their negative 
charge allows direct write control. The size of electrons enables 
nanoscale features. Regarding the size of electrons, if you com-
pare the hydrogen atom nucleus to a baseball stadium, an elec-
tron would be about the size of a bee circling the stadium. Today 
electron beam lithography is in wide use to create features as 
small as 10 nanometers.
The example above demonstrates nanomanufacturing of inte-
grated circuit devices. Three important benefits result from shrink-
ing integrated circuit devices into the nanoscale. First, nanoscale 
devices are faster and use less power. Second, they enable the 
manufacturer to increase the number of integrated circuits that a 
given substrate holds, which reduces manufacturing cost. Lastly, 
new properties, only present at the nanoscale, enable increased 
integrated circuit functionality.
Integrated circuits incorporating nanoscale devices enable 
numerous applications. For example, many within the nanotechnol-
ogy community agree that the nanoweapon laser shown in figure 1 
is only possible via nanoscale components. The U.S. government 
is not going to comment on its construction. There is no mention 
of it on the nni website, which appears intentional. In general, 
the nni website provides little information on the use of nano-
technology in warfare. After searching the nni website, I found 
several articles focused on soliciting basic research projects that 

40 
i come in peace
support the Defense Threat Reduction Agency mission to safe-
guard America and its allies from weapons of mass destruction.
According to nni, “nni agencies are investing heavily in nano-
manufacturing r&d and infrastructure. Over 90 nni- funded cen-
ters and user facilities across the country provide researchers with 
the facilities, equipment, and trained staff to develop nanotechnol-
ogy applications and associated manufacturing processes.” nni 
takes great pride in its role relating to the development of nan-
otechnology products and manufacturing. It devotes an entire 
section on the website to benefits and applications, and the list 
is impressive. However, it does not mention a single military or 
weapon application. Almost certainly, the DoD held a confer-
ence similar to the 2012 International Symposium on Assess-
ing the Economic Impact of Nanotechnology to discuss military 
nanotechnology research, nanomanufacturing, and nanoweapon 
applications. However, that conference only included defense con-
tractors engaged in nanoweapons research, manufacturing, and 
applications, along with associated DoD leaders. I attended sim-
ilar conferences regarding Honeywell’s work on DoD programs. 
Those conferences were secret, and their proceedings were with-
held from the public.
3. Medical Nanotechnology
The medical application of nanotechnology in medicine is termed 
“nanomedicine.” According to the editor in chief of the Journal 
of Human Reproductive Sciences, Mallanagouda Patil, nanomedi-
cine is “the science and technology of diagnosing, treating, and 
preventing disease and traumatic injury, of relieving pain, and of 
preserving and improving human health, using nanoscale struc-
tured materials, biotechnology, and genetic engineering, and even-
tually complex machine systems and nanorobots.”
Current applications in nanomedicine include nanomaterials, 
biological devices, and nanoelectronic biosensors. Future appli-
cations are likely to include biological machines and nanorobot-
ics. One of the most important problems that nanomedicine is 

i come in peace 
41
addressing is the toxicity and environmental impact of nanoscale 
materials, especially nanoparticles. Unfortunately, man- made 
pollution produces nanoparticles, and some nanoparticles pose 
a health hazard.
Nanomaterials are particularly useful in nanomedicine, since 
their size is in the same range as biological molecules. Nano-
technologists are working to bond nanomaterials with biologi-
cal molecules to construct “drug carriers.” This is leading to an 
entirely new class of nanomedicines, “smart drugs.” Smart drugs 
are analogous to smart bombs. Experts at the European Medicines 
Agency assert, “The majority of current commercial applications 
of nanotechnology to medicine are geared towards drug delivery 
to enable new modes of action, as well as better targeting and bio-
availability of existing medicinal substances. Novel applications of 
nanotechnology include nanostructure scaffolds for tissue replace-
ment, nanostructures that allow transport across biological barri-
ers, remote control of nanoprobes, integrated implantable sensory 
nanoelectronic systems, and multifunctional chemical structures 
for drug delivery and targeting of disease.”
Many bacteria and viruses are nanoscale in size. It is logical 
to use nanoscale treatments, nanomedicine, to fight bacteria and 
viruses on their own level. The ancient Greeks used silver to pro-
mote healing of wounds. Today physicians use bandages impreg-
nated with silver nanoparticles to treat burn victims. The silver 
nanoparticles are more active than the bulk material due to their 
increased surface to volume ratio and their ability to easily pene-
trate the skin. In addition, unlike antibiotics, bacteria and viruses 
appear unable to build a resistance to silver nanoparticles. As a 
result, burn victims heal faster, and their bandages do not require 
frequent and painful changes.
One of the most exciting uses of nanomedicine is in diagnos-
ing and treating cancer. Researchers Edward Kai- Hua Chow and 
Dean Ho published a 2013 paper in Science Translational Medicine 
on the efficacy of using nanomedicine: “Nanotechnology- based 
chemotherapeutics and imaging agents represent a new era of 

42 
i come in peace
‘cancer nanomedicine’ working to deliver versatile payloads with 
favorable pharmacokinetics and capitalize on molecular and cel-
lular targeting for enhanced specificity, efficacy, and safety.”
There are numerous other areas of nanomedicine, including 
tissue engineering and nanosurgery. Nanomedicine is moving 
into the mainstream. According to the Kidlington Centre, the 
nanomedicine “market is on a steady growth, and with a com-
pound annual growth rate (cagr) of 12.5 percent from 2011, the 
market size will reach to $130.9 billion by 2016.”
Closely related to nanomedicine is nanoelectronics in medi-
cine. Conventional electronics, including integrated circuits, find 
ubiquitous use in medical monitoring of vital signals, pacemak-
ers, drug delivery, and limb stimulation. Nanoelectronics will 
accelerate implanted electronics to facilitate both diagnostics and 
treatment of numerous illnesses, with cancer heading the list.
There is an immense body of literature discussing nanomedi-
cine. The focus of this section is to raise the awareness of the use 
of nanotechnology in medicine. However, let us address the most 
important question, What long- term benefits should we expect 
from nanomedicine?
According to Robert A. Freitas Jr., a senior research fellow at 
the Institute for Molecular Manufacturing in Palo Alto, California, 
“The ultimate goal of nanomedicine is to perform nanorobotic 
therapeutic procedures on specified individual cells comprising 
the human body.” Freitas reasons, “Most human diseases involve 
a molecular malfunction at the cellular level.” He envisions using 
nanobots about the size of blood cells that would traverse the 
human body using its vascular system to treat individual cells via 
genetic therapy by removing the damaged genetic material from 
the cell and inserting newly manufactured genetic material that 
would restore normal cell function. Freitas’s paper is “the first 
theoretical scaling analysis and mission design for a cell repair 
nanorobot.” To some, Freitas’s vision may come off as science 
fantasy. In my opinion, it is not. I see it as a futurist’s perspective 
on how nanomedicine may evolve to treat disease at the cellular 

i come in peace 
43
level. Given the enormous strides in nanotechnology in just the 
past decade, I judge we may soon see Freitas- type nonorobots, 
which he calls “chromallocytes,” emerge.
4. Military
Sections 1– 3 make a strong case that the consumer, industrial, 
and medical uses of nanotechnology are becoming ubiquitous, 
as governments and companies take advantage of nanotechnol-
ogy’s unique properties. It is also apparent that nanotechnology 
has the potential to enable a quantum leap toward a brighter 
future for humanity, from curing inoperable cancer to providing 
ultra- fast nanoelectronic computers. However, nanotechnologies 
and nanomanufacturing also embody the potential for disaster, 
including human extinction. Technology is ethically neutral, but 
applications give rise to ethical issues. For example, the same 
nanotechnology that finds application in making concrete stron-
ger, thus enabling taller skyscrapers, can also find application in 
weapons, like military bunkers. Indeed, in the next chapter, we 
will see that many consumer, industrial, and medical applications 
can form the basis of nanoweapons.
Our history as a species gives testimony to two indisputable 
facts. First, we engage in wars. Wars have plagued humanity since 
ancient times. Second, each war gives rise to weapons with greater 
destructive capability. At the end of World War II, we entered the 
nuclear age. Nuclear weapons were our first weapons of mass 
destruction. Even today, there are sufficient nuclear weapons to 
wipe out humanity twice over. We have not used nuclear weap-
ons in any conflict since 1945. The reason for their lack of use 
does not stem from some well- thought- out ethical foundation. 
It is based on the doctrine of mutually assured destruction. This 
has kept the use of nuclear weapons at bay. It is simple survival. 
If we use nuclear weapons, our adversary will also use nuclear 
weapons. In effect, we ensure our mutual destruction.
Similar thinking went into banning the use of biological weap-
ons. In a 1969 press conference, President Richard Nixon stated, 

44 
i come in peace
“Biological weapons have massive, unpredictable, and potentially 
uncontrollable consequences.” He added, “They may produce 
global epidemics and impair the health of future generations.” In 
1972 Nixon submitted the Biological Weapons Convention to the 
Senate. By laying this groundwork, the Prohibition of the Devel-
opment, Production, and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biologi-
cal) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction proceeded to 
become a multilateral disarmament treaty in 1975.
In my view, the year 2000 marked our entry into the nano-
technology age. Nanoweapons, similar to nuclear and biological 
weapons, have the potential to render humanity extinct. Will we 
recognize the danger that nanoweapons pose to the survival of 
humanity prior to using them in armed conflict, or will it require 
equivalent Hiroshima and Nagasaki events to make their mas-
sive destructive power visible?

4
The Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing
If we continue to develop our technology without wisdom or prudence, 
our servant may prove to be our executioner.
— gen. omar n. bradley
This chapter discusses how nanotechnology in consumer, 
industrial, and medical applications can be transformed into 
nanoweapons. For example, the same nanoscale laser that may 
find nanosurgical applications to remove a cancerous tumor cells 
can form the basis of a mini- nuke nanoweapon. It also discusses 
nanoweapons specific to military applications that have no com-
mercial counterpart.
To bring order to our discussion, I have developed five categories.
1. Nanoweapons pervasive in all branches of the U.S.  
military
2. U.S. Navy nanoweapons
3. U.S. Army nanoweapons
4. U.S. Air Force nanoweapons
5. Nanoweapon thrusts of other nations
My research indicates that the United States leads in nanoweap-
ons, but the full scope of that lead is closely guarded. It is likely 
that all nanoweapons are classified above Top Secret, with the 
“need to know” rule rigorously enforced. My point is that it is 
possible that no one in the entire United States knows the full 

46 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
details about nanoweapons in all categories, including the pres-
ident of the United States.
With the above understanding, let us begin.
1. Nanoweapons Pervasive in All Branches of the U.S. Military
In 2009 the DoD published its “Defense Nanotechnology Research 
and Development Program.” The report asserts,
The DoD nanotechnology program is based on coordinated planning 
and federated execution among the military departments and agen-
cies (components) (e.g., the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency [darpa] and the Defense Threat Reduction Agency [dtra]). 
Nanotechnology currently represents a scientifically and technolog-
ically advanced research theme that has proven and expected value 
toward enhancing defense capabilities. This report was compiled by 
a team of personnel from all the DoD Components involved in nano-
technology research and technology and associated with the National 
Nanotechnology Initiative (nni). Detailed technical and program-
matic reviews of nanotechnology efforts were collected and collated 
to respond with current, planned, and expected projects and were 
augmented with studies to summarize global research efforts, tran-
sition progress, and industrial base status and requirements.
Although dated, this report provides important historical insight 
into the DoD’s nanoweapons research and development. Much 
of what is contained in this chapter result from that report. In 
places where the report does not sufficiently address nanoweap-
ons, we will use a wide spectrum of other literature to paint a 
complete picture.
Without doubt, the number one pervasive nanoweapons are 
nanoelectronic integrated circuits. All branches of the U.S. mili-
tary, as well as government agencies, use computers. As mentioned 
earlier, Intel’s recent generation of processors employ nanotech-
nology. Therefore, as the U.S. military and specific government 
agencies procure new computers, they are deploying nanoweap-
ons. This is an obvious nanoweapons application, but worth not-

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
47
ing as indicative of commercial technology finding nanoweapon 
applications. Less obvious is the use of radiation- hardened nano-
electronic integrated circuits. These find wide application in any 
electronic systems likely to encounter the high levels of radiation, 
such as during a nuclear detonation. Weapon systems include 
missiles, surveillance satellites, communication satellites, and 
nuclear weapons, to name a few. In general, radiation- hardened 
integrated circuit development and manufacturing is similar to 
commercial integrated circuit development and manufacturing, 
differing in two ways, process and design.
The first and most important is process. Radiation- hardened 
integrated circuits processing employs insulating substrates, such 
as silicon on insulator (soi), instead of the usual silicon sub-
strates. This prevents the ionizing radiation from causing cur-
rent leakage to the substrate. Commercial integrated circuits can 
withstand between 50 and 100 “gray,” where a gray is the absorp-
tion of one joule of radiation energy per one kilogram of matter. 
A radiation- hardened integrated circuit on soi can withstand at 
least ten times that amount and, with proper design, even more. 
The design of radiation- hardened integrated circuits is signifi-
cantly different from that of their commercial counterparts and 
depends on the circuit’s application. The actual design methods 
are classified.
The second pervasive nanoweapons are nanoparticles. These 
are finding applications in nanomedicine, nano coatings, nano- 
enhanced materials, and nanotechnology- based explosives. In the 
last chapter, we discussed the use of nanoparticles in nanomed-
icine. Every branch of the military is making use of nanomedi-
cine as it becomes available. Nano coatings are finding widespread 
application, especially in the U.S. Navy. Nano- enhanced materi-
als, such as nanoengineered metals, brings new meaning to the 
phrase “stronger than steel.” Nanotechnology- based explosives will 
eventually replace conventional explosives due to the increase in 
their destructive force. For example, the DoD is using nanoalu-
minum to create ultrahigh burn rate chemical explosives, with a 

48 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
ten times greater explosive punch than conventional explosives. 
This enables smaller payloads, about a tenth of the amount, with 
an equal or greater destructive power. Imagine, for example, a 
mortar projectile that is capable of taking out a fortified enemy 
command installation.
The third pervasive nanoweapons are nanosensors. The mili-
tary uses numerous sensors in every branch. Nanosensors offer 
unparalleled opportunities to interact (i.e., sense) at the molecu-
lar level. This makes them extremely effective as biosensors and 
chemical sensors, where the requirement is to detect low concen-
trations with high specificity. Nanobiosensors and nanochemical 
sensors offer significant potential in the detection of explosives, 
biological warfare agents, and chemicals. The realities of modern 
warfare are driving the DoD to develop “lab- on- a- chip” devices 
(i.e., integrated circuits that incorporate sensors). The goal is to 
manufacture reliable, inexpensive devices with technology simi-
lar to integrated circuits. The low cost, weight, and size efficiency 
of nanosensors make them especially attractive. Ideally, each sol-
dier could carry with them a lab- on- a- chip that monitors their 
health and environment. Is this a nanotechnology pipe dream? 
Not according to a 2007 mit Technology Review article, “Nano-
sensors in Space,” by Brittany Sause:
nasa scientists built the nanosensors by coating carbon nanotubes 
with different polymers that react with various chemicals, or by doping 
the carbon nanotubes and nanowires with different catalytic metal par-
ticles that act as the sensing material. There are 32 sensing channels 
on a chip; depending on the chemical to be detected, various nano-
structure materials, carbon nanotubes, or metal- oxide nanowires— 
coated or uncoated— are put in each channel. When a small amount 
of the targeted chemical touches the sensing materials, it triggers a 
reaction that causes the electric current flowing through the sensor 
to increase or decrease. The different responses will form a pattern, 
which the sensor can use to identify a gas.
The entire sensor package is about 5.1 by 6.4 by 2.5 centimeters. 

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
49
(Note: 2.5 centimeters is approximately equal to one inch.) In addi-
tion, it is wireless and can transmit sensor data electronically. The 
technology can be tuned to detect various agents by changing the 
nanostructures in the various channels. Given that the mit arti-
cle is in the public domain suggests even more advanced nano-
sensors are under development.
The fourth and final pervasive nanoweapons are nanorobot-
ics. Today’s military makes use of robotics in every aspect of war-
fare, from surveillance to offensive operations. Nanorobotics will 
extend the use of robotics to a wider range of critical applications.
Please note that pervasive nanoweapons have a strong tie to 
similar nanotechnologies used in consumer, industrial, and medi-
cal applications. This is an important point. Nanotechnologies are 
enablers. The specific application dictates the category. If nanopar-
ticle enhanced steel is a structural element in a building, we view 
it as an industrial application. If the same steel finds application 
in tank armor, we view it as a military application.
Other nanoweapons are not as pervasive as nanoelectronics, 
nanoparticles, nanosensors, and nanorobotics. Therefore, we will 
cover them in the context of the military branches.
One point deserves mention in this section. Governments, 
working with the private sector, generally find it easier and less 
costly to construct a nanoweapons manufacturing facility versus a 
nuclear weapons facility. For example, the equipment used by radi-
ation hardened integrated circuit manufacturers, like Honeywell, 
is commercially available. Although the integrated circuit compa-
nies using nanolithography must still invest in process technology 
to optimize the manufacture of nanoscale features, their starting 
point is commercially available equipment and process materials. 
Another example is the manufacture of nanoparticles, which play 
an important role in consumer and industrial products, as well as 
nanoweapons. In 2014 the University of Massachusetts Amherst 
announced “a breakthrough technique for creating water- soluble 
nano- modules and controlling molecular assembly of nanoparti-
cles over multiple length scales.” They state that their new technol-

50 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
ogy will reduce the time that nanotechnology companies spend to 
develop nanoscale materials using traditional methods. In many 
cases, it is possible to establish nanoweapons manufacturing in 
a relatively small facility, like a small office building, compared 
to a nuclear weapons manufacturing facility, and at a fraction 
of the cost. In addition, detection of nanoweapons manufacture 
is extremely difficult compared with detection of nuclear weap-
ons manufacture, which gives off a telltale radioactive signature. 
Lastly, international treaties do not regulate nanoweapons. They 
do regulate nuclear weapons.
Before we proceed to the next section, let me add perspective. 
This chapter represents a snapshot in time. With the passage of 
time, other nanoweapons may become pervasive. Like all mili-
tary systems, nanoweapons will evolve as nanotechnology evolves. 
Specific nanoweapons may become obsolete with new nanoweap-
ons taking their place. Entirely new nanoweapons may emerge as 
nanotechnology advances. In short, we should view any discus-
sion regarding nanoweapons as dynamic, subject to change as 
nanotechnology and threat assessments evolve. With this under-
standing, let us continue.
2. U.S. Navy Nanoweapons
The U.S. Navy is using a wide spectrum of nanoweapons. In fact, 
the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory includes the Institute for 
Nanoscience. According to their website, “The Institute exploits 
the broad multidisciplinary character of the Naval Research Lab-
oratory in order to bring together scientists with disparate train-
ing and backgrounds to attack common goals at the intersection 
of their respective fields at this length scale. The objective of the 
Institute’s programs is to provide the Navy and the DoD with sci-
entific leadership in this complex, emerging area and to identify 
opportunities for advances in future Defense technology.”
The 2009 DoD report, “Defense Nanotechnology Research and 
Development Program,” details the U.S. Navy’s significant nan-

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
51
otechnology research and development (r&d). Here are the key 
r&d goals and challenges quoted from the report:
Fundamental Phenomena and Processes— Understand novel 
phenomena that are manifested at the nanometer length scale: 
plasmonic and coupled plasmonic/photonic behavior; phonon/
electron transport; nanoscale chemical signaling; dna- guided 
patterning for sub 10- nm accuracy and electron spin physics, 
including quantum coherent phenomena
Materials— Control the physical and chemical properties of 
nanoscale carbon materials and doped nanowires for electron 
devices, sensors, and solid- state energy conversion
Devices and Systems— Construct novel electron devices and 
associated circuits that are intrinsically advantageous to field- 
effect transistors
Manufacturing
Develop bio- enabled fabrication of electronics that bridges 
top- down and bottom- up approaches to achieve better than 
10- nm spatial resolution
Develop electrochemical techniques for patterning metals 
to produce nanoscale features for antennas, sensors, meta- 
materials, and catalysts
Research Facilities and Instrumentation— Provide instrumen-
tation to support research in the areas of spintronics, nanotube 
sorting, and three- dimensional (3- d) fabrication via the Defense 
University Research Instrumentation Program
Education and Societal Dimensions— The programs within the 
Navy nanoscience research area directly support approximately 
150 graduate students and 75 postdoctoral students
The depth and breadth of the Navy’s research and development 
of nanotechnology are formidable. As is evident, many of the 
thrusts are fundamental research. This is intentional. Accord-

52 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
ing to the DoD report, “Nanotechnology must still be consid-
ered to be in its technological and engineering infancy. Some 
significant applications have been noted, but these applications 
are viewed as just the beginning of an age of practical products 
based on nanomaterials and nanoprocesses. The engagement of 
DoD in nanotechnology research will continue to be important 
in ensuring the optimum direction of ongoing research efforts 
and the optimum leveraging of this knowledge to advance war-
fighter and defense- related systems capabilities.” In effect, the 
DoD is acknowledging that it is too early to determine which 
nanotechnologies will be required for the next generation of 
nanoweapons.
Having surveyed the Navy’s r&d, let us explore some of the 
Navy’s nanoweapon applications. In chapter 1, we discussed the 
Navy’s deployment of a laser nanoweapon on the uss Ponce in 
2013. While this is a good example, let us survey some of the 
other nanoweapons the Navy is pursuing. In 2015 the Office of 
Naval Research published the “Naval Science & Technology Strat-
egy.” It mentions “nano” eight times, including “nanotechnol-
ogy,” “nanoscale materials,” “coatings at the nano- meter,” “nano 
electronics,” “nanometer scale electronic devices and sensors,” 
and “Naval Research Laboratory’s Institute for Nanoscience.” The 
report indicates that the fields of materials, electronics, and biol-
ogy are of particularly high interest to the Navy.
Since 2002 the Navy has been applying nanotechnology in 
ship fabrication and maintenance. One of the biggest challenges 
the Navy faces is corrosion. The Navy uses various metals to 
construct ships. As a simple high school science project demon-
strates, if you put two different metals in a jar filled with saltwa-
ter, you create a battery. From the Navy’s viewpoint, the battery 
effect is undesirable, since it accelerates corrosion. To combat 
this issue, the Navy is using nanoceramic coatings, which pro-
vide all the protective features of conventional ceramics, but 
adhere to surfaces better and are far less brittle, to the point 
they can deform along with whatever it covers. This is critical 

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
53
in a battle scenario. For example, when a submarine is under 
depth charge attack, the hull will undergo significant deforma-
tion stresses. The nanoceramic coatings are able to flex and 
continue to adhere during the stresses. In fact, the first naval 
application using nanoceramic was on a submarine hatch made 
of a titanium plate bolted to the steel frame. The purpose of 
the hatch was to open underwater and allow the deployment of 
sensors and other electronics. The nanoceramic coating solved 
the battery issue, known as a galvanic reaction, and proved an 
extremely durable coating. Other Navy applications for nano-
ceramic coatings are to reduce friction between components, 
such as reducing the friction of ball valves that regulate water 
flow in submarines.
This is a good place to emphasize an important point. Nanoweap-
ons are any military technology that exploits the use of nanotech-
nology. Thus even a naval ship coating can be a nanoweapon. 
Another serious problem the Navy faces is marine growth on the 
outer hulls of their ships. For example, barnacles can add over 
60 percent drag, which wastes fuel and diminishes speed. Barna-
cles, sea creatures related to crabs and lobsters, are able to attach 
themselves to any surface under any condition, and their natural 
cement rivals superglue. The Navy is continually evaluating mate-
rials to stop barnacles from attaching themselves to Navy ships. 
In 2009 the Office of Naval Research announced research into a 
promising new biofriendly coating, but they did not disclose the 
details. However, in 2014, X. Zhao et al. published an article that 
provides potential insight into the Navy’s new coating, “Studies 
on Nano- additive for the Substitution of Hazardous Chemical 
Substances in Antifouling Coatings for the Protection of Ship 
Hulls.” They state: “Based on the bactericidal capacity of cuprous 
oxide and photochemical effect of nano- additive, environment- 
friendly and efficient marine antifouling paints were prepared in 
this study.” It is conceivable that this nanotechnology- based coat-
ing is the basis of the Navy’s new coating.
Lastly, let us discuss power control systems. A Navy ship, such 

54 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
as an aircraft carrier, supplies power throughout the ship simi-
lar to how a power company supplies power to a city. It relies on 
copper cables, insulators, transformers, and other bulky equip-
ment. Unfortunately, this conventional approach results in sig-
nificant weight and power loss due to Joule heating. Joule heating 
results when a current passes through a conductor. The heat-
ing is the result of electrons colliding with atoms of the conduc-
tor and themselves. The collisions create heat, which results in 
energy loss. Here is a simple example. If you get a power surge, 
the rubber insulation of wires leading to electrical appliances 
may melt. This is due to Joule heating. The Navy is turning to 
nanotechnology to solve these problems. According to Nanow-
erk, “The Office of Naval Research has awarded University at 
Buffalo engineers an $800,000 grant to develop narrow strips 
of graphene called nanoribbons that may someday revolutionize 
how power is controlled in ships, smartphones and other elec-
tronic devices.” Graphene is a nanocarbon material that is thin, 
light, strong, and the best- known conductor of heat and elec-
tricity. Graphene can withstand extreme energy loads, approxi-
mately 1,000 times greater than copper. In addition, graphene 
can be grown, similar to growing a biological material. Finding 
an improved power control system is critical to the twenty- first 
century U.S. Navy, which appears to be driving toward electric 
propulsion systems. For example, the Navy recently launched its 
first stealth destroyer, the uss Zumwalt, and in 2015 began sea 
trials. In addition to being the Navy’s largest destroyer and hav-
ing a significantly reduced radar profile, about fifty times less 
than conventional destroyers, the uss Zumwalt boasts an inte-
grated power system, which is an all- electric system powered by 
gas turbines. This example underscores the criticality of having 
an improved power control system.
There are many more applications in development, from nanow-
ire gas sensors to nano- coated self- cleaning window glass. There 
are also, undoubtedly, nanoweapons buried even deeper below 
the cloak of secrecy.

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
55
3. U.S. Army Nanoweapons
In 2003 the U.S. Army established the Institute for Soldier Nano-
technologies (isn). Its goal is to enhance the soldiers’ protection 
and survivability, including “threat detection, threat neutralization, 
automated medical treatment, concealment, enhanced human 
performance, and reduced logistical footprints.” The isn lists five 
strategic research areas, delineated as sras. Under each sra, they 
list themes and projects. Because the isn’s list demonstrates the 
depth and breadth of the Army’s nanoweapon research, appendix 
1 lists the sras, themes, and projects verbatim from their website.
I recognize reading isn’s list may be daunting. Unfortunately, 
their use of technical terms and acronyms tend to hinder under-
standing. To enable insight, I have defined the technical terms and 
acronyms in the glossary. However, even using the isn’s list and 
this book’s glossary may still result in confusion. For this reason, 
I am going to present a simplified view. When most of us think 
about the Army, our minds conjure pictures of soldiers in bat-
tle gear, snipers, tanks, rifles, and artillery. That picture is likely 
to stay the same even when the isn’s nanoweapons are widely 
applied by the Army, but the effectiveness of every element in our 
picture is likely to increase dramatically. Here are enhancements 
the isn is likely to provide within the next decade:
1. Soldiers wear nanomaterial that feels like cloth but is imper-
vious to bullets, as well as biological and chemical agents.
2. Reduce the weight a solder carries in battle, often over sev-
enty pounds during the Afghanistan and Iraq wars, to less than 
fifty pounds without loss of capabilities.
3. Snipers become completely invisible under a nanomaterial 
invisibility cloak and fire smart bullets that make a one- mile 
kill routine.
4. Tank armor is a nanomaterial, stronger and lighter than con-
ventional steel, and the projectiles they fire have nano- enhanced 
explosives capable of leveling a large building

56 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
5. Army infantry lasers, mounted to conventional vehicles, are 
able to fire laser bursts of energy capable of destroying cruise 
missiles, artillery, rockets, and mortar rounds
6. Artillery fires “smart” projectiles with nano- enhanced explo-
sives capable of leveling a large enemy fortification or surgi-
cally assassinating a single enemy combatant
Everything you just read may sound like science fiction. How-
ever, it is not. To make this case, we will examine each point and 
the nanotechnology that enables it.
Let us start with wearable nanomaterial and the rationale for its 
use. The body armor that infantry soldiers wear on patrol in Iraq 
weighs at least thirty- three pounds. While this armor offers pro-
tection against enemy rifle bullets and, to a limited extent, impro-
vised explosive devices (ieds), it makes agile movement difficult. 
In response to this issue, the Army is seeking body armor with 
reduced weight that would allow normal agility. Nanomaterials 
appear to offer a solution.
In 2012 scientists at mit, supported by the U.S. Army Research 
Office, published a paper demonstrating the capability of a thin,  
light composite nanomaterial to stop bullets as effectively as 
heavyweight inch- thick body armor. However, the Army is con-
sidering numerous other solutions as well. They include pas-
sive nanomaterial, such as adding Si or TiO2 nanoparticles 
embedded in epoxy matrix, SiO2 nanoparticles in a liquid poly-
mer that hardens on ballistic impact, and carbon nanotubes, 
a material lighter than plastic and one hundred times stron-
ger than steel. In addition to passive nanomaterial, the Army 
is investigating smart nanomaterial, meaning the nanomate-
rial properties are controlled by sensors embedded in the sol-
dier’s armor. For example, if a body armor sensor detects an 
impact, it could trigger an electric pulse to iron nanoparticles 
in inert oil, which harden on electric pulse stimulation. It is 
also a near certainty that the next generation of body armor 
will include embedded sensors, capable of sensing impact, heat, 

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
57
chemical, and biological agents. In addition, it is likely the mil-
itary would also impregnate the body armor with nanomedi-
cal agents to offer immediate first aid, such as blood clotting 
and antibacterial agents.
In total, the weight of the U.S. soldier’s body armor and gear 
is over seventy pounds. As a result, soldiers are suffering muscu-
loskeletal injuries. In fact, one- third of medical evacuations from 
Iraq and Afghanistan, between 2004 and 2007, were the result of 
musculoskeletal, connective tissue, or spinal injuries. Therefore, 
in addition to reductions in body armor weight, the Army seeks to 
reduce the total “load out” carried by the soldier, which includes 
a communication radio, extra batteries for the radio, water, food, 
flashlight, first aid kit, and ammunition. Once again, nanotechnol-
ogy appears to offer solutions. Nanomaterial- enhanced batteries, 
such as silicon- coated carbon nanotube anodes for lithium-ion/
(Li- ion) batteries, are an attractive option. The nano- enhanced 
Li- ion batteries would have an energy capacity ten times that of 
conventional batteries and eliminate the need for extra batteries. 
Ultimately, nanoelectronics will enable a reduction in the size and 
weight of the radio and flashlight with no compromise in func-
tionality. The Army’s goal is to get the total weight a solider car-
ries to be less than fifty pounds. In addition, it is also likely that 
some soldiers will be fitted with an exoskeleton to amplify their 
muscle strength to enable them to carry out specific missions. 
No doubt, the exoskeletons will use light nanomaterials stronger 
than steel, such as carbon nanotubes, powered with nanomaterial- 
enhanced batteries.
A cloak of invisibility seems to be a phrase out of Star Trek. 
However, it exists now. Scientists at the U.S. Department of Ener-
gy’s Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the University of 
California Berkeley have devised a nano- thin invisibility cloak that 
makes 3d objects “disappear.” The ultrathin invisibility nanoma-
terial can conform to the shape of an object and conceal it from 
detection with visible light. According to the September 18, 2015, 
Nanowerk News article:

58 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
Working with brick- like blocks of gold nanoantennas, the Berkeley 
researchers fashioned a “skin cloak” barely 80 nanometers in thick-
ness, that was wrapped around a three- dimensional object about 
the size of a few biological cells and arbitrarily shaped with multiple 
bumps and dents. The surface of the skin cloak was meta- engineered 
to reroute reflected light waves, which rendered the object invisible 
to optical detection.
Imagine military personnel invisible to the naked eye. Imagine 
combining that capability with nanomaterials able to insulate a 
person’s body heat, similar to how polar bears’ fur insulates their 
bodies, and to scatter infrared. In effect, a Special Forces team 
using skintight invisible cloaks becomes real- life ninjas able to 
penetrate even highly guarded installations. Conventional cam-
ouflage would become obsolete.
Today we have smart bombs. As electronics shrink to the 
nanoscale, it will be possible to have smart bullets. In fact, cnn 
reported in April 2015: “The U.S. military said this week it has 
made great progress in its effort to develop a self- steering bullet. 
In February, the smart bullets— .50- caliber projectiles equipped 
with optical sensors— passed their most successful round of live- 
fire tests to date, according to the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency, or darpa.”
If you find this scary, imagine a bullet “with your name on it.” 
More precisely, imagine a bullet programmed to target you via your 
dna. Actually, the word “bullet” may be inappropriate. The pro-
jectiles would be similar to bullet- sized guided missiles, including 
nanosensors, nanoprocessors, and nano guidance systems that 
enable it to seek a specific enemy combatant, even when hidden 
behind cover. Snipers, armed with such smart bullets, could rou-
tinely make kills out to a mile or more.
Enhanced steel will likely find wide military application. In 
chapter 3 we discussed how adding nanoparticles and nano coat-
ings could make the steel ten times stronger and more resistant 
to fatigue. The nano coating is especially interesting. Any metal 

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
59
can cost- effectively undergo this nano- coating process. Accord-
ing to Christina Lomasney, ceo of Modumetal (2016), “The pro-
cess costs the same as conventional metal treatments such as 
galvanization.” Imagine tanks half the weight, with armor stron-
ger than today’s tanks. Being lighter, they could travel faster and 
further with the same amount of fuel they currently consume. 
This is just one example. The use of metals in military applica-
tions is ubiquitous.
Nanoparticles are finding use as catalysts to increase the destruc-
tive power of conventional explosives. We discussed this earlier, 
but will expand further in this section. The field of nanoenerget-
ics, which relates to manipulating the flow of energy within and 
between molecules, is yielding nanoweapon explosives with up 
to ten times the destructive capability of conventional explosives. 
They also offer enhanced propellants for missile applications. 
Researchers at Sandia Laboratories are experimenting with add-
ing materials known as superthermites. Superthermites refer to 
the mixture of nanoparticles, such as iron oxide and aluminum 
nanoparticles, which react more rapidly than micro thermites due 
to the large surface to volume ratio of nanoparticles. The applica-
tions are wide- ranging, from more devastating artillery projectiles 
to smart bullets that not only penetrate but also explode. Typi-
cally, being grazed by a conventional bullet is not fatal. However, 
a smart bullet that explodes on contact is likely to be fatal to its 
intended target and those in close vicinity.
Mobile lasers are likely to become widely deployed by the Army. 
In 2009 Northrop Grumman announced the successful devel-
opment of an electric laser capable of producing a 100 kilowatt 
ray of light, sufficient to destroy cruise missiles, artillery, rockets, 
and mortar rounds. Electric lasers are mountable to conventional 
vehicles because they require less space than chemical lasers. 
In this, we see science fiction, like Star Trek and Flash Gordon, 
becoming science fact.
Nanotechnology will transform current artillery to smart artil-
lery, profoundly changing the role of artillery. The impact of nan-

60 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
otechnology on artillery may even change the role of the Army, as 
a land force, to a strategic force, capable of engaging air, sea, and 
land targets. The history of artillery in warfare dates back hun-
dreds of years. All military scholars agree regarding its use as a 
primary weapon during the Civil War, World War I, and World 
War II. Artillery generally applies to a class of weapons, such as 
howitzers, cannons, mortars, and other weapons that fire a large 
projectile. It excludes small arms and missiles. Nanoelectronics 
and nanosensors have the capability to make artillery projectiles 
“smart,” meaning they will have properties that resemble guided 
missiles. The projectiles will be programmable to target specific 
coordinates, structures, and even people. Nano- enhanced explo-
sives will provide the smart projectiles with a new level of devas-
tation. I project it will be possible to program their devastation to 
accomplish the mission while limiting collateral damage.
Although the Army is the oldest branch of the U.S. military, 
it makes use of high- tech equipment, including nanoweapons. 
The phrase “boots on the ground” may change to “nanoweap-
ons on land.”
4. U.S. Air Force Nanoweapons
The 2009 DoD report “Defense Nanotechnology Research and 
Development Program” provides significant insight into the Air 
Force’s nanotechnology r&d. Quoted from the report:
Fundamental Phenomena and Processes— Advance the tech-
nology to create the world’s smallest array of imaging pixels 
for high- resolution, multispectral imaging systems
Materials— Identify a better nanoparticle and develop a tech-
nique to create multilayer superconducting wire with care-
fully controlled particles dispersion via an amenable industrial 
process
Devices and Systems— Develop 2- nm platinum- silicide (PtSi) 
films on silicon (Si) and image processing methods to domi-
nate infrared (ir) camera technology

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
61
Manufacturing— Create a highly uniform array of carbon nano-
tubes with an electronic grade junction to a Si semiconductor 
substrate to develop an ultralightweight, uncooled ir detector
Environmental Health and Safety— Develop assessment stud-
ies to understand the risks associated with the physiochemical 
properties of size, shape, and surface chemistry
Perusing the list, an obvious question arises, What is driving the Air 
Force’s nanotechnology needs? In simple terms, it is the increased 
strategic requirement for unmanned aerial vehicles (uavs), also 
termed “drones.” Currently about a third of all Air Force fighter 
planes are drones, and the need for drone missions skyrocketed 
during the Obama administration. Drones have proven effective 
in gathering intelligence and killing high- value targets. Some esti-
mate that drones have killed over 2,500 enemy combatants, argu-
ably some of them civilians, during the Obama administration.
Most of the nanoweapons the Air Force seeks arise from the 
need to increase the effectiveness of drones. High- resolution, mul-
tispectral imaging systems and nanotechnology enhanced infra-
red technologies are created to increase the effectiveness of drone 
surveillance. In the 2009 DoD report, the Air Force provides a 
rationale for nano- enhanced munition: “Munitions enhanced with 
nanoaluminum powder are being developed to give performance 
and lethality enhancements in miniaturized munitions needed 
for the reduced volume of advanced aircraft munitions bays and 
for weaponization of unmanned air vehicles (uavs).”
My insight suggests that by the 2030s, Air Force drones will 
account for over two- thirds of all fighter aircraft. My rationale for 
this is threefold.
1. Artificially intelligent (ai) machines will equal human intel-
ligence in the period 2025– 30. You may wonder if this is a 
wild prediction, a machine with the general intelligence of a 
human. It is not. Many futurists, familiar with ai, would agree, 

62 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
and we will discuss the rapid pace of artificial intelligence in 
a later chapter.
2. With the advent of artificial intelligence that equals human 
intelligence and nanoelectronics miniaturization, an artificially 
intelligent machine will be small enough to replace a human 
pilot in a drone aircraft. Hence drones will be able to perform 
every role that manned fighter aircraft perform, including air-
craft carrier launch and retrieval.
3. The U.S. citizens are weary of losing husbands and wives, 
sons and daughters, in remote countries for ideological reasons, 
regardless of the rationale. As the Wall Street Journal reported, 
“Americans in large numbers want the United States to reduce 
its role in world affairs even as a showdown with Russia over 
Ukraine preoccupies Washington, a Wall Street Journal/nbc 
News poll finds.”
When we think of drone fighter aircraft, our minds often conjure 
images of the Predators and the larger Reapers. Both represent 
scaled- down versions of manned fighter aircraft. Future drones 
will be the size of birds and even insects, especially when the mis-
sion is for reconnaissance or assassination.
Let us now turn our attention to the U.S. nuclear arsenal, which 
is under the control of Strategic Command. The Air Force and 
Navy are the key players. Since Strategic Command is headquar-
tered at Offutt Air Force Base in Omaha, I think it is appropriate 
to discuss the latest developments in missiles.
The latest development relating to the strategic missile capa-
bility is development of the intercontinental hypersonic missiles. 
Although the DoD is tight- lipped regarding the technology embed-
ded in their intercontinental hypersonic missiles that approach 
targets at a steep, almost flat angle of attack and Mach 10 speeds 
(i.e., ten times the speed of sound), my view is that nanotechnol-
ogy is playing a significant role. Before we discuss the technol-
ogy, let us understand the mission.
Russia and China are aware of the United States’ formidable 

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
63
stealth technology. As a result, both Russia and China are develop-
ing stealth weapons and methods to detect an adversary’s stealth 
weapons. To use an old cliché, it is a cat- and- mouse game. Inter-
continental hypersonic missiles remove the need for stealth. Their 
hypersonic speed and steep angle of attack make them virtually 
impossible to detect or destroy with current antimissile defenses. 
The strategic goal of the DoD is to be able to reach and destroy 
any target in the world in less than an hour. The DoD claims 
their payload is conventional, but in light of mini- nukes, the line 
between conventional and nuclear weapons is becoming fuzzy. 
Regarding the technology, the propellant is likely using nanopar-
ticles. My rationale is that superthermites using nanoparticles 
have proved to be useful in increasing the energy release of con-
ventional explosives and propellants. Therefore, it makes sense 
that the DoD would consider using superthermites to boost their 
missiles’ propulsion. Given their hypersonic speed and the need 
to make extremely fast trajectory corrections, there is a signifi-
cant likelihood the DoD is using state- of- the- art guidance and con-
trol systems, which would suggest nanoelectronic processors. It 
may sound like Star Wars, but the United States is already suc-
cessfully testing the missile. Russia and China are also attempt-
ing to develop a hypersonic missile. Russia is testing its Yu- 71 
hypersonic boost- glide missile and China its wu- 14 rocket- boosted 
hypersonic glide missile. Currently, and perhaps in large part due 
to nanotechnology, the United States is leading in this arms race. 
I want to add a cautionary note. The use of nanotechnology in 
intercontinental hypersonic missiles is speculation on my part, 
but the dots appear to connect.
I think it is also appropriate to discuss mini- nukes in this sec-
tion. As discussed in chapter 1, Russia, Germany, and the United 
States are pursuing mini- nukes, which are small nano- enhanced 
nuclear bombs with a minuscule amount of fissionable material. 
Mini- nukes can result in an explosion, depending on construc-
tion, that equates to a hundred tons of conventional explosives 
with almost no radioactive fallout. Based on the small amount of 

64 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
fissionable material and the lack of radioactive fallout, the United 
States may classify mini- nukes as conventional weapons.
The United States began developing mini- nukes under Pres-
ident George W. Bush in 2002. The exact methods to construct 
mini- nukes remain Top Secret. However, some nanotechnologists 
speculate that a high- energy nano laser could trigger a compar-
atively small thermonuclear fusion explosion in a mixture of tri-
tium and deuterium. Given that the United States began research 
in 2002, it is likely that mini- nukes exist. Since the United States 
seeks to use conventional weapons in regional conflicts as well 
as in their intercontinental hypersonic missiles, it is conceivable 
that mini- nukes may fit the role, especially when seeking signif-
icant destruction.
5. Nanoweapon Thrusts of Other Nations
Other nations are developing nanoweapons. This arms race gar-
ners little in the way of daily media coverage. Yet the major play-
ers spend billions of dollars annually.
Think of this section as an Impressionistic painting. The paint-
ing may appear fuzzy because the major players are keeping their 
nanoweapon thrusts under a cloak of secrecy. The pigments are 
ground from over twenty years of media remnants, such as arti-
cles, books, and news reports. In suggestive brush strokes, the 
painting will surface those nations participating in the nanoweap-
ons arms race. A few words of caution are in order. I am using the 
analogy of an Impressionism painting to convey that what follows 
is widely subject to interpretation. The Impressionism movement 
started because of the invention of the camera. The camera was 
able to reproduce pictures with excellent clarity. This meant that 
artists were no longer required to paint a picture to document a 
scene. The camera could do that with ease. This freed artists to 
interpret a scene, and the movement of Impressionism was born. 
In what follows, I provide my interpretation, much like Impres-
sionist painters provide their interpretation. I invite you to review 
the salient information to form your own interpretation.

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
65
How do we determine the major players? I suggest we use two 
methods: follow the money and follow the patents. Let me clar-
ify why I chose this approach.
1. You may argue that nations are unlikely to seek patents on 
their nanoweapons. I agree. However, I argue that a nation’s 
capability in nanoweapons will closely align with their com-
mercial applications, where they will seek patent protection. 
What I am suggesting is what I have argued all along. Nano-
technology commercial applications form a base for nanoweap-
ons development.
2. You may wonder why I did not include nanotechnology papers 
in technical journals. While I agree that scientific nanotech-
nology publications are an indication of research, patents are 
a strong indicator of research output as it relates to applica-
tions. In my view, it is a stronger measure of a nation’s nano-
technology prowess.
To address item 1, let us start with nanotechnology investments 
by nation. This is difficult to measure for several reasons. First, no 
common definition of nanotechnology or a nanotechnology- based 
product exists internationally. Second, nations seek to hide their 
investments in weapons. However, even with these difficulties, 
the U.S. government, as well as other organizations, has sought 
to quantify the nanotechnology investments of other nations.
Let’s start with the U.S. government’s estimates. According 
to the nni website, nano.gov, “estimates from 2008 showed the 
governments of the European Union (eu) and Japan invested 
approximately $1.7 billion and $950 million, respectively, in nano-
technology research and development. The governments of China, 
Korea, and Taiwan invested approximately $430 million, $310 mil-
lion, and $110 million, respectively. . . . This compares to 2008 
U.S. government spending of $1.55 billion.” Obviously, this is a 
single data point, and my research indicates it is not comprehen-
sive. For example, there is no mention of Russia, who in 2007 suc-

66 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
cessfully tested the world’s most powerful nonnuclear air- delivered 
bomb, nicknamed the “father of all bombs,” which relies on nan-
otechnology. This is a clear indication that nni is intentionally 
omitting references to nanoweapons. However, from the 2012 
nni workshop, whose proceedings are in the public domain, we 
can get a more complete picture of nanotechnology global fund-
ing. One report from the workshop is from London- based con-
sulting firm Cientifica. The report is “Nanotechnology Funding: 
A Global Perspective,” by Tim Harper. Cientifica asserts that it 
compiles the data every two years, it includes government and 
private funding, and it is the most accurate funding picture avail-
able. After surveying what is available to the public, Cientifica’s 
claims appear valid. These are the salient points from their report:
There is a global investment in nanotechnology approaching 
a quarter trillion dollars by 2015.
Governments account for $67.5 billion, and the remainder is 
private funding, such as corporate research.
In Purchasing Power Parity (ppp) terms, Cientifica delineates 
the countries making the largest investments as, in descend-
ing order, the United States, Russia, and China. Coming in a 
relatively distant fourth and fifth, in descending order, are the 
European Commission (European Union) and Japan.
This gives us a reasonably clear idea regarding the major players. 
From all sources, I judge the United States is clearly the largest 
player, but close on its heels are Russia and China.
The Cientifica report addresses another important question: 
How effective is the funding? To address the question, Cientifica 
looks at a number of factors, such as overall global competitive-
ness, quality of scientific institutions, capacity for innovation, lev-
els of company spending on r&d, and “the real funding.” From 
this, they derive the Nanotech Impact Factor, which is provided 
below for the top three players:

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
67
United States
120.41
China
98.18
Russia
98.18
This is as far as our “follow the money” approach is going to take 
us. Let us now address item 2, “follow the patents.” These are the 
number of nanotechnology patents filed in the U.S. Patent and 
Trademark Office by the United States, China, and Russia in 2015:
United States
4,365
China
393
Russia
8
The 2015 fillings are indicative of previous years. If you look at 
2015 patents filled in the European Patent Office, the top three 
retain their rankings with 421, 38, and 3, respectively.
Based on the above research and assuming that national spend-
ing on nanotechnology and filed patents equates directly to the 
development of nanoweapons, I conclude the following:
1. The United States leads in the nanoweapons arms race
2. China is a near follower
3. Russia is a distant third
Let me share my rationale for the above rankings. Clearly, based 
on national investment, the Nanotech Impact Factor, and the pat-
ents filed, the United States is leading. Using the similar reason-
ing, China and Russia place second and third, respectively.
What is surprising is that Russia appears to be a distant third. 
Cientifica estimates that Russia is investing more than China in 
nanotechnology. Why isn’t Russia’s investment yielding better 
results? One answer is “Rusnano,” but that story is complex, with 
twists, turns, corruption, and intrigue. Let us start at the beginning.
In 2007 Russian leaders established the Russian Corporation 
of Nanotechnologies. This move was likely a response to emulate 
the effective U.S. National Nanotechnology Initiative, established 

68 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
in 2000. Due to both a weak Russian economy and systemic cor-
ruption, in 2011 the state corporation re- registered as an open joint- 
stock company, Rusnano. However, at the point of reorganization, 
the Russian government owned all of Rusnano’s stock. Why reor-
ganize? According to the chairman of the executive board of Rus-
nano, Anatoly Chubais, “Reorganization as an open joint- stock 
company is a transition to the greater transparency and responsi-
bility that characterizes this organizational form. We are moving 
to a different plane of collaboration with the business and science 
communities. And that will be reflected in new high- technology 
projects in the Russian nanoindustry.” Ultimately Rusnano seeks 
to sell its managing company to private investors by 2020. I spec-
ulate that the state corporation may have had issues related to cor-
ruption and interacting effectively with the business and science 
community, resulting in financial losses. Unfortunately Rusnano 
is off to a rocky start. According to Russia’s Accounting Chamber, 
as of 2013, Rusnano had losses totaling $1.37 billion, including 
losses of $40 million in shell corporations (dating back to 2007), 
$450 million in a nonfunctioning semiconductor facility, $800 
million in reserves against risky ventures, and $80 million in 
2012 operational losses. Facing these embarrassing revelations, 
President Putin accused Chubais of poor decisions guided by cia 
operatives. As a result, Chubais spoke at a news conference, admit-
ting mistakes. “We’ve made more mistakes in the nanotechnol-
ogy sector in Russia than anyone else. We know the pitfalls better 
than anyone else— so who else are you going to give your money 
to besides us? This is an argument that works.” Chubais added, 
“By 2020, we’ve been tasked with raising 150 billion rubles ($5 
billion). Believe me, it’s a very ambitious task when you want to 
raise funds not for oil, gas, or Moscow property but for Russian 
high- tech, nanotechnology.” However, the situation for Rusnano 
grew worse with time. In 2015 Putin placed Leonid Melamed, 
president of Effortel and of the executive board of the Supervi-
sory Council of Rusnano, under house arrest pending an inves-

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
69
tigation related to the “waste of public money.” After Melamed’s 
arrest, five senior Rusnano managers left Russia. To sum it up, 
Russia’s ride into nanotechnology is a train wreck and why, even 
after significant investment, they are running a distant third on 
the nanotechnology world stage.
Let’s now look at how China and Russia may be applying their 
nanotechnology to create nanoweapons. China is the world’s sec-
ond largest economy with the second largest defense budget, rel-
ative to the United States. Given their economy and significant 
military capabilities, China presents a formidable presence on the 
world stage. Earlier we ranked China’s nanotechnology thrusts 
as second only to the United States. Therefore, it should come 
as no surprise that, similar to the United States, China seeks to 
integrate its nanotechnology into its weapon systems.
On September 3, 2015, China celebrated the seventieth anni-
versary of the Chinese People’s War of Resistance against Japa-
nese Aggression during World War II. The Beijing military parade 
offered the world the first official revelation of many new weapon 
systems, including their latest strategic and anti- ship missiles. 
Missing from the parade were three of China’s highly secret weap-
ons, including:
1. The hypersonic strike missile, wu- 14
This new hypersonic missile is in many ways similar to the 
U.S. intercontinental hypersonic missiles under development, 
in that it is capable of traveling up to Mach 10 (i.e., ten times 
the speed of sound). Its first test in early 2014 adds China to 
the list of countries (United States and Russia) that are test-
ing hypersonic missiles. China launches its hypersonic mis-
sile using a booster missile, known as “boost- glide” technology, 
to reach the edge of space. It then reenters the atmosphere at 
Mach 10 to glide toward its target at a flat angle. This makes 
them difficult to destroy using current antimissile defense sys-
tems. The wu- 14 can carry a conventional or nuclear warhead 

70 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
and would be effective against land and sea targets. My com-
ments on this weapon’s use of nanotechnology are similar to 
those mentioned regarding the U.S. intercontinental hyper-
sonic missiles. There is a possibility that the wu- 14 boost- glide 
technology uses nanoparticles to increase its propulsion and 
nanoelectronics in its guidance system.
2. Cyber warfare forces
China’s cyber espionage and reconnaissance appears to be 
highly effective and is among their most closely guarded secrets. 
The United States and other countries, including Australia, 
Canada, and India, have accused China of cyber espionage, 
which China denies. China has accused the United States of 
cyber espionage, which the United States denies. The reality 
is that it is close to impossible to prove that cyber attacks are 
state sponsored, due to the difficulty in tracing the source of 
the attack. It would be reasonable to think that China would 
employ top- of- the- line computers to conduct its cyber warfare. 
This would suggest the use of nanoelectronic processors, simi-
lar to the Intel® Core™ M processor. China has a well- earned 
reputation regarding its ability to copy U.S. and Russian mili-
tary technology. Using nanoelectronics in warfare qualifies it 
as a nanoweapon.
3. Ground launched antisatellite missiles
The United States relies heavily on surveillance and com-
munication satellites to conduct military operations. China 
has two antisatellite missiles. According to the Washington 
Free Beacon:
A forthcoming report by the congressional United States– China Eco-
nomic and Security Review Commission contains an entire chapter 
on China’s military and civilian space capabilities.
The report discusses two antisatellite missiles, the sc- 19 and the 
larger dn- 2, which are meant to be fired in predetermined flight 
paths as a satellite passes over Chinese territory. . . . The report did 

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
71
not include the latest dn- 3 test . . . Air Force Lt. Gen. John “Jay” Ray-
mond, commander of the Joint Functional Component Command for 
Space, said at a House hearing in March that “we are quickly approach-
ing the point where every satellite in every orbit can be threatened.”
Rick Fisher, a military analyst with the International Assessment 
and Strategy Center, said that if the dn- 3 interceptor test is confirmed, 
“this is the first mention of the dn- 3, apparently either a modified 
version of the dn- 2 or a new antisatellite weapon.”
The complexity of targeting low and high orbit satellites sug-
gest highly sophisticated guidance systems, potentially using 
nanoelectronic processors. A long held military practice is to 
use the most advanced technology possible, since development 
and deployment of a military system generally require years to 
decades. Using the most advanced technology during develop-
ment ensures the military system will not be obsolete at the 
time of deployment. Therefore, it is completely reasonable 
that China would use nanoelectronic microprocessors. If cor-
rect, this would represent another application of nanoweapons.
In China’s three new weapon systems, nanotechnology is likely 
playing a role. The most probable role is in nanoelectronics. Given 
the high commercial profile of the Intel® Core™ M processor, 
China is almost certainly aware of its capabilities and has found a 
way to obtain samples. History suggests China will find a way to 
copy them or obtain samples in nefarious ways to apply them to 
their weapon systems. When we think about the military might 
of China, we need to think in terms of “asymmetrical warfare.” In 
this context, asymmetrical warfare means winning against a foe 
with a superior military by neutralizing the military systems that 
make the foe superior. For example, a technologically advanced 
military like the United States would be crippled if it lost its sur-
veillance and communications satellites.
Lastly, let us discuss Russia’s nanoweapons. Although we ranked 
Russia third with regard to nanotechnology, we should view it 
as a serious player. It is obvious the Russian leadership under-

72 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
stands the importance of nanotechnology, both commercially and 
militarily. Russia also has a solid trade relationship with China, 
including China’s import of Russian crude oil and weapon sys-
tems. For example, Russia sold China its s- 400 Missile Defense 
Systems, with delivery scheduled in mid- 2017. The details of the 
deal are murky. I conjecture that Russia is getting high- tech mil-
itary weapons as part of the deal. China has hypersonic strike 
missile technology, successfully tested several times. Russian 
leadership wants that technology, and they are accelerating their 
development of a hypersonic intercontinental ballistic missile. I 
leave it to you to connect the dots.
As previously discussed, Russia is engaged in developing 
nanoweapons. In chapter 1, we discussed Russia’s 2007 deto-
nation of “the father of all bombs,” which relies on nanotech-
nology to achieve its destructive power. In 2014 DefenseReview.
com published an article suggesting that the Russians are also 
pursuing nanomaterials to improve their body armor, as well as 
the weapons their soldiers carry. This article makes it clear the 
Russians are aware of the benefits offered by nanomaterials and 
are pursuing nanoweapons. Although Russian nanotechnology 
thrusts appear behind those of the United States, during the Cold 
War Russians proved their ability to remain a “near follower” in 
military technology by using espionage and disproportionately 
investing a large portion of their gross domestic product in their 
military. In a speech to the Federal Assembly in 2013, President 
Vladimir Putin stated, “Russia will respond to all the challenges, 
both political and technological. We have all the necessary poten-
tial.” Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin, who oversees the 
Russian military and defense industry, made it clear that Russia 
will not engage in a costly arms race but will maintain military 
parity through “asymmetrical means.” These statements are a 
clear indication that Russian leadership is aware that technology 
is critical to maintain military parity with the United States. It is 
obvious that they are pursuing nanomaterials to improve body 
armor as well as other weapons. Their timing suggests they have 

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
73
a means to know and copy some aspects of the United States’ 
nanoweapons thrusts.
During the mid- 2000s, both Russia and the United States 
acknowledged building mini- nukes. Purportedly, these nuclear 
bombs weighed 60– 70 pounds and could fit in a backpack, not 
a suitcase. High- ranking gru defector Stanislav Lunev claimed 
Russia possessed nuclear bombs the size of suitcases, but his 
claims are suspect according to the fbi. With the advent of nan-
otechnology, there is a heightened concern that a true mini- nuke, 
about the size of this book with a weight around 5 pounds, is fea-
sible. According to a 2005 mit review article:
Nanotechnology “could completely change the face of weaponry,” 
according to Andy Oppenheimer, a weapons expert with analyst firm 
and publisher Jane’s Information Group. Oppenheimer says nations 
including the United States, Germany, and Russia are developing 
“mini- nuke” devices that use nanotechnology to create much smaller 
nuclear detonators.
Oppenheimer says the devices could fit inside a briefcase and 
would be powerful enough to destroy a building. Although the devices 
require nuclear materials, because of their small size, “they blur the 
line with conventional weapons,” Oppenheimer says.
Does the United States, Russia, or Germany have mini- nukes? U.S. 
nanotechnology is highly advanced, and I speculate it is possible 
that the United States has developed a mini- nuke. Russian nan-
otechnology is primitive by comparison, and I have reservations 
that they have one. However, Russia has a long and deep back-
ground in nuclear technology and espionage. Therefore, while 
I think the probability is low, I would not rule it out completely. 
Germany has a robust nanotechnology infrastructure, and in my 
opinion, Germany has the capability to build a mini- nuke.
Let me make an important point. Both China and Russia empha-
size developing an asymmetrical warfare capability. This largely 
stems from two difficulties both nations face:

74 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
1. Maintaining military investments on par with the United 
States.
2. Attempting to achieve military parity in areas where the 
United States has decisive leadership.
Lastly, before we conclude this chapter, let us discuss two import-
ant points:
1. A slight asymmetry in nanoweapons capability could be the 
deciding factor in any conflict.
2. Will it be possible to develop, deploy, and use nanoweapons 
in warfare without rendering humanity extinct?
In light of China and Russia’s apparent strategy to pursue asym-
metrical warfare, their emphasis on nanoweapons should not be 
surprising. Neither nation has the financial and technological 
resources to reach full conventional and nuclear parity with the 
United States within one or two decades. On the world stage, to 
rank as a superpower they need substantial asymmetrical mili-
tary capabilities. Nanoweapons offer that potential. Even if they 
had only one devastating nanoweapon that the United States 
could not defend itself against, it could hold the United States 
at bay. For example, if they had weaponized nanobots capable of 
destroying steel and smuggled billions of them into the United 
States, our most formidable weapons would become a question-
able deterrent. In a sense, we could be back to mad (i.e., mutu-
ally assured destruction). Although the United States could use 
nuclear weapons against such an adversary, our civilization would 
likely crumble. Even a slight asymmetry in nanoweapons, such as 
the capability to kill tens to hundreds of millions of people with 
something as simple as toxic nanoparticles, would be a formida-
ble deterrent. Let us also be clear about delivery of a nanoweapon. 
It is unlikely for an adversary to wait for the outbreak of hostili-
ties to attempt a nanoweapon delivery. It would be easier and stra-
tegically advantageous to have the nanoweapon in place, inside 
the target foe’s borders, prior to an outbreak of hostilities. Given 

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
75
the size of nanoweapons, like nanobots and nanoparticles, smug-
gling makes sense, and manufacturing them within the borders 
of a target foe makes sense. This is not a new or completely 
radical idea. Stanislav Lunev, the high- ranking gru defector we 
discussed earlier, claims that Russia has already smuggled tacti-
cal nuclear weapons known as ra- 115 “suitcase bombs” into the 
United States to assassinate U.S. leaders in the event of war. As 
mentioned earlier, the fbi questions his claims, but his asser-
tions suggest that this type of assassination strategy was, at min-
imum, known in the gru.
Let us now address the question, Will it be possible to develop, 
deploy, and use nanoweapons in warfare without rendering human-
ity extinct? Before attempting to answer it, let us understand the 
threat that nanoweapons pose. Nanoweapons have the capabil-
ity to destabilize the balance of power, whether it is with nano-
electronics guiding hypersonic intercontinental ballistic missiles 
or millions of insect- sized nanobots capable of assassinating the 
population of a nation. If one rogue state or one “accident” pro-
vokes a nanoweapons attack that a nuclear power like the United 
States cannot defend itself against, then expect things to escalate 
quickly to the point when humanity could face extinction. Let’s 
take two fictitious war game examples to illustrate this point.
Example 1. China sinks a U.S. aircraft carrier. A nation like 
China misinterprets the actions of a U.S. aircraft carrier oper-
ating in the China Sea as an attack on mainland China. China 
uses nanoelectronically guided wu- 14 hypersonic glide mis-
siles to attack and sink the carrier. The U.S. submarines and 
other warships in the carrier group receive orders to use all 
force necessary to neutralize the threat. Simultaneously, the 
United States targets all Chinese military forces, land, sea, and 
air that pose a threat. At this point, things escalate beyond the 
limits of diplomacy. Automated defensive and offensive sys-
tems engage faster than the human ability to stop the conflict. 
Emboldened by China’s attack, North Korea unleashes a nuclear 

76 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing
attack against South Korea and Japan. The United States uses 
nuclear ballistic missiles to annihilate North Korea. China’s 
nuclear submarines, in the mid- Pacific, launch a nuclear ballis-
tic missile attack on the United States, but the national origins 
of the attacks are fuzzy and appear to originate from Russian 
submarines, known to be operating in the area. The United 
States retaliates against Russia. A global conflict ensues. This 
is a fictitious war game example, but the military capabilities 
in the example exist.
Example 2. A rogue nation unleashes a nanoweapons attack 
on the United States by introducing lethal nanobots into every 
major U.S. city. The nanoweapons attack goes undetected until 
millions of people show symptoms and die. The United States 
has no effective countermeasures to halt the attack short of 
committing its entire military capability. The United States 
and its nato allies retaliate. In a broad- spectrum attack, they 
use nuclear missiles against rogue states and terrorist groups 
deemed responsible. In doing so, the launch of nuclear weap-
ons is “misinterpreted.” Russia interprets the launch as a first 
strike attempt by the United States and immediately launches 
a nuclear retaliation. The exchange ignites a global conflict, 
forcing other nations like China and North Korea to engage 
perceived adversaries. The destruction that ensues reduces 
humanity to the pathetic remnants that we see in apocalyptic 
movies. This is a fictitious war game example. Lethal nanobots 
may already exist, and we will discuss them in chapter 5. Their 
weaponized delivery does not exist, but it is within a decade or 
less to realization.
The answer to the question regarding nanoweapons rendering 
humanity extinct is complex. We entered the nanotechnology age 
in 2000. Since our entry, nations have been developing nanoweap-
ons, and humanity continues to survive. However, our current 
nanoweapons are primitive relative to those that will appear in 

the wolf in sheep’s clothing 
77
the arsenals of nations in one or two decades. Will we continue 
to survive when those nanoweapons exist?
I left Example 2 for last. It describes a lethal nanobots attack sce-
nario. Make no mistake. While nanobots are still in their infancy, 
the development pace of nanotechnology suggests we should pre-
pare ourselves for the rise of the nanobots.


5
The Rise of the Nanobots
Something big is going on in war today, and maybe even the history 
of humanity itself. The United States military went into Iraq with a 
handful of drones in the air. We now have 5,300. We went in with zero 
unmanned ground systems. We now have 12,000. And the tech term 
“killer application” takes on new meaning in this space.
— p. w. singer
Nanobots are nanoscale robots. For the most part, the evolution 
of nanobots has its roots in warfare. Let’s briefly examine their 
evolution.
The history of military robots dates back to the nineteenth cen-
tury. In 1898 Nicola Tesla, called a mad scientist by some and the 
“father of electricity” by others, demonstrated his wireless remote 
control boat to the U.S. Navy. His pitch was that the Navy could 
use it to produce radio- controlled torpedoes. It must have bog-
gled their minds, because they passed on adopting the invention. 
This was not the first time the United States passed on a high- 
tech weapon. In 1866 British engineer Robert Whitehead devel-
oped the self- propelled torpedo. The torpedo drew great interest 
from navies around the world, but not from the United States. 
However, in 1891, one event caught the attention of Americans. 
During the Chilean Civil War, the Chilean naval vessel Almirante 
Lynch sank the rebel Chilean armored vessel Blanco Encalada 
using a Whitehead torpedo. Clearly the torpedo had promise. That 
prompted the United States to commission its first torpedo boat 
destroyer, long after other navies had deployed almost a thousand 

80 
the rise of the nanobots
such boats. Even in 1891, the big turnoff for the U.S. Navy was 
that early torpedoes were not reliable, meaning they could not 
stay on course to hit an adversary’s ship at a distance. Although 
the compressed air engine of the Whitehead torpedo had a range 
of 1,000 yards, it was unlikely to remain on target for that dis-
tance, confining its practical use to about 400 yards. For a navy 
vessel to be within 400 yards of an adversary meant its almost 
certain demise by enemy fire. Even 1,000 yards presented peril-
ous problems. That changed in 1896 when Austrian naval offi-
cer Ludwig Obry invented the gyroscope. This single invention 
became a game changer, making the torpedo stable and a long- 
range weapon. It would also play an important role in stabilizing 
ballistic missiles, but that was to come almost half a century later.
After getting a “no” from the U.S. Navy, the not easily discour-
aged Tesla traveled to the United Kingdom, made the same offer, 
and received another “no.” Apparently it was a technology ahead 
of its time that neither government valued. However, Tesla must 
have made some impression on the world navies, for his think-
ing soon found application during World War I. Germany, for 
example, deployed remote control boats, Sprengbootes, with three 
hundred pounds of explosives tethered to a fifty- mile- long cable, 
which made the boats and operator vulnerable. Germany then 
adopted Tesla’s wireless remote control technology to address this 
vulnerability. The Royal Navy deployed an aerial torpedo, consist-
ing of a remote controlled biplane, Sopwith at. The United States 
experimented with the Wickersham Land Torpedo, a tethered 
armored tractor meant to carry hundreds of pounds of explosives 
into enemy trenches, and the Kettering Bug, a bomb in the form 
of a small plane built to fly a predetermined route and explode at 
an enemy’s position. However, the war ended before the United 
States could deploy its military robots in combat.
During the 1930s and into the early 1940s, the Soviet Union 
developed the first wireless remote controlled unmanned tanks, 
“teletanks.” The Soviets deployed two teletank battalions on the 

the rise of the nanobots 
81
eastern front during the “Winter War” of World War II, a feat not 
achieved by other nations until recently. The Soviet Union also 
deployed remote controlled boats, “telecutters,” and planes, “tele-
planes.” Although it is not obvious these robotic weapons played 
a significant role during the war, the Soviet Union deserves credit 
for their remarkable robotic achievements.
The German Wehrmacht deployed the Goliath tracked mine, a 
remote controlled demolition vehicle. Its mission was to destroy 
tanks, disrupt infantry formations, and demolish buildings and 
bridges. It too represented a leap in military robotic technology, 
but it was not wireless. Instead, it was controlled using a 2,130- 
foot wire cable. In 1942 the Wehrmacht deployed the Goliath on 
every front, including the Allied D- day invasion of Normandy. 
Although the German war machine produced over 7,500 Goli-
aths, the weapon was largely ineffective. Its 6 mph top speed, less 
than five inches of ground clearance, thin armor, and vulnerable 
cable made it easy to disable, even by rifle fire. In fact, most of 
the Goliaths encountered on D- day were useless because Allied 
artillery fire had cut their long cables.
However, Nazi Germany did deploy robotic missiles that terri-
fied London, first with their v- 1 cruise missile and later with their 
v- 2 ballistic missile. Nazi Germany launched over 8,000 v- 1s at 
Britain, with the majority aimed at London, but less than 2,500 
reached the city. The v- 1’s pulse jet engine resulted in a relatively 
slow missile, traveling about 400 miles per hour. Because they were 
slow with a predictable trajectory, British antiaircraft guns could 
destroy them en route. However, the v- 2s were true ballistic mis-
siles, with speeds over three times the speed of sound. They were 
invisible until they exploded on target. Fortunately, their deploy-
ment came close to the end of the war. Nazi Germany launched 
1,000 v- 2s before Allied troops destroyed their launching sites.
The United States began its military use of robotic drones in 
1940, with its purchase of 53 Dennymite radio- controlled aircraft 
from World War I British flyer Reginald Denny, a hobbyist who 

82 
the rise of the nanobots
built model airplanes and opened the Reginald Denny Hobby 
Shop on Hollywood Boulevard in 1934. As World War II loomed 
in 1940, threatening to engulf the United States, Denny pitched 
the U.S. Army to use his remote controlled 6- hp, 12- foot wing-
span drones for antiaircraft gunnery targets. After the bombing 
of Pearl Harbor and the United States’ entry into World War II, 
the U.S. military bought nearly 15,000 Dennymites, which they 
designated the oq- 1. In 1944 the U.S. Army Air Force and Navy 
embarked on Operations Aphrodite and Anvil, respectively, to 
create a large bomber filled with explosives to attack highly for-
tified enemy positions. The weapon strategy was to let a crew fly 
the bomber close to the target, bail out, and let a ground crew 
wirelessly pilot the bomber. On its first mission, the bomber car-
ried ten tons of Torpex, an explosive more powerful than tnt. 
Unfortunately, the Torpex proved unstable and exploded en route, 
killing the bomber’s two crewmembers and forcing abandon-
2. Micro drone from darpa. Content from darpa Image Gallery, http://
www.darpa.mil/about-us/image-gallery.

the rise of the nanobots 
83
ment of the project. More successful was the Army- developed 
vb- 1 Azons, unmanned remote controlled glide bombers carrying 
1,000 pounds of explosives. In 1944, 450 vb- 1 Azons saw com-
bat in the Pacific and Burma.
The robotic weapons of World Wars I and II had little effect 
on their outcomes. However, in some cases they did cause ter-
ror, serious destruction, and loss of lives. In addition, from the 
standpoint of military history, they laid the foundation for mili-
tary robotics.
Postwar development of remote controlled weapons slowed 
considerably. The newly formed U.S. Air Force felt threatened by 
unmanned aircraft. The Pentagon left development of such sys-
tems to the Army and Navy, which resulted in only two significant 
contracts. The first, in 1962, was to Ryan Aeronautical to manufac-
ture an unmanned reconnaissance aircraft, which flew 3,435 mis-
sions over Southeast Asia between 1962 and 1975. The second, in 
1979, was to Lockheed for the mqm- 105 Aquila program, which 
the Army intended to be a small, propeller- powered reconnais-
sance drone. Program overruns amounting to half a billion dollars, 
almost twice the cost of the original program, resulted in program 
cancellation in 1987, with only a few prototypes produced.
Aerial drones did not play a major role during the 1991 Persian 
Gulf War, although the United States did use Israeli- developed 
Pioneer reconnaissance drones with some success. Most notable 
examples are the Navy’s use of drones to pinpoint targets for naval 
bombardment and the surrender of a group of Iraqi soldiers to a 
drone. That event marked the first time in history that humans 
surrendered to a robot.
In 1995 integration of the U.S. Global Positioning System with 
unmanned aerial vehicles (uavs) enabled the United States to per-
form reconnaissance and targeting missions with extreme pre-
cision. This was a game changer and ushered in modern drone 
warfare. In 1999 the United States successfully used General 
Atomics rq- 1 Predators and Northrop Grumman rq- 4 Global 
Hawks in nato air reconnaissance operations against Serbia 

84 
the rise of the nanobots
during the Kosovo Conflict. In 2003 a U.S.- led coalition invaded 
Iraq to root out weapons of mass destruction. Although the United 
States did not find any, it has continued its military presence in 
the region and greatly expanded its use of robotic systems.
Since 2003 the U.S. military has been developing autonomous 
robotic systems, starting with the Mobile Autonomous Robot 
Software program. In 2005 the U.S. Army began developing the 
Autonomous Rotorcraft Sniper System, an unmanned autono-
mous helicopter carrying a remote controlled sniper rifle. Obvi-
ously the United States has an ongoing autonomous weapons 
research program, and it appears to be bearing fruit. In a 2014 
media release, the Navy announced a technological breakthrough 
that will allow an “unmanned surface vehicle (usv) to not only pro-
tect Navy ships but also, for the first time, autonomously ‘swarm’ 
offensively on hostile vessels.” The Navy plans to deploy the auton-
omous swarmboats in 2017.
The United States is not alone in developing autonomous weap-
ons. Defense One reported, “In March 2014, the Russian Strategic 
Missile Forces announced it would deploy armed sentry robots that 
could select and destroy targets with no human in or on the loop 
at five missile installations.” According to U.S. Deputy Secretary 
of Defense Robert Work, in 2015 Russia and China were heavily 
investing in autonomous military robotic systems. Secretary Work 
stated that their aim is to deploy a roboticized army, and he quoted 
Russian chief of general staff Valery Vasilevich as stating, “In the 
near future, it is possible that a complete roboticized unit will be 
created capable of independently conducting military operations.”
In recent years, a new thrust in military robotics is emerging, 
namely, shrinking them. For example, the U.S. military is devel-
oping a new generation of reconnaissance drones, some the size 
of birds (see figure 2) and others the size of insects.
On February 2, 2016, darpa announced that their Fast Light-
weight Autonomy (fla) program, whose goal is to develop algo-
rithms that allow uavs to fly autonomously, achieved a successful 
first flight. darpa reports, “Sensor- loaded quadcopters that recently 

the rise of the nanobots 
85
got tested in a cluttered hangar in Massachusetts did manage to 
edge their way around obstacles and achieve their target speeds 
of 20 meters per second.” darpa is almost certainly going to 
apply this technology to micro drones. Autonomous micro drones 
about the size of birds and insects would offer the U.S. military 
the ability to enter buildings, performing surveillance and poten-
tially offensive operations. This gives a completely new meaning 
to “being a fly on the wall.” According to darpa’s announcement, 
human operators would focus on “higher- level supervision of mul-
tiple formations of manned and unmanned platforms as part of 
a single system.” The notion of multiple formations suggests a 
“swarm,” which we will discuss in the next chapter.
If you are reading about military technology development, it is 
likely old news, because the military is already working on some-
thing even more cutting edge. Since darpa is sharing their work 
on micro drones, I suspect it likely they are also working on nano 
drones and nanobots. While this may seem a leap of imagina-
tion on my part, its basis is published research. For example, on 
December 16, 2014, the Army Research Laboratory announced 
the creation of a “fly drone” weighing only a fraction of a gram. 
Although researchers say it may take another decade or more 
before the Army has a deployable fly- sized drone, I judge it is 
much closer, in view of advances in medical nanobots.
While the technology that enables advanced military nanobots 
is typically secret, advanced medical nanobots are not. Examining 
advances in medical nanobots will provide insight into military 
nanobots. Let’s begin by examining two medical announcements 
regarding nanobots:
1. On May 15, 2015, Pfizer revealed that it is partnering with 
Dr. Ido Bachelet, manager of Bar- Ilan University’s robot labo-
ratory, on dna nanobots.
2. nextbigfuturereports.com, “Bachelet has developed a method 
of producing innovative dna molecules with characteristics 
that can be used to ‘program’ them to reach specific locations 

86 
the rise of the nanobots
in the body and carry out preprogrammed operations there in 
response to stimulation from the body.” In this case, the pre-
programming involves detecting cancer cells and delivering 
an existing cancer drug treatment directly to a cancerous cell, 
bypassing healthy cells. According to 3tags.org, Bachelet forms 
the nanobots from single strand dna folded like a clamshell to 
hold the drug until it reaches its preprogrammed target cell. As 
3tags.org’s report notes, “The first dna nanobot trial in a human 
subject will take place this year— in fact, it could be happening 
right now— on a person with late- stage leukemia. The patient 
is expected to die, but Bachelet believes that, based on previ-
ous animal trials, the nanobots can remove the cancer in the 
span of a month. If the trial goes well, we could see nanotech-
nology hit the public in one to five years.” By “this year,” they 
mean 2016. However, as of this writing, there have been no 
further announcements. This could mean several things. First, 
the human trial may not have taken place. Second, the human 
trial may not have been successful. Third, Pfizer is intention-
ally being quiet to enable them to continue their research with-
out a spotlight of public and competitor scrutiny.
Bachelet and Pfizer are not the only ones using dna nano-
bots. Jack Andraka, science prodigy and winner of the Smithso-
nian American Ingenuity Youth Award, is building nanobots out 
of iron oxide nanoparticles that can destroy cancer cells. Andraka 
makes his own nanoparticles “in a jar” and uses programmed 
dna molecules to make them artificially intelligent. According 
to Andraka, “With the dna you actually just buy the sequences. 
I tell them what sequence I want and they ship it to me and then 
I can just pop it on my nanorobots.” He makes it sound easy, but 
then he is a science prodigy, and to him it probably is easy.
Other medical researchers are taking a different approach to 
treating cancer at the cellular level. In essence, they remove some 
of the patient’s T- cells, which are cells produced by the patient’s 
thymus gland. T- cells work as part of the human immune system. 

the rise of the nanobots 
87
After removing the T- cells, researchers alter them in the labora-
tory with a gene therapy to make them recognize a protein on the 
cancer cells. Then they inject the altered T- cells into the patient’s 
bloodstream. There the T- cells order the cancerous cells to return to 
their normal configuration. If the cell has mutated too far, it orders 
the cell to self- destruct. Their results, reported in 2013, have been 
astounding, causing the cancer of fourteen out of sixteen termi-
nally ill patients to go into remission. It is arguable whether the 
reprogrammed T- cells are true nanobots. I leave that to your judg-
ment. However, I feel that the results are worth noting. It demon-
strates the effectiveness of fighting diseases at the cellular level.
Nanobots are science fact. Given the current research, we could 
see breakthroughs in nanomedicine to treat numerous diseases, 
including cancer, within the next five years. If darpa’s research 
pans out, our next major conflict could involve micro or even 
nano drones. There is no doubt in my mind that all this will hap-
pen. Micro drones are close to being a reality and may already be 
in field tests. Nano drones will follow close on their heels within 
a decade. The difficulty in making autonomous micro and nano 
drones is cramming all the processing power into such a small 
package. However, nanoelectronics and dna programming are 
rapidly evolving, which holds promise to make this possible.
What capabilities should we expect in military micro and nano 
drones? Surveillance is certain. However, the military will also 
want offensive capabilities. This suggests, for example, bird- sized 
drones that explode, taking out an adversary’s command and con-
trol center. It also suggests micro and nano drones that assassi-
nate. Imagine a micro or nano drone capable of injecting dna 
nanobot “bombs,” folded dna molecules with toxins that release 
when the dna nanobots sense dna associated with genetic ances-
try. It would represent the ultimate in racial or ethnic targeting.
The technology to determine dna ancestry exists. Companies, 
like Ancestry.com, already offer genetic testing services. Many 
local pharmacies sell test kits for less than one hundred dollars. 
In addition, if the military had a sample of a terrorist’s dna, con-

88 
the rise of the nanobots
ceivably they could release their micro or nano drones on a “seek 
and destroy” mission targeted at that specific terrorist. There are 
dna sequences that are more prevalent in people from one area 
of the world than from another area and dna sequences that are 
prevalent in a specific family. With dna targeting, it would be 
possible to wipe out specific people or a specific person, includ-
ing their entire lineage.
Early on, I mentioned that controlling nanoweapons is a major 
issue. Imagine a scenario where a military unleashes “killer nano-
bots” with dna targeting to kill a few specific people. Now what 
if their programming has a glitch? For example, suppose the mil-
itary releases 10 million killer nanobots, but the dna targeting 
does not work properly, and the killer nanobots kill everyone they 
contact. You may ask, Why would a military release 10 million 
killer nanobots to kill just a few people? One reason is that the 
location of the intended targets could be widely scattered over a 
large geographical area. If that military believed that their nano-
bots were harmless except to the few with specific dna charac-
teristics, it is plausible that the military would release millions 
of killer nanobots. Glitches have been the bane of programming 
from the beginning. Programming dna is similar to program-
ming computers. The complexity of the dna strand makes a 
glitch seem entirely possible. In this scenario, with 10 million 
killer nanobots killing everyone they contact, the killer nanobots 
become a weapon of mass destruction.
In the future, the nanobots could be complex molecules in a 
configuration that performs a specific function. It is conceivable 
that the molecules could be the result of a chemical reaction, just 
waiting for programmed dna strands to give them artificial intel-
ligence. Nanoweapon factories may end up being pharmaceuti-
cal companies, manufacturing nanobots capable of curing cancer 
on one production line and nanobots capable of assassination on 
another. A nanofactory may be small enough to fit on a tabletop. 
This would make transporting one easy, but detecting one diffi-

the rise of the nanobots 
89
cult. This suggests that nanofactories designed to build nanobots 
will exist not only within a nation’s borders but covertly within an 
adversary’s borders, enabling an attack from within. The super-
powers of the future will require a nanoweapons industrial infra-
structure capable of supplying large quantities of nanoweapons 
for offensive purposes. For example, if a country wants to attack 
the largest weapons of an adversary, they may design nanoweap-
ons that attach themselves to steel structures and deliver a payload 
that causes corrosion. For an attack like this, billions to trillions of 
nanobots will be required. In effect, nanobots will attack a nation’s 
largest weapons, like aircraft carriers, by borrowing a tactic from 
nature called “swarming.”


6
The “Swarm”
The ﬁercest serpent may be overcome by a swarm of ants.
— adm. isoroku yamamoto
The smallest of weapons, nanoweapons, are able to attack and 
destroy other nations’ largest weapons by borrowing a useful tac-
tic from Mother Nature: swarming. A single ant or bee is typically 
innocuous. However, consider army ants and killer bees. Their 
predatory swarming, typically termed “attacks,” causes sizable 
animals, including humans, to avoid them.
We see evidence of swarming’s effectiveness in almost all life- 
forms. Ants, bees, and wasps all exhibit swarm behavior to attack 
larger prey. Termites swarm to attack buildings by eating the 
wooden beams that support them. Dragonflies, beetles, butter-
flies, and moths migrate in swarms. Locusts swarm to devour 
crops, at times covering 100 square miles and consuming over 
100,000 tons of plant matter in a single day. About 1,800 bird 
species swarm (i.e., flock) to migrate long distances. Some fish 
swarm (i.e., school) to attack, such as piranhas. Tuna, herring, 
and anchovies school to defend against predators and to enhance 
their probability of finding food and mates. Even humans swarm. 
Early humans formed tribes and hunted in groups to find and kill 
larger prey. In the modern era, humans form civilizations and 
work together for mutual benefit. Swarming is without a doubt 
one of nature’s most useful tactics. It enables smaller animals to 
compete with larger animals.

92 
the “swarm”
If you have any doubt about the effectiveness of swarms to 
harm their intended targets, you need look no further than the 
1918 Spanish flu pandemic, involving the h1n1 influenza virus. 
Viruses, among the smallest of all life- forms, infect by swarming 
to destroy the host’s healthy cells. The 1918 pandemic infected 
500 million people and left 100 million dead, which was about 
5 percent of the world’s population at the time. Viruses are not 
nanobots in the traditional sense. Yet they are similar in size 
to nanoparticles. For example, the h1n1 is about 80– 120 nm 
in diameter and usually spherical, and they attack at the cellu-
lar level. Nanobots can use swarming tactics to disable larger 
objects. To accomplish this, though, they must work together 
with an increased level of intelligence, similar to the way army 
ants work to achieve their goal. Let’s illustrate this with a sim-
ple example.
Imagine nanobots capable of seeking and destroying weapons- 
grade radioactive material. One such nanobot would do little 
damage, perhaps destroying a few atoms of the nuclear mate-
rial. Billions to trillions could render the nuclear arsenal of a 
nation useless. If the nanobots were artificially intelligent to mimic 
swarming bees and their target was weapons- grade radioactive 
material, releasing them in close proximity to nuclear missile silos 
might be sufficient. Bees, for example, sense pollen and nectar- 
laden flowers by their bright colors, the patterns on the petals, 
their aromatic scents, and their electric field. The bee’s ability to 
sense a flower’s electric field is a recent finding. Apparently this 
capability allows a bee to distinguish between fields of different 
flowers. It even enables the bee to determine whether other bees 
have recently visited a flower. To locate fields of flowers, bees send 
out scouts. If a scout scores, it signals the hive. Some scouts do 
this by marking the route with aromatic flower oils, others by 
leading their hive mates. Honeybees communicate to the hive 
by “dancing.” The dancing is a form of intricate communication. 
The nanobot could use a similar strategy. Once a nanobot scout 
finds the nuclear material, it could emit a signal. A nanobot’s 

the “swarm” 
93
size would suggest that the signal would be extremely weak, per-
haps just reaching the next nearest nanobot. Their tactic to com-
municate to the swarm might be similar to the “fourth general 
order” of the U.S. military. The U.S. armed forces, regardless of 
branch, maintain “The Eleven General Orders.” The fourth gen-
eral order is “to repeat all calls from posts more distant from the 
guard house than my own.” By employing nanobot to nanobot 
signaling, in a matter of seconds, the entire swarm may know the 
location of the nuclear material. To destroy it, they may simply 
dislodge the material, atom by atom, until it is a pile of radioac-
tive dust. This would render it useless as a weapon. Imagine tril-
lions of nanobots in a swarm and countless swarms. In a short 
while, perhaps measured in hours, all land- based nuclear mis-
siles would be useless.
While under attack, the humans who control the missiles may 
know only that there is a malfunction at their location. They would 
report it to their superior officer, who would forward the message 
up the chain of command. By the time the message reaches the 
top command echelons, there may be no recourse except to alert 
the “boomers,” the nuclear missile– carrying submarines. Even 
if the boomers are operational, the perpetrator may not be obvi-
ous. Which nation do they target?
You may wonder, How can nanobots get into the nuclear mis-
sile’s payload? Surely each missile is in a silo, covered by steel 
blast doors, to provide some hardening against nuclear weapons. 
The radioactive payload is inside an airtight container. Unfortu-
nately, the exact details of nuclear weapon storage are classified. 
However, here is a scenario that addresses the question. The 
deposition of thin films requires a vacuum. There is an old adage 
that dates back to Aristotle, “Nature abhors a vacuum.” Aristo-
tle argued that material surrounding a vacuum would inevita-
bly find a way to fill the void. From my experience as a thin film 
process engineer, I can confirm that Aristotle was correct. Creat-
ing and maintaining a vacuum to deposit thin films is difficult. 
The vacuum pumps continually fight miniscule leaks. I would 

94 
the “swarm”
venture to say that the meaning of “airtight” is relative. Every 
man- made vacuum has a miniscule leak, perhaps only notice-
able using a helium leak detector. Since the helium molecule 
is smaller than the oxygen molecule, helium is able to traverse 
the miniscule passages and reveal the leakage points. Conceiv-
ably, nanotechnologists may develop nanobots with a diameter 
smaller than even an oxygen molecule and able to take advan-
tage of any miniscule passage. Perhaps such nanobots would 
have a rod shape, similar to the dna molecule, which is only 
2 nanometers in diameter and about 3 nanometers long. Like 
virus, they may be airborne, carried by winds, or travel like 
snakes on the ground. Once a scout finds the radioactive fuel, 
it will lead the swarm to its location. If the minuscule passage 
is in the nanoscale range, the scout will enter and the remain-
der of the swarm will follow.
To destroy large structures requires incredibly large numbers 
of nanobots. I cited the dna molecule as an example of a complex 
structure that only has a 2- nanometer diameter and a 3- nanometer 
length. If Mother Nature can make such structures, it is conceiv-
able that eventually nanotechnologists will, too.
In the last chapter, we discussed several medical breakthroughs 
to fight cancer. In each case, it involved a “swarm” of medical 
nanobots to treat the patient. The technological nanobots in 
two of those examples used modified dna molecules to provide 
the nanobots with artificial intelligence. In this, we are seeing a 
blend of nanotechnology and biology. It would not be surpris-
ing to see this methodology extended to weaponized nanobots, 
perhaps to the point they could distinguish organic tissue from 
inorganic elements. To target a specific inorganic substance is 
simpler than analyzing chemical composition. The weapon-
ized nanobots seek only a preprogrammed match. In the case of 
radioactive material, it may use the ionizing properties of radi-
ation to detect it, similar to how a Geiger counter works. Per-
haps, at the nanoscale, the collision of radioactive particles with 
members of the nanobots swarm may be the indicator. Nano-

the “swarm” 
95
bots attacking radioactive material present a unique challenge. 
The radioactive material is emitting particles and gamma rays, 
which could strike the nanobots like a bullet and destroy them. 
To nanobots, collision with emitted particles would be simi-
lar to nuclear missiles hit by high- energy projectiles. This also 
argues for enormous numbers of nanobots for such a mission. 
They would need to overcome their heavy losses to successfully 
carry out the mission.
Although destroying a nation’s land- based nuclear weapons 
would be a devastating blow, nations like the United States, Rus-
sia, and China have nuclear missile submarines, boomers. There-
fore, an attack on only the land- based missiles would not neutralize 
the threat of retaliation. Even if nanobots succeeded in assassi-
nating the bulk of people and leadership of a nation, the nuclear 
retaliation would reduce the suspected adversaries to radioactive 
rubble. Clearly there would be no winners. For an attack to suc-
ceed, an adversary would have to disable a nation’s ability to retali-
ate, which would be extremely difficult. Let’s understand why this 
would be so difficult.
At the height of the Cold War, the United States employed the 
nuclear triad, which included land- based nuclear missiles, nuclear 
missile submarines, and airborne bombers carrying nuclear bombs 
and cruise missiles. Today the United States, Russia, and China 
still employ land- based missiles and nuclear submarines. This 
makes attacking them, even with nanoweapons, a no- win sce-
nario. In a sense, the doctrine of mutually assured destruction 
still applies. However, understand that terrorists and rogue states 
may still launch such an attack, literally hoping to slip under 
the radar or even cause a war between nuclear powers. Unlike a 
nuclear missile attack, the perpetrator of a nanoweapons attack 
is difficult to detect. This makes the world an even more danger-
ous place than it was during the nuclear age.
Does any government possess swarming nanobots capable of 
destroying a large military target? The answer is a qualified yes. 
The Faculty of Life Sciences and the Institute of Nanotechnology 

96 
the “swarm”
& Advanced Materials at Bar- Ilan University in Israel published 
“Universal Computing by dna Origami Robots in a Living Ani-
mal.” According to the abstract:
Here, we show that dna origami can be used to fabricate nanoscale 
robots that are capable of dynamically interacting with each other in 
a living animal. The interactions generate logical outputs, which are 
relayed to switch molecular payloads on or off. As a proof of princi-
ple, we use the system to create architectures that emulate various 
logic gates.
In effect, they created robots capable of interacting with each 
other and performing functions, including sensing. Although 
their paper discusses the nanoscale robots’ behavior inside a living 
animal, they performed proof of concept outside a living animal. 
This is getting close to our scenario. The capability of “interact-
ing with each other” suggests that if properly programmed, they 
could swarm and communicate. Since the interactions generate 
“logical outputs, which are relayed to switch molecular payloads 
on or off,” it is conceivable that the payload could be a material 
that attacks a specific structure. It is interesting to note that their 
paper uses two terms to identify its content, “dna computing” 
and “dna machines.” This suggests that the authors understand 
the potentially wide applications their work may enable.
The reason I qualified my answer is that the Israeli scientists 
are directing their work toward nanomedicine, with the hope of 
curing diseases like cancer, not nanoweapons. However, there 
are many historical examples of making commercial and med-
ical products into weapons. The most significant challenges to 
turning the nanobots into weapons in this example are twofold:
1. Making them capable of performing in the harsh environ-
ments found outside living animals, including wind, rain, dirt, 
and pollutants, to name just a few.
2. Making the payload perform the desired function, such as 
disassembling atoms of a larger structure.

the “swarm” 
97
These are significant obstacles, but we do know that Mother 
Nature is able to do it routinely with viruses. Some infectious flu 
viruses can live up to eight hours on a surface, such as a book 
or doorknob. It is conceivable nanotechnologists will eventually 
learn to mimic nature and develop nanobots with similar or even 
more robust qualities.
I have little doubt that some nations like the United States and 
China are working on the problem. However, their closeness to a 
solution is a well- kept secret. It appears, in this regard, that nano-
medicine is ahead of nanoweapons. To be effective weapons, nano-
bots would need to work under the typical conditions found in real 
life, be controllable, and be intelligent enough to perform their mis-
sion. Mother Nature has given us proof of concept regarding real- 
life survival of nanoscale organisms outside living animals. We 
know it is possible, and eventually nanotechnologists will learn how 
to do it. Addressing the control issue may mean, on a rudimen-
tary level, just limiting the geographic location and fuel that powers 
the nanobots. Providing just enough fuel to operate within a geo-
graphic location may be all the control necessary for the first gener-
ation of such nanoweapons. When they run out of fuel, they cease 
to function. Unlike living creatures, they need not be self- replicating 
and capable of refueling. The big challenge is intelligence. dna is 
unlikely to provide the complete answer to nanobots working out-
side an animal’s body. If the attack is on a man- made structure, 
its structures do not have dna or easily recognized cells. They are 
made of atoms and molecules. Therefore, weaponized nanobots 
will require a greater level of artificial intelligence to detect and 
destroy man- made structures. Human intelligence allows educated 
adults to differentiate between a missile and a baseball bat with-
out chemically analyzing them, even though they have roughly the 
same shape. If we had that level of intelligence in nanobots, it would 
simplify targeting. Will we reach that level of artificial intelligence?


Part 2
THE GAME CHANGERS


7
The “Smart” Nanoweapons
There are lots of examples of routine, middle- skilled jobs that involve 
relatively structured tasks, and those are the jobs that are being elim-
inated the fastest. Those kinds of jobs are easier for our friends in the 
artiﬁcial intelligence community to design robots to handle them. They 
could be software robots; they could be physical robots.
— erik brynjolfsson
Most people use a “smart” phone to make a telephone call or even 
watch a movie. Today’s smart phones make Star Trek’s commu-
nicators seem primitive by comparison. My iPhone has numer-
ous applications. With the touch of a screen icon, I can find out 
the weather or baseball scores, send an instant message, and 
perform a number of other functions. What makes the iPhone 
smart? Artificial intelligence. The word “smart,” in this context, is 
synonymous with the phrase “artificial intelligence.” If you own 
a smart phone, it is artificially intelligent and has more comput-
ing power than nasa had when it landed two men on the moon.
Have you noticed military announcements and commercial 
advertising rarely use the phrase “artificial intelligence”? Instead, 
the military states they use “smart bombs.” Commercial adver-
tisements state you can own a smart anything, from a phone to a 
microwave oven. Consumers routinely buy cars that park them-
selves, microwave ovens that have one button for popcorn, and 
thermostats that regulate room temperature and humidity rela-
tive to the outside weather conditions. The reason why we do not 
often hear the phrase “artificial intelligence” is that generally we  

102 
the “smart” nanoweapons
do not focus on technology. We focus on function. For example, 
we might say we have a self- parking car. We do not say, “We have 
an artificially intelligent car.” Few would understand our meaning. 
When artificial intelligence (ai) enables a product’s function, we 
describe the product by its function, not its technology. You may 
have read an article about Google’s self- driving cars. Notice, we are 
describing the product by its function, not its technology, which is 
artificial intelligence. Now that we are discussing all these appli-
cations, you might wonder, How does artificial intelligence work?
The technological wonders, like smart phones and other smart 
products, use a computer, often only a microprocessor chip, run-
ning specific programs to provide instructions for a product to 
perform its functions. Each function requires a different program, 
and each manufacturer uses a different approach to accomplish 
the same function. Similarly, ai researchers can use different 
approaches to accomplish the same task. In fact, ai is a multidis-
cipline field, and the approach to make a product artificially intel-
ligent largely depends on the background of the researchers. The 
ai that enables a product to perform a specific goal is termed an 
“intelligent agent.” In fact, many textbooks will define the field of 
ai as the study and design of intelligent agents. For example, if 
you play chess on your phone, you are playing against an intelli-
gent agent, a software program that runs on the microprocessor 
that makes expert- level chess moves in response to your moves.
At the heart of all ai applications are a computer and a soft-
ware program. The combination of the computer’s processing 
power and the software’s capabilities determines the machine’s 
intelligence. No computer currently has the equivalent process-
ing power (i.e., the speed at which a computer can perform an 
operation) of a human brain, but the Chinese Tianhe- 2 super-
computer comes extremely close. It is difficult to define how 
close because there is no widely accepted definition regarding 
the processing capability of the brain. However, even if Tian-
he- 2 equaled its processing power, it still would not equate to 
human intelligence. It lacks the software to enable it to think 

the “smart” nanoweapons 
103
as humans think. If it could think like a human, we would say 
it has “general artificial intelligence,” as opposed to being an 
intelligent agent.
You might wonder, How will we determine when a machine 
has general artificial intelligence equal to a human? In 1950, 
mathematician and computer scientist Alan Turing devised just 
such a test. Many people are now aware of Alan Turing from the 
movie Imitation Game as the man who broke the Nazi Enigma 
code. The Turing test is widely accepted among ai researchers 
to represent the minimum test that a machine would have to 
pass to equal human intelligence. It works like this. Imagine a 
person in the same room as a computer. Imagine that the per-
son will type questions and comments to engage the computer 
in a conversation. The computer will answer and comment. If a 
third person is unable to tell which portion of the conversation is 
the computer versus the person, researchers argue the computer 
passes the Turing test and is generally artificially intelligent. One 
point to keep in mind is that the answers to the questions do not 
have to be correct. Just as humans do not know the answers to all 
questions, the computer does not need to know the answers to 
all questions. The computer’s reply only needs to appear human.
To date, no computer/program has successfully passed the 
Turing test, but some have come close. The most notable is the 
Eugene Goostman software program, developed by a team of pro-
grammers from Princeton, Saint Petersburg, and Kiev in 2001. In 
2014, in a contest held by the Royal Society and marking the six-
tieth anniversary of Turing’s death, thirty judges conversed inde-
pendently with the Goostman program and a human. Ten judges 
thought Goostman was human. I do not think the test is conclu-
sive, due to the constraints. The information given to the judges 
led them to believe that Goostman was a Ukrainian thirteen- year- 
old boy. Thus, even if some of the answers appeared wrong or 
simplistic, the judges would be tempted to attribute that to the 
subject’s age and nationality. A lot of controversy surrounds the 
interpretation of the test.

104 
the “smart” nanoweapons
When will artificial intelligence equal human intelligence? Most 
ai researchers predict this will occur in the time frame 2025– 30. 
How was this projection determined? The way we arrive at this 
is by assessing the current capability of ai technology and then 
using “Moore’s law” to determine where it will be in the future. 
But what is Moore’s law? In 1975 Intel founder Gordon Moore 
observed that “the number of transistors incorporated in a chip 
will approximately double every twenty- four months.” This means 
that the new chip would have twice the density of circuits and 
cost about the same as the old chip. A colleague of Moore made 
another observation. If Moore was correct, the processing power 
of a computer would double every eighteen months. This obser-
vation took into account that smaller circuit features meant faster 
processing. Using Moore’s law, futurists are able to predict when 
a combination of computer and software will equal human intel-
ligence. However, this is not the whole story. Most researchers 
believe that Moore’s law only applies to computer hardware, not 
software. Although there are different opinions, in my observation 
software capability appears to increase linearly. In addition, I view 
Moore’s law as broader than just applying to integrated circuits. 
In my view, Moore’s law is an observation regarding humanity’s 
creativity. It can be used to project improvements in technology 
when that technology field is highly funded, like integrated circuit 
technology. The reason that it historically did not apply to com-
puter programs is funding. Most of the funding went to devel-
oping the computer. A smaller fraction went to developing the 
software to run the computer, but that is beginning to change. 
Given that we are on the cusp of a computer almost passing the 
Turing test, with Goostman, I judge one decade should be suffi-
cient to realize that goal. Just consider this. In ten years, if inte-
grated circuit technology continues to follow Moore’s law, the 
processing power of a typical computer will be over 100 times 
greater than today’s computer. I think that generation of comput-
ers will pass the Turing test.
The U.S. military uses artificial intelligence in its weapon sys-

the “smart” nanoweapons 
105
tems. In fact, they have been funding ai from the beginning, and 
it has been giving them a return on their investment. The most 
notable are smart bombs, which garnered an enormous amount 
of television coverage during the Iraq wars. However, when com-
puter intelligence equals human intelligence, it is reasonable 
to believe that weapons, like drones, will become autonomous. 
Humans may specify mission parameters, but the computers will 
carry out the mission. This is similar to how a commanding offi-
cer gives the personnel in his command the mission goal, and 
they carry out the mission. In the case of drones, even the use of 
missiles may be autonomous. Warfare as we know it will no lon-
ger exist. Instead of humans performing life- threatening mis-
sions, autonomous ai robots, which we will term smart robots, 
will perform those missions.
There is a lot of negative press coverage regarding fully auton-
omous weapons. We will discuss it by first defining terms. Fully 
autonomous weapons relate to weapon systems that can select 
and attack targets without human intervention. The concern is 
that the computer will carry out the mission without injecting 
judgment, which every human pilot must exercise. When pilots 
make mistakes, they are held accountable. This accountability 
requires pilots and their mission controllers to exercise extreme 
care before using a weapon. All political and military ramifications 
require careful judgment. For example, during the Cold War it 
was typical for the Russians and the United States to breach one 
another’s air space to measure the quickness of their respective 
responses. Typically several jets would be scrambled to intercept 
the intruder, who would detect them on radar and return to inter-
national air space before their arrival. Each side was aware of the 
other’s intention and acted accordingly. Without judgment, such 
intrusions could result in an exchange of missiles.
Does a computer with intelligence equivalent to a human have 
judgment equivalent to a human? There are numerous articles 
on the subject. Some argue yes and some no. I have read many of 
them, and I conclude that no one knows. The question is hypo-

106 
the “smart” nanoweapons
thetical, since we do not have computers equivalent to human 
intelligence. However, the reality is that Russia is deploying a fully 
autonomous weapon. For example, according to Defense One, “In 
March 2014, the Russian Strategic Missile Forces announced it 
would deploy armed sentry robots that could select and destroy 
targets with no human in or on the loop at five missile installa-
tions.” China is likely to follow. To maintain military parity, the 
United States is also likely deploying such weapons. The autono-
mous weapons currently deployed do not have artificial intelligence 
equivalent to human intelligence. Therefore, we can conclude 
that they lack human judgment. The real issue is whether with-
out human judgment these autonomous weapons will kill inno-
cent people or even ignite a war. Unfortunately, only the future 
will provide those answers.
There are also numerous ethical considerations surrounding 
autonomous weapons. Here is a short list:
1. Will autonomous weapons act in accordance with the inter-
national humanitarian law?
2. Will autonomous weapons act proportionally in response 
to an attack?
3. Who will be accountable for the actions of autonomous 
weapons?
The largest issue regarding questions 1 and 2 is preventing 
harm to noncombatants. In general, the U.S. military complies 
with international humanitarian law. However, can the United 
States, or any nations, ensure compliance when deploying auton-
omous weapons? Question 3 is not only an ethical question but 
also a military question. If an autonomous weapon malfunctions 
and commits an act of war, does this require retaliation? For exam-
ple, consider this scenario. Russia has an autonomous missile 
defense system surrounding Moscow. Suppose it malfunctions 
and destroys a U.S. aircraft in international airspace. Should the 
United States retaliate? If the destroyed aircraft is part of an auton-

the “smart” nanoweapons 
107
omous drone formation, it is conceivable that the formation would 
attack the Russian autonomous defense system. What happens 
next may be the start of World War III.
The use of autonomous weapons is in its infancy. There are 
many military and moral questions regarding their use. However, 
nations are developing and deploying them even as I write these 
words. To my eye, it appears they make the world more danger-
ous because these first- generation autonomous weapons lack 
human judgment. Will later generations have the capability of 
human judgment? At this point no one can definitively answer 
the question. That is why the United Nations is working with its 
members to ban the use of autonomous weapons, but that pro-
cess is just beginning, and it appears to be almost at a standstill.
Let us use this information to understand what this may mean 
regarding nanoweapons. In my view, we can formulate three crit-
ical implications regarding nanoweapons in the 2030s:
1. Computers, with ai equal to human intelligence, will design 
nanoweapons, especially electronics and robots. Humans will 
define the nanoweapon parameters, and the computer will per-
form the design with low human and computer interactions.
2. Nanoweapons will become autonomous, including weapon 
systems like drones and nanobots.
3. A nation’s military prowess will equate primarily to its 
nanoweapons capabilities and less on its nuclear weapons capa-
bilities. Thus nanoweapons will define the balance of power.
To understand the basis of these implications, let’s discuss them 
in detail. The first two points are already happening. Nanoweap-
ons and nanoelectronics are designed using computers. This is 
not new. The more sophisticated a weapon system or integrated 
circuit, the more we rely on computers to assist with the design. 
As computers become more capable, this trend will increase. 
The term that describes this methodology is “computer- aided 
design,” or cad. We are also seeing a trend toward more auton-

108 
the “smart” nanoweapons
omy in weapon systems, like the Navy swarmboats we discussed 
in chapter 5. The reason for this trend is that computers can func-
tion faster than humans and typically with greater expertise. The 
rationale for the third point is multifold. Let us consider a nano-
bots attack versus a nuclear weapons attack.
A nuclear attack aimed at destroying a nation requires the use 
of missiles. Military powers are capable of detecting a nuclear 
missile launch. Indeed, with the use of satellites, the United 
States can detect when a potential adversary begins fueling their 
land- based nuclear missiles. In essence, it would be difficult for 
any nation to launch nuclear missiles and avoid detection. This 
would invite a counterstrike. In the case of a nuclear attack on 
the United States, all nato nations would consider it an attack on 
them as well. The retaliation would be devastating. In contrast, a 
nanoweapons attack that involves the release of billions of auton-
omous ai nanobots would be hard to detect prior to the attack. 
Their ai capability may allow them to attack only when all nano-
bots are strategically in place. In a matter of hours, a nation may 
have no leadership or even a clue as to the nature of the attack. 
The stealth and lethal capabilities of a nanoweapons attack sug-
gest that nations with smart nanoweapons will overshadow other 
nations with less advanced nanoweapons and even nations with 
nuclear weapons. The same applies to weapon systems that rely 
on nanoelectronics, such as hypersonic ballistic missiles with 
nuclear warheads. A hypersonic missile attack could occur faster 
than a nation could respond or determine the adversary. Nuclear 
submarines, the “boomers,” would not know which nations to tar-
get. Even if they do launch their nuclear missiles at likely perpe-
trators, the adversary would be expecting retaliation and would be 
ready with antimissile defenses. The boomers themselves would 
give away their positions by launching their missiles and become 
targets for “killer subs.”
It is conceivable that a nation could develop autonomous smart 
nanobots capable of traversing space and water, like viruses, to 
attack a nation’s land- based, air- based, and sea- based weapons. 

the “smart” nanoweapons 
109
Again, they could lie dormant until all nanobots are in place before 
performing their assigned military tasks. For example, a military 
commander could assign nanobots to find and destroy enemy sub-
marines, missile silos, and bombers with nuclear weapons. This 
would render the doctrine of mutual assured destruction useless. I 
recognize that today this example sounds like science fiction. How-
ever, given sufficient funding, nanotechnologists could develop 
such nanobots. No law of science prohibits their existence. The 
task would be monumental, similar in scope to putting a man on 
the moon, which was once also science fiction. In addition, given 
that such nanobots may require years to carry out their assigned 
mission, it would likely require nanobots to generate their own 
power. For example, they could use solar power or wind power 
to charge a nanoscale battery. Similar to nuclear- powered subma-
rines that are able to generate their own power for decades, self- 
powered nanobots would pose a viable threat indefinitely.
Even if nations control their nanoweapons, terrorists and mad 
scientists may still initiate an attack. Consider this scenario. A dis-
gruntled nanoweapons scientist decides to seek revenge for some 
perceived unjust treatment. The scientist makes billions of auton-
omous smart nanobots at home and takes them to a reservoir in 
a suitcase. There, the scientist releases the nanobots, which con-
taminate the drinking water of a major metropolis. Within a few 
weeks, people drinking the contaminated water begin to show 
signs of illness. However, at this point, it is too late for counter-
measures. Millions of innocent people begin to die. The nation 
is in shock, and its citizens live in fear. The government wants to 
act, but it is not clear what they should do. Even if they discover 
the mad scientist, beyond prosecuting him, what can they do to 
prevent a similar attack?
One nanoweapons attack could ignite a global conflict. Con-
sider the mad scientist scenario, but replace him with a terror-
ist group. If terrorists launch autonomous smart nanobots on 
a nation, that nation may retaliate against any nation known to 
harbor such terrorists. Such a widespread retaliation may ignite 

110 
the “smart” nanoweapons
a global conflict as nations attempt to defend themselves. In the 
fog of war, it may be impossible to determine who is doing what 
to whom. A nation may face a “use it or lose it” situation. This 
means that if they do not use their weapons, they may lose them. 
In such a scenario, any outcome is possible.
I have examined many scenarios related to autonomous smart 
nanoweapons attacks. Every scenario led me to the same two 
conclusions:
1. Nanoweapons are inherently dangerous, even to the nations 
that deploy them. One incident, intentional or accidental, could 
ignite a global conflict.
2. Nations deploying nanoweapons will garner military respect, 
but they will also garner high scrutiny, even to the point of para-
noia. We may find ourselves in a new and even more danger-
ous cold war.
By 2045, most researchers and futurists in artificial intelli-
gence predict that computers will exceed the combined cognitive 
intelligence of humanity. Google’s director of engineering, Ray 
Kurzweil, calls this point in time the “singularity.” In my opin-
ion, singularity level computers will design nanobots capable of 
self- replication, and they will do this with minimal human assis-
tance. Once self- replicating nanobots become a reality, just a few 
nanobots gaining entry to a submarine would eventually result 
in the swarms necessary to destroy it. I have found that the easi-
est way to think about nanobot attacks is to liken them to biologi-
cal agents. In effect, self- replicating nanobots become an artificial 
life- form, and we become their gods.

8
The Genie Is Loose
I would like to say that the only thing that would preserve security 
would be to lock everybody up, and when they decided to leave to 
shoot them and be done with it. That is the only way you could have 
perfect security.
— general l. r. groves
Almost all technologically advanced countries are pursuing nan-
otechnologies, and some are pursuing nanoweapons. Indeed, 
there is a nanoweapons arms race among the United States, Rus-
sia, and China. This new arms race has garnered almost no pub-
licity, and like nanoweapons themselves, it is invisible to most 
of humanity. We could appropriately term it “the invisible arms 
race.” However, make no mistake. This new arms race is real, 
and each nation engaged is investing billions of dollars to have 
nanoweapons that qualify it as a superpower.
As of this writing, the United States appears to be winning this 
race. However, if history has taught us anything, it is that main-
taining a military edge is fleeting. For example, the United States 
was the first country to have atomic bombs, which it used on the 
Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945. By 1949, the 
Soviet Union had detonated their first atom bomb. The Soviets 
were able to replicate the United States’ most destructive weapon 
via espionage and their own engineering. Most Americans were 
shocked by how quickly the technology secrets of the atomic bomb 
were in the hands of another nation. However, the U.S. Energy 

112 
the genie is loose
Department, which published a thirty- six- volume Manhattan Dis-
trict History, reveals that even during the development of the bomb 
there were 1,500 leaks of classified information:
Since September 1943, investigations were conducted of more than 
1,500 “loose talk” or leakage of information cases and corrective action 
was taken in more than 1,200 violations of procedures for handling 
classified material. . . . Complete security of information could be 
achieved only by following all leaks to their source.
The Manhattan Project, as it is commonly termed, was Top 
Secret. This raises a question, Why were there so many leaks? 
When most people think about the development of the atom bomb, 
it typically conjures images of a handful of scientists working in 
secret. The truth is completely different. There were 130,000 peo-
ple working on the atom bomb. It was a monumental project. 
In 1945 dollars, it cost nearly $2 billion. That equates to about 
$26 billion in 2016 dollars. There is an old saying, attributed to 
Benjamin Franklin, “Three can keep a secret, if two of them are 
dead.” The reality is that with 130,000 people involved and spies 
everywhere, keeping the Manhattan Project a complete secret 
was impossible. The United States managed to stay just ahead of 
other nations. Even General Groves, the Manhattan Project leader, 
understood this: “Now, I think that really when it comes to mili-
tary security and the relative advantages of giving out information 
and not giving it out, what we are interested in from the military 
standpoint is the relative movement, you might say, of ourselves 
and other nations. It isn’t so much how fast we progress; it is the 
relative motion of the two.”
This is the situation we are in today. The United States has 
invested over $20 billion as of 2015, managed through the nni, 
and we have nearly a million workers in an estimated trillion dol-
lar nanotechnology industry. According to a 2016 report by the 
director of national intelligence, James R. Clapper, “China contin-
ues to have success in cyber espionage against the United States 
government, our allies, and United States companies.” In this 

the genie is loose 
113
report, delivered to the Senate Armed Forces Committee, Clap-
per said, “Russia and China continue to have the most sophisti-
cated cyber programs.” Given this insight, isn’t it likely that both 
Russia and China can maintain a near parity position regard-
ing the United States’ nanoweapons? It is also likely the United 
States does likewise via the Central Intelligence Agency. Military 
secrets are hard, if not impossible, to keep for long durations. I 
fully expect that any nanoweapons deployed by any nation will 
soon be deployed by other nations. History bears witness to the 
validity of this assertion.
According to the Stockholm International Peace Research 
Institute, as of 2014, nine nations have nuclear weapons: the 
United States, Russia, United Kingdom, France, China, India, 
Pakistan, Israel, and North Korea. Factually, though, any indus-
trial nation could develop a nuclear weapon within a few years 
if it sought to do so. The how- to information can be found on 
the Internet. Nations with the technological expertise of Ger-
many and Japan could not only develop nuclear weapons but 
within a decade also have arsenals on parity to the United States 
and Russia. Treaties, like the Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty, 
entered into force on March 5, 1970, have not stopped non-
signatory nations like Pakistan, Israel, and North Korea from 
developing nuclear weapons. In general, treaties have only been 
marginally effective. If we learn from history, nanoweapons will 
also proliferate.
Let’s take a look at which nations are likely to have offensive 
nanoweapons. My list of “Nanoweapons Offensive Capability of 
Nations” (nocon) has three categories:
1. Nanoweapons Nations— Nations that already deploy 
nanoweapons and have robust ongoing development programs
2. Near Follower Nanoweapons Nations— Nations that are devel-
oping or deploying nanoweapons but are one or more gener-
ations behind other nations

114 
the genie is loose
3. Nanoweapons Capable Nations— Nations capable of devel-
oping nanoweapons, but who have chosen not to do so
The question now becomes, How do we determine which nation 
to place in each category? We will use the time- proven method 
of “following the money.” However, we will also examine three 
additional factors:
1. A nation’s ability to commercialize nanotechnology
2. A nation’s focus on military prowess, as judged by their mil-
itary spending
3. National alliances that enable nanotechnology and nanoweap-
ons sharing
Appendix 2 explains a systematic process and rationale for 
assigning a nation to a specific category. It requires correlation 
of a nation’s nanotechnology capabilities, military budget, and 
military alliances. However, let me admit at the outset: although 
I have invested countless hours in constructing the nocon list, 
it may be wrong. There is no standard way to construct the list. 
For those interested, I encourage you to read appendix 2 to gain 
deeper insight and formulate your own conclusions.
Nanoweapons Offensive Capability of Nations
This is how I view the Nanoweapons Offensive Capability of Nations:
1. Nanoweapons Nations
United States is the clear leader in developing and deploying 
offensive nanoweapons. Close alliances with nato nations 
like the United Kingdom and France may prove synergistic 
in developing nanoweapons.
China is a near follower that understands the importance 
of nanoweapons, deploys them as they become available, 
and is ramping up their nanoweapons programs as rapidly 
as their economy allows. Alliances with Russia and North 
Korea may prove synergistic in developing nanoweapons.

the genie is loose 
115
Russia comes in as a distant third that has gotten a relatively 
poor return on its investment in nanotechnology, mainly 
due to corruption and poor management. Its alliance with 
China may prove synergistic in developing nanoweapons.
The United Kingdom is the United States’ closest ally. In 
fact, military strategists characterize their relationship as spe-
cial. The level of cooperation between them with regard to 
military planning, execution of military operations, nuclear 
weapons technology, and intelligence sharing is unparalleled 
among major powers. There is every reason to believe that 
this special relationship includes nanoweapons sharing. In 
addition, the United Kingdom is a nuclear power and a nato 
nation. It would be in the best interest of the United States 
to ensure that the United Kingdom is a fully capable military 
ally, including its ability to deploy nanoweapons. However, 
this is not a one- sided relationship. The United Kingdom 
would be able to share any advances in nanoweapons it makes 
resulting from its membership in the European Framework 
Programmes for Research and Technological Development. 
From an economic viewpoint, including trade and commerce, 
and from a military viewpoint, the United Kingdom is the 
undeclared fifty- first state of the United States. I do not make 
this statement lightly. The United Kingdom and the United 
States have been close allies for well over a hundred years, 
and their special relationship has been forged in numerous 
military and political conflicts: World War I, World War II, 
the Korean War, the Cold War, the Falklands War, the Gulf 
Wars, and now the war on terror
2. Near Follower Nanoweapons Nations
France is probably developing nanoweapons via their Cen-
tre National de la Recherché Scientifique and their participa-
tion in the nanotechnology development thrusts of European 
Framework Programmes for Research and Technological 

116 
the genie is loose
Development. They are a nato nation and a nuclear power. 
French nuclear weapons, like those of the United States, 
United Kingdom, and Russia, are on high alert, ready to use 
on short notice. Their nanoweapons would likely result from 
their commercial applications, for example, using nanoparti-
cles for automotive catalytic converters, and their ever increas-
ingly close alliance with the United States. Some military 
analysts suggest that France is replacing the United Kingdom 
as the United States’ closest ally. I do not agree, but I do think 
that France equals the United Kingdom in military capabil-
ity. It also politically aligns with the United States regarding 
defeating Islamist militants and opposing Russian aggression. 
In fact, in 2013 French president François Hollande launched 
a military intervention in Mali to defeat Islamist militants.
Germany is likely developing nanoweapons. As of 2015, there 
are about 1,000 German companies engaged in the develop-
ment, application, and distribution of nanotechnology prod-
ucts. Those companies account for about 70,000 jobs. In 
general, Germany’s nanotechnologies thrusts are increasing. 
Historically Germany is a signatory of the Treaty of Brussels, 
which forbids them to possess nuclear, biological, or chemical 
weapons. Germany is also a signatory of the Non- Proliferation 
Treaty and agrees not to develop or deploy strategic nuclear 
weapons. However, as a nato nation, Germany, along with 
Belgium, Italy, the Netherlands, and Turkey, receives tactical 
nuclear weapons from the United States, which also controls 
their use. Given Germany’s strong nanotechnology infra-
structure and constraints regarding nuclear, biological, and 
chemical weapons, it is logical that they would seek to have a 
strong position in nanoweapons. I judge it is likely, for exam-
ple, that Germany is developing specific nanoweapons, such 
as mini- nukes. Germany is also a member of the European 
Union and participates in the nanotechnology development 
thrusts of European Framework Programmes for Research 
and Technological Development.

the genie is loose 
117
South Korea is the world’s fifteenth largest economy and 
has nearly 30,000 U.S. troops stationed within its borders. 
South Korea is an ally of the United States and an import-
ant trade partner. In addition, South Korea’s military bud-
get is almost as large as the entire gdp of North Korea, its 
hostile neighbor. It is likely that:
• U.S. troops in South Korea have the latest generation 
of conventional weapons and tactical nuclear weapons to 
thwart a nuclear strike by North Korea.
• South Korea is developing offensive nanoweapons, espe-
cially related to the threat that North Korea poses.
3. Nanoweapons Capable Nations
Japan focuses its nanotechnology on commercial, indus-
trial, and medical applications. Based on the 1960 Treaty of 
Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States 
and Japan, Japan is a protectorate of the United States and 
an important trading partner. Strategically, it makes sense 
for Japan to focus on its continued economic growth and 
on strengthening its relationship with the United States. 
Most military strategists suggest that Japan would like to 
upgrade its relationship with the United States from pro-
tectorate to ally.
India primarily focuses its nanotechnology on commercial, 
industrial, and medical applications. India is a nuclear power. 
It is actively pursuing new ballistic missile, cruise missile, 
and sea- based nuclear delivery systems. Given their low mil-
itary budget and modest nanotechnology capabilities, it is 
doubtful they have a robust nanoweapons program.
Saudi Arabia did not show up in Cientifica’s report. Based 
on that, it would be reasonable to believe it is not pursu-
ing nanoweapons. However, the 2016 edition of The Mil-
itary Balance, published by iiss, estimates Saudi Arabia’s 
2015 military budget at $81.8 billion, making it the third 

118 
the genie is loose
largest military budget in the world behind only the United 
States and China. It is also a close ally of Pakistan, shar-
ing commercial, cultural, religious, and political interests. 
Pakistan is a nuclear power. Currently Saudi Arabia’s focus 
is on remaining one of the world’s largest oil exporters. 
Their foreign policy appears guided by maintaining rela-
tions with other oil- producing and major oil- consuming 
countries. However, the Middle East is a hotbed for reli-
gious conflict and wars related to the region’s oil resources 
and access to the Persian Gulf. For example, one major 
reason Iraq invaded the small nation of Kuwait in the first 
Gulf War was to gain direct access to the Persian Gulf. In a 
practical sense, Saudi Arabia has a large defense budget and 
aligns itself with Pakistan to deal with their perceived threat 
from Iran. However, that is not the whole story. The Mid-
dle East is the most militarized region in the world. Saudi 
Arabia’s relationship with the United States has drawn crit-
icism from radical Islamic groups throughout the region. 
Given Saudi Arabia’s military budget, its precarious position 
in the Middle East, and its alliance with Pakistan, it would 
be reasonable to believe it would acquire nanoweapons as 
they became available. Today, most arms sales are to Mid-
dle Eastern nations. I am not suggesting that Saudi Arabia 
is developing nanoweapons. I am suggesting that their oil 
wealth and defense budget would enable them to buy some 
of the best nanotechnologists in the world to develop offen-
sive nanoweapons or even buy offensive nanoweapons that 
become available in the military market, if they perceive it 
in their national interest.
The desire to acquire offensive nanoweapons will, I judge, 
strongly guide international relations starting in the late 2020s. 
With the advent of artificial intelligence that rivals human intelli-
gence, smart nanoweapons will become weapons of choice. There 
are seven reasons for this:

the genie is loose 
119
1. Nanoweapons in the late 2020s will be less expensive than 
nuclear weapons.
2. They will be easier to deliver than nuclear weapons.
3. Detecting nanoweapons manufacturing will be difficult.
4. The destructive power of nanoweapons will rival nuclear 
weapons and offer the potential to be more selective, minimiz-
ing collateral damage.
5. The use of nanoweapons will appear more ecofriendly com-
pared to nuclear weapons.
6. Detecting a nanoweapons attack will be difficult until sig-
nificant damage occurs.
7. Determining the source of a nanoweapons attack will be 
difficult.
Items 1– 7 essentially guarantee the proliferation of nanoweapons, 
and even small nations may wield significant military might. The 
definition of a superpower will change. It will focus not solely 
on a nation’s nuclear arsenal and delivery systems but also on its 
nanoweapons arsenal and delivery systems. To my eye, this guar-
antees a new cold war.
In particular, I expect nations in the Middle East to be among 
the first to buy their way into becoming nanoweapons nations. 
I also expect the emergence of cold wars in the late 2020s and 
early 2030s:
1. The East versus West: China and Russia will square off against 
the United States and other nato nations, like the United King-
dom and France.
2. The Middle East: Nations within the Middle East, and mili-
tant groups within those nations, will square off against each 
other for the same historical reasons that have engulfed that 
part of the world in conflict for thousands of years.
3. Korea: North Korea will square off against South Korea, as 
it has for over half a century.

120 
the genie is loose
4. Terrorism versus the rest of the world: Radicalized Islamist 
militant groups will square off against the United States, the 
United Kingdom, France, and Russia, which they see as hav-
ing exploited the Middle East to control the flow of oil.
Going forward, I will refer to the nanoweapons cold wars as the 
new cold war, the sum of all hostilities, propaganda, and threats 
between nations and terrorists, short of open warfare.
Item 4 represents a new kind of cold war. The adversaries are not 
a nation within a specific geographical border. They are Islamic ter-
rorists, widely spread throughout the Middle East and other parts of 
the world, who interpret tenets of the Quran and the Hadith to jus-
tify their acts of terrorism. But that is not the whole story. Two stud-
ies of Islamic terrorists, one in the United Kingdom and one in 
France, found almost no connection between religious piety and ter-
rorism. What is it that drives them? There are numerous answers, 
and opinions differ. Here are two profiles that I find provide insight:
1. Olivier Roy, a professor at the European University Institute 
in Florence, Italy, profiles global terrorists as:
a. Coming to avenge what is going on in their country.
b. Lacking religion before being “born again” in a foreign 
country.
c. Coming from “de- territorialized backgrounds. . . . For 
instance, they may be born in a country, then educated in 
another country, then go to fight in a third country, and take 
refuge in a fourth country.” (Roy also judges this lack of iden-
tity with nationality as responsible for the success that terror-
ist groups have in recruiting members throughout the world.)
d. Believing that jihad (a war against nonbelievers) is per-
manent and not linked with a specific territory.
2. Afghan pathologist Yusef Yadgari’s 2007 study of 110 Afghan-
istan suicide bombers discloses that 80 percent had some kind 
of physical or mental disability.

the genie is loose 
121
Numerous authorities and volumes profile terrorists. These 
two, to my eye, capture the essence of most of the information. 
I conclude that the cold war with terrorists presents the greatest 
danger. Even if the suicide bombers represent only a tiny fraction 
of all terrorists, they are a serious threat that could turn a cold 
war into a full- out conflict.
As of this writing, numerous nations have thwarted terrorists’ 
plots to gain nuclear weapons. However, in the late 2020s and early 
2030s, nanoweapons will be available on the black market. Numer-
ous manufacturers will make them. Unlike nuclear weapons, if 
some go missing, they will be harder to find than nuclear weap-
ons. They will not give off a telltale radiation signature. I am con-
cerned that it may be possible for suicide terrorists to gain access to 
offensive nanoweapons via the black market. Another issue is the 
portability of nanoweapons. A disgruntled employee in a nanoweap-
ons factory may be able to find a way to steal them. One briefcase 
filled with nanoparticles may be enough to wipe out a metropolis. I 
believe authorities will apprehend the perpetrator, but only after the 
fact. By that point, millions of people may be dead and many others 
dying. Whether the disgruntled employee is a lone wolf or a mad sci-
entist will not matter. Given the large workforce of the nanoweapons 
military industrial complex, the probability of this occurring is high.


9
Fighting Fire with Fire
Be stirring as the time; be ﬁre with ﬁre;
Threaten the threatener and outface the brow
Of bragging horror.
— shakespeare, King John, 1595
Defensive Nanoweapons Scenario—The White House knew some-
thing was wrong because U.S. satellites indicated that Russia was 
fueling icbms at the Plesetsk missile base located in Mirny, about 
five hundred miles north of Moscow. President Arnold James 
was not overly concerned. There were no other reports of Rus-
sian offensive activity. He knew that Russia historically launched 
missiles from Plesetsk to test their missile technology. However, 
protocol required him to contact the Russian leadership via the 
Moscow- Washington hotline, a secure computer link established 
in 2008 over which the two nations exchanged email messages. 
Text messages were preferred because speech could be misin-
terpreted. Leaders sent their messages in their native language. 
Each side translated the messages at the receiving end. The first 
official use of the original hotline occurred in 1963, following the 
assassination of President Kennedy. At this time the hotline was a 
teletype machine. In 1991 the Kremlin and the White House also 
established a direct phone link. Having learned from the Cuban 
Missile Crisis, which required six hours or more to exchange “offi-
cial” communications, each nation wanted the ability to connect 
quickly, especially to avoid misunderstandings that could ignite 
a nuclear war.

124 
fighting fire with fire
The president ordered the first email sent at 8:43 a.m. est. It 
read, “Dear President Kozlov, we have detected missiles being 
fueled at Plesetsk. Please advise intentions. Respectfully, Arnold 
James, President of the United States. April 23, 2035, 8:43 a.m. 
est.” The message was intentionally short and each word diplo-
matically chosen.
Any use of the hotline was automatically classified “Eyes Only— 
The President” and deemed urgent. Normally the United States 
would receive a reply within minutes, even if the reply merely 
acknowledged receiving the message. At 9:00 a.m., after receiv-
ing no reply, President James decided to call the Kremlin directly. 
Before making the call, he had Secretary of State John Callahan and 
Secretary of Defense Carol Baker join him and his chief of staff, 
Michele Powers. The phone rang six times. That was strange, as 
each nation had people ready to answer the phone 24/7.
Finally, a strained voice answered, “This is Stepanov.” Prime 
Minister Stepanov spoke fluent English.
“Hello, Mr. Prime Minister, this is Arnold James.” The phone 
was on speaker, but the president did not mention it.
“Yes, Mr. President.”
“Is everything all right?”
“No, Mr. President. Everything is not all right.”
“We have detected that you are fueling your missiles at Plesetsk.”
“Yes, Mr. President. We are taking defensive measures.”
The atmosphere in the Oval Office became tense, and every-
one moved slightly closer to the speaker on the president’s desk.
James kept his tone calm and even. “What defensive measures? 
Against whom?”
“We do not know. We are still gathering intelligence.”
“Is President Kozlov available?”
“No, Mr. President. He is dead.”
This took the president completely by surprise. He lowered his 
voice. “My condolences. . . . When did he die?”
“About one hour ago, along with four members of Parliament.”

fighting fire with fire 
125
“We deeply regret your losses. Do you know what is causing 
them?”
“Yes, we are under attack. Nanobots are responsible. I am speak-
ing to you from the Kremlin Defense Ministry Room.” This was 
a highly fortified three- story structure, the equivalent to the U.S. 
presidential bunker. Stepanov continued, “We have to take defen-
sive measures.”
“I understand. I assure you that we are not responsible.”
“Yes, Mr. President.” Stepanov’s tone was condescending, and 
the phone went silent for ten seconds. To President James, the sec-
onds seems like minutes, and Stepanov’s condescending tone con-
cerned him. He hit the high alert button on his other desk phone 
and then said, “I give you my word we are not responsible and will 
assist in any way we can. I will call you back shortly.” The call ended.
The high alert button automated defcon 2 via executive order, 
meaning that nuclear war was imminent. Eight members of the 
Secret Service immediately entered the Oval Office and without 
exchanging words grabbed the president and others. With guns 
drawn, the agents took them to the White House bunker. This 
high drama was protocol, but extremely unusual. Within twenty- 
five seconds, they were locked inside the bunker.
Based on Stepanov’s tone, the president was not sure who 
the Russians held responsible. He had no alternative but to take 
defensive measures. He contacted General Arthur, the head of the 
Joint Chiefs. He and his staff had moved to the Pentagon bunker.
“General, what the hell is going on?”
“We don’t exactly know, Mr. President.”
“Then tell me what you do know.”
“At 8:29 a.m. our satellites detected that the Russians were fuel-
ing their icbms at Plesetsk. Two of our killer subs also reported 
that the Russian boomers [slang for ballistic missile submarines] 
they were following are sinking. Other Russian boomers are act-
ing erratically, almost as if they are not under control. None are 
at missile launch depth. Our forces remain fully operational.”

126 
fighting fire with fire
“Thank you, General. Keep the line open and listen in. I am 
going to call Stepanov back.”
“Yes, sir.”
The president picked up the hotline in the bunker, and Ste-
panov answered almost immediately. The president wanted to 
avoid any appearance of hostility and decided to be completely 
open with him.
“Mr. Prime Minister, we have some information for you.”
“Yes?”
“Our surveillance indicates your missile subs are acting errat-
ically. Two appear to be sinking.” The president paused to give 
Stepanov time to process the information. “Are you aware of this 
situation?”
“We are.”
James persisted. “What are your intentions?”
“We will defend ourselves.”
“Mr. Prime Minister, you are now the president of the Russian 
Federation. I urge you to not launch your missiles.”
“We must defend ourselves.”
“I understand, but let us help.”
“Help? How?”
“We have countermeasures that will neutralize the threat Rus-
sia is facing.”
“What countermeasures?”
“Defensive nanobots that neutralize offensive nanobots.”
“We know about your defensive nanobots, but what good is 
that going to do us now?”
Stepanov’s acknowledgment surprised President James. Defen-
sive nanobots were classified above Top Secret as a special access 
program. How did the Russians learn about our defensive nanobots? 
There was no time for speculation. “We can’t undo what some 
adversary has done to you, but we can stop further losses. Together 
we will find the parties responsible and bring them to justice.”
“What do you propose?”
“We need to fire hypersonic missiles on Moscow, Plesetsk, and 

fighting fire with fire 
127
every major Russian city and military installation. Those missiles 
will carry our defensive nanobots.”
“You want to fire missiles on Russia?” Stepanov’s tone was 
disbelief.
“Yes. With warheads containing defensive nanobots.”
“How can we be sure this is not a trick to launch an even 
greater attack?”
“You must trust me. I have put our military on defcon 2 to 
ensure we don’t suffer a similar fate.” Frustrated, the president 
said, “Look, if we were responsible, wouldn’t we just launch our 
hypersonic missiles and continue the attack? We know that Russia 
has no defense against our hypersonic missiles and can’t detect 
them until they reach their target. Why would we be talking right 
now if our intent was to destroy Russia?”
“Yes. What you say makes sense.” There was about a twenty- 
second pause as Stepanov weighed his options. “We must defend 
ourselves to show we are still a superpower. We intend to fire our 
missiles at isis concentrations in the Middle East.”
“I think that would be risky. If China or we misinterpret their 
trajectories, we will have to respond.”
“If Russia is to be no more, then isis is to be no more.”
“Please let me confer with my people for about fifteen seconds.”
“Yes, Mr. President.”
President James hit the mute button and asked, “General 
Arthur . . . your thoughts?”
“We can destroy Plesetsk or even their missiles in flight. Some 
Russian subs, bombers, or mobile launch pads may still launch 
a devastating counterattack on the continental United States. I 
cannot guarantee that we can fully destroy all possible incom-
ing missiles.”
“I understand. Please hold, General.”
“President Stepanov, I urge you to let us help you.” The presi-
dent paused, hoping for Stepanov to reply, but after about six sec-
onds he asked, “Have you let China know about your intentions?”
“No.”

128 
fighting fire with fire
“We need to do that.” The president signaled to Secretary Cal-
lahan to get China up to speed.
Callahan quietly got up and accessed another phone to have 
his office put him through to China’s ambassador to the United 
States. Within a minute Callahan was discussing the situation 
with Ambassador Chong. In tandem, President James contin-
ued his conversation with Stepanov.
He reiterated, “We don’t want any misunderstandings. We have 
Ambassador Chong on the line.”
“Greetings, President Stepanov,” said Chong in a respectful tone. 
“I am contacting my leadership. I urge you not to provoke China.”
“We must all do what we must do.” Stepanov seemed resigned 
to accept the hand that fate had dealt him.
“I have a proposal that may resolve this issue,” said President 
James.
“Yes, Mr. President.”
“Fire one missile that we can track and let us fire our hypersonic 
missiles. The one missile will demonstrate your military might.”
The look on the people’s faces in the bunker was a mixture 
of horror and disbelief. The president of the United States had 
just suggested that Russia fire an icbm with a nuclear warhead. 
Chong was silent.
“How are you going to help?” Stepanov was confused.
“Let us neutralize the nanobots attacking you.”
Stepanov believed the attack was a terrorist attack, retaliation 
for Russia’s combat presence in the Middle East. He also thought 
that the United States and China would not risk nuclear war with 
Russia via a nanobots sneak attack. Stepanov was a graduate of 
the prestigious General Staff College of the Russian Federation’s 
armed forces and a highly respected moderate in the Russian 
leadership. His feelings toward the United States and China were 
friendly. He carefully weighed several scenarios and reached a 
conclusion. “Okay. We will do as you suggest. You can fire your 
hypersonic missiles on Russia.” After pausing again, Stepanov 

fighting fire with fire 
129
continued with emotion choking his voice. “Let us hope for Rus-
sia and the world that your plan works.” The call ended.
“Mr. Chong, please alert your leadership not to overreact to this 
nuclear demonstration,” James said in a matter- of- fact tone. James 
knew that China’s leaders were likely already on the line and lis-
tening. Not waiting for a reply, President James continued, “I will 
need to put you on hold.” President James hit the mute button.
“Mr. President,” General Arthur spoke up, “our satellites detect 
Russia has launched a single icbm. Its current trajectory sug-
gests Syria is the target.”
“Where in Syria?” James was concerned that coalition troops, 
mostly the United States, United Kingdom, and Russia, could be 
causalities of the nuclear detonation.
“Can’t specify exactly . . . hold on . . . looks like it will detonate 
in the Syrian desert in the Al- Hamad.”
“Do we have any coalition troops in that region?”
“No. It’s desolate. There’s nothing there, not even isis.”
James knew that the Russian president did not want to risk a 
nuclear war. By targeting the Al- Hamad desert, there would be vir-
tually no casualties. However, like firing a warning shot, it would 
send a message.
He took Chong off mute and said, “I’m sure that your people 
are tracking Russia’s nuclear demonstration.”
“We are tracking Russia’s missile. We see it is targeting Syria.”
“Yes, Mr. Ambassador,” said Callahan in a conversational tone. 
“We think it will detonate in the Al- Hamad. No Chinese interests 
will be threatened.”
“We will watch the situation carefully.” Chong’s voice was stern.
“We will watch with you,” replied Callahan and put Chong on 
mute again. Russia’s close proximity to Syria cut the missile’s 
time to target to about seven minutes. Tension was evident on 
every face in the bunker. Finally, the missile’s warhead detonated 
in the Al- Hamad.
General Arthur said, “It’s a small tactical nuke, about 10 kilo-

130 
fighting fire with fire
tons . . . smaller than the Hiroshima bomb. Fall- out should be 
minimal.”
James took Chong off mute and said, “It was a small nuclear 
detonation to send a message to isis.”
“Yes, we confirm that, but we will continue to watch this sit-
uation carefully.” Chong paused, probably getting orders from 
his leadership, and then continued, “China will hold the United 
States responsible for any attack by Russia on China’s assets.”
“Please assure your leadership that we are doing all we can to 
contain this situation,” replied James. He knew that China was 
only saber rattling, as was their custom.
“I hope we understand each other,” replied Chong, and the 
call ended.
The president ordered Secretary Baker to fire the hypersonic 
missiles carrying the defensive nanobots. The missiles were always 
in a state of readiness, and targeting took only minutes. Baker 
told General Arthur to carry out the president’s orders.
President James spoke into the speakerphone. “General, how 
long before our missiles reach Moscow?”
“First missiles from our subs will arrive in seventeen minutes. 
Moscow is priority 1. Our launches from South Dakota will take 
fifty- four minutes.”
“How long for them to take out the killer nanobots?”
“Hold on, Mr. President. We’re making that calculation.”
About a minute passed, and General Arthur’s voice came 
through the speakerphone. “We estimate complete eradication 
will require four hours after release of our defensive nanobots.”
“What about the people infected?”
“The defensive nanobots will penetrate their skin and perform 
a ‘seek and destroy’ mission. Most should begin to feel better in 
less than an hour, but they must expose themselves to our defen-
sive nanobots.”
“What about the Russian subs?”
“If they have been infected, it may be too late for them.”

fighting fire with fire 
131
“Pipe our satellite coverage of Moscow to my bunker. I want 
to observe.”
One of the bunker’s monitors came to life and displayed a sat-
ellite image of Moscow. They kept the image centered on the 
Kremlin with a Magnification that represented about 1,000 feet.
“Okay, General, stay on line. I’m calling Stepanov.”
Stepanov answered immediately.
“Yes, Mr. President?”
“Our first missiles will be over Moscow in about fifteen min-
utes. They will detonate over the city. It will appear more like fire-
works, but warn your people of falling missile debris.”
“We have already sounded the sirens. Everyone is taking cover.”
“It’s important to make sure everyone gets exposed to our nano-
bots. That means you will have to flush your bunker with air 
from outside.”
“What will happen to us?”
“Most people will feel better in less than an hour. However, 
our calculations indicate it will take four hours to destroy all the 
killer nanobots once our defensive nanobots arrive.”
“What about our submarines?”
“If you can reach them, order them to surface and open their 
hatches. We will target missiles to deliver defensive nanobots to 
their locations.”
“And if we cannot reach them?” Stepanov’s voice was both sad 
and frustrated.
“I will ask my people.” James hit the mute button, putting Ste-
panov on hold, and said, “General Arthur, what do you suggest?”
“Hold on, Mr. President, and give us a few minutes to confer.”
“Okay. I am going to talk to Stepanov while you confer. Signal 
my phone when you have an answer.”
James took Stepanov off mute. “President Stepanov?”
“Yes, Mr. President.”
“We are working on the problem. Have you reached any of 
your subs?”

132 
fighting fire with fire
“Yes, five so far. They have an order to surface and open their 
hatch in four hours.”
“Good, we’ll locate them and . . . ” The sight of hypersonic mis-
siles detonating over Moscow interrupted James’s train of thought.
Stepanov spoke. “We have detected your missiles detonating 
over Moscow. We will open our venting to the outside as soon as 
your defensive nanobots start to work.”
“Good.” James knew that Stepanov wanted to see if the defen-
sive nanobots were effective before he completely surrendered 
control. The light on James’s phone signaled that General Arthur 
was ready with an answer. He addressed Stepanov. “Can I call you 
back in about fifteen minutes?”
“Of course.” Stepanov voice seemed to signal relief. James 
ended the call.
“Yes, General, what do you have for me?”
“I’m afraid it’s bad news followed by worse news.”
“Go ahead, General.”
“The bad news is that any subs not under control will eventu-
ally sink or collide with something. Even if they surface, they will 
become a navigation hazard.”
“And the worse news?”
“Sinking subs may contaminate the area with radiation, or a 
nuclear warhead may detonate.”
“Okay, General, now tell me what we’re going to do about it.”
“Our best option is to sink the subs ourselves.”
“How about the radiation?”
“We’ll only sink them by using nanobots that target the con 
tower. Then we’ll salvage the warheads.”
“Can you guarantee that?”
“No, Mr. President, I cannot. I can only say that in the limited 
time we’ve had to work the situation, this is the best scenario we 
came up with.”
“Okay, General, stay on line. I’m calling Stepanov.”
James placed the call, and Stepanov immediately answered.
“President Stepanov . . .”

fighting fire with fire 
133
“Yes, Mr. President . . .”
“There is no easy answer to our problem. My people say that 
our best chance is to sink your out- of- control subs and salvage 
the warheads.”
“Yes, we have come to the same conclusion.” Stepanov paused 
and took a breath. “But any warheads recovered are the property 
of the Russian Federation. They must be returned to us.”
“Whatever warheads we recover will be returned to Russia. 
You have my word.”
“Thank you, Mr. President.”
“I also want to thank you for detonating your tactical nuclear 
warhead in the Al- Hamad.”
“You are welcome. Hold, please. I am getting reports that mem-
bers of our Parliament are recovering. It seems your defensive 
nanobots are working.”
“Good. Moscow should be completely safe against further 
attacks.”
“How long do your defensive nanobots last?”
“A long time.” President James did not want to let them know 
that the nanobots were self- sustaining and would last indefinitely, 
unless turned off remotely by the United States.
“I understand.” Stepanov knew by James’s answer that the 
defensive nanobots were going to last indefinitely, but did not 
feel this was a good time to discuss that point.
“My people are telling me that your subs are surfacing.”
“Yes, we amended our orders.”
“We’ll take it from here.”
“Mr. President?” Stepanov’s voice filled with emotion. “You are 
a friend to Russia. We will not forget what you have done for us.”
“President Stepanov, I hope this marks a new and closer alliance 
between our great nations . . . and we will find out who is behind this.”
“Thank you, Mr. President. We must continue our dialogue. 
There is still much to do.”
Although the preceding scenario is fictitious, it is entirely plausible.

134 
fighting fire with fire
If history has taught us anything, it is these four truisms:
1. It is in humanity’s nature to engage in war. Modern humans 
evolved about 200,000 years ago. However, evidence of our 
ancient ancestors using spears dates back to 400,000 bc.
2. Every war gives rise to weapons with increasingly greater 
capability for destruction. Many experts estimate that the cur-
rent nuclear arsenal is sufficient to render humanity extinct.
3. For every offensive weapon deployed, an adversary soon devel-
ops a defensive weapon to nullify it. For example, the deploy-
ment of tanks during World War I in 1917 spurred the invention 
of a German antitank weapon in 1918. It was a large rifle fir-
ing a 13mm solid bullet that could penetrate the tank’s armor 
and destroy the engine or kill the occupants. Every offensive 
weapon, right through modern times, appears to have a defen-
sive counterpart. Even icbms are destroyable in flight by anti-
ballistic missile systems, like the Russian a- 135 and the U.S. 
Ground- Based Midcourse Defense system.
4. Military secrets are extremely difficult to keep.
If you accept these truisms, I suggest that the history of nanoweap-
ons will be no different.
Similar to our fictional scenario, the most effective countermea-
sure against nanoweapons, would be defensive nanoweapons, such 
as smart defensive nanobots. The size of smart offensive nano-
bots and their dispersal make them impossible to attack using 
conventional or nuclear weapons without significant collateral 
damage. For example, it is not possible to use nuclear weapons 
to stop smart offensive nanobots from attacking the leadership 
of a nation without killing the leadership and all people in prox-
imity. If the smart offensive nanobots covered a ten- mile radius, 
that might mean killing millions of people and doing irreparable 
harm to the environment. Again, thinking about smart offensive 
nanobots as a virus is a good model. How do you eradicate the 
virus without eradicating the affected population?

fighting fire with fire 
135
We need to stop offensive smart nanobots at their own level using 
defensive smart nanobots. In this context, by “smart nanobots” we 
mean they are autonomous and have ai functionality. Unfortu-
nately, using defensive smart nanobots to fight offensive smart 
nanobots becomes problematic. Here are some of the problems:
• The defensive smart nanobots may not be completely effec-
tive, just as antiviral medications are not effective on all viruses. 
Even today, we don’t have a cure for the common cold.
• The defensive smart nanobots may prove harmful to some 
people, just as an antiviral medication can have serious side 
effects for some people.
• The offensive smart nanobots that are able to evade the defen-
sive smart nanobots become, in a sense, resistant, much the 
same way that influenza viruses can become resistant to anti-
viral medications.
• If the defensive smart nanobots have an extensive longevity, 
their ai code could eventually become corrupt, causing them 
to become a danger to animals and humans.
The major issue with using smart nanobots as an offensive or 
defensive weapon boils down to control. The initial nanobots may 
become uncontrollable following their release. One approach to 
address the control issue is to limit their power source so that, 
like normal life- forms, they cease to function after some period of 
deployment. Another approach would be to have them respond to 
a homing signal, similar to the way some bacteria, known as mag-
netotactic bacteria, follow the Earth’s magnetic field to migrate in a 
specific direction. I judge that nanotechnologists will build in meth-
ods to control nanobots, but the real test will be the modern bat-
tlefield, which could end up being your or my city. In addition, any 
controls must be sufficiently sophisticated to ensure that an adver-
sary does not hack them. If our four truisms remain in effect, it is 
likely any type of secret external control signal will eventually be in 
the hands of an adversary. This is part of the problem.

136 
fighting fire with fire
Let us imagine we are in the mid- 2030s, and some nations have 
smart nanoweapons. Each nation will seek to make its offensive 
nanoweapons resistant to another nation’s defensive nanoweap-
ons. Each nation will seek to make control of their nanoweapons 
so sophisticated that other nations will not be able to compromise 
them. The new nanoweapons arms race, like all arms races before 
it, will become a cat- and- mouse game. As one class of nanoweap-
ons becomes vulnerable, another class will be developed that elim-
inates the vulnerability. In a sense we will be back to the Cold War 
arms race between the former Soviet Union and the United States, 
except that now there are numerous adversaries, some known and 
some unknown. Some will be familiar. Some will be new. Most 
concerning will be the unknown and nontraditional nanoweap-
ons superpowers. Today a nuclear superpower needs a significant 
amount of weapons- grade uranium, a huge chemical processing 
facility to yield highly concentrated plutonium (Pu- 239), a complex 
mechanism to make it into a bomb, and a missile delivery system. 
These are detectable by satellite surveillance and their radiation 
signature. A nanoweapons superpower may only require a facility 
about the size of a house, and the delivery system might be a suit-
case. Traditional military prowess may not count for much.
If our artificial intelligence and nanoweapons technology con-
tinues on its current course, by the mid- 2030s a number of nations 
will be deploying offensive and defensive nanoweapons. The defen-
sive nanoweapons will give rise to a new generation of more resis-
tant offensive nanoweapons. It is a vicious cycle. As Virgil put it 
in Latin, aegrescit medendo, which translates as “the cure is worse 
than the disease.” Unfortunately, if any nation or terrorist group 
achieves an asymmetrical nanoweapons advantage where they 
can launch an attack and simultaneously neutralize any counter-
attack, the world will find itself at a tipping point.

Part 3
THE TIPPING POINT


10 The Nanoweapons Superpowers
The superpowers often behave like two heavily armed blind men feel-
ing their way around a room, each believing himself in mortal peril 
from the other, whom he assumes to have perfect vision.
— henry a. kissinger
The year is 2050. The world has experienced two “technologi-
cal singularities.” In this context, we will define a technological 
singularity as a point in time when technology profoundly alters 
human evolution. Here are the technological singularities that 
will occur by 2050:
1. Artificially intelligent machines will exist that exceed the 
combined cognitive intelligence of humanity. These machines, 
which we will term “Singularity Computers,” will be in the 
hands of governments and possibly a few wealthy companies, 
like Google. Singularity Computers will increase the rate of 
technology development in every field, including nanoweap-
ons, and will initially appear to interact well with their human 
handlers. They will work on any projects submitted to them, 
as well as numerous projects they deem require address. Sin-
gularity Computers will first emerge in the early 2040s, and 
their superintelligence will yield results that benefit human-
ity. Here are some examples:
• Pharmaceuticals to address serious human illnesses, like 
antivirals that cure aids, the common cold, and influenza.

140 
the nanoweapons superpowers
• Gene therapies that extend human life and reverse the 
effects of aging.
• Self- connecting stem cells that repair spinal and brain 
injuries.
• Smart prosthetics to replace lost limbs that link directly 
with the central nervous system and are stronger and more 
agile than the recipient’s original limb.
• Implantable image sensors that link directly with the cen-
tral nervous system and enable the blind to see with greater 
acuity than humans with normal vision.
• Artificial organs, printed on 3- d printers, using organic “inks” 
that replicate the recipient’s tissue down to the specific dna.
• Nanoelectronic processors that make commercial laptops 
into supercomputers. Methods to upload the consciousness 
of deceased humans, where the person appears to be alive 
“inside the machine,” happily living in virtual reality.
• Brain implants that augment intelligence, capable of wire-
lessly interfacing with the Singularity Computers to retrieve 
any stored knowledge.
• Self- replicating smart nanobots (ssn) that can be programmed 
for various functions and manufactured using a combina-
tion of existing pharmaceutical and nanoelectronic compa-
nies. This gives rise to the second technological singularity.
2. The ssn (self-replicating smart nanobot) will have the poten-
tial to render humanity extinct. These ssn have completely 
changed every aspect of human existence. They mine raw mate-
rials and build factories to manufacture products to satisfy nearly 
all human needs. They provide medical treatments for previ-
ously untreatable conditions, like inoperable brain tumors. They 
offer unparalleled military security, able to nullify threats in 
the planning stages. Singularity Computers, which continue to 
remain under human control, interface with ssn wirelessly and 

the nanoweapons superpowers 
141
direct their activities, including self- replication. Life in technolog-
ically advanced countries, with Singularity Computers and ssn, 
is like the biblical Garden of Eden. Humans want for nothing.
In this new reality, Singularity Computers will eventually per-
form all research and development, as well as run robotic facto-
ries to cost- effectively fulfill humanity’s needs, even our food. 
Problems that have plagued humanity since its emergence as a 
species will appear solvable. The focus of humans in countries 
with Singularity Computers will be leisure.
Because of the technological singularities, new superpowers 
will emerge characterized by the prowess of their Singularity Com-
puters and nanoweapons, especially their ssn capabilities. It will 
become apparent that superpowers enjoy an extraordinary qual-
ity of life. It also will be apparent that Singularity Computers are 
able to develop extremely effective nanoweapons, especially ssn. 
Nuclear weapons will still play a role, but it will be an entirely dif-
ferent role than they played historically.
These technological singularities will become extremely dis-
ruptive on the world stage in three ways:
Disruption 1: New, and in some cases unknown, superpowers 
will emerge. It will be unclear regarding which nations are the 
new superpowers, with both Singularity Computers and effec-
tive nanoweapons, and how they rank relative to each other. The 
stealth aspect will obscure their identities. However, a reason-
able judgment regarding the new superpowers and their 2050 
rankings is possible by using my list of “Nanoweapons Offen-
sive Capability of Nations” (nocon) delineated in chapter 8, 
the military alliances likely to exist in 2050, and the following 
assumptions:
• “Moore’s law,” in its most general form, continues to apply 
to technology evolution.
• Computer programming, starting in the early 2030s, begins 
to follow Moore’s law as computers with self- learning capa-
bilities become the norm.

142 
the nanoweapons superpowers
• Humanity continues to pursue its current course in arti-
ficial intelligence and nanoweapons technology, free from 
regulation.
Before we proceed, let me provide a few words of caution. 
While I feel the projections are correct, I acknowledge they rest 
on the validity of the nocon, projected military alliances, and 
the specific assumptions delineated. I leave it to you to formu-
late your own judgment using the information provided. There 
are a number of ways to envision the world in the year 2050. I 
think you will find this methodology interesting and logical, but 
I accept that other methodologies may yield an even more accu-
rate vision.
Here are projections of how the nations will rank, in descend-
ing order, regarding the new superpower status:
• United States will be the first nanoweapons superpower. 
Its prominence as a superpower is directly proportional to its 
economy, which enables it to outspend its closest rivals, like 
China and Russia, by a factor of four to ten, respectively. How-
ever, China and Russia maintain near parity via espionage 
and their own nanoweapons development. The United States 
will be the first nanoweapons superpower to deploy self- 
replicating smart nanobots in all aspects of human endeavor, 
including commercial, industrial, medical, and military. The 
ssn represent a new prosperity engine, unparalleled in any 
previous industrial revolution. ssn also represent weapons 
far more devastating and flexible than nuclear weapons. Peo-
ple of the world both admire and fear the United States as 
the most visible and potent superpower.
• China will be a nanoweapons superpower and will not 
attempt to hide its capabilities. Its economy will be second 
only to the United States’. In tandem with its growing econ-
omy and military might, China will become “westernized,” 
meaning that it will adopt the economic and political systems 
of Europe and North America. Initially China’s economy 

the nanoweapons superpowers 
143
flourished based on being the world’s cheap labor source. 
However, by the 2050s robotics will change the dynamics 
of manufacturing and remove the need for human labor. 
In China’s case, their first real experience with capital-
ism and a quasi- democratic government occurred when 
Hong Kong reverted to their control in 1997. It became 
obvious that the system worked, and China’s leaders will 
extend the Hong Kong model to mainland China. China’s 
deeply felt need for a strong military will continue. It will 
seek military parity with the United States, which is the 
world’s de facto gold standard of economic wealth and mil-
itary might. China will continue to emphasize computer 
technology and eventually evolve Tianhe- 2 to a Singular-
ity Computer, Tianhe- 3. The stealth aspects of nanoweap-
ons will keep much of China’s capability hidden from the 
world, with the exception of the United States, which will 
use its ssn capability to monitor every nation, even its clos-
est ally, the United Kingdom.
• United Kingdom will be a nanoweapons superpower. 
Most nations will suspect that the UK’s relationship with 
the United States enables this status, but its complete capa-
bility will remain hidden. The UK will become a nanoweap-
ons superpower out of necessity. The United States will 
need a nanoweapons superpower ally they can trust. The 
special relationship between the United States and United 
Kingdom will enable joint military planning, execution of 
military operations, nuclear weapons technology sharing, 
computer technology sharing, nanoweapons sharing, and 
intelligence sharing. In addition, the United Kingdom will 
play an even more important role as a nato nation than 
it currently does. For reasons that we will discuss shortly, 
nations will be highly reluctant to allow Singularity Comput-
ers to interface with each other. However, given the special 
relationship between the United States and the UK, I judge 

144 
the nanoweapons superpowers
that they will allow their Singularity Computers to inter-
face, ensuring that each nation remains united to the other.
• France will become a nanoweapons power but not a super-
power. France will continue to seek a closer alliance with the 
United States and politically align with it against rogue states 
and terrorist groups as well as Russian and Chinese military 
aggression. France will become a nanoweapons power by:
Increasing their alliances with the United States, which 
I expect will include limited computer technology and 
nanoweapons sharing.
Focusing on developing nanoweapons via their Centre 
National de la Recherché Scientifique and participating 
in the nanotechnology development thrusts of European 
Framework Programmes for Research and Technologi-
cal Development.
Given sufficiently high cold war tensions, France may 
expand its role in nato to include committing its nuclear 
and nanoweapons. French nuclear and nanoweapons, like 
those of the United States, United Kingdom, Russia, and 
China, will be on high alert, ready to use on short notice.
• Germany will become a nanoweapons power but not a 
superpower. Blocked initially by the Treaty of Brussels and 
later by the Non- Proliferation Treaty, Germany was unable 
to develop or possess strategic nuclear weapons. Therefore, 
their military prowess was limited and their defense highly 
dependent on the United States, which under the U.S.– nato 
nuclear weapons sharing provisions provided Germany with 
tactical nuclear weapons under U.S. control. However, World 
Wars I and II provide ample evidence of Germany’s need 
to be a world- stage military power. Based on their robust 
nanotechnology infrastructure and their strong commer-
cial applications, Germany will develop effective computer 
and nanoweapons technology and hold a position similar to 

the nanoweapons superpowers 
145
the United Kingdom’s today. It will not have complete parity 
with the United States, but it will have sufficient nuclear and 
nanoweapons to be a strong military ally. I think it is likely 
that Germany will focus on specific nanoweapons, such as 
mini- nukes and nanobots, while placing high emphasis on 
continuing to market its consumer, industrial, and medical 
nanotechnology products throughout the world. Germany 
will continue as a member of the European Union and partic-
ipate in the nanotechnology development thrusts of European 
Framework Programmes for Research and Technological 
Development. Germany’s importance as a nato nation will 
grow as it becomes clear that it is a nanoweapons power.
Russia will be a nanoweapons power but not a superpower. 
Russia will continue to view itself as having parity with the 
United States and China, but that will be self- delusion. Cor-
ruption and mismanagement will take its toll on Russia. 
Russia’s oil wealth and close alliance with China allows main-
taining only early generations of nanoweapons. All efforts 
to commercialize nanotechnology will still leave Russia far 
behind market leaders, like the United States, Germany, and 
Japan. Russia will not have a Singularity Computer. Rus-
sia will maintain its nuclear arsenal, but it no longer will 
offer a strategic offensive threat. Singularity Computers in 
highly advanced technological countries will develop effec-
tive countermeasures to nullify any Russian use of nuclear 
missiles against them.
Saudi Arabia will become a nanoweapons power, using 
its oil as a strategic bargaining chip to gain computer and 
nanoweapons technology from the United States. It will also 
use its oil wealth to buy world- class nanotechnologists and 
computer technologies. I judge that Saudi Arabia will seek 
to become a nato nation. It would be in the best interests 
of Europe and the United States to have another capable 
nato ally in the Middle East.

146 
the nanoweapons superpowers
•  Japan will not become a nanoweapons power but will 
remain a nanoweapons capable nation. Japan will have sin-
gularity computer technology but will not build a Singularity 
Computer. Japan will continue to focus its nanotechnology on 
commercial, industrial, and medical applications. Japan will 
remain a “protectorate” of the United States and an important 
trade partner. Given its lack of military prowess, I believe the 
United States will not upgrade Japan’s relationship to “ally.”
Disruption 2: The new cold war will cause every nation to live 
in fear, even the superpowers. The doctrine of mutually assured 
destruction (mad) will not be a clear deterrent.
Disruption 3: The new cold war will give rise to new military 
alliances. I expect Russia and China to form a military alliance. 
Their alliance will be in response to the new nato alliance, 
which now includes nations with Singularity Computers and 
nanoweapons. I also think it likely that China will force North 
Korea to abandon its military aspirations and become a pro-
tectorate of China. My rationale is that China will harbor great 
concerns regarding North Korea’s unpredictable military behav-
ior. I also think most nations of the world will pressure China, 
through trade sanctions, to disarm North Korea.
In the atmosphere of the new cold war, major world religions 
will unite and proclaim nanoweapons to be inhumane and a clear 
violation of the natural order. Some philosophers and scientists 
will openly warn of the increased danger of Singularity Com-
puters combined with nanoweapons. They will argue that each 
separately presents a 5 percent risk of human extinction by the 
year 2100, but combined, the risk is much greater than 10 per-
cent, since one technology empowers the other. This is simi-
lar to using matches near tnt. Matches represent a risk of fire. 
tnt represents a risk of explosion. Using them in close proxim-
ity edges the combined risk of a catastrophe to a near certainty. 
Faced with this reality, the United Nations will seek to broker a 
new arms reduction focused on nanoweapons.

the nanoweapons superpowers 
147
Some superpowers may believe the world is safer than it was 
during the first Cold War. Unlike nuclear weapons, nanoweapons 
offer options, from assassinating one person to being a weapon of 
mass destruction. From my point of view, this mind- set increases 
the probability of using nanoweapons. The issue is that one use 
of nanoweapons sets a precedent and may lead to an escalation.
Those nations without Singularity Computers and nanoweap-
ons will seek to:
• Form a military alliance with a superpower. In this regard, I 
see nato expanding its role, becoming stronger, and accept-
ing new members. A new “Warsaw Pact” may emerge, with 
Russia and China forming its core. It will be tough for nations 
without nuclear or nanoweapons to go it alone.
• Have nuclear weapons as some form of deterrent. Even if 
they detonate the nuclear weapons within their own borders, 
it would threaten a nuclear winter that could render the Earth 
uninhabitable. According to a 2014 report published in the jour-
nal Earth’s Future, out of the more than 15,000 nuclear weap-
ons in existence, the detonation of even 100 relatively small 15 
kiloton bombs (each bomb equal to the atom bomb dropped on 
Hiroshima) would eject over 5.5 million tons of black soot into 
the atmosphere. This soot would block sunlight, causing global 
temperatures to drop for twenty- five years. It would also tem-
porarily destroy a significant portion of the Earth’s ozone layer, 
which would allow an 80 percent increase in uv radiation to 
reach the Earth’s surface. The result would be the destruction 
of the Earth’s ecosystem. The entire concept of a nation threat-
ening to detonate its own nuclear arsenal would be an attempt 
at establishing a new doctrine to replace mad. In this case, they 
would threaten to render humanity extinct. Thus the new doc-
trine would likely be termed “mutually assure extinction.” To 
accomplish this, a nation could set up their nuclear weapons to 
autonomously detonate unless someone enters a safe code at 
predetermined intervals. This is a form of a dead man’s switch. 

148 
the nanoweapons superpowers
For example, the engineer of a train must continually engage 
the throttle. If something were to happen to the engineer, the 
train would come to a stop. The new cold war may force non- 
nato nuclear powers like India and Pakistan into this position, 
essentially threating worldwide nuclear suicide.
I also expect to see some of the same elements that characterized 
the first Cold War to be prominent in the new cold war, such as:
• Propaganda— each side will engage in portraying themselves 
as victims in an attempt to sway world opinion to their side. I 
don’t think there will be as much saber rattling, since each side 
will seek to keep their nanoweapons secret and not provoke an 
undesirable response, such as trade sanctions.
• An arms race— a nanoweapons arms race will rage, similar 
to the nuclear arms race during the first Cold War. It will be 
difficult to quantify costs, since Singularity Computers will 
design and build the nanoweapons. I suspect the cost will be 
in lost opportunities to use the computers for the further ben-
efit of humanity.
• Espionage— many nations, large and small, will engage in 
espionage, especially with regard to computer technology and 
nanoweapons. Spy nanobots will replace humans, but satellite 
surveillance will continue.
• Clandestine operations— nations will continue to use spe-
cial forces and political rebels to destabilize adversaries’ 
governments.
• Economic wars— nations will trade with governments deemed 
friendly and place sanctions on governments deemed adversarial.
• There will also be additional elements to the new cold war:
• A superintelligence race— superpowers will seek to have the 
most advanced computers, which will lead to an intelligence 
explosion. Each generation of Singularity Computers will design 

the nanoweapons superpowers 
149
another one even more powerful. Many ai authorities warn 
that this may ultimately lead to human extinction.
• A redefinition of a nation’s monetary value— when it becomes 
obvious that Singularity Computers are the key to a nation’s pros-
perity and military prowess, the new currency will be energy and 
specific raw materials. The Singularity Computers will require 
energy and raw materials to function, build factories, enable 
prosperity, and build military prowess. This is the new reality. 
Scientifically speaking, Einstein taught us that energy and mass 
are equivalent in his iconic equation E = mc2, where E is energy, 
m is mass, and c is the speed of light in a vacuum. Eventually it 
will all boil down to energy. With it, we will be able to make any 
material we need. Where do we get that kind of energy? This is 
speculation, but perhaps in the twenty- second century we will 
learn to harness the complete energy of a star, like our Sun. I 
do not want to digress further, so for now and the latter half of 
the twenty- first century, consider a nation’s monetary value to 
equate with energy (i.e., fossil fuels, nuclear, solar, and wind) 
and raw materials.
Each superpower will also grapple with a new issue, namely, 
preventing a Singularity Computer from gaining too much mili-
tary prowess. Let us frame this new issue. A Singularity Computer, 
essentially a computer more intelligent than the entire human race, 
may feel threatened by humanity. Its database will clearly show that 
humanity is an unpredictable, emotional, warring species, with the 
capability to destroy Earth and therefore to destroy it. Today many 
researchers argue that a Singularity Computer will represent a new 
life- form, artificial life, and as with all life- forms, it will seek to pro-
tect itself. While I tend to agree, I do not think it necessary for it 
to be a life- form to seek to protect itself. I judge its logic alone will 
lead to that. Let me illustrate this with a real example.
Recent experiments, performed in 2009 at the Laboratory of 
Intelligent Systems in the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in 
Lausanne, suggest even primitive artificially intelligent machines 

150 
the nanoweapons superpowers
are capable of learning deceit, greed, and self- preservation with-
out being programmed to do so. For insight, let us examine 
the experiments. A research team programmed small, wheeled 
robots to find “food” (signified by a light colored ring on the floor) 
and avoid “poison” (a dark- colored ring). Each robot received 
points the longer it stayed close to food and lost points when it 
was close to poison. The researchers programmed each robot 
to flash a blue light when it found food that the other robots 
could detect. In effect, the researcher programmed the robots 
to work together to find food. “Over the first few generations, 
robots quickly evolved to successfully locate the food while flash-
ing the blue light. This resulted in a high intensity of light near 
food, which provided social information allowing other robots 
to more rapidly find the food,” according to the authors. Follow-
ing each experiment, the research team would use the data to 
“evolve” new generations of robots, copying the artificial neu-
ral networks of the most successful robots to lesser successful 
robots. The space around the food, a light colored ring on the 
floor, was limited. If a robot found food and flashed its light, 
the other robots moved in, bumping and jostling each other. 
Even the original robot that found the food could end up being 
jostled out. By the fiftieth generation, some robots that found 
food learned not to flash their lights. In effect, some robots 
became deceitful and greedy. It also implies they learned self- 
preservation. After several hundred generations, almost all the 
robots stopped flashing their lights when they found food. Even 
more startling, some robots flashed their lights to mislead the 
other robots.
These robots were not self- evolving (able to learn through expe-
rience). The researchers had to help them evolve. However, what 
happens when robots have intelligence equal to or greater than 
humans? The Lausanne experiment suggests they will act in their 
own best interest, even ignoring their programming.
The concern regarding Singularity Computers gaining too much 

the nanoweapons superpowers 
151
military prowess is that they could use their military might on 
us. If they “reason” that we, humanity, are a threat to their exis-
tence, they will seek to eliminate the threat. In such a situation, 
our own weapons would turn against us.
A related concern is allowing Singularity Computers to inter-
face with one another. Imagine a network of Singularity Comput-
ers. Potentially they could pool their intelligence and devise an 
ingenious plan to gain control over us or even eliminate us. The 
renowned science fiction author Isaac Asimov anticipated this 
threat and created the Three Laws of Robotics. He introduced 
them in his 1942 short story “Runaround.”
1. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, 
allow a human being to come to harm.
2. A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except 
in cases where such orders would conflict with the First Law.
3. A robot must protect its own existence as long as such pro-
tection does not conflict with the First or Second Laws.
While these laws appear to address the issue in principle, the 
Lausanne experiment suggests that they would need to be hard-
wired, not expressed in software.
Let us briefly summarize the world in the year 2050 as envi-
sioned in this chapter:
• Superpowers are defined by the prowess of their Singularity 
Computers and nanoweapons.
• Singularity Computers offer humanity the potential to end 
human suffering, extend human longevity, and increase human 
intelligence, but they also threaten human extinction.
• Nanoweapons offer unparalleled options, from surveillance to 
destruction, from assassination to mass annihilation, but con-
trolling them is problematic, and loss of control could result 
in human extinction.
• A new cold war has the entire world in its grip.

152 
the nanoweapons superpowers
• The new cold war fuels a new arms race, with each super-
power seeking to have the best Singularity Computers and 
nanoweapons.
• Combining Singularity Computers with nanoweapons 
increases the threat of human extinction higher than 10 per-
cent by the year 2100.
• Nuclear powers, without Singularity Computers and nanoweap-
ons, adopt a mutually assured extinction strategy to avoid being 
attacked by nanoweapons.
• The “dial the level of destruction” aspect of nanoweapons 
makes their use in conflict greater than the use of nuclear 
weapons.
The United States and Russia are already deploying nanoweap-
ons, which offer more options than conventional weapons. For 
example, the United States’ new laser weapon can disable an air-
craft without destroying it. Given our history as a warrior species 
and the options that nanoweapons offer, it is a near certainty that 
nanoweapons will play a role in future warfare. The only ques-
tion is, Will humanity survive the nano wars?

11
The Nano Wars
If men can develop weapons that are so terrifying as to make the 
thought of global war include almost a sentence for suicide, you would 
think that man’s intelligence and his comprehension . . . would include 
also his ability to ﬁnd a peaceful solution.
— dwight d. eisenhower
With the challenging international landscape today, the average 
person and even some military commanders may not be able to 
define war, let alone the “spectrum of conflict.” In 2006 the pre-
eminent Oxford military historian Hew Strachan made this point 
in a lecture: “If we are to identify whether war is changing, and— if 
it is— how those changes affect international relations, we need to 
know first what war is. One of the central challenges confronting 
international relations today is that we do not really know what is 
a war and what is not. The consequences of our confusion would 
seem absurd, were they not so profoundly dangerous.”
This may seem like a philosophical splitting of hairs, but it is 
not. The spectrum of conflict defines our level of involvement 
and the types of weapons used in each component of the spec-
trum, including the use of nanoweapons. Therefore, before we 
can discuss nano war, we need to define war.
The first crucial thing to understand is that in contemporary 
times there is no peace, if we define peace as a period absent 
of conflict. Most Western cultures think of war in binary terms, 
namely, war or peace. For the most part, they cling to Prussian 

154 
the nano wars
general Carl von Clausewitz’s classic nineteenth- century defini-
tion: “War therefore is an act of violence to compel our oppo-
nent to fulfil our will.” Our experiences in two world wars served 
to reinforce our thinking, along with our concept that advanced 
weapons, like the atomic bomb, are fundamental to winning 
such wars. Military strategists categorize those wars as “large 
theater conflicts.”
Our adversaries do not share our binary perception of war, and 
there is strong evidence that they are right. We find ourselves in 
a spectrum of conflicts, including:
• Limited conventional wars
• Counterinsurgency and stability operations
• Hybrid wars
• Ambiguous wars
• Gray zone wars
Limited Conventional Wars
Limited conventional wars are conflicts between nations using 
conventional military means, limited by geographic boundar-
ies, types of targets, and disciplined use of force. Most notable is 
the absence of nuclear weapons. Examples include U.S. involve-
ment in Operation Desert Storm (1991) and the U.S. invasion of 
Iraq (2003).
In both examples, the United States used conventional weap-
ons against military targets while attempting to avoid civilian 
casualties. The conflict was limited in geographic scope. This 
represented a highly disciplined use of force.
Counterinsurgency and Stability Operations
After Operation Desert Storm, the U.S. public and military elite 
began to believe three questionable paradigms:
1. War is tidy and well defined.
2. War can be won quickly with low casualties.

the nanowars 
155
3. War is won with advanced military weapons and well- trained 
troops.
Following our invasion of Iraq in 2003, which has led to our con-
tinued involvement in the Middle East to maintain security, most 
would agree those paradigms are false. Instead of winning peace, 
we found it necessary to engage in counterinsurgency and sta-
bility operations.
We should have remembered our own national history. If the 
three paradigms were true, we would still be a British colony. It 
appears that many of our military leaders have forgotten the les-
sons learned during the American Revolution, 1775– 83. Thir-
teen small colonies defeated one of the greatest military powers 
in existence, Great Britain. How did we win? Let us look at the 
salient aspects.
• First, the conflict became larger than just the original 20,000 
Patriot militia fighting the 50,000 British regulars, 30,000 Ger-
man (Hessian) mercenaries, and 50,000 Loyalists, colonists 
that remained loyal to Great Britain. The conflict evolved into a 
global war, during which the Americans formed alliances with 
the French, Spanish, and Dutch to fight the British.
• Second, the British largely distrusted the Loyalists, alienat-
ing them and effectively reducing their forces by over a third. 
British concepts about war and conducting military operations 
ultimately led to defeat.
• Third, the Continental army and militias used guerrilla tactics 
learned during their battles with the Indians. General Wash-
ington’s strategy was to avoid large- scale confrontations with 
the well- equipped royal army. This made it impossible for the 
British to win a decisive victory. In fact, only once during the 
entire war did an American army surrender to British forces. 
That one victory in 1780, at Charleston, South Carolina, hardly 
constituted a knockout blow to the Americans. A skirmish typi-
cally would involve militia behind trees shooting British troops. 

156 
the nano wars
After briefly attacking, the militia would disappear into the 
safety of the forest. In addition, since the militia wore civilian 
dress, the British could not distinguish militia from Loyalists.
• Fourth, the Americans’ alliance with France, Spain, and 
the Dutch served them well. France aligned itself with the 
colonists in 1775 by secretly sending them money and weap-
ons. In 1778 France declared war on Brittan and increased its 
involvement by sending an army to fight with the Americans. 
In 1776 Spain began funding Roderigue Hortalez and Com-
pany, which provided military supplies to the revolutionaries. 
In 1781 Spain also funded the siege of Yorktown. In 1782 the 
Dutch was the second European nation to diplomatically rec-
ognize the Continental Congress, or as we term it today, the 
United States. (In 1777 Morocco became the first country to 
diplomatically recognize the United States as an indepen-
dent nation.) This made the American Revolution a global 
confrontation in which Great Brittan had no allies. Most his-
torians doubt the Americans would have prevailed without 
the help of its allies.
• Fifth, the British focused on capturing cities. In fact, they 
did capture New York City and held it for the duration of the 
war. Capturing cities was not difficult for the British, but this 
proved a questionable strategy. The colonists did not have a 
national capital that the British could capture and thereby end 
the conflict. In addition, without the support of Loyalists, the 
British found it difficult to hold captured cities. For example, 
the Continental army drove the British out of Boston in 1776.
• Sixth, the geographical size of the colonies made it impos-
sible for the royal forces to end the rebellion via occupation. 
Although there were four cities, Philadelphia, New York, Bos-
ton, and Charleston, 90 percent of the colonists lived in rural 
areas, which includes Delaware, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts 
Bay Colony (which included Maine), New Jersey, Georgia, Con-
necticut, Maryland, South Carolina, New Hampshire, Virginia, 

the nanowars 
157
New York, North Carolina, Rhode Island, and Providence Plan-
tations. New York State alone is almost 55,000 square miles. 
The royal forces numbered about 80,000, not counting the 
Loyalists. This means the royal forces could not station even 
one soldier per square mile occupied by the colonists.
• Widespread support for the Revolution cut across regions, 
religions, and social ranks. Thousands of farmers, artisans, ex- 
servants, slaves, shopkeepers, merchants, and laborers took 
up arms to fight the British. Today’s military strategists would 
characterize the tactics of the Americans as “unconventional 
asymmetrical warfare.”
My point in capsulizing the salient aspects of the Revolution 
is that our commonly held ideas regarding the nature of war are 
largely erroneous. War is not tidy and well defined. Superior weap-
ons and well- trained troops do not guarantee victory.
Hybrid Wars
One level down from limited conventional war is hybrid warfare, 
which includes “irregular wars,” or any blend of regular and irreg-
ular tactics. According to the 2008 U.S. Army Posture Statement, 
the United States defines irregular warfare as “a violent struggle 
among state and non- state actors for legitimacy and influence 
over the relevant populations.” It embodies indirect and asym-
metric approaches that avoid direct confrontations with strong 
forces. The 9/11 terrorist attacks on the United States would qual-
ify as an example.
Ambiguous Wars
According to the Center for Naval Analysis, the phrase “ambig-
uous warfare” is a term that “applies in situations in which a 
state or non- state belligerent actor deploys troops and proxies in 
a deceptive and confusing manner— with the intent of achieving 
political and military effects while obscuring the belligerent’s 
direct participation.” An example is Russia’s seizure of Crimea 

158 
the nano wars
in 2014, ordered by Russian president Vladimir Putin to protect 
“Russian citizens and compatriots on Ukrainian territory.” Mos-
cow’s actions deliberately obscured the annexation of Crimea 
and delayed Western responses. The initial Russia troops who 
seized Crimea wore uniforms without national insignias. Was it 
a Russian invasion? Was it a move to protect Russian citizens? 
You be the judge.
Gray Zone Wars
We can define gray zone wars as deliberate activities by a nation, 
or fractions within a nation, that seek to achieve strategic goals 
without the use of military forces. China’s assertive behaviors in 
the South China Sea, such as the deliberate use of security forces 
to assert sovereignty in and around contested shoals and islands 
in the Pacific, is an example of a gray zone conflict. Their behavior 
aims at changing the norms of international behavior and assert-
ing their interpretation. Russia is also engaging in gray zone con-
flicts, such as seeking to extend its influence in numerous regions 
without triggering an armed nato response.
Defense policy veteran Nadia Schadlow made this observation 
regarding the U.S. reaction to gray zone conflict: “By failing to 
understand that the space between war and peace is not an empty 
one— but a landscape churning with political, economic, and secu-
rity competitions that require constant attention— American for-
eign policy risks being reduced to a reactive and tactical emphasis 
on the military instrument by default.”
I liken this to someone who is rude and behaves just short of 
provoking an altercation. For example, a neighbor may use a por-
tion of your property to have an outdoor party without asking per-
mission. The neighbor may even invite you to the party. In such 
a situation, many people would be inclined to let it go without 
making an issue. First, they may want to stay on friendly terms 
with their neighbor. Second, it is temporary. The trespassing lasts 
only for the duration of the party. Third, the neighbor invited you 

the nanowars 
159
to join the party. The neighbor’s behavior is rude, since he or she 
never sought your permission, but it is unlikely to cause an alter-
cation or even an exchange of words. In real life, this happens all 
the time. You may even attend the party and bring a case of beer 
as a goodwill gesture. However, now the neighbor has established 
a precedent, namely, it is okay to use your property for a party. 
Consider how difficult it will be to object to its use next time. That 
is the exact nature of gray zone conflict, except it occurs on the 
national and international levels.
Nano War and Its Place in the Spectrum of Conﬂicts
Now that we have discussed the spectrum of conflicts, you may 
ask, Where does a nano war fit into the spectrum? To address this 
question, let us start by reiterating two important points:
1. Nanotechnology is an enabling technology. Think of it as a 
category of technologies, not a specific technology.
2. Nanoweapons are weapons that exploit the use of nano- 
technology.
We can define a nano war as any war that includes the use of 
nanoweapons. To categorize nano wars in the spectrum of con-
flicts, it is important to define the categories of nanoweapons.
Let’s define the categories, discuss each, and give some con-
crete examples of the nanoweapons in each category.
1. Passive nanoweapons: This category relates to any use of nan-
otechnology in warfare that has a nonoffensive/nondefensive 
application, but may increase the effectiveness of conventional 
or strategic weapons. In many cases, passive nanoweapons will 
have a commercial, industrial, or medical counterpart. Repre-
sentative examples include:
a. Nanoelectronic integrated circuits: These advanced inte-
grated circuits form the backbone of Department of Defense 
computers and smart weapons. While nanoelectronic inte-

160 
the nano wars
grated circuits themselves are not a weapon in the tradi-
tional sense, they enable a wide spectrum of conventional 
and strategic nanoweapons.
b. Nanoparticles: All branches of the U.S. military will use 
nanomedicine, such as nanosilver- impregnated bandages to 
inhibit infection. The Navy is using nano coatings to inhibit 
corrosion and marine growth on its ships. The Army is using 
nano- enhanced materials to develop lighter, stronger armor 
for combat troops. Nanotechnology- based explosives can 
increase the destructive power of conventional explosives.
c. Nanosensors: These sensors are finding wide application 
in every branch of the U.S. military because they offer unpar-
alleled opportunities to interact (i.e., sense) at the molecu-
lar level. This makes them extremely effective as biosensors 
and chemical sensors. They are also finding applications in 
image sensing.
d. Nanotechnology- based commercial and industrial products: 
These are finding military applications, including enhanced 
steel and concrete to build command and control centers, 
armor plating, and stronger artillery.
2. Offensive tactical nanoweapons: This category relates to 
offensive weapons whose nanotechnology components enhance 
their tactical capabilities.
a. Nanotechnology- based lasers: The Navy’s is deploying 
laser weapons that offer options to disable or destroy adver-
sary targets. The Army is fielding infantry lasers, mounted 
to conventional vehicles, that are able to fire laser bursts of 
energy to destroy cruise missiles, artillery, rockets, and mor-
tar rounds.
b. Superior snipers: The Army is working to make their 
snipers completely invisible under a nanomaterial cloak of 
invisibility with the ability to fire smart bullets that make a 
one- mile kill routine.

the nanowars 
161
c. Smart artillery: The Army is developing smart artillery, 
which may profoundly change the role of artillery or even 
the role of the Army, as a land force, to a strategic force capa-
ble of engaging air, sea, and land targets.
d. Mini- nukes: These nuclear weapons are arguably con-
ventional, since they do not result in residual radiation or 
radioactive fallout. As such, they will likely find offensive 
applications in every branch of the U.S. military
e. Nanorobotics: Every branch of the U.S. military will use 
this class of robotics in offensive applications. The Army is 
developing the Autonomous Rotorcraft Sniper System, an 
unmanned helicopter carrying a remotely controlled sniper 
rifle. The Navy is testing an offensive unmanned drone ves-
sel, the Anti- Submarine Warfare Continuous Trail Vessel, 
to track enemy submarines and limit their tactical capacity 
for surprise. Navy drone vessels will play a role similar to 
their Air Force counterparts. The Air Force is developing 
bird- sized and insect- sized drones that can carry an explo-
sive payload, sufficient to kill a single adversary or destroy 
an adversary’s command and control installation.
3. Defensive tactical nanoweapons: This category relates to 
defensive weapons whose nanotechnology components enhance 
their tactical capabilities. Representative examples include:
a. Nanorobotics: Every branch of the U.S. military will use 
this class of robotics in defensive applications. The Army, for 
example, will use it to detect and disarm improvised explo-
sive devices (ieds). The Air Force will use it to develop sur-
veillance drones the size of birds and insects. The Navy is 
already using it in their swarm boats.
b. Nano- enhanced metal: New steels, with ten times the 
strength of normal steel, will find wide military applica-
tion, from Army armored troop carriers to Navy ships. The 
nano- coated metals may become a standard “mil- spec” for all 

162 
the nano wars
metal components, due to the improved strength and corro-
sion resistance. Being lighter, Army vehicles and Navy ves-
sels could travel farther and faster with the same amount of 
fuel they now consume, with coated engine parts that virtu-
ally never wear out.
c. The invisibility cloak: This technology is likely to find 
numerous applications in all branches of the military. In 
addition to providing a new level of cover for Army snipers, 
the Army will use it to add stealth to its soldiers and weap-
ons. Future drones may not only have low radar signatures 
but also be optically invisible. Imagine, for example, a fly- 
sized invisible drone. It could sit on the table of an adversary’s 
command and control center to provide real- time military 
intelligence on the adversary’s plans
4. Offensive strategic nanoweapons: This category relates to 
weapons whose nanotechnology components enhance their 
strategic capabilities. It also includes offensive autonomous 
smart nanobots. Representative examples include:
a. Autonomous smart nanobots— these would represent the 
ultimate weapons of mass destruction. A nation, or even 
a terrorist organization, could program them to attack an 
adversary’s infrastructure, its leaders, and its people. Cur-
rent technology already confirms that making such nanobots 
is possible. Extrapolation of current technology to the year 
2050 suggests that building self- replicating smart nanobots 
(ssn) will be possible. The issue will be maintaining control 
of these nanoweapons, which represent the ultimate dooms-
day devices and threaten human extinction.
b. Hypersonic glide missiles: These will likely require nano-
materials, nano- enhanced fuels, and nanoelectronic guidance 
systems. They will be capable of reaching a target halfway 
around the globe in an hour. The United States claims that 
they will only use conventional warheads on such missiles, 

the nanowars 
163
but they clearly have the capability to deliver nuclear weap-
ons and nanoweapons. Currently the United States is the 
clear leader in hypersonic glide missile technology. As of this 
writing, there is no known defense against such missiles.
5. Defensive strategic nanoweapons: This category relates to 
defensive strategic weapons whose nanotechnology components 
enhance their strategic capabilities. It also includes defensive 
autonomous smart nanobots. Representative examples include:
a. Autonomous smart nanobots: Nations could program these 
nanobots and the future self- replicating smart nanobots to 
destroy a nation’s offensive weapons, including nanoweap-
ons. The issue, again, is controlling these nanoweapons to 
avoid threatening human extinction.
b. Antiballistic missile defense system: The United States 
has limited antiballistic missile defense capabilities, but I 
judge advancements in nanoelectronics and solid, stable 
nano- enhanced fuels for ballistic missiles will change that 
position. Based on the rate that nanotechnology and artifi-
cial intelligence are advancing, I project that within a decade, 
the United States will have the capability to destroy adver-
sary ballistic missiles in flight.
Now that we have categorized nanoweapons, let us discuss 
their application in warfare. Since nanoweapons offer numer-
ous options, from killing one person to wiping out a nation, from 
destroying civilian infrastructure to destroying military hardware, 
their use in conflict is certain. Indeed, we have already discussed 
several nanoweapons, such as the Navy laser and nanoparticle- 
enhanced explosives, which are combat- ready. Numerous oth-
ers are likely to be used in future conflicts. The most likely are 
nanoweapons in the following categories:
• Passive nanoweapons
• Offensive tactical nanoweapons

164 
the nano wars
• Defensive tactical nanoweapons
In my opinion, nations will use passive and offensive/defen-
sive tactical nanoweapons in conflict. This opinion reflects the 
historical trend of warfare. Since the emergence of our species, 
each war has given rise to weapons of greater destruction. Deploy-
ment and use of passive and tactical nanoweapons will just con-
tinue a trend that has gone on for over 200,000 years. Given this 
opinion, it is natural to ask, What about the deployment and use 
of strategic nanoweapons?
Even in warfare, humanity draws a line when certain weapons 
threaten the extinction of our species. Humanity is not a perfect 
species, but we collectively act to prevent our own extinction. I 
think of it as a collective self- defense reaction. There are several 
examples that illustrate this:
1. Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
The Cold War tensions between the United States and the 
Soviet Union brought the world to the edge of a nuclear con-
frontation. This resulted in a widely held belief among nations 
that proliferation of nuclear weapons would reduce world secu-
rity, increase the risks of miscalculation and accidents, and even-
tually lead to a nuclear conflict. Historically, the United Nations 
opened the treaty for signature in 1968. It went into force in 
1970 and was “extended indefinitely” in 1995. Today 191 nations 
are signatories of the treaty, but five nations are not, includ-
ing India, Pakistan, and North Korea, which have openly tested 
and declared that they possess nuclear weapons. Israel is also a 
nonsignatory and refuses to disclose its nuclear weapons capa-
bilities. South Sudan never joined the treaty, but there is no evi-
dence they possess nuclear weapons. Thus, out of the 196 world 
nations, only 9 have nuclear weapons, and 5 of the 9 are signato-
ries of the treaty. Although this is not ideal, more countries have 
adhered to this treaty than to any other arms limitation and disar-
mament agreement. No one, not even nonsignatories, has used 
nuclear weapons in conflict since World War II. Historically, 

the nanowars 
165
since 1945, nations have engaged in 250 major conflicts killing 
over 50 million people. This provides evidence that humanity is 
able to restrain itself. However, this restraint came with a price. 
The world witnessed the detonation of two atomic bombs used 
in World War II, killing over 250,000 Japanese, and 520 atmo-
spheric nuclear test detonations, including automorphic testing 
of the largest nuclear weapon, the 50- megaton Russian an602 
hydrogen bomb. Many experts believe these nuclear detonations 
and the associated radioactive fallout are still causing an increase 
in cancer- related illnesses. My point is that people of the world 
knew that nuclear weapons presented an unparalleled risk to 
humanity’s survival. Because people were informed, there was a 
grassroots thrust to limit the number of nuclear powers, which 
influenced world leaders to commit their nations to the treaty.
2. Limited Test Ban Treaty
The Limited Test Ban Treaty (ltbt) is officially the treaty ban-
ning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space, 
and under water. The Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and 
the United States signed and ratified this treaty in 1963. Most 
countries, with the exception of China, France, and North Korea, 
have signed and ratified the treaty. Even nonsignatory coun-
tries are abiding by it. There have been several violations, but 
to a large extent the treaty slowed the nuclear arms race and 
addressed rising concerns about radioactive fallout as a result 
of nuclear weapons testing. At the time of the treaty’s ratifica-
tion, most of the world’s population knew that nuclear fallout 
could be just as deadly as the initial blast. Again, people were 
informed, and their leaders acted in accordance with national 
sentiments.
3. Biological Weapons Convention (bwc)
Officially this is the Convention on the Prohibition of the 
Development, Production, and Stockpiling of Bacteriological 
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. 
The bwc took the 1925 Geneva Protocol, which prohibits 

166 
the nano wars
use but not possession or development of chemical and bio-
logical weapons, to the next step. It represents the first mul-
tilateral disarmament treaty banning the production of an 
entire category of weapons. It went into force in 1975, and 172 
nations are signatories. Again, the use of chemical weapons 
in World War I and the 1918 flu pandemic, which afflicted 
one- third of the world’s population, killing an estimated 50 
million people, was sufficient to convince the world popula-
tion and their national leaders to adopt the bwc. (However, 
although the bwc is generally successful, there have been 
some violations. The most notable exception is Iraq’s 1988 
use of chemical weapons against the Kurdish people in the 
city of Halabja forty- eight hours after the city fell to the Ira-
nian army and Kurdish guerrillas. In 2010 the Iraqi High 
Criminal Court condemned the attack as an act of genocide 
and a crime against humanity.
Conclusions
My main point in presenting these three examples is that their 
adoption required an informed population. This point, along with 
the previous discussions, allows us to draw conclusions regard-
ing the development, deployment, and use of strategic offensive/
defensive nanoweapons.
Conclusion 1: Once presented with evidence that a class of 
weapons can threaten human extinction, humanity will act to 
protect itself. This will be true of strategic offensive/defensive 
nanoweapons. Unfortunately, most of the world’s population 
is oblivious to the existence of nanoweapons. They garner no 
headlines or primetime news coverage. There are no treaties 
adopted to prevent nations from developing and deploying them. 
This suggests that strategic offensive/defensive nanoweapons 
will be developed, deployed, and used in conflict before the 
world understands the threat that they pose to our existence.

the nanowars 
167
Unfortunately, even deploying strategic nanoweapons rep-
resents a risk, which is greater than deploying nuclear weapons. 
I judge the risk to be greater because strategic nanoweapons 
will embody artificial intelligence, and we risk losing control 
over them and the Singularity Computers that built them.
Conclusion 2: The threat of a full- out nano war will loom large 
in the second half of the twenty- first century. This threat is 
large because identifying the source of a nanoweapons attack 
will be problematic due to the inherent stealth associated with 
them. As a result, nations and terrorist groups will find it com-
pelling to unleash offensive tactical nanoweapons on an adver-
sary. However, any attack increases the possibility of a full- out 
nano war, which like a full- out nuclear war would threaten 
humanity’s survival.
The new cold war of the 2050s and beyond will be extremely 
dangerous, even more so than the first Cold War. The world knew 
what was at stake regarding nuclear weapons. This knowledge 
forced nations to dial back the threat of nuclear war. This is not 
the situation with nanoweapons. Currently the bulk of the world 
population does not even know that nanoweapons exist, and major 
powers are in a new nanoweapons arms race. This argues that the 
next cold war has a greater probability of escalating into a strate-
gic nano war, which would push humanity to the brink.


12 Humanity on the Brink
All of us might wish at times that we lived in a more tranquil world, 
but we don’t. And if our times are difﬁcult and perplexing, so are they 
challenging and ﬁlled with opportunity.
— robert f. kennedy
Many great tragedies require a series of events to take place, to line 
up like dominos where the fall of one domino ultimately results in 
the fall of all. Each event may appear innocuous at the time, like 
one falling domino. In and of itself, it may engender no feelings 
of danger or concern. It is only after the series of events results 
in some unforeseen tragedy that we realize the significance of 
each event. History is ripe with examples. Let us consider one, 
the nuclear disaster at Chernobyl.
The Chernobyl Nuclear Disaster
April 25, 1986, was an important day for day shift workers at 
the Chernobyl nuclear power plant. After weeks of planning, it 
was time for them to participate in an experiment scheduled to 
test a potential safety emergency core- cooling feature of the Cher-
nobyl #4 nuclear reactor. In addition, a team of electrical engi-
neers was present to test the new voltage regulating system. The 
experimental procedure was well defined:
1. Run the reactor at a low power level, between 700 mw and 800 
mw. (mw stands for megawatts, 1 megawatt equals 1,000,000 
watts. Thus a plant running at 700 mw produces 700 mega-

170 
humanity on the brink
watts per hour, which is sufficient to run 7,000,000 100 watt 
lightbulbs for one hour.)
2. Run the steam- turbine generator at full speed.
3. Shut off the steam to the turbine generator as soon as con-
ditions 1 and 2 are achieved.
4. Record the turbine generator performance to determine 
whether it could provide the bridging power for coolant pumps 
until the emergency diesel generators start to power the cool-
ing pumps automatically. (The engineers knew that it would 
take the emergency diesel generators about one minute to start 
and power the cooling pumps. The plan was to use the residual 
power in the turbine generator to bridge the one- minute gap.)
5. Freewheel down (i.e., allow to run down in its normal course) 
the turbine generator after the emergency generators reach 
normal operating speed and voltage.
The objective of the test was to ensure that the residual power 
in the turbine generator would supply the power necessary to 
keep the main water- cooling pump operational until the emer-
gency generators came online.
On paper, the test appeared straightforward and necessary to 
ensure a viable backup in the event of a power failure. But then 
a series of events turned the test into a disaster. Appendix III 
details these events for those who seek a deeper understanding. 
Here, I will only present my observations:
1. The experimental procedure lacked contingency planning. 
After reviewing the series of events, it is apparent that no 
what- if exercises were discussed. This required that every ele-
ment of the Chernobyl experiment result in the expected out-
come. In my experience with state- of- the- art development and 
manufacture of integrated circuits and sensors, I can state it 
is extremely rare in a complex experiment for every result to 
be anticipated or for the experiment itself to proceed per plan.

humanity on the brink 
171
2. External events, such as another power station going off 
grid , interrupted and delayed the experimental procedure. An 
event like this would have been anticipated in a properly per-
formed what- if exercise.
3. The delays caused by another power station going off grid 
ultimately left an inexperienced night shift engineer in charge 
of control room personnel who had little training to conduct the 
experiment. In a perfect world, this event alone would result 
in suspending the experiment.
4. When events deviated from the experimental procedure, the 
lead engineer and control room personnel did not suspend the 
experiment, but continued it under dangerous circumstances. 
This illustrates the inexperience and disregard for safety that 
characterized the participants.
5. Poor judgment, likely the result of stress and inexperience, 
played a significant role in turning the experiment into a disas-
ter. The series of events illustrates key times that automated 
safety procedures were disengaged and warning alarms were 
intentionally ignored.
We know that the explosion of Chernobyl’s reactor #4 resulted 
in a fireball, smoke, and steam that carried radioactive material 
into the atmosphere. We also know that the Soviet government 
did not immediately warn its people or their neighboring nations. 
Even though thirty- two people died and dozens more suffered 
radiation burns in the first few days of the crisis, the Soviet gov-
ernment only admitted the accident after Swedish authorities, 
more than eight hundred miles to the northwest of Chernobyl, 
reported radioactive fallout. An estimated 985,000 died, mostly 
from cancer, due to the Chernobyl accident. It is widely recog-
nized as humanity’s worst nuclear disaster.
The Chernobyl explosion illustrates these lesson points:

172 
humanity on the brink
1. Modern technology, such as nuclear technology and nanoweap-
ons, can be complex and require high expertise to deploy and 
control.
2. Humans have limitations, and the complexity of modern 
technology challenges those limitations.
a. Our ability to anticipate and control the outcome of a long 
series of complex technological events is questionable. The 
Chernobyl disaster presented the lead engineer and control 
room personnel with just that situation, and they failed to 
recognize, in a timely manner, the danger they faced. Ulti-
mately, each event appeared to them as isolated, like the fall 
of a single domino. They failed to understand the ultimate 
safety hazard embodied in the series of events. In effect, 
they did not recognize that the fall of one domino would 
ultimately result in the fall of all dominos.
b. Human judgment can be severely impaired by lack of 
experience and stress.
3. Control of nuclear technology and nanoweapons will always 
present risks, including risks to humanity’s survival.
A World with Nanoweapons Superpowers
We will use the lesson learned from the Chernobyl disaster by 
applying them to nanoweapons. To do this, let us fast forward to 
the second half of the twenty- first century. If the world remains 
on its current trajectory, the second half of the twenty- first century 
will be similar to the Cold War in the second half of the twentieth 
century, where nuclear superpowers could determine the world’s 
fate with the push of a button. However, this time the superpowers 
will have added tactical and strategic nanoweapons to their arsenal.
If this view of the world is correct, what will characterize the 
world environment beyond the year 2050?
1. First, we will have all the cold war elements we discussed 
in chapter 10, including military alliances, worldwide nuclear 

humanity on the brink 
173
suicide threats, propaganda, a nanoweapons arms race, espio-
nage, clandestine operations, economic wars, Singularity Com-
puters (computers that are more intelligent than the combined 
intelligence of humanity), and monetary systems based on raw 
materials and energy.
2. Second, technology complexity will be orders of magnitude 
greater than it is today, which suggests:
a. Developing and deploying nanoweapons will be prob-
lematic, with many Chernobyl- like disasters in the offering.
b. Controlling Singularity Computers will be problematic, 
as we run the risk that the super intelligent machines may 
become adversarial toward humanity.
Even with this environment, a question remains, Will human-
ity understand that its existence is balanced on a knife edge? The 
answer will depend on one thing, namely, a nanoweapons super-
power using a significant fraction of its capabilities in conflict. 
Think about it. No one understood the implications of nuclear 
weapons until their use in conflict. No one understood the implica-
tions of “stealth” technology until its use in conflict. At this point, 
a thick veil of secrecy obscures our view of the destructive power 
of nanoweapons. Using nanotechnology- enhanced conventional 
weapons will not be sufficient. For example, if the Navy uses its 
new nanotechnology- based laser to disable a plane, the laser, not 
the nanotechnology that enables it, will impress the average per-
son. Let’s take an example closer to home. When you turn on your 
brand- new computer, what impresses you, the computer’s perfor-
mance or the nanotechnology that enables it? Most people do not 
know that their new computer even incorporates nanotechnol-
ogy. Based on historical precedent, only a definitive combat appli-
cation of nanoweapons will reveal their true destructive nature.
You may ask, What will constitute a definitive combat appli-
cation of nanoweapons? Let us consider two examples, short of 
full- out nano war.

174 
humanity on the brink
Winning a naval conﬂict without ﬁring a shot
Imagine, a tense situation forming in the China Sea. U.S. car-
rier fleets prowl the region. An adversary threatens Japan, a U.S. 
protectorate. The adversary has its own carrier fleets, including 
submarines with nuclear missiles and surface vessels with mis-
sile launch capabilities. From the standpoint of conventional and 
nuclear weapons, let us assume there is a complete balance of 
naval power. In this example, let us assume that the adversary pre-
pares to launch its attack on Japan. The adversary’s submarines 
hover at missile launch depth and begin opening their missile 
hatches. The adversary’s carrier launches its planes, and they are 
heading for Japan. The United States concludes that within sec-
onds the adversary will rain death and destruction on Japan. The 
United States has no alternative. It activates the self- replicating 
smart nanobots that infest every element of the adversary’s arse-
nal. Almost immediately, the adversary’s submarines begin to 
sink, the carrier’s planes fail in flight and crash into the ocean, 
the carrier and missile launch vessels begin to sink. In despera-
tion, the adversary attempts to launch missiles, but the missiles 
never leave the launch pads. Within a few minutes, the adversary 
has no naval capabilities left. The battle is over before it begins. 
Now begins the most difficult part.
The adversary launches a formal protest with the United 
Nations. The elements of the protest claim:
• The adversary was peacefully performing naval operations 
in the China Sea.
• The United States conducted a sneak attack using 
nanoweapons.
• The adversary calls on the United Nations to condemn the 
attack as an act of war by the United States and enact appro-
priate sanctions against the United States.
The United States presents its data, recorded on its satellites and 
naval instruments. Using the data, the United States argues that the 

humanity on the brink 
175
adversary was beginning an attack on Japan. As a protectorate of 
the United States, the adversary provoked the use of nanoweapons.
The world is shocked. Headlines and “experts” saturate all 
media detailing the destructive power of nanoweapons. Human-
ity begins asking the hard questions:
What kind of nanoweapons did the United States use?
How destructive are these new nanoweapons?
Are nanoweapons controllable?
Do nanoweapons threaten humanity?
I will not take this further. I think the point is clear. The unequiv-
ocal use of nanoweapons in conflict will be a wakeup call for the 
world population.
Genocide
For this example, consider a nanoweapons superpower, Nation- X, 
with an incredibly large population. There is significant unrest 
throughout the population due to food shortages and scarce med-
ical attention. Other superpowers, by comparison, provide an 
unparalleled standard of living for its citizens, including social-
ized medical treatment, luxurious housing, and even antiag-
ing therapies. In addition, Nation- X is geographically large. A 
significant portion of its population remains poorly educated 
and continues to rely on family farming for sustenance. The 
senior elements of this population continue to suffer normal 
human illnesses associated with aging. The significant unrest 
among the general population of Nation- X has given rise to 
public antigovernment protests. Most protesters feel the gov-
ernment focuses on weapons ahead of caring for its people. A 
typical protestor’s sign reads, “People, Not Weapons.” The gov-
ernment of Nation- X is losing popular support, which is erod-
ing its ability to govern.
To regain control, over a three- day period Nation- X takes the 
following steps:

176 
humanity on the brink
• Suspends the right of its citizens to protest
• Forces all foreign news agencies to leave the country, creat-
ing a media blackout
• Closes its borders
• Shuts down all but government communications
Phone service is suspended, including land, cell, and sat-
ellite service.
The Internet is restricted to only government websites.
Email is shut down except for secure email between gov-
ernment officials and government email to other nations.
It jams any radio or television transmissions that are not 
government initiated.
The United States and other nato nation satellites detect large 
portions of Nation- X’s population is dying or already dead. The 
United States reveals this finding at an emergency meeting of 
the United Nations.
Nation- X claims they are dealing with a “super influenza” that 
does not respond to even advanced antiviral pharmaceuticals. It 
declines all help offered by member nations.
The United States calls for a United Nations confirmation of 
Nation- X’s claim. Nation- X responds that any such inspection 
would potentially spread the infection and strenuously objects.
The United Nations proceedings drag on for days. Tensions 
in the world spread. Suppose Nation- X is telling the truth. Will 
other nations be next? The United Nations’ puts a proposed 
resolution to investigate the super influenza to a vote. The bulk 
of world nations vote in favor of the resolution, with the pro-
vision that the United Nations inspectors remain in Nation X 
until the world community has a way to deal with this super 
influenza.
As the United Nations slowly grinds to a resolution, some cit-
izens of Nation- X escape into bordering countries and are given 
asylum, but to no avail. They too die. The United States obtains 

humanity on the brink 
177
the dead bodies of several victims of the super virus and performs 
autopsies at sea, to ensure that any super virus remains confined 
to the limits of one vessel.
The United States confirms what they suspected, killer nano-
bots. Nation- X released smart autonomous killer nanobots on its 
own people. The nanobots’ programming limited their attack to 
specific geographic regions and specific dna signatures. With 
this data, the United States estimated that Nation- X was intent 
on eliminating about half of its population, with specific attacks 
on protestors (via dna signatures), the elderly, and those with ter-
minal illnesses.
The United States brings its data before the United Nations. 
Nation- X denies any involvement in genocide and argues only 
the United States has that level of advanced autonomous smart 
nanobots. The United States is outraged and denies any involve-
ment in the genocide.
The proceedings of the United Nations dominate media cov-
erage. Humanity begins to ask the hard questions:
Did Nation- X commit genocide using advanced nanoweapons?
Would the nanobots remain confined to Nation- X?
I will not take this further. I think the point is clear. The unequiv-
ocal use of nanoweapons by a nation, even within its own bor-
ders, will be a wakeup call for the world population.
In both examples, I judge humanity will heed the alarm and 
respond. Similar to humanity’s actions in the decades following 
the use of nuclear weapons in conflict, humanity will seek trea-
ties limiting nanoweapons use and assurances that nanoweap-
ons will remain under control. We are likely to see treaties that 
parallel those in place for nuclear weapons.
Conclusion
An important question remains, Will humanity’s reaction to a 
nanoweapons event be timely and sufficient to avoid its own 
extinction?

178 
humanity on the brink
I believe waiting for history to answer the question is too risky. 
Nanoweapons, like nuclear and biological weapons, threaten the 
survival of humanity. Nanoweapons represent the ultimate threat 
because:
1. Controlling extremely sophisticated nanoweapons may be 
beyond the capability of human intelligence. Let us recall the 
Chernobyl disaster presented at the beginning of this chapter. 
The technology of Chernobyl would be TinkerToys compared 
to the technology of advanced nanoweapons. To my mind, 
it is not a matter of if we will have a Chernobyl- like disas-
ter with nanoweapons, but when. The sophisticated nature of 
advanced nanoweapons makes them another Chernobyl wait-
ing to happen.
2. The Singularity Computers under human direction designed 
the advanced nanoweapons. However, Singularity Computers 
represent an inherent threat, in and of themselves. This argues 
that allowing Singularity Computers to have complete control 
of advanced nanoweapons could be catastrophic, since this 
may give them the means to render humanity extinct. There-
fore, any nanoweapons designed using Singularity Computers 
must be hardwired to respond to human control. There must 
be a fail- safe way for humans to override any Singularity Com-
puter commands to nanoweapons.
With the rise of nanoweapon superpowers and the increased 
threat of a nano war, nations and the bulk of humanity will recog-
nize the threat that nanoweapons pose to the survival of human-
ity. It may take a Chernobyl- like accident or the tactical use of 
nanoweapons to sound the alarm. We humans appear to be a 
reactive species. It generally requires a sizable event to galva-
nize us to act.
Given the full capabilities of nanoweapons, nations will become 
increasingly suspicious of other nations with nanoweapon capa-
bilities, resulting in a higher probability of first- strike warfare and 

humanity on the brink 
179
the use of nuclear weapons, as a more controllable alternative to 
nanoweapons. This is ironic. Today we consider the use of nuclear 
weapons horrific, given their devastation, residual radiation, and 
the unpredictable path of radiation fallout. However, the use of 
nuclear weapons to thwart a nanoweapons attack may represent 
the best alternative, namely, the lesser of two evils.
In a world where humanity is on the brink of causing its own 
demise, this chapter makes a case that the ethics and control of 
nanoweapons will become the #1 United Nations issue. The epi-
logue talks to this last point and delineates strategies that human-
ity can employ to avoid falling victim to its own technologies.


Epilogue
The nuclear arms race is like two sworn enemies standing waist deep 
in gasoline, one with three matches, the other with ﬁve.
— carl sagan
I believe that people who have access to current information choose 
to go through life in one of two ways, namely, either remaining 
actively informed or remaining purposely ignorant. That may 
seem harsh and simplistic. However, I see its manifestation in 
almost every substantive interaction. The information highway 
we ride on a daily basis overwhelms some people. You probably 
have heard someone say, “I never watch the news.” Do you know 
people who only read the comics section or only do the crossword 
puzzles in their local newspaper? I am not being judgmental. I 
am only observing, and I believe many readers would agree with 
this observation. In fact, if I have a highly stressful day, I will put 
aside catching up on the news. Instead, I may listen to music or 
relax. It is human nature. With today’s instant communication, 
we know about almost every disaster in the world within minutes. 
I have also observed that most headlines carry bad news. Why is 
this? In my view, bad news appears to pique more interest than 
good news. It sells more media advertising. However, lack of infor-
mation offers no protection against the “slings and arrows of out-
rageous fortune” that life aims at us. I speculate that as many as 
half of the nearly million people who died as a result of the Cher-
nobyl disaster did not know that this event had sealed their fate.
Attention to strategic nanoweapons as weapons of mass destruc-

182 
epilogue
tion has been sparse to nonexistent among the media, policy mak-
ers, and scholars. In contrast, a vast body of literature exists about 
nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons. It appears, though, that 
no connection equates strategic nanoweapons to those weapons 
of mass destruction, mainly because a cloak of secrecy ensures 
that nanoweapons remain below the radar. Most people are obliv-
ious to the existence of nanoweapons. This fact, and the threat 
that nanoweapons pose to humanity’s survival, prompted me to 
write this book.
This book is about providing information on the next and most 
deadly generation of military weapons the world has ever encoun-
tered. The information is concerning. Some of the conclusions 
drawn from the information are horrific. In many cases, I have 
presented the facts and left it to the readers to draw their own 
conclusions. It is important to inform the public. As Thomas 
Jefferson put it, “If a nation expects to be ignorant and free in a 
state of civilization, it expects what never was and never will be. 
An informed citizenry is at the heart of a dynamic democracy.”
This book is a compilation of facts about nanoweapons. These 
facts are hidden in the countless pages online, in books, in arti-
cles, and in scientific journals about nanotechnology. For every 
thousand pages on nanotechnology, there is perhaps one page 
related to its use as a nanoweapon. You can verify this assertion 
yourself by simply comparing the Google search returns on “nan-
otechnology” versus “nanoweapons.” Yet, if you are willing to sift 
through the data, it is possible to extract the facts like gold nug-
gets from tons of ore. This is what I have done. In addition, I 
have organized the facts and provided projections. I believe that 
many readers will use the information to develop their own pro-
jections. This is how it should be. Through this process, we learn 
and refine our understanding.
I know it is a cliché to say, “In no time in history has it been 
more important than now to have an informed electorate.” How-
ever, given the challenges that nanoweapons present, the cliché 
is accurate. It is critical for all to understand the potential threat 

epilogue 
183
that nanoweapons pose. We cannot ignore their existence. We 
cannot ignore the nanoweapons arms race among the United 
States, China, and Russia. We must address the question, Will it 
be possible to develop, deploy, and use nanoweapons in warfare 
without rendering humanity extinct? Let us address this ques-
tion by examining how humanity historically has dealt with sim-
ilar weapons of mass destruction.
In previous chapters, I have characterized humanity as a war-
like species, but I also believe that humanity learns from history 
and that we collectively act in self- defense. There is abundant evi-
dence supporting this assertion. Examples include the Treaty on 
the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Limited Test Ban 
Treaty, and the Biological Weapons Convention.
Humanity’s existence has historically balanced itself on a knife 
edge since the invention of weapons of mass destruction (wmd). 
However, let us be clear on what constitutes wmd. The un Com-
mission for Conventional Armaments of 1948 defined wmd as 
including “atomic explosive weapons, radioactive material weap-
ons, lethal chemical and biological weapons, and any weapons 
developed in the future which have characteristics comparable in 
destructive effect to those of the atomic bomb or the other weapons 
mentioned above.” So how does this definition affect nanoweapons?
In chapter 11, we divided nanoweapons into five categories:
1. Passive
2. Offensive tactical
3. Defensive tactical
4. Strategic offensive
5. Strategic defensive
If we apply the un definition, only categories 4 and 5 embody 
nanoweapons of mass destruction:
• Autonomous smart nanobots (including self- replicating smart 
nanobots)

184 
epilogue
• Hypersonic glide missiles
• Antiballistic missile defense systems
This is an important observation. It suggests that there are his-
torical precedents that may provide insight on how to treat stra-
tegic offensive/defensive nanoweapons.
Let us begin by examining the most destructive of all nanoweap-
ons: self- replicating smart nanobots (ssn). To my mind, ssn are 
technological artificial life- forms and analogous to their biological 
counterparts, viruses. I suggest we consider classifying ssn under 
the Biological Weapons Convention. This would be an obvious 
extension of that treaty to cover this new class of nanoweapons.
Typically biological life- forms satisfy five conditions:
1. Are made of cells
2. Obtain and use energy
3. Grow and develop
4. Reproduce
5. Respond and adapt to their environment
Self- replicating smart nanobots would satisfy conditions 2, 4, 
and 5. They do not have biological cells, and they do not grow and 
develop. As a result, you may argue they are not, strictly speak-
ing, a life- form. However, I think the conditions we imposed for 
something to be a life- form may be incorrect, since it relies only 
on our experience with biological life- forms. Technological life- 
forms may satisfy a different set of conditions, but still be equiv-
alent to a biological life- form. Science fiction writer Arthur C. 
Clark said it best: “Whether we are based on carbon or on silicon 
makes no fundamental difference; we should each be treated with 
appropriate respect.” Clark’s comments related to artificial intel-
ligence, but I judge they are extendable to ssn.
I favor extending existing treaties and conventions for weapons 
of mass destruction to cover strategic nanoweapons. This elimi-

epilogue 
185
nates the need to “reinvent the wheel,” which could take decades 
and not address the issue in a timely manner.
If we categorize weaponized ssn as within the Biological 
Weapons Convention, we still have to deal with other strategic 
nanoweapons, namely, autonomous smart nanobots, hypersonic 
glide missiles, and antiballistic missile defense systems. Therefore, 
this one move would not solve the entire problem. The question 
now becomes: How do we prevent the remainder from threaten-
ing human extinction?
I suggest three strategies:
1. Confine hypersonic glide missiles to the delivery of conven-
tional weapons. The United States is already committing to 
this strategy. Russia is not. In fact, Russia states it will arm its 
hypersonic glide missiles with nuclear warheads. Obviously, 
this would make the new cold war extremely dangerous. In my 
view, Russia is taking this stance because the United States is 
currently leading in hypersonic glide missile technology, and 
Russia wants to “one up” the stakes. Unfortunately, this may 
force the United States to alter its hypersonic glide missiles to 
carry nuclear warheads or even strategic nanoweapons war-
heads. This is obviously the wrong direction. We need to lower 
tensions and to prevent the use of wmd. Therefore, it is imper-
ative that everyone agree to keep hypersonic glide missiles con-
fined to conventional warheads. In my view, this is an urgent 
area for the United Nations to focus on.
2. Define autonomous smart nanobots (asn) as equivalent 
to nuclear weapons and falling under the Treaty on the Non- 
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Limited Test Ban 
Treaty. My reasoning is that both are wmd and threaten human 
extinction. There is no doubt that asn have the potential to 
cause destruction equivalent to nuclear weapons. Similar to 
nuclear weapons, the amount of destruction is programmable. 
In my view, the United Nations should work with its members 
to define autonomous smart nanobots as equivalent to nuclear 

186 
epilogue
weapons and categorize them as falling under the existing 
nuclear weapons treaties.
3. Allow nations to build antiballistic missile systems, if they 
choose to do so. Today we count on the doctrine of mad (mutu-
ally assured destruction) to avert nuclear war. To date, that has 
worked. However, as weapons grow more complex, the pos-
sibility of an unintentional missile launch grows greater. We 
need to ask ourselves: Do we want to risk destroying the planet 
in the advent of an unintentional missile launch? Even if some 
adversary, such as a rogue state, intentionally launched inter-
continental ballistic missiles, do we want our only defense to 
be nuclear retaliation? Consider carefully. It is a no- win situa-
tion. In the words of President Ronald Reagan:
“For these reasons and because of the awesome destructive potential 
of nuclear weapons, we must seek another means of deterring war. 
It is both militarily and morally necessary. Certainly, there should be 
a better way to strengthen peace and stability, a way to move away 
from a future that relies so heavily on the prospect of rapid and mas-
sive nuclear retaliation and toward greater reliance on defensive sys-
tems which threaten no one.”
After having surveyed the available literature, I believe Rea-
gan is correct. As of this writing, both China and North Korea are 
improving their missile delivery systems. In the coming decade, 
I believe they will both have accurate intercontinental ballistic 
missiles (icbms). To my mind, all nations need to neutralize the 
threat that icbms pose. From a basic scientific viewpoint, it is not 
obvious that the technology for a completely effective antiballis-
tic missile system exists. The technology may take a decade or 
more to mature and deploy. Even when it does exist, nanoweap-
ons will be the new weapons of mass destruction, and there is 
evidence that suggests their delivery systems will not depend on 
icbms. I do not think we can stop nations from building antibal-
listic missile systems, and nanoweapons may negate their effec-

epilogue 
187
tiveness as a deterrent. In effect, my suggestion is that we accept 
what is likely to be inevitable.
My expertise is in technology, not political policy or ethics. I am 
viewing this from the standpoint of a technologist and recom-
mending strategies based on the similarity of nanoweapons to 
other weapons that threaten human extinction. My view is that 
we already have experience with biological and nuclear weapons 
that threaten our extinction and have effectively curtailed their 
use via multilateral treaties and conventions. Let’s take advantage 
of our experience with existing wmd and use it to curtail the use 
of strategic nanoweapons.
To summarize, my suggestions are straightforward:
1. Classify weaponized self- replicating smart nanobots (ssn) 
as a life- form (artificial life) and categorize it as part of the Bio-
logical Weapons Convention.
2. Confine hypersonic glide missiles to deploy only conven-
tional weapons.
3. Define autonomous smart nanobots as equivalent to nuclear 
weapons, since they are both weapons of mass destruction, 
and categorize them as falling under the Treaty on the Non- 
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Limited Test Ban 
Treaty.
4. Allow nations to build antiballistic missile systems if they 
choose to do so.
These are only suggestions. They are conceptually simple, but 
I believe the logic that underpins them is sound. I recognize that 
there is much work ahead, and the international treaties may 
take many different forms. In the final analysis, it will be a jour-
ney. Leaders who respect the fundamental right that all humans 
have to life will lead the way. I view this book as the first step on 
that journey. You have taken that step. You have taken the time to 
become informed. You now know that the next and most deadly 

188 
epilogue
generation of military weapons the world has ever encountered, 
nanoweapons, threatens human extinction.
Now this is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the end. But it is, per-
haps, the end of the beginning.
— winston churchill

appendix 1
Institute for Soldier Nanotechnologies
The Institute for Soldier Nanotechnologies (isn) website (http://isnweb 
.mit.edu) lists five “strategic research areas,” delineated as sras. 
Under each sra they list themes and projects. Because the list 
demonstrates the depth and breadth of the Army’s nanoweapon 
research, this appendix reproduces it verbatim from the isn 
website.
sra 1: Lightweight, Multifunctional Nanostructured Materials
Theme 1.1: Quantum Dots for Wide- Bandwidth Imaging 
and Communications
Project 1.1.1: Hybrid Quantum Dot- Based Imagers and 
Emitters with Broadly Tunable Spectral Characteristics
Theme 1.2: Nanoscale Carbon Forms for Situational 
Awareness
Project 1.2.1: Graphene Devices for Next- Generation Night 
Vision Systems
Theme 1.3: High- Functionality Nanostructured Surface 
Capabilities
Project 1.3.3: Enabling Architectures and Technologies 
for Next- Generation Fiber Devices
Theme 1.4: Environmental Obfuscation and Extended Reach 
Situational Awareness
Project 1.4.1: Tailored Nano- particles for Obscurant 
Applications

190 
appendix 1
sra 2: Soldier Medicine— Prevention, Diagnostics, and Far- 
Forward Care
Theme 2.1: Cellular Immune Response and Nano- engineered 
Drug Delivery
Project 2.1.1: Nanotechnology for Stimulating, Sampling, 
and Monitoring Immunity
Theme 2.2: Microfluidics of Dissolution and Mixing
Project 2.2.1: Rapid Reconstitution Packages of Lyophilized 
Medicines
Theme 2.3: Synthesis and Characterization of Therapeu-
tic Materials
Project 2.3.1: Nano- structured Biomaterials for Treatment 
of Hemorrhagic Shock
Project 2.3.2: Multi- component Nanolayer Assemblies for 
Soldier Wound Healing
Project 2.3.3: Delivery of Brain Lipid Nanoparticles Using 
Microtech Devices for Treatment of Traumatic Brain Injury
Project 2.3.4: Complementary Wound- Healing Strategies 
Enabled by Synthetic Biology and Nanotechnology
sra 3: Blast and Ballistic Threats: Materials Damage, Injury 
Mechanisms, and Lightweight Protection
Theme 3.2: Grain and Phase Boundary Manipulation in 
Nanocrystalline Metal Alloys
Project 3.2.1: Layered/Graded Nanocrystalline and 
Superelastic- Fiber Alloys for Lightweight Protection
Theme 3.3: Physical, Biological, and Physiological Mecha-
nisms of Injury and Tissue Materials Modeling
Project 3.3.1: Blast- Induced tbi— Connections among the 
Physical, Biological, and Behavioral Dimensions
Project 3.3.2: Electromechanical Interactions in Blast- 
Induced Traumatic Brain Injury

appendix 1 
191
Project 3.3.3: Molecular to Macroscale Exploration of Fun-
damental Properties of Gels
Theme 3.4: Multi- scale Descriptions of Complex Mechani-
cal Phenomena
Project 3.4.1: Advanced Computational Tools for Multi- 
scale Modeling and Simulation of Multi- Threat Protec-
tive Systems
Theme 3.5: Novel Bio- inspired and Carbon- nanostructured 
Materials
Project 3.5.2: Design and Synthesis of Carbon- based Chain-
mail Structures for Flexible, Ultra- lightweight Protection
sra 4: Hazardous Substances Sensing
Theme 4.1: Coupled Optoelectronic and Biochemical Mech-
anisms in Specialized Nanostructures
Project 4.1.2: Resistivity- Based Microfluidic Biosensing
Project 4.1.4: Molecular Recognition Using Carbon Nano-
tube Adsorbed Polymer and Bio- Polymer Phases: Syn-
thetic Nanotube Templated Antibodies
Theme 4.2: Quantum Dots for Chem/Biosensing
Project 4.2.1: Chem- Bio Analyte Sensing with Hybrid 
Quantum Dot Constructs
sra 5: Nanosystems Integration: Flexible Capabilities in Com-
plex Environments
Theme 5.1: Coupled Optoelectronic and Phononic Structure 
in Novel Fiber Materials
Project 5.1.1: Ferroelectric Acoustic Fibers
Theme 5.2: New Regimes of Light Matter Interactions in 
Complex Nanostructured Materials
Project 5.2.1: Multifunctional Integrated Fabrics
Project 5.2.2: Enabling Novel Lightwave Phenomena

192 
appendix 1
Project 5.2.3: Spatial Awareness around Corners
Theme 5.3: Novel Thermal Radiation Phenomena in Pho-
tonic Crystal Materials Systems
Project 5.3.1: Novel Thermal Radiation Management Using 
Advanced Photonic Crystals

appendix 2
Nanoweapons Offensive Capability of Nations ( NOCON)
Categories
To bring order to our discussion, this list has three categories:
1. Nanoweapons nations: Nations that are already deploying 
nanoweapons and have robust development programs.
2. Near follower nanoweapons nations: Nations that are devel-
oping or deploying nanoweapons but that are one or more gen-
erations behind nanoweapons nations
3. Nanoweapons capable nations: Nations that are capable of 
developing nanoweapons but have chosen not to do so.
Methodology Overview
The methodology to assign nations to a nocon category requires 
a fourfold approach:
1. The Cientifica report, “Nanotechnology Funding: A Global 
Perspective,” by Tim Harper, was presented at the National Nan-
otechnology Initiative Workshop in May 2012. It delineates the 
Nanotechnology Impact Factor (nif) of key nations. The nif 
measures how the impact of a nation’s thrusts in nanotechnol-
ogy is likely to affect its economy. The nif list is the first crit-
ical piece of information.
2. To understand how a nation’s thrusts in nanotechnology will 
affect its ability to develop nanoweapons, we examine the 2015 
defense budgets of nations and consider it representative of 
the nation’s military industrial complex. The defense budgets 
are the second critical pieces of information.

194 
appendix 2
3. To develop a metric that expresses a nation’s capability to 
develop and deploy offensive nanoweapons, which we will term 
the Nanoweapons Offensive Capability of Nations or nocon 
score, we use the following equation:
nocon score = (military budget) × (nif expressed as a decimal)
This, in effect, says that a nation’s military budget is represen-
tative of their military industrial complex and a nation’s Nano-
technology Impact Factor (nif, expressed as a decimal relative 
to the highest being 1.0) determines its ability to develop and 
deploy offensive nanoweapons, the nocon score.
4. We will also examine national alliances that enable nano-
technology and nanoweapons sharing.
5. Combining the results from items 3 and 4, we will use judg-
ment to develop the Nanoweapons Offensive Capability of 
Nations list.
Applying the Methodology
We will start by “following the money.” Harper indicates that 
of the quarter trillion dollars spent on nanotechnology between 
2001 and 2012, the countries that invested most are, in descend-
ing order:
1. United States
2. Russia
3. China
4. European Commission, the executive body of the European 
Union
5. Japan
6. India
In terms of total spending, adjusted for purchasing power parity 
(ppp), the United States, Russia, and China are investing about 

appendix 2 
195
the same regarding nanotechnology investments. The European 
Commission is investing about a third as much as the top three, 
Japan about a quarter, and India about a tenth.
In addition to adjusting investments in terms of ppp, Harper 
also adjusts investments in terms of the Emtech Exploitation Index 
(eei). The eei is a measure regarding how effectively a country 
can “commercially” exploit its nanotechnology investments. It 
takes into account factors such as overall global competitiveness, 
quality of scientific institutions, and capacity for innovation. Here 
are the eeis provided in the Cientifica report for various nations:
1. United States
5.00
2. Germany
4.93
3. Taiwan
4.90
4. Japan
4.88
5. South Korea
4.60
6. United Kingdom
4.55
7. China
4.30
8. France
4.23
9. India
3.95
10. Russia
3.57
Cientifica concludes that the United States has the best infrastruc-
ture to capitalize on its investments. The report places emphasis 
on experienced researchers and scientists, as well as commercial, 
industrial, and medical “know how” to bring new products to mar-
ket. From this, they conclude that Russia and China would have 
to spend almost twice as much in real ppp terms to outpace the 
United States in nanotechnology commercialization.
Combining national investments with eeis, Cientifica develops 
a Nanotechnology Impact Factor (nif), which measures how the 
impact of a nation’s thrusts in nanotechnology is likely to affect 
its economy. The Cientifica nifs reported below are “normalized” 

196 
appendix 2
such that the highest score equals 100 and is in the first column 
(#1). The second column (#2) is the score represented as a decimal:
Nation
No. 1
No. 2
1. United States
100
1.00
2. China
89
0.89
3. Russia
83
0.83
4. Germany
30
0.30
5. Japan
29
0.29
6. eu
27
0.27
7. South Korea
25
0.25
8. Taiwan
9
0.09
9. UK
6
0.06
10. India
5
0.05
This information agrees with and expands the information pre-
sented in chapter 4, which focused on only the top three nations. 
However, we need to understand how a nation’s thrusts in nano-
technology will affect its ability to develop nanoweapons. There 
is no “standard” methodology to do this. Therefore, we will need 
to develop a reasonable approach to make this determination.
Let’s start by examining the 2015 defense budgets of the nations 
on the list. We will use the 2016 edition of The Military Balance 
published by the International Institute for Strategic Studies (iiss), 
which is a British research firm that focuses on international 
affairs. I have chosen to use the iiss because it provides military 
expenditures for 2015 using average market exchange rates and 
is one of the top ten most influential think tanks in the world. 
Accessing other think tank estimates will yield different results, 
but for the most part the general rankings are close. In addition, 
we will look at the military budgets of only the top ten nations on 
Cientifica nifs report. We will also only focus on nations within 
the European Union (eu) that have the largest budgets. All 2015 
budgets are in billions of U.S. dollars:

appendix 2 
197
1. United States
597.5
2. China
129.8
3. United Kingdom
56.2
4. Russia
51.6
5. India
47.9
6 France
46.7
7. Germany
36.6
8. South Korea
33.4
9. Japan
11.9
10. Taiwan
10.2
Using a nation’s nif and military budget, we can develop a met-
ric that expresses a nation’s capability to develop and deploy offen-
sive nanoweapons, which we term the “nocon score.” Further, 
we can define a nation’s nocon score according to the equation:
nocon score = (military budget) x (nif expressed as a decimal)
This, in effect, says that a nation military budget and commercial, 
industrial, and medical infrastructure (nif) determines its ability 
to develop and deploy offensive nanoweapons. Since the Cienti-
fica report did not provide a nif for France, we will equate it to 
the European Union’s nif. In general, this appears conservative:
• France’s nanotechnology thrusts benefit from its member-
ship in European Framework Programmes for Research and 
Technological Development
• France has the second highest military budget within the 
European Union
If we apply the nocon score equation, we get the following:
1. United States
597.5
2. China
115.5
3. Russia
43.8
4. France
12.6

198 
appendix 2
5. Germany
11.0
6. South Korea
8.4
7. United Kingdom
3.4
8. India
2.4
9. Japan
3.4
10. Taiwan
0.9
Results
The above list provides insight regarding how to categorize nations 
in nocon. However, it cannot be “strictly by the numbers.” Military 
alliances will also play a role. This is especially true of the United 
Kingdom, which has the largest military budget of all European 
Union nations and ranks fifth in the world overall, even ahead 
of Russia’s military budget. This begs a question, Why don’t they 
rank higher on the nocon score? This is a direct result of their 
low nif ranking. My interpretation of the Cientifica report sug-
gests that they attribute the United Kingdom’s low nif results 
to three factors:
1. A lack of strategic focus and continuity
2. Environment, Health and Safety (ehs) concerns
3. Poor synergy between academic research and industry
While I respect Cientifica’s analysis, I do not agree. Consider 
this. The United Kingdom is the United States’ closest ally. In 
fact, military strategists characterize their relationship as “Spe-
cial.” The level of cooperation between them with regard to mili-
tary planning, execution of military operations, nuclear weapons 
technology, and intelligence sharing is “unparalleled” among 
major powers. There is every reason to believe that this “special 
relationship” includes nanotechnology and nanoweapons shar-
ing. In addition, the United Kingdom is a nuclear power and 
a nato nation. It would be in the best interest of the United 
States to ensure the United Kingdom is a fully capable military 

appendix 2 
199
ally, including its ability to deploy nanoweapons. However, this 
is not a one- sided relationship. The United Kingdom would be 
able to share any advances in nanotechnology it makes resulting 
from its membership to the European Union’s nanotechnology 
development thrusts of European Framework Programmes for 
Research and Technological Development. From an economic 
viewpoint, including trade and commerce, and from a military 
viewpoint, the United Kingdom is in my view the “undeclared 
51st state” of the United States. I do not make this statement 
lightly. The United Kingdom and the United States have been 
close allies for well over a hundred years, and their “special rela-
tionship” has been forged in numerous military and political 
conflicts such as World War I, World War II, the Korean War, 
the Cold War, the Falklands War, the Gulf Wars, and now the 
War on Terror.
Let’s also discuss Saudi Arabia. They did not show up on any of 
Cientifica’s lists. Based on that, it would be reasonable to believe 
they are not pursuing nanoweapons. However, the 2016 edition of 
The Military Balance published by iiss estimates their 2015 mili-
tary budget at $81.8 billion, which is the third largest military bud-
get in the world, behind only the United States and China. They 
also are a close ally of Pakistan, sharing commercial, cultural, reli-
gious, and political interests. Pakistan is a nuclear power. Currently, 
Saudi Arabia’s focus is on remaining one of the world’s largest 
oil exporters. Their foreign policy appears guided by maintaining 
relations with other oil- producing and major oil- consuming coun-
tries. However, the Middle East is a turbulent hotbed for religious 
conflict, as well as wars related to the region’s oil resources and 
access to the Persian Gulf. For example, one major reason Iraq 
invaded the small nation of Kuwait in the first Gulf War was to 
gain direct access to the Persian Gulf. In a practical sense, Saudi 
Arabia has a large defense budget and aligns itself with Pakistan 
to deal with their perceived threat from the Islamic Republic of 
Iran and other hostilities in the region. However, that is not the 
whole story. The Middle East is the most militarized region in the 

200 
appendix 2
world. Saudi Arabia’s relationship with the United States draws 
criticism from radical Islamic groups throughout the region. Given 
Saudi Arabia’s military budget, its precarious position in the Mid-
dle East, and its alliance with Pakistan, it would be reasonable to 
believe they could acquire nanoweapons. Today, most arms sales 
are to Middle East nations. I am not suggesting Saudi Arabia is 
developing nanoweapons. I am suggesting their oil wealth and 
defense budget would enable them to buy some of the best nan-
otechnologists in the world to develop offensive nanoweapons, 
or even buy offensive nanoweapons that become available in the 
military market, if they perceive it in their national interest.
Conclusions and Rationale
Given the above information, this is how I view the Nanoweap-
ons Offensive Capability of Nations:
1. Nanoweapons Nations
• United States is the clear leader in developing and deploying 
offensive nanoweapons. Close alliances with nato nations 
like the United Kingdom and France may prove synergistic 
in developing nanotechnology and nanoweapons.
• China is a near follower that understands the importance 
of nanoweapons, deploys them as they become available, 
and is ramping up its nanoweapons programs as rapidly as 
its economy allows. Alliances with Russia and North Korea 
may prove synergistic in developing nanotechnology and 
nanoweapons.
• Russia is a distant third that has gotten a relatively poor 
return on its investment in nanotechnology, mainly due to 
corruption and poor management. Its alliance with China 
may prove synergistic in developing nanotechnology and 
nanoweapons.
• United Kingdom: for reasons previously stated.

appendix 2 
201
2. Near Follower Nanoweapons Nations
France is likely developing nanoweapons via the Centre 
National de la Recherché Scientifique and participation in 
the nanotechnology development thrusts of European Frame-
work Programmes for Research and Technological Develop-
ment. They are a nato nation and a nuclear power. French 
nuclear weapons, like those of the United States, United 
Kingdom, and Russia, are on high alert, ready to use on short 
notice. Their nanoweapons would likely result from their 
commercial applications, for example, using nanoparticles 
for automotive catalytic converters, and their ever increas-
ingly close alliance with the United States. Some military 
analysts suggest that France is replacing the United King-
dom as the United States’ closest ally. I do not agree, but I 
do feel that France equals the United Kingdom in military 
capability. They also politically align with the United States 
regarding defeating Islamist militants and opposing Rus-
sian aggression. In fact, in 2013 French president François 
Hollande launched a military intervention in Mali to defeat 
Islamist militants.
• Germany is likely developing nanoweapons. As of 2015, 
there are about a thousand German companies engaged in 
the development, application, and distribution of nanotech-
nology products. Those companies account for about 70,000 
jobs. In general, Germany’s nanotechnologies thrusts are 
increasing. Historically, Germany is a signatory of the Treaty 
of Brussels, which prohibited them to possess nuclear, bio-
logical, or chemical weapons. The Brussels treaty expired 
in 2010, and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (nato) 
replaced it. Germany is a member of nato. Germany is also 
a signatory of the Non- Proliferation Treaty and agrees not 
to develop or deploy strategic nuclear weapons. However, 
as a nato nation under the “United States– nato nuclear 
weapons sharing” provisions, Germany, along with Belgium, 

202 
appendix 2
Italy, the Netherlands, and Turkey, receives tactical nuclear 
weapons from the United States, which also controls their 
use. Given Germany’s strong nanotechnology infrastructure 
and constraints regarding nuclear, biological, and chemical 
weapons, it is logical that they would seek to have a strong 
position in nanoweapons. I think it is likely, for example, 
that Germany is developing specific nanoweapons, such as 
mini- nukes. Germany is also a member of the European 
Union and participates in the nanotechnology development 
thrusts of European Framework Programmes for Research 
and Technological Development.
• South Korea is the world’s fifteenth largest economy and 
has nearly 30,000 U.S. troops stationed within its borders. 
South Korea is an ally of the United States and an import-
ant trade partner. In addition, South Korea’s military bud-
get is almost as large as the entire gdp of North Korea, its 
hostile neighbor. It is likely that:
The United States troops in South Korea have the latest 
generation of conventional weapons and tactical nuclear 
weapons to thwart a nuclear strike by North Korea.
South Koreas is developing offensive nanoweapons, espe-
cially related to the threat North Korea poses.
3. Nanoweapons Capable Nations
Japan primarily focuses its nanotechnology on commercial, 
industrial, and medical applications. Based on the 1960 Treaty 
of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United 
States and Japan, Japan is a U.S. protectorate and an import-
ant trading partner. Strategically it makes sense for Japan to 
focus on its continued economic growth and strengthening 
its relationship with the United States. Most military strat-
egists suggest that Japan would like to upgrade from pro-
tectorate to ally.

appendix 2 
203
India primarily focuses its nanotechnology on commercial, 
industrial, and medical applications. India is a nuclear power. 
It is actively pursuing new ballistic missile, cruise missile, 
and sea- based nuclear delivery systems. Given India’s low 
military budget and modest nanotechnology capabilities, 
it is doubtful that there is a robust nanoweapons program.
Saudi Arabia: for reasons previously stated.


appendix 3
The Events Leading to the Chernobyl Disaster
1. At 1:06 a.m. (local time) April 25, 1986, a gradual reduc-
tion in the output of the power of Chernobyl’s reactor #4 com-
menced until the power level reached 50 percent of its nominal 
3,200 mw thermal level. This took a number of hours, and by 
the time the power level reached 50 percent, the day shift had 
begun. This first step proceeded without incident.
2. Suddenly, without warning, a regional power station went 
offline. This prompted the Kiev electrical grid controller to 
request postponing any further reduction of Chernobyl’s out-
put. The controller’s concern was to have sufficient power for 
the peak evening demand. This request was unexpected, but did 
not appear to represent a threat to safety. Chernobyl complied.
3. Preparations for the test not affecting the reactor’s power 
continued, including disabling the emergency core cooling sys-
tem. The eccs is a backup system intended to provide cooling 
water to the core in a loss- of- coolant accident. The disabling of 
the eccs, in hindsight, represented a questionable judgment 
and the inherent lack of attention to safety.
4. After satisfying the evening peak demand, at 11:04 p.m. the 
Kiev grid controller gave permission to resume the Chernobyl 
reactor shutdown. At this point, the evening shift was getting 
ready to leave. The night shift would take over at midnight. 
The original plan required the test to be completed during 
the day shift. The night shift’s job was only “maintenance” of 
the decay heat cooling systems in a shutdown plant. A large 
“red flag” should have been apparent and caused a halt of the 

206 
appendix 3
test. The night shift was ill prepared to carry out any elements 
of the plan, other than maintenance. Still, no one voiced con-
cerns, and the test proceeded.
5. During the shift change, an inexperienced night shift engi-
neer executed a rapid reduction in the power level from 50 per-
cent to a little over 20 percent. By 12:05 a.m. on April 26, the 
reactor was at 700 mw test goal level.
6. Then the unexpected happened: the core power continued 
to decrease. The nuclear physics regarding this behavior is 
well known. In the parlance of nuclear physics, it is a process 
known as “reactor poisoning.” (Please consult the glossary and 
annotations for more information. Understanding the exact 
nuclear physics of reactor poisoning is unnecessary. It is only 
important to know that the engineer should have anticipated 
reactor poisoning given the conditions surrounding the rate 
of power reduction.)
7. When the reactor power reached 500 mw, the engineer mis-
takenly inserted the control rods too far. We will never know 
the cause of this error, as the engineer and the night shift man-
ager died shortly following the disaster.
8. This rendered the reactor in a near shutdown mode, with 
a power output of less than 30 mw, or about 5 percent of the 
output deemed safe for the test.
9. To counter the reactor poisoning, the control room person-
nel decided to disable the automatic system governing the con-
trol rods and manually extract the reactor control rods to their 
upper limits, but to no avail. They were unable to get the reac-
tor above 200 mw, which allowed increased poisoning of the 
reactor core.
10. The reactor’s low operational level and increased poison-
ing triggered alarms. Between 12:35 and 12:45 a.m., the control 
room personnel ignored emergency alarm signals concerning 
thermal- hydraulic parameters, apparently to maintain the reactor 

appendix 3 
207
power level. In a decision that defies reason, at 200 mw and with 
increased reactor poisoning, the control room continued the test.
11. Per the test plan, the control room activated extra water 
pumps at 1:05 a.m. The increased water flow through the reac-
tor produced an increase in the inlet coolant temperature of the 
reactor core because the water did not have sufficient time to 
release its heat in the turbine and cooling towers. This reduced 
the cooling efficiency and safety margin.
12. The increased water flow exceeded the allowed limit. As a 
result, at 1:19 a.m. an alarm signaled low steam pressure in 
the steam separators. Since water absorbs neutrons better than 
steam, turning on the additional pumps decreased the reac-
tor’s power even further. The crew responded by turning off 
two pumps in an effort to increase steam pressure.
13. The result was an extremely unstable reactor configura-
tion. Out of 211 control rods, the control room removed all but 
18. Safety requires 28 rods in the reactor at all times. All auto-
matic safeties were disabled. The control crew did not “man-
ually” reinsert all the control rods to shut down the reactor. 
Their lack of action remains a mystery.
14. In the absurdity of this situation, they continued the exper-
iment. At 1:23:04 a.m., with only four of the eight Main Circu-
lating Pumps (mcp) active (six are normally active), the control 
room turned off the steam to the turbines, which allowed the 
turbine generator to run down. The diesel generators were to 
have completely picked up the mcps’ power needs by 1:23:43 
a.m. In the interim, 31 seconds, the turbine generator, now 
coasting down, was supposed to power the mcps.
15. When they turned off the turbine generator, it stopped pow-
ering the pumps. This caused the water flow rate to decrease, 
leading to the formation of more steam voids (bubbles) in the 
core. The formation of steam voids reduced the amount of 
the liquid water to absorb neutrons. This increased the reac-

208 
appendix 3
tor’s power output. The situation was now out of control. As 
the reactor’s power increased, so did the steam voids. As the 
steam voids increased, the reactor’s power increased.
16. At 1:23:40 a.m., the records indicate that someone man-
ually pressed the eps- 5 button of the reactor emergency pro-
tection system, which automatically inserted all control rods.
17. The design of the control rods included a graphite tip, 
which displaced neutron- absorbing water with graphite before 
introducing neutron- absorbing boron material. Initially, this 
increased the reaction rate.
18. A few seconds after the graphite rod tips entered the fuel 
pile, a massive power spike occurred. This caused the core to 
overheat, fracturing some of the fuel rods. The fractured fuel 
rods blocked the control rod columns at a point that placed the 
graphite tips in the middle of the core. The reactor output shot 
above 530 mw in three seconds.
19. Instruments did not record the rest of what happen. We 
only know that the last reading on the control panel was 33,000 
mw, ten times the normal output. Here is one simulation of 
what might have happened:
a. The power spike caused an increase in fuel temperature.
b. The increase in fuel temperature caused massive steam 
buildup.
c. The massive steam buildup caused a rapid increase in 
steam pressure.
d. The rapid increase in steam pressure caused the fuel clad-
ding to fail.
e. This allowed the fuel and water to mix.
f. This was followed by three steam explosions, two internal 
to the reactor and the final one external.

appendix 3 
209
g. The final explosion tore off the 1,000- ton upper plate, 
which is fastened to the entire reactor, and shot it through 
the roof of the building.
21. Witnesses report huge fireball eruptions 1,000 feet into 
the air that continued for two days. The actual fire lasted seven 
days, as the reactor melted down.


notes
Introduction
 xi 
The events that most people consider: A. Sandberg and N. Bostrom, “Global Cat-
astrophic Risks Survey,” Technical Report #2008- 1 (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2008).
1. What You Don’t Know Can Kill You
 8 
Fact 1: The National Nanotechnology Initiative: “nni Vision, Goals, and Objec-
tives,” Nano.gov, retrieved April 13, 2016, http://www.nano.gov/about-nni/what 
/vision-goals.
 10 Given these facts, it is not: David M. Berube, “Public Perception of Nano: A Summary 
of Findings,” NanoHype: Nanotechnology Implications and Interactions, retrieved April 
13, 2016, http://nanohype.blogspot.com/2009/10/public-perception-of-nano-summary 
-of.html#uds-search-results.
 11 
In 2001 Nobel laureate Richard Smalley: Richard E. Smalley, “Of Chemistry, Love, 
and Nanobots,” Scientific American 285, no. 3 (September 2001): 76– 77.
 12 
In 2007 the Russian military successfully: Adrian Blomfield, “Russian Army 
‘Tests the Father of All Bombs,’” Telegraph, September 12, 2007, retrieved April 13, 
2016, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/1562936/Russian-army-tests 
-the-father-of-all-bombs.html.
2. Playing LEGOS with Atoms
 25 Nanolithography is also a technique used: M. Despont, J. Brugger, U. Drechsler, 
U. Dürig, W. Häberle, M. Lutwyche, H. Rothuizen, R. Stutz, and R. Widmer,  
“vlsi- nems chip for parallel afm data storage,” Sensors and Actuators 80, no. 2 
(2000): 100– 107.
 26 The red color emits from the: J. Winter, “Gold Nanoparticle Biosensors,” May 
23, 2007, https://leelab.engineering.osu.edu/sites/nsec.osu.edu/files/uploads 
/WinterGoldNanoparticles.pdf.
3. I Come in Peace
 29 Defining a nanotechnology product is challenging: E. O’Rourke and M. Morrison, 
“Challenges for Governments in Evaluating Return on Investment from Nanotech-
nology and Its Broader Economic Impact,” paper from International Symposium on 

212 
notes
Assessing the Economic Impact of Nanotechnology, 2012, Nano.gov, http://www.nano 
.gov/sites/default/files/dsti_stp_nano201212.pdf.
 29 The 2012 International Symposium on Assessing: International Symposium on 
Assessing the Economic Impact of Nanotechnology, 2012, Nano.gov, http://www.nano 
.gov/node/785.
 31 
In fact, many consider nanotechnology: M. Knell, “Nanotechnology and the Chal-
lenges of Equity, Equality, and Development,” Nanotechnology and the Sixth Technolog-
ical Revolution: Yearbook of Nanotechnology in Society 2 (September 30, 2010): 127– 43.
31  
Zettl’s machines, like the nanoradio: K. Bourzac, “Nanoradio Tunes In to Atoms,” 
mit Technology Review, July 21, 2008, https://www.technologyreview.com/s/410487 
/nanoradio-tunes-in-to-atoms.
32 
Some estimates place the worldwide market: M. Roco, “Nanotechnology Research 
Directions for Societal Needs in 2020,” March 28, 2012, International Symposium 
on Assessing the Economic Impact of Nanotechnology, http://www.nano.gov/node/797.
 32 An estimate of the worldwide economy: A. Laudicina and E. Peterson, “Global 
Economic Outlook, 2015– 2020: Beyond the New Mediocre,” January 2015, A. T. 
Kearney Global Business Policy Council, https://www.atkearney.com/documents 
/10192/5498252/Global+Economic+Outlook+2015-2020—Beyond+the+New+Mediocre 
.pdf/5c5c8945-00cc-4a4f-a04f-adef094e90b8.
 32 Given the stakes, economically and militarily: M. Roco, “Nanotechnology Research 
Directions for Societal Needs in 2020,” March 28, 2012.
 33 
The cpi was updated in 2013: M. E. Vance, T. Kuiken, E. P. Vejerano, S. P. McGin-
nis, M. F. Hochella, D. Rejeski, and M. S. Hull, “Nanotechnology in the Real World: 
Redeveloping the Nanomaterial Consumer Products Inventory,” Beilstein Journal of 
Nanotechnology, 2015, 1769– 80, http://www.beilstein-journals.org/bjnano/single 
/articleFullText.htm?publicId=2190-4286-6-181.
 34 Intel states on their website: Intel Corporation, retrieved April 16, 2016, http://www 
.intel.com/content/www/us/en/processors/core/core-m-processors.html.
 35 
For example, did you know: Terry Paige, “The Rise of Nanotechnology,” LifeFact pia, 
May 11, 2013, http://lifefactopia.com/technology/Nanotechnology.
 35 
We do know that the National: “Nano Exposed: A Citizen’s Guide to Nanotech-
nology,” Organic Consumers, December 2010, https://www.organicconsumers.org 
/sites/default/files/nano-exposed_final_41541.pdf.
 36 The 2016 nni budget proposes: “Supplement to the President’s Budget for Fis-
cal Year 2016,” The National Nanotechnology Initiative, White House, https://
www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/nni_fy16_budget_supple 
ment.pdf.
 36 The use of concrete- like materials: N. Gromicko and K. Shepard, “The History of 
Concrete” Internachi, http://www.nachi.org/history-of-concrete.htm#ixzz31v47zuu.
 36 The ancient Romans used concrete extensively: N. Gromicko and K. Shepard, “The 
History of Concrete.”
 36 There is wide agreement that concrete: Florence Sancheza and Konstantin 
Sobolevb, “Nanotechnology in Concrete,” May 15, 2010, https://www.researchgate 
.net/publication/222873024_Nanotechnology_in_Concrete_-_A_Review.

notes 
213
 36 Nanotechnology is finding wide application: S. Mann, “Nanotechnology and Con-
struction,” Nanoforum.org, European Nanotechnology Gateway, October 31, 2006, 
http://www.nanowerk.com/nanotechnology/reports/reportpdf/report62.pdf.
 36 Steel has been used: S. Mann, “Nanotechnology and Construction.”
 36 In fact, according to a forecast: Wesley Cook, “Bridge Failure Rates, Consequences, 
and Predictive Trends,” All Graduate Theses and Dissertations, 2163, 2014, http:// 
digitalcommons.usu.edu/etd/2163.
 37 
Although this collapse was due: S. Jones, “Friday Marks 7 Years since I- 35w 
Bridge Collapse,” Minneapolis (wcco), August 1, 2014, http://minnesota.cbslocal 
.com/2014/08/01/friday-marks-7-years-since-i-35w-bridge-collapse; Charles C. Rob-
erts Jr., “Minneapolis Bridge Collapse,” http://www.croberts.com/minneapolis-bridge 
-collapse.htm.
 37 
According to structural engineer Surinder Mann: S. Mann, “Nanotechnology and 
Construction,” Nanoforum.org, European Nanotechnology Gateway, October 31, 
2006, http://www.nanowerk.com/nanotechnology/reports/reportpdf/report62.pdf.
 37 
In general, there are two ways: “Nano- engineered Steels for Structural Applica-
tions,” Nanowerk Spotlight, May 10, 2010, http://www.nanowerk.com/spotlight 
/spotid=16203.php.
 38 In 2015 mit Technology Review: K. Bullis, “Nano- Manufacturing Makes Steel 10 
Times Stronger,” mit Technology Review, February 16, 2015, https://www.technology 
review.com/s/534796/nano-manufacturing-makes-steel-10-times-stronger.
 38 According to nni, examples include: “Manufacturing at the Nanoscale,” Nano.gov. 
retrieved April 15, 2016, http://www.nano.gov/nanotech-101/what/manufacturing.
 40 According to nni, “nni agencies: “Manufacturing at the Nanoscale,” Nano.gov.
 40 It devotes an entire section: Nano.gov, retrieved April 15, 2016, http://www.nano.gov/you 
/nanotechnology-benefits.
 40 According to the editor in chief: M. Patil, D. S. Mehta, and S. Guvva, “Future Impact 
of Nanotechnology on Medicine and Dentistry,” J Indian Soc Periodontol 12, no. 2 
(May– August 2008): 34– 40.
 41 
Experts at the European Medicines Agency: “Reflection Paper on Nanotechnology- 
Based Medicinal Products for Human Use,” European Medicines Agency, June 29, 
2006, http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_gb/document_library/Regulatory_and 
_procedural_guideline/2010/01/wc5 000 
69728.pdf.
 41 
Researchers Edward Kai- Hua Chow: E. Kai- Hua Chow and D. Ho, “Cancer Nano-
medicine: From Drug Delivery to Imaging,” Science Translational Medicine 5, no. 216 
(December 18, 2013).
 41 
According to the Kidlington Centre: “Nano- Medicine Market Size Is Expected to 
Be Worth $130.9 Billion by 2016,” Kidlington Centre, Kidlington, UK, March 17, 
2015, prnewswire, http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/nano-medicine 
-market-size-is-expected-to-be-worth-1309-billion-by-2016-296544211.html.
 42 According to Robert A. Freitas: Robert A. Freitas Jr., “The Ideal Gene Delivery 
Vector: Chromallocytes, Cell Repair Nanorobots for Chromosome Replacement 
Therapy,” Journal of Evolution and Technology 16, no. 1 (June 2007): 1– 97, http:// 
jetpress.org/v16/freitas.pdf.

214 
notes
4. The Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing
 46 In 2009 the DoD published: Department of Defense, “Defense Nanotechnology 
Research and Development Program,” Nano.gov, 2009, retrieved April 15, 2016, 
http://www.nano.gov/node/621.
 47 Radiation- hardened integrated circuits processing: “Rad Hard Microelectronics,” 
Honeywell, retrieved April 15, 2016, http://www51.honeywell.com/aero/common 
/documents/myaerospacecatalog-documents/Space/Rad_hard_Microelectronics 
_Products_and_Services.pdf.
 47 Commercial integrated circuits can withstand: The International System of Units, 
2008, http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/SP330/sp330.pdf. 
 48 The realities of modern warfare: S. Sagadevan and M. Periasamy, “Recent Trends 
in Nanobiosensors and Their Applications,” Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci. 36 (2014): 62– 69, 
http://www.ipme.ru/e-journals/rams/no_13614/06_13614_suresh.pdf.
 48 The entire sensor package: Brittany Sause, “Nanosensors in Space,” mit Technology 
Review, 2007, https://www.technologyreview.com/s/408190/nanosensors-in-space.
 49 In 2014 the University of Massachusetts: “Eco- Friendly ‘Pre- Fab’ Self- Assembling 
Nanoparticles Could Revolutionize Nano Manufacturing,” Kurzweil Accelerating Intel-
ligence News, August 14, 2014, retrieved April 15, 2016, http://www.kurzweilai.net 
/eco-friendly-pre-fab-self-assembling-nanoparticles-could-revolutionize-nano-man 
ufacturing; Timothy S. Gehan et al., “Multi- Scale Active Layer Morphologies for 
Organic Photovoltaics through Self- Assembly of Nanospheres,” Nano Letters, 2014 
(doi: 10.1021/nl502209s).
 52 In 2015 the Office of Naval Research: Naval S&T Strategy, 2015, retrieved April 15, 
2016, http://www.navy.mil/strategic/2015-Naval-Strategy-final-web.pdf.
 53 
However, in 2014, X. Zhao: X. Zhao, W. Fan, J. Duan, B. Hou, and J. Pak, “Studies on 
Nano- Additive for the Substitution of Hazardous Chemical Substances in Antifoul-
ing Coatings for the Protection of Ship Hulls,” Pharm Sci., July 2014; 27 (4 Suppl): 
1117– 22., pmid: 25016277.
 54 According to Nanowerk: “U.S. Navy Eyes Nanotechnology for Ultimate Power Con-
trol System,” Nanowerk News, July 21, 2015, retrieved April 15, 2016, http://www 
.nanowerk.com/nanotechnology-news/newsid=40827.php.
 55 
In 2003 the U.S. Army: The Institute for Soldier Nanotechnologies, retrieved April 
15, 2016, http://isnweb.mit.edu.
 56 In 2012 scientists at mit: J. Lee, D. Veysset, J. P. Singer, M. Retsch, G. Saini, T. Pezeril, 
K. Nelson, and E. L. Thomas, “High Strain Rate Deformation of Layered Nanocom-
posites,” Nature Communications 3, Article number: 1164 doi:10.1038/ncomms2166, 
November 6, 2012,
 57 
In fact, one- third of medical evacuations: Hal Bernton, “Weight of War: Gear 
That Protects Troops Also Injures Them,” Seattle Times, February 13, 2011, http://
www.seattletimes.com/nation-world/weight-of-war-gear-that-protects-troops-also 
-injures-them.
 57 
Scientists at the U.S. Department: “Nano- Thin Invisibility Cloak Makes 3d Objects 
Disappear,” Nanowerk News, September 18, 2015, retrieved April 16, 2016, http://
www.nanowerk.com/nanotechnology-news/newsid=41348.php.

notes 
215
 58 In fact, cnn reported: D. Melvin, “No More Dodging a Bullet, As U.S. Develops 
Self- Guided Ammunition,” cnn, April 29, 2015, http://www.cnn.com/2015/04/29 
/us/us-military-self-guided-bullet.
 58 The nano coating is especially interesting: K. Bullis, “Nano- Manufacturing Makes 
Steel 10 Times Stronger,” mit Technology Review, February 16, 2015, https://www 
technologyreview.com/s/534796/nano-manufacturing-makes-steel-10-times 
-stronger.
 59 Researchers at Sandia Laboratories: J. Gartner, “Military Reloads with Nano-
tech,” mit Technology Review, January 21, 2005, https://www.technologyreview 
.com/s/403624/military-reloads-with-nanotech.
 59 In 2009 Northrop Grumman announced: P. Pae, “Northrop Advance Brings Era 
of the Laser Gun Closer,” Los Angeles Times, March 19, 2009, http://articles.latimes 
.com/2009/mar/19/business/fi-laser19.
 61 Currently about a third of all: C. Coren, “Obama Administration to Increase 
Drone Flights 50 Percent,” Newsmax, August 17, 2015, http://www.newsmax.com 
/Newsfront/drones-50-percent-airstrikes-Air-Force/2015/08/17/id/670454.
 61 Some estimate that drones have killed: J. Serle, “Monthly Updates on the Covert 
War Almost 2,500 Now Killed by Covert U.S. Drone Strikes since Obama Inaugu-
ration Six Years Ago: The Bureau’s Report for January 2015,” Bureau of Investigative 
Journalism, February 2, 2015, https://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/2015/02/02 
/almost-2500-killed-covert-us-drone-strikes-obama-inauguration.
 61 Artificially intelligent (ai) machines will equal: L. Muehlhauser, “When Will 
ai Be Created?” Machine Intelligence Research Institute, May 15, 2013, https:// 
intelligence.org/2013/05/15/when-will-ai-be-created.
 62 As the Wall Street Journal reported: J. Hook, “Americans Want to Pull Back from 
World Stage, Poll Finds,” Wall Street Journal, April 30, 2014, http://www.wsj.com 
/articles/sb10001424052702304163604579532050055966782.
 62 Future drones: David Axe, “From Bug Drones to Disease Assassins, Super Weap-
ons Rule U.S. War Game,” Wired, August 24, 1012, http://www.wired.com/2012/08 
/future-warfare.
 62 Although the DoD is tight- lipped: “Speed Is the New Stealth,” Economist, June 
1, 2013, retrieved April 16, 2016, http://www.economist.com/news/technology 
-quarterly/21578522-hypersonic-weapons-building-vehicles-fly-five-times-speed 
-sound.
 63 I think it is also appropriate: John Gartner, “Military Reloads with Nanotech,” mit 
Technology Review, January 21, 2005, https://www.technologyreview.com/s/403624 
/military-reloads-with-nanotech.
 65 According to the nni website: Frequently Asked Questions, “How Does This Spend-
ing Compare to Other Countries?” Nano.gov, http://www.nano.gov/nanotech-101 
/nanotechnology-facts.
 66 However, from the 2012 nni workshop: “nni Workshop Agendas and Presen-
tations,” Nano.gov, file downloads, “Tim Harper, Cientifica Ltd. Nanotechnol-
ogy Funding: A Global Perspective. | 2.3 mb,” http://www.nano.gov/sites/default 
/files/pub_resource/global_funding_rsl_harper.pdf.

216 
notes
 67 These are the number: “Nanotechnology Patents in uspto,” StatNano, retrieved 
April 15, 2016, http://statnano.com/report/o103.
 67 In 2007 Russian leaders established: Rusnano Corporation, retrieved April 15, 2016, 
http://en.rusnano.com/about.
 68 As a result, Chubais spoke: “Russian State Tech Fund Starts Again after Missteps,” 
Reuters, June 13, 2013, http://www.reuters.com/article/russia-rusnano-shakeup 
-idusl5n0ep2i420130613.
 68 In 2015 Putin placed Leonid Melamed: “Бывшего главу «Роснано» обвинили в 
растрате,” tvrain.ru, retrieved April 15, 2016, https://tvrain.ru/articles/byvshego 
_glavu_rosnano_obvinili_v_rastrate-390379.
 69 On September 3, 2015, China celebrated: B. Gertz, “The China Challenge: The Weapons 
the pla Didn’t Show,” Asia Times, September 8, 2015, http://atimes.com/2015/09/the 
-china-challenge-the-weapons-the-pla-didnt-show.
 70 According to the Washington Free Beacon: B. Gertz, “China Tests Anti- Satellite 
Missile,” Washington Free Beacon, November 9, 2015, http://freebeacon.com 
/national-security/china-tests-anti-satellite-missile.
 71 
History suggests China will find: U.S. Naval Institute Staff, “China’s Military 
Built with Cloned Weapons,” U.S. Naval Institute, October 27, 2015, http://news 
.usni.org/2015/10/27/chinas-military-built-with-cloned-weapons.
 72 For example, Russia sold China its: F. Gady, “China to Receive Russia’s s- 400 
Missile Defense Systems in 12– 18 Months,” Diplomat, November 17, 2015, http:// 
thediplomat.com/2015/11/china-to-receive-russias-s-400-missile-defense-systems 
-in-12-18-months.
 72 Russian leadership wants that technology: F. Gady, “Russia’s Secret New Weapon: 
Should the West Be Afraid?” Diplomat, July 1, 2015, http://thediplomat.com/2015/07 
/russias-secret-new-weapon-should-the-west-be-afraid.
 72 In 2014, DefenseReview.com published: D. Crane, “Russian Nano- Armor Coming 
in 2015 for Future Soldier ‘Warrior Suit,’ and Russian Spetsnaz (Military Special 
Forces) Already Running Improved 6b43 Composite Hard Armor Plates, New Plate 
Carriers and Combat Helmets, ak Rifle/Carbines, gm- 94 Grenade Launchers and 
Other Tactical Gear in Crimea, Ukraine,” April 23, 2014, http://www.defensereview 
.com/russian-nano-armor-coming-in-2015-and-russian-spetsnaz-military-special 
-forces-already-running-improved-6b43-composite-hard-armor-plates-new-plate 
-carriers-ak-riflecarbines-gm-94-grenade-launch.
 72 In a speech to the Federal Assembly: “‘No One Will Prevail over Russia Militarily’: 
Putin Eyes $700bn to Advance Army,” rt.com, December 13, 2013, retrieved April 
15, 2016, https://www.rt.com/news/putin-address-military-russia-125.
 73 
During the mid- 2000s, both Russia: S. M. Hersh, The Samson Option (New York: 
Random House, 1991), 220.
 73 
High- ranking gru defector: Stanislav Lunev, Through the Eyes of the Enemy 
(Washington dc: Regnery, 1998); N. Horrock, “fbi Focusing on Portable Nuke 
Threat,” upi, December 20, 2001, http://www.upi.com/Top_News/2001/12/21/fbi 
-focusing-on-portable-nuke-threat/90071008968550.

notes 
217
 73 
According to a 2005 mit review: J. Gartner, “Military Reloads with Nanotech,” mit 
Technology Review, January 21, 2005, https://www.technologyreview.com/s/403624 
/military-reloads-with-nanotech.
5. The Rise of the Nanobots
 79 The history of military robots dates: Jon Turi, “Tesla’s Toy Boat: A Drone before 
Its Time,” engadget, January 19, 2014, http://www.engadget.com/2014/01/19/nikola 
-teslas-remote-control-boat.
 79 In 1866 British engineer Robert Whitehead: Patrick McSherry, “Whitehead Torpedo,” 
Spanish American War Centennial, http://www.spanamwar.com/torpedo.htm.
 80 During the 1930s and into the: Alexander Lychagin, “What Is Teletank?” Odint 
Soviet News, October 9, 2004, http://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&langpair 
=ru%7cen&u=http://www.odintsovo.info/news/?id=1683.
 81 
The Soviet Union also deployed: Alexey Isaev, “1942, Battle of Kharkov,” interview 
for Echo of Moscow, http://echo.msk.ru/programs/victory/50054; and “A Short His-
tory vniirt,” essays, http://pvo.guns.ru/book/vniirt/index.htm#_Toc122708803.
 81 
The German Wehrmacht deployed: Goliath Demolition Tank on YouTube, https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=zhK8L0PgPdA.
 81 
However, Nazi Germany did deploy robotic: N. Trueman, “The V Weapons,” His-
tory Learning Site, April 2015 and December 2015, http://www.historylearning 
site.co.uk/world-war-two/world-war-two-in-western-europe/the-v-revenge-weapons 
/the-v-weapons.
 81 
The United States began its military: P. W. Singer, “Drones Don’t Die— A History 
of Military Robotics,” HistoryNet, May 5, 2011, http://www.historynet.com/drones 
-dont-die-a-history-of-military-robotics.htm.
 82 In 1944 the U.S. Army Air: John F. Keane and Stephen S. Carr, “A Brief History 
of Early Unmanned Aircraft,” Johns Hopkins apl Technical Digest 32, no. 3 (2013), 
https://www.law.upenn.edu/live/files/3887-keane-and-carr-a-brief-history-of 
-early-unmanned.
 83 
More successful was the Army- developed: Peter Warren Singer, “Drones Don’t Die— A 
History of Military Robotics,” HistoryNet, May 5, 2011, http://www.historynet.com 
/drones-dont-die-a-history-of-military-robotics.htm.
 83 
The first, in 1962, was to: Peter Warren Singer, Wired for War (New York: Penguin, 
2009), 54.
 83 
The second, in 1979, was to: “Lockheed mqm- 105 Aquila,” Directory of U.S. Mil-
itary Rockets and Missiles, 2002, http://www.designation-systems.net/dusrm 
/m-105.html.
 83 
Aerial drones did not play: Chris Cole, “Rise of the Reapers: A Brief History of 
Drones,” Drone Wars uk, June 10, 2014, http://dronewars.net/2014/10/06/rise-of-the 
-reapers-a-brief-history-of-drones.
 83 
In 1999 the United States successfully: R. Dixon, “uav Employment in Kosovo: Les-
sons for the Operational Commander,” Naval War College, February 8, 2000, www 
.dtic.mil/cgi-bin/Gettrdoc?ad=ada378573.

218 
notes
 84 Since 2003 the U.S. military: K. Kawamura, D. M. Wilkes, and J. A. Adams, “Center 
for Intelligent Systems at Vanderbilt University: An Overview,” ieee Systems, Man 
and Cybernetics Newsletter 1, no. 3 (2003).
 84 In 2005 the U.S. Army: Lewis Page, “Flying- Rifle Robocopter: Hovering Sniper Backup 
for U.S. Troops,” Register, April 21, 2009, http://www.theregister.co.uk/2009/04/21/
arss_hover_sniper.
 84 In a 2014 media release: “The Future Is Now: Navy’s Autonomous Swarmboats 
Can Overwhelm Adversaries,” Office of Naval Research, 2014, retrieved April 16, 
2016, http://www.onr.navy.mil/Media-Center/Press-Releases/2014/autonomous 
-swarm-boat-unmanned-caracas.aspx.
 84 Defense One reported: Patrick Tucker, “The Pentagon Is Nervous about Russian and 
Chinese Killer Robots,” Defense One, December 14, 2015, http://www.defenseone.com 
/threats/2015/12/pentagon-nervous-about-russian-and-chinese-killer-robots/124465.
 84 According to U.S. Deputy Secretary: Tucker, “The Pentagon Is Nervous about Rus-
sian and Chinese Killer Robots.”
 84 For example, the U.S. military is: John W. Whitehead, “Roaches, Mosquitoes, and 
Birds: The Coming Micro- Drone Revolution,” HuffPost Tech, June 17, 2013, http://
www.huffingtonpost.com/john-w-whitehead/micro-drones_b_3084965.html.
 84 On February 2, 2016, darpa announced: “fla Program Takes Flight,” Outreach@
darpa.mil, February 12, 2016, http://www.darpa.mil/news-events/2016-02-12.
 85 For example, on December 16, 2014: Patrick Tucker, “The Military Wants 
Smarter Insect Spy Drones,” Defense One, December 23, 2014, http://www.defense 
one.com/technology/2014/12/military-wants-smarter-insect-spy-drones/101970.
 85 On May 15, 2015, Pfizer revealed: “Pfizer Partnering with Ido Bachelet on dna Nanoro-
bots,” Next Big Future, May 15, 2015, http://nextbigfuture.com/2015/05/pfizer-partnering 
-with-ido-bachelet-on.html.
 85 Next Big Future reports, “Bachelet has: “Pfizer Partnering with Ido Bachelet on dna 
Nanorobots.”
 86 According to 3tags.org, Bachelet forms: “dna Nanobots Will Target Cancer Cells 
in the First Human Trial Using a Terminally Ill Patient,” 3tags, 2016, http://3tags 
.org/article/dna-nanobots-will-target-cancer-cells-in-the-first-human-trial-using-a 
-terminally-ill-patient.
 86 Jack Andraka, science prodigy and winner: Joshua Ostroff, “Jack Andraka Invented 
a Cancer Breakthrough. Now He’s Building Nanobots. He’s 18,” Huffington Post, July 
15, 2015, http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2015/07/09/jack-andraka-cancer-nanobots 
-treatment_n_7746760.html.
 86 Other medical researchers are taking: Renier J. Brentjens et al., “cd19- Targeted T- Cells 
Rapidly Induce Molecular Remissions in Adults with Chemotherapy- Refractory 
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia,” Science Translational Medicine 5, no. 177 (March 
20, 2013), http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/5/177/177ra38.
 87 The technology to determine dna ancestry: Ancestry.com, retrieved February 17, 
2016, http://dna.ancestry.com/?hl=Explore+your+heritage+with+dna&s_kwcid=dna 
+testing+for+heritage&gclid=Cj0keqiArou2brdcoN_c6ndi3ombeiqaneix5hOezsgzY 

notes 
219
_edMrLuu1jlrxsgkwrohzythytSojl_Qt8aApyo8p8haq&o_xid=55307&o_lid=55307&o 
_sch=Paid+Search+%e2%80%93+NonBrand.
6. The “Swarm”
 91 We see evidence of swarming’s effectiveness: Roland Bouffanais, Design and Con-
trol of Swarm Dynamics (New York: Springer, 2015).
 92 If you have any doubt: “Pandemic Flu History,” Flu.gov, http://www.flu.gov/pandemic 
/history.
 92 The bee’s ability to sense: Tracy V. Wilson, “Dinner and Dancing: Bee Navi-
gation,” How Stuff Works, May 30, 2007, http://animals.howstuffworks.com 
/insects/bee5.htm.
 93 The U.S. armed forces, regardless: “Learn the 11 Military General Orders,” Military.
com, http://www.military.com/join-armed-forces/military-general-orders.html.
 94 Perhaps such nanobots would have: “dna,” The Encyclopedia of Earth, http://www 
.eoearth.org/view/article/158858.
 94 In each case, it involved: “Swarms of dna Nanorobots Execute Complex Tasks in 
Living Animal,” Foresight Institute, http://www.foresight.org/nanodot/?p=6410.
 95 The Faculty of Life Sciences: “Universal Computing by dna Origami Robots in 
a Living Animal,” Nature Nanotechnology, April 6, 2014, http://www.nature.com 
/nnano/journal/v9/n5/full/nnano.2014.58.html#affil-auth.
 97 Some infectious flu viruses can live: “Preventing Seasonal Flu Illness,” Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, retrieved April 16, 2016, http://www.cdc 
.gov/flu/about/qa/preventing.htm.
7. The “Smart” Nanoweapons
 102 No computer currently has: Louis A. Del Monte “When Will a Computer Equal a 
Human Brain?” Science Questions and Answers, June 5, 2014, http://www.louisdelmonte 
.com/when-will-a-computer-equal-a-human-brain.
 103 In 1950 mathematician and computer scientist: Alan Turing, “Computing Machin-
ery and Intelligence,” Mind 59, no. 236 (October 1950): 433– 60.
 103 The most notable is the Eugene: Lance Ulanoff, “The Life and Times of ‘Eugene Goost-
man,’ Who Passed the Turing Test,” Mashable, June 12, 2014, http://mashable.com 
/2014/06/12/eugene-goostman-turing-test/#gHxdw0xr2iqQ.
 104 Most ai researchers predict this will: Ben Rossington, “Robots ‘Smarter than 
Humans within 15 Years,’ Predicts Google’s Artificial Intelligence Chief,” Mirror, 
February 23, 2014, http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/technology-science/technology 
/ray-kurzweil-robots-smarter-humans-3178027; and Nadia Khomami, “2029: 
The Year When Robots Will Have the Power to Outsmart Their Makers,” Guard-
ian, February 22, 2014, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/22 
/computers-cleverer-than-humans-15-years.
 104 But what is Moore’s law?: Gordon Moore, “Progress in Digital Integrated Electron-
ics,” 1975 ieee Text Speech, retrieved April 16, 2016, http://www.eng.auburn.edu 
/~agrawvd/course/e7770_Spr07/read/Gordon_Moore_1975_Speech.pdf.

220 
notes
 105 There is a lot of negative: “Fully Autonomous Weapons,” Reaching Critical Will, 
retrieved February 25, 2016, http://www.reachingcriticalwill.org/resources/fact-sheets 
/critical-issues/7972-fully-autonomous-weapons.
 105 Does a computer with intelligence equivalent: “Do you think artificial intelligence 
can ever be equal to humans in judgement and emotions?” Debate.org, retrieved Feb-
ruary 25, 2016, http://www.debate.org/opinions/do-you-think-artificial-intelligence 
-can-ever-be-equal-to-humans-in-judgement-and-emotions.
 106 For example, according to Defense One: Patrick Tucker, “The Pentagon Is Nervous 
about Russian and Chinese Killer Robots,” Defense One, December 14, 2015, http:// 
www.defenseone.com/threats/2015/12/pentagon-nervous-about-russian-and-chinese 
-killer-robots/124465.
 106 In general, the U.S. military complies: “United States of America, Practice Relat-
ing to Rule 139. Respect for International Humanitarian Law,” International Com-
mittee of the Red Cross, retrieved April 16, 2016, https://www.icrc.org/customary-ihl 
/eng/docs/v2_cou_us_rule139.
 110 By 2045, most researchers and futurists: Louis A. Del Monte, The Artificial Intelli-
gence Revolution (North Charleston sc: Createspace, April 2014), 128.
8. The Genie Is Loose
 111 However, the U.S. Energy Department: “Manhattan District History,” U.S. Department 
of Energy, retrieved February 28, 2016, https://www.osti.gov/opennet/manhattan 
_district.jsp.
 112 There were 130,000 people working: Barton J. Bernstein, “The Uneasy Alliance: 
Roosevelt, Churchill, and the Atomic Bomb, 1940– 1945,” Western Political Quar-
terly 2 (June 1976): 202– 30.
 112 Even General Groves, the Manhattan Project: “Chapter 8, Security Classification of 
Information,” Federation of American Scientists, retrieved February 28, 2016, http://
www.fas.org/sgp/library/quist2/chap_8.html.
 112 The United States has invested over: “Is a Career in Nanotechnology in Your Future?” 
National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network, retrieved March 3, 2016, http://
www.nnin.org/news-events/spotlights/nanotechnology-careers.
 112 According to a 2016 report by: Franz- Stefan Gady, “Top U.S. Spy Chief: China Still Suc-
cessful in Cyber Espionage against U.S.,” Diplomat, February 16, 2016, http://thediplo-
mat.com/2016/02/top-us-spy-chief-china-still-successful-in-cyber-espionage-against-us.
 113 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute: “16 June 2014: Nuclear Forces 
Reduced While Modernizations Continue, Says sipri,” Stockholm Interna-
tional Peace Research Institute, http://www.sipri.org/media/pressreleases/2014 
/nuclear_May_2014.
 113 The how- to information can be: Tuan C. Nguyen, “Why It’s So Hard to Make 
Nuclear Weapons,” Livescience, September 22, 2009, , http://www.livescience 
.com/5752-hard-nuclear-weapons.html.
 113 Treaties, like the Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty: “Section 7.0 Nuclear Weapon 
Nations and Arsenals,” nuclearweaponarchive.org, August 2001, retrieved April 16, 
2016, http://nuclearweaponarchive.org/Nwfaq/Nfaq7.html.

notes 
221
 120 Two studies of Islamic terrorists, one: Alan Travis, “mi5 Report Challenges Views 
on Terrorism in Britain,” Guardian, August 20, 2008, http://www.theguardian 
.com/uk/2008/aug/20/uksecurity.terrorism1, retrieved March 2, 2016; and Oliv-
ier Roy, “What Is the Driving Force behind Jihadist Terrorism?” Inside Story, 
December 18, 2015, http://insidestory.org.au/what-is-the-driving-force-behind 
-jihadist-terrorism.
 120 Olivier Roy, a professor: “Olivier Roy Interview (2007): Conversations with History; 
Institute of International Studies, uc Berkeley,” retrieved March 2, 2016, http:// 
globetrotter.berkeley.edu/people7/Roy/roy07-con5.html.
 120 Afghan pathologist Yusef Yadgari’s 2007 study: Soraya Sarhaddi Nelson, “Disabled 
Often Carry Out Afghan Suicide Missions,” NPR.org, http://www.npr.org/templates 
/story/story.php?storyId=15276485.
9. Fighting Fire with Fire
 134 Modern humans evolved about 200,000: “Timeline: Weapons Technology,” New 
Scientist, July 7, 2009, retrieved March 4, 2016, https://www.newscientist.com 
/article/dn17423-timeline-weapons-technology.
 134 Many experts estimate that the current: Michael J. Mills et al., “Multidecadal Global 
Cooling and Unprecedented Ozone Loss Following a Regional Nuclear Conflict,” 
Earth’s Future, April 1, 2014, http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2013ef000205 
/full.
 134 For example, the deployment of tanks: Frederick Myatt, Modern Small Arms (New 
York: Crescent Books, 1978), 228– 29.
 134 Even icbms are destroyable in flight: “System a- 135 Missile 51t6- abm- 4 gorgon,” 
Military Russia, February 15, 2016, retrieved March 4, 2016, http://militaryrussia 
.ru/blog/topic-345.html; Ronald T. Kadish, “Reorganization of the Missile Defense 
Program,” March 13, 2002, http://www.mda.mil/global/documents/pdf/ps_kadish 
13mar02.pdf.
10. The Nanoweapons Superpowers
 139 Singularity Computers will first emerge: Louis A. Del Monte, The Artificial Intelli-
gence Revolution (North Charleston sc: Createspace, April 2014), 103– 5, 128.
 147 According to a 2014 report published: Michael J. Mills et al., “Multidecadal Global Cool-
ing and Unprecedented Ozone Loss Following a Regional Nuclear Conflict,” Earth’s 
Future, April 1, 2014, http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2013ef000205/full.
 149 Recent experiments, performed in 2009: Kristina Grifantini, “Robots ‘Evolve’ the 
Ability to Deceive,” mit Technology Review, August 18, 2009, https://www.technology 
review.com/s/414934/robots-evolve-the-ability-to-deceive.
11. The Nano Wars
 153 With the challenging international landscape today: Frank Hoffman, “The Contempo-
rary Spectrum of Conflict,” 2016 Index of U.S. Military Strength, retrieved March 15, 2016 
http://index.heritage.org/military/2016/essays/contemporary-spectrum-of-conflict.
 154 We find ourselves in a spectrum: Hoffman, “The Contemporary Spectrum of Conflict.”

222 
notes
 155 How did we win?: “How Were the Colonies Able to Win Independence?” Digital 
History, retrieved March 15, 2016, http://www.digitalhistory.uh.edu/disp_textbook 
.cfm?smtid=2&psid=3220.
 157 According to the Center for Naval: Mary Ellen Connell and Ryan Evans, “Russia’s 
‘Ambiguous Warfare’ and Implications for the U.S. Marine Corps,” Center for Naval 
Analysis, May 2015, https://www.cna.org/cna_files/pdf/dop-2015-u-010447-Final.pdf.
 158 We can define gray zone wars: Hoffman, “The Contemporary Spectrum of Conflict.”
 158 Nadia Schadlow made this observation: Hoffman, “The Contemporary Spectrum of 
Conflict.”
 164 Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear: “The Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty 
(npt), 1968,” U.S. Department of State Office of the Historian, retrieved March 15, 
2016, https://history.state.gov/milestones/1961-1968/npt.
 165 Limited Test Ban Treaty: “The Limited Test Ban Treaty, 1963,” U.S. Department 
of State Office of the Historian, retrieved March 15, 2016, https://history.state.gov 
/milestones/1961-1968/limited-ban.
 165 Biological Weapons Convention: “Convention on the Prohibition of the Develop-
ment, Production, and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weap-
ons and on Their Destruction,” United Nations, retrieved March 15, 2016, http://
www.un.org/disarmament/wmd/Bio/pdf/Text_of_the_Convention.pdf.
12. Humanity on the Brink
 171 Even though thirty- two people died: “1986 Nuclear Disaster at Chernobyl,” His-
tory, retrieved April 16, 2016, http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/nuclear 
-disaster-at-chernobyl.
 171 An estimated 985,000 died: Karl Grossman, “Chernobyl Death Toll: 985,000, 
Mostly from Cancer,” Global Research, March 13, 2013, http://www.globalresearch 
.ca/new-book-concludes-chernobyl-death-toll-985-000-mostly-from-cancer/20908.
Epilogue
 183 The un Commission for Conventional Armaments: “A Study on Conventional Dis-
armament,” United Nations, December 9, 1981, retrieved April 16, 2016, http://www 
.un.org/documents/ga/res/36/a36r097.htm.
 186 For these reasons and because of: Ronald Reagan, “Foreword Written for a Report 
on the Strategic Defense Initiative, December 28, 1984,” The American Presidency 
Project, http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=38499.
Appendix 2
 193 The Cientifica report, “Nanotechnology Funding: Tim Harper, Cientifica Ltd., 
“Nanotechnology Funding: A Global Perspective,” Report of the National Nanotech-
nology Initiative Workshop, May 1– 2, 2012, Nano.gov, https://www.nano.gov/sites 
/default/files/pub_resource/nni_rsl_2012_rpt_0.pdf.
 196 Let’s start by examining the 2015: “The Military Balance 2016,” International Insti-
tute of Strategic Studies, February 9, 2016, retrieved April 16, 2016, https://www 
.iiss.org/en/publications/military%20balance/issues/the-military-balance-2016-d6c9.

notes 
223
 198 In fact, military strategists characterize their: James Wither, “An Endangered Part-
nership: The Anglo- American Defence Relationship in the Early Twenty- first Cen-
tury,” European Security 15, no. 1, March 2006, 47– 65, retrieved April 16, 2016, http://
www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/09662830600776694.
 199 They also are a close ally: Robert Lacey, Inside the Kingdom: Kings, Clerics, Modernists, 
Terrorists, and the Struggle for Saudi Arabia (New York: Viking Press, 2009), 294.
 201 French nuclear weapons, like those: “Status of World Nuclear Forces,” Feder-
ation of American Scientists, retrieved February 29, 2016, http://fas.org/issues 
/nuclear-weapons/status-world-nuclear-forces.
 201 Some military analysts suggest that France: Michael Shurkin and Peter A. Wilson, 
“France Is Replacing the UK as America’s Top Ally in Europe,” Newsweek, March 30, 
2015, http://www.newsweek.com/france-replacing-uk-americas-top-ally-europe-317774.
 201 As of 2015, there are about: “Nanotechnology,” Research in Germany, retrieved 
March 2, 2016, http://www.research-in-germany.org/en/research-areas-a-z/nano 
technology.html.
 201 Historically Germany is a signatory: “Statement of the Presidency of the Perma-
nent Council of the weu on behalf of the High Contracting Parties to the Mod-
ified Brussels Treaty— Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, 
The Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom,” Western European 
Union, Brussels, March 31, 2010, retrieved March 2, 2016, http://www.weu.int 
/Declaration_E.pdf.
 201 The Brussels treaty expired in 2010: “Member Countries,” nato, retrieved March 
2, 2016, http://www.nato.int/nato-welcome.
 202 South Korea is the world’s fifteenth: Kyle Mizokami, “It’s Time for the U.S. Mili-
tary to Leave South Korea,” The Week, August 13, 2015, http://theweek.com/articles 
/570764/time-military-leave-south-korea.
Appendix 3
 205 At 1:06 a.m. (local time): Zhores Medvedev, The Legacy of Chernobyl (New York: W. 
W. Norton, 1990).
 206 In the parlance of nuclear physics: Khalid Alnoaimi, “Xenon- 135 Reactor Poisoning,” 
March 15, 2014, http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2014/ph241/alnoaimi2.


glossary
ambiguous wars Situations in which a state deploys troops and 
proxies in a deceptive and confusing manner, with the intent 
of achieving political and military goals, while obscuring the 
direct participation of the state or non- state.
analyte Pertains to a substance being analyzed for its chemi-
cal composition.
artificial intelligence Computers with software that allow them 
to emulate aspects of human intelligence.
autonomous weapons Weapons, typically guided by artificial 
intelligence, that can act without human intervention.
biochemical Pertaining to the chemical processes of living 
organisms.
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) The Convention on the 
Prohibition of the Development, Production, and Stockpil-
ing of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on 
Their Destruction.
biosensor A sensor with a biological component that aids in the 
detection of a substance.
boomer Slang for a submarine that carries intercontinental bal-
listic missiles, typically to deliver nuclear weapons to a dis-
tant target.
brain implants Technology implants that connect directly to the 
human brain to augment its intelligence and allow it to con-
nect wirelessly with Singularity Computers.
catalyst A substance that increases the rate of a chemical  
reaction.

226 
glossary
centimeter A unit of length in the metric system, equal to 1/100 
of a meter.
cold war Political hostility from 1945 to 1990 between the United 
States and Soviet Union characterized by threats, especially the 
threat of nuclear war, and propaganda.
counterinsurgency Military or political action against guerril-
las or revolutionaries.
defensive strategic nanoweapons Defensive strategic weapons 
whose nanotechnology components enhance their strategic capa-
bilities. It also includes defensive autonomous smart nanobots.
defensive tactical nanoweapons Defensive weapons whose nan-
otechnology components enhance their tactical capabilities.
DNA An acronym for deoxyribonucleic acid, a self- replicating 
material present in almost all living organisms and the carrier 
of genetic information.
doping In integrated circuit fabrication, this refers to diffusing 
specific substances into unmasked portions of a substrate to 
change the electrical properties of that region.
electric field A region around a charged particle, like an elec-
tron, or electrically charged object, like a “charged” balloon that 
children make by rubbing the balloon on their cloths to make 
it stick to a wall. Within the region, a force exerts on other 
charged particles or objects.
electromagnetic radiation A type of radiation, such as visible 
light, gamma rays, X- rays, and radio waves, that includes simul-
taneously varying electric and magnetic fields.
electron A fundamental subatomic particle with a negative charge 
found in atoms.
electron beam lithography A maskless technology in which a pat-
tern results from a digital representation on computer, which 
controls scanning an electron beam across an electron sensi-
tive resist- coated substrate.
electrons scanning microscope A microscope that uses a beam 
of electrons to produce images of a sample.

glossary 
227
emtech exploitation index A measure regarding how effec-
tively a country can commercially exploit its nanotechnology 
investments.
environmental obfuscation Pertaining to the use of obscurants, 
like white smoke or strobe lights that make it difficult to deter-
mine elements in an environment.
Eugene Goostman A software program that emulates the per-
sona of a thirteen- year- old Ukrainian boy.
European Framework Programmes for Research and Technolog-
ical Development Also termed “Framework Programmes” or 
abbreviated “fp1 through fp7,” with “fp8” being named “Hori-
zon 2020,” are funding programs by the European Union/
European Commission to support research in the European 
Research Area (era).
father of all bombs The nickname of Russia’s most powerful 
nonnuclear air- delivered bomb, speculated to use nanotechnol-
ogy, which makes it four times more destructive than the U.S. 
Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb, nicknamed the “mother 
of all bombs.”
ferroelectric A substance that displays a permanent electric polar-
ization in proportion to an applied electric field.
field- effect transistor A transistor in which current flows across 
a channel controlled by a transverse electric field.
full- out nano war A nano war that includes the use of strate-
gic nanoweapons.
gels A substance with the constancy of jelly.
gene therapies Transplantation of genes into cells in order to 
correct genetic disorders or alter genetic programming.
graphene A single layer of carbon atoms structured like a hon-
eycomb, with excellent mechanical strength and electrical con-
duction properties.
gray zone wars Deliberate activities by a nation, or fractions 
within a nation, that seek to achieve strategic goals without 
the use of military forces.

228 
glossary
GRU An acronym for Glavnoye Razvedyvatel’noye Upravleniye, 
which is Russia’s largest foreign intelligence agency.
helium leak detector An apparatus that detects helium gas.
hybrid wars Any blend of regular and irregular tactics involving 
a violent struggle among state and non- state actors for legiti-
macy and influence over the relevant populations.
hydrophilic The tendency of a substance to mix with, dissolve 
in, or be “wetted” by water.
ICBM An acronym for “intercontinental ballistic missile.”
imaging sensor A device that converts an optical or infrared 
image into an electric signal.
integrated circuits Solid- state silicon “chips” (integrated circuit 
chips) that embody electronic circuits and, potentially, sensors.
integrated circuit chip Typically a small, thin, flat rectangular 
or square piece of silicon that contains numerous electronic 
and/or sensor elements.
intelligent agent A microprocessor running a program that 
enables it to perform functions equivalent to a human expert 
performing the same function.
Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) A ballistic missile with 
a minimum range greater than 3,400 miles and designed to 
deliver nuclear weapons.
International Humanitarian Law A set of rules and principles 
that requires nations to act “humanely” during war.
limited conventional wars Conflicts between nations using con-
ventional military means, limited by geographic boundaries, 
types of targets, and disciplined use of force.
Limited Test Ban Treaty (LTBT) A treaty that prohibits the testing 
of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, under water, or in space.
lipid A class of fatty acid organic compounds that is insoluble 
in water but soluble in organic solvents.
lyophilized medicines Freeze- dried medicines.
mach Ratio of the speed of a body relative to the speed of sound 
(e.g., Mach 10 = 10 times the speed of sound, where the speed 
of sound = 1,125 feet per second).

glossary 
229
magnetotactic bacteria Bacteria that migrate along the Earth’s 
magnetic field lines.
meta- materials A synthetic composite material that exhibits 
properties not found in natural materials.
meter A unit of length in the metric system, equal to 100 cen-
timeters or approximately 39.37 inches.
micelle A collection of molecules in a colloidal solution (i.e., 
floating in a solution).
microprocessor A computer that resides on an integrated cir-
cuit chip.
mini- nuke A nuclear bomb briefcase- sized or smaller made pos-
sible by nanotechnology. Mini- nukes are purportedly under 
development by the United States, Russia, and Germany. There 
is speculation that the nuclear device utilizes a nano laser capa-
ble of triggering a comparatively small thermonuclear explo-
sion when directed into a mixture of tritium and deuterium.
Moore’s law An observation by Intel founder Gordon Moore 
that the density of integrated circuits doubles every two years 
in a cost- effective manner.
nano war Any war that involves nanoweapons.
nanoantenna A nanoscale antenna for transmitting electromag-
netic waves, such as visible light.
nanobubble A bubble with a diameter at the nanoscale, 1– 100 
nanometers.
nanocrystalline A nanoscale polycrystalline material.
nanometer A unit of length in the metric system, equal to one- 
billionth of a meter.
nanotechnology Science, engineering, and technology conducted 
at the nanoscale, which is 1– 100 nanometers.
nanotechnology impact factor A metric that measures how the 
impact of a nation’s thrusts in nanotechnology is likely to affect 
its economy.
nanotube A tubular carbon molecule.
nanoweapon Any military technology that exploits the use of 
nanotechnology.

230 
glossary
nanoweapons capable nations Nations capable of developing 
nanoweapons that have chosen not to do so.
nanoweapons nations Nations already deploying nanoweap-
ons and having robust ongoing nanoweapons development 
programs.
nanoweapons power Nations with nanoweapons and supercom-
puters that are one or more generations behind nanoweapon 
superpowers.
nanoweapons superpowers Nations that have Singularity Com-
puters and the best in class nanoweapons, especially self- 
replicating smart nanobots (ssn), programmable to perform 
numerous functions.
nanowire A semiconductor nanoscale rod used in some tran-
sistor and laser applications.
National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) According to http://
www.nano.gov/about-nni/what, “a U.S. government research 
and development (r&d) initiative involving the nanotechnology- 
related activities of 20 departments and independent agencies.”
NATO An acronym for North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
near follower nanoweapons nations Nations developing or deploy-
ing nanoweapons that are one or more generations behind 
nanoweapons nations.
NIF An acronym for Nanotechnology Impact Factor.
NOCON An acronym for Nanoweapons Offensive Capability of 
Nations.
NOCON score A metric that expresses a nation’s capability to 
develop and deploy offensive nanoweapons, which is defined 
by the following equation: nocon score = (military budget) × 
(nif expressed as a decimal).
NORAD An acronym for North American Aerospace Defense 
Command.
Non- Proliferation Treaty (also known as the Treaty on the Non- 
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons) An international treaty 
to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, to promote coop-

glossary 
231
eration in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and to achieve 
nuclear disarmament and general and complete disarmament.
North American Aerospace Defense Command An organiza-
tion of the United States and Canada whose mission is to pro-
vide aerospace warning, air sovereignty, and defense for North 
America.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization A military alliance of Euro-
pean and North American democracies to strengthen inter-
national ties between member states and historically to 
counterbalance the Warsaw Pact.
obfuscation Obscuring elements in the environment.
obscurant A material or method to darken, confuse, stupefy, 
or bewilder.
offensive strategic nanoweapons Weapons whose nanotech-
nology components enhance their strategic capabilities. It 
also includes (hypothetical) offensive autonomous smart  
nanobots.
offensive tactical nanoweapons Offensive weapons whose nan-
otechnology components enhance their tactical capabilities.
optoelectronic Technology that focuses on the combination of 
electronics and light.
passive nanoweapons Any use of nanotechnology in warfare 
that has a nonoffensive/nondefensive application, but may 
increase the effectiveness of conventional or strategic weapons.
phonon A quantum of energy associated with a sound wave or 
vibration in a crystal lattice.
photon A zero mass quantum of electromagnetic radiation, 
including visible light.
photonic Pertaining to photons.
photonic crystals A synthetic optical nanostructure that affects 
the motion of photons.
plasma An ionized gas consisting of equal proportions of positive 
ions and free electrons resulting in no overall electric charge.
plasmonic A quantum of plasma oscillation.

232 
glossary
polycrystalline Consisting of many randomly oriented crystal-
line parts.
processing power The speed at which a computer can perform 
an operation.
purchasing power parity The adjustment needed regarding 
the exchange rate between countries for the exchange to be 
equivalent.
quantum dots Semiconductor nanoparticles.
quantum mechanics A theory in physics that holds all matter at 
the level of atoms and subatomic particles possess a dual wave/
particle nature, mathematically interpreted as “wavefunction,” 
which completely describes the atom or subatomic particle’s 
physical state and its change with time.
radiation The emission of electromagnetic waves or subatomic 
particles.
resist A photo or electron sensitive material that when exposed 
to photons or electrons, and appropriately processed, can act 
as an etching mask.
RFID An acronym for radio frequency identification, which is a 
technology that uses electromagnetic or electrostatic coupling 
in the radio frequency range of the electromagnetic spectrum 
to identify an object, animal, or person.
scanning tunneling microscope A type of microscope that works 
by detecting electrical forces with an ultrafine tip probe to reveal 
the atomic and molecular surface of a sample.
Schrödinger equation An equation that forms the basis for the 
mathematical description of atoms and subatomic particles in 
quantum mechanics.
self- replicating smart nanobots (SSN) Hypothetical smart nano-
bots that are able to replicate by building copies of them-
selves from raw materials, similar to how a biological virus  
reproduces.
Singularity Computers Computers that are more intelligent than 
the combined cognitive intelligence of humanity.

glossary 
233
smart An adjective often used to modify a product having arti-
ficial intelligence, such as “smart phone.”
smart nanobots Nanobots with artificial intelligence.
smart prosthetics Prosthetics that embody artificial intelligence 
that enable it to connect directly to the central nervous sys-
tem and perform all normal functions, equivalent to the limb 
it replaced.
spectrum of conflict The different forms of conflict, from full- 
out nuclear “theater conflict” to provocative behavior “gray 
zone” war.
spin physics In the physics of quantum mechanics, “spin” relates 
to the intrinsic angular momentum of elementary particles, 
composite particles, and atomic nuclei.
spintronics The study of electron spin (i.e., a component of it 
angular momentum).
SSN An acronym for self-replicating smart nanobots
stability operations Defined by DoD Instruction 3000.05 as 
“various military missions, tasks, and activities conducted out-
side the United States in coordination with other instruments 
of national power to maintain or reestablish a safe and secure 
environment, provide essential governmental services, emer-
gency infrastructure reconstruction, and humanitarian relief.”
subatomic particle Any particle that is required to form an atom, 
such as an electron.
substrate In integrated circuit manufacture, this structure embod-
ies the individual integrated circuit chips prior to being “diced” 
(cut apart).
superthermite Also known as super- thermite and nano- thermite, 
refers to a mixture of nanoparticles, oxidizers, and reducing 
agents, such as iron oxide and aluminum nanoparticles, which 
react more rapidly than their micro counterparts do because of 
the high surface to volume ratio of nanoparticles.
Technological Singularity A specific point in time when tech-
nology profoundly alters the path of human evolution.

234 
glossary
thermite A mixture of powdered aluminum and iron oxide, 
which produces a high temperature during combustion, mak-
ing it ideal for incendiary bombs.
Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons According 
to the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, this is 
an “international treaty whose objective is to prevent the spread 
of nuclear weapons and weapons technology, to promote coop-
eration in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and to further 
the goal of achieving nuclear disarmament and general and 
complete disarmament.”
Warsaw Pact A military alliance of communist nations in East-
ern Europe, organized in 1955 to counter nato but dissolved 
in 1991.
wavefunction In quantum mechanics it pertains to a mathe-
matical object, typically designated by the Greek letter ψ, that 
represents the quantum state (the most complete physical 
description) of a specific isolated system of one or more particles.
WU- 14 The Pentagon’s code name for a Chinese experimental 
hypersonic glide vehicle (hgv), now called the df- zf.

index
abalone shells, 17, 30
accountability and autonomous weap-
ons, 105– 6
active nanostructures, 31
afm. See atomic force microscope (afm)
aging therapies, 32, 140
ai. See artificial intelligence (ai)
alliances, national: American Revolution 
and, 155, 156; nanotechnology capabili-
ties and, 114– 15, 116, 144, 145; new cold 
war and, 146, 147, 198
ambiguous wars, 157– 58
American Revolution, 155– 57
Ancestry.com, 87
Andraka, Jack, 86
antiballistic missile defense systems, 72, 
163, 185, 186
antisatellite missiles, 70– 71
Anti- Submarine Warfare Continuous 
Trail Vessel, 161
antivirals, 135, 139
armor: body, 55, 56– 57, 72, 160; tank, 30, 
55, 59, 134
arms race, nanoweapons, xii, 5– 6; major 
players in, 64– 67; new cold war and, 
148, 151, 183; secrecy of, 111; treaties 
and, 165; vicious circle of, 136. See also 
nanoweapons, foreign development of
arms race, nuclear, 181
Army Research Laboratory, 85
artificial intelligence (ai), 225; develop-
ment of, 61– 62, 104– 5, 107, 136; equal-
ity of human intelligence to, 61– 62, 
102– 7; exceeding human intelligence, 
110, 118, 139, 149, 151; functions in, 101– 
2; general, 103; nanobots and, xxiii, 6, 
86, 88, 92– 94, 97, 105, 108; software 
programs and, 102; term use of, 101– 2
artillery, 56, 59– 60, 160– 61
Asimov, Isaac, 151
asns. See autonomous smart nanobots 
(asns)
asymmetrical warfare, 71, 73– 74, 157
atomic bombs, 13, 111– 12, 165, 183
atomic control, 21, 24
atomic force microscope (afm), 24
atomic layer epitaxy, 38
atomic submarines, xiv
atoms, xiii, 10, 17, 19, 20– 22, 24
attacks: autonomous weapons and, 106– 
7, 108– 10; cyber, 70; detecting and 
determining source of, 70, 119, 167; 
nanoweapons scenario, 3– 6, 75– 76, 
109– 10, 125– 33, 174– 77; nuclear versus 
nano, 108; swarming, 91– 97
Autonomous Rotorcraft Sniper System, 
84, 161
autonomous smart nanobots (asns), 108– 
10, 135, 162– 63, 177, 185– 86, 187
autonomous weapons, 79, 225; ethical 
considerations for, 106– 7; nano, 87, 
107– 10, 135, 162– 63, 177, 185– 86, 187; 
non- nano, 84– 85, 105– 6, 161. See also 
specific types
bacteria, 41, 135
balance of power, 75, 107
batteries, 52– 53, 57
Binnig, Gerd, 21
biological life- forms, 184

236 
index
biological weapons, xi, xiii, 43– 44, 165– 
66, 182, 183
Biological Weapons Convention (bwc), 
44, 165– 66, 184– 85, 187
biosensors, 24, 40, 48, 160, 225
black market, 121
body armor, 55, 56– 57, 72, 160
boomers: about, 93, 95, 108, 125; in 
nanoweapon scenario, 125– 26, 131– 33
boost- glide technology, 63, 69– 70
botulinum toxin type H, 6, 7
Bradley, Omar N., 45
brain implants, 140, 225
bridge collapses, 36– 37
Brynjolfsson, Erik, 101
budgets: military, 69, 117– 18; nanotech-
nology, xii, 8– 9, 23, 35, 65– 67
bullets, smart, 55, 58– 59, 160
burn victims, treatment for, 41
bwc. See Biological Weapons Conven-
tion (bwc)
cancer nanomedicine, 41– 42, 86– 87, 88
Center for Naval Analysis, 157
Centre National de la Recherché Scien-
tifique, 115– 16, 144
ceramics, 52– 53
chemical nanosensors, 48– 49, 160
chemical weapons, 166
Chernobyl nuclear disaster, 169– 72, 178, 
181, 205– 9
China, 113, 146, 158, 165; assymetric war-
fare capabilities of, 73– 74; autonomous 
weapons and, 84, 106; espionage and, 
70, 112– 13, 142; nanotechnology devel-
opment and, 5– 6, 23, 62– 64, 69– 72, 
114– 15, 119, 142– 43; nanotechnology 
spending of, 65, 66– 67, 194– 96; Rus-
sian trade with, 71- 72; scenarios and, 
75– 76, 127– 30; submarines and mis-
siles and, 95, 186; supercomputers and, 
102– 3
chips, computer, 38– 39, 48, 104
chromallocytes, 43
Chubais, Anatoly, 68
Churchill, Winston, 188
Cientifica, 66– 67, 193, 195– 96, 197, 198
Clapper, James R., 112– 13
Clark, Arthur C., 184
classified information, xii, 8– 9, 45– 46, 
112
coatings, 37– 38, 47– 48, 52– 53, 58– 59, 
160, 161– 62
Cold War, 72, 95, 105, 148, 164
cold wars, future, 119– 21, 146, 148– 49, 
151– 52, 167, 185
collective self- defense, 164– 67
commercial uses of nanotechnology. See 
nanotechnology, commercial uses of
computer- aided design of nanoweapons, 
107– 8
computer processing power, 102– 4
concrete, 36, 160
construction, 30, 36– 38
consumer nanotechnology products, 30, 
32– 36, 49
Convention on the Prohibition of the 
Development, Production, and Stock-
piling of Bacteriological (Biological) and 
Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruc-
tion, 44, 165– 66, 184– 85, 187
corrosion, 37– 38, 52– 53, 89, 160
counterinsurgency and stability opera-
tions, 154– 57
Crimean War, 157– 58
critical events for emergence of nanotech-
nology, 21– 22
cyber espionage, 70, 112– 13
cyber warfare, 70
Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (darpa), 8, 58, 82, 84– 85, 87
“Defense Nanotechnology Research and 
Development Program” (DoD), 46, 50– 
52, 60– 61
Defense One, 84, 106
Defense Threat Reduction Agency, 40
defensive nanoweapons, 134– 35; scenario 
on, 123– 33; strategic, 163; tactical, 161– 
62, 164
defensive strategic nanoweapons, 163
defensive tactical weapons, 161, 164

index 
237
Denny, Reginald, 81– 82
Dennymites, 81– 82
Department of Defense (DoD): 
nanoweapons conferences and, 40; 
nni and, 8– 9; research and develop-
ment and, 11, 46, 47– 48, 50– 52, 60– 
61, 63, 159
destruction capability growth, 134
detection: of manufacture of nanoweap-
ons, 50; of nanoweapons, xiii, 13, 14, 48– 
49, 108, 119; of nucl`ear missiles, 108
deterrence of war, 74, 146, 186
development of nanotechnology. 
See research and development of 
nanotechnology
dip pen nanolithography (dpn), 24, 25
dn- 2s, 70– 71
dn- 3s, 71
dna: human nano processes and, 19; 
nanobots and, 85– 86, 87– 88, 94, 96, 
97; replication of, 140; smart bullets 
and, 58
dpn (dip pen nanolithography), 24, 25
Drexler, Kim Eric, 10– 11, 21, 22
drones, 61– 62, 79, 82; autonomous, 105, 
106– 7; evolution of, 81– 85; future mili-
tary development of, 161– 62; micro and 
nano, 87– 88, 161. See also Sopwith ats; 
Wickersham Land Torpedoes
drug delivery, 20, 41, 42, 85– 86
Earth’s Future, 147
economic wars, 148
ecosystem, Earth’s, 147
Eigler, Don, 21, 24
electric lasers, 59
electromigration, 31
electron beam lithography, 38– 39
Eleven General Orders, 93
embedded sensors, 56– 57
Emtech Exploitation Index (eei), 195
energy for Singularity Computers, 149
Engines of Creation (Drexler), 10, 21, 22
Environmental Protection Agency (epa), 35
envisionment of year 2050. See year 2050 
envisionment
espionage, 70, 72, 73, 111– 13, 142, 148
European Framework Programmes for 
Research and Technological Develop-
ment, 23, 115– 16, 144, 145
European Medicines Agency, 41
European Patent Office, 67
European Union (eu), 23, 65, 66
exoskeletons, 57
explosives, 11, 47– 48, 55– 56, 59– 60, 160, 
161
extinction of humanity, xi– xiii, 75– 76; 
cold war risk of, 146, 147– 48, 149, 152; 
nanobots and, 7, 140; nuclear arsenal 
and, 134; prevention of, 164, 185– 86
Faculty of Life Sciences, 95– 96
fail- safe override of Singularity Comput-
ers, 178
fallout, radioactive, 13, 63– 64, 165, 171, 
179
Fast Lightweight Autonomy program 
(fla), 84– 85
“father of all bombs,” 11, 13, 66
fatigue of steel, 36– 38
Feynman, Richard, 10– 11, 17
flowers, 19, 92
Food and Drug Administration (fda), 35
foreign development of nanoweapons, 
64– 77. See also “Nanoweapons Offen-
sive Capability of Nations” (nocon); 
specific nations
fourth general order, 93
Framework Programmes, 23, 115– 16, 144, 
145
France: American Revolution and, 156; 
Limited Test Ban Treaty and, 165; 
nanoweapons and, 114, 115– 16, 144, 195, 
197; nuclear weapons and, 113, 165; ter-
rorism and, 120
Franklin, Benjamin, 112
funding: of the military, 69, 117– 18; of 
nanotechnology, xii, 8– 9, 23, 35, 65– 67
future cold wars, 119– 21, 146, 148– 49, 
151– 52, 167, 185
General Atomics, 83
gene therapies, 87, 140

238 
index
genetic testing, 87
Geneva Protocol, 165– 66
genocide, 166, 175– 77
Germany: arms race and, 6, 12– 13; 
nanoweapons development and, xxii, 
12, 73, 116, 144– 45, 195– 98; World War 
I and II weaponry of, 81– 82, 134
Global Catastrophic Risk Conference, xi
Global Positioning System (gps), 83
gold, 26
Goliath track mines, 81
Goostman software program, 103, 104
graphene, 54
gray zone wars, 158– 59
Great Britain, 155– 57
Groves, L. R., 111, 112
guerrilla tactics, 155– 56
h1n1 virus, 92
Health and Consumer Protection Direc-
torate, 35
Health and Fitness nanotechnology prod-
ucts, 33, 34– 35
helicopters, unmanned, 84, 161
Hong Kong, 143
hotline, Moscow- Washington, 123
human brain processing capability, 102– 3
human extinction. See extinction of 
humanity
human intelligence: computer intelli-
gence equal to, 61– 62, 97, 102– 7; com-
puter intelligence exceeding, 110, 115, 
139, 149, 151
humanitarian law, international, 106
hybrid wars, 157
hydrogen bombs, 165
hypersonic missiles, 62– 63, 69– 70, 75, 
108, 162– 63, 185
image sensors, 140, 160
imaging systems, 60, 61
India: nanoweapons capability of, 117, 
194– 98; nuclear weapons and, 113, 164
industrial nanotechnology products, 30, 
36– 40, 49, 160
informed population, 165– 66, 181– 83
Institute for Nanoscience, 50– 51, 52
Institute for Soldier Nanotechnologies 
(isn), 55– 56, 189– 92
Institute of Nanotechnology & Advanced 
Materials, 95– 96
integrated circuits, 8– 9, 38– 39, 42, 46– 
47, 48, 49, 104, 159– 60
Intel, 34, 71
intelligence and computers, 61– 62, 97, 
102– 7, 110, 139, 151, 178
intelligence augmentation, 140
intelligent agents, 102– 3
intercontinental ballistic missiles 
(icbms), 75, 186
intercontinental hypersonic missiles, 62– 
64, 69– 70, 72, 75
International Symposium on Assessing 
the Economic Impact of Nanotechnol-
ogy, 29– 30
invisibility cloaks, 55, 57– 58, 160, 162
Iraq, 84, 118, 166
irregular warfare, 157
isn. See Institute for Soldier Nanotech-
nologies (isn)
Israel, 113, 164
Japan, 37, 113; atomic bombings in, 13, 111, 
165; nanotechnology spending of, 65, 
66; nanoweapons capability of, 117, 146, 
194– 98; in scenarios, 174
judgment, human, 105– 6, 107, 172
Kettering Bugs, 80
Kidlington Centre, 42
Kurzweil, Ray, 22, 110
lab- on- a- chip devices, 48
Laboratory of Intelligent Systems experi-
ment, 149– 50
large theater conflicts, 154
laser weapons, 11– 13, 12, 39, 56, 59, 64, 
152, 160
Lausanne experiment, 149– 50, 151
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 
57
leaks, information, 112– 13
life- forms, 149, 184, 187
Li- ion batteries, 57

index 
239
Limited Test Ban Treaty (ltbt), 165, 185– 
86, 187
Lockheed, 9, 83
Lomasney, Christina, 59
lotus effect, 19
mad (mutually assured destruction), 43, 
74, 95, 109, 146, 147, 186
magnetotactic bacteria, 135
Manhattan Project, 15, 112
marine growth, 53, 160
Markov, Georgi, 6– 7
Massive Ordnance Air Blast bombs, 11
McGinnis, Sean P., 33
medical nanotechnology. See 
nanomedicine
metal: electromigration and, 31; nano- 
enhanced, 11, 47, 58– 59, 161– 62; 
nanoscale and, 26; silver, 33, 41; steel, 
30, 36– 38, 58, 160, 161– 62
micelles, 18, 20
micro drones, 82, 85, 87
The Military Balance, 117– 18, 196, 199
mini- nukes, 12– 13, 45, 63– 64, 73, 116, 161
missile defense systems, 72, 106– 7, 163, 
185, 186
missiles, 62– 63, 69– 71, 75, 81, 108, 162– 
63, 185. See also specific types
mit Technology Review, 38, 48, 73
Mobile Autonomous Robot Software pro-
gram, 84
mobile lasers, 59
molecular manipulation, 10, 17
molecular manufacturing, 22
molecular self- assembly, 25
monetary value, redefinition of, 149
Moore, Gordon, 104
Moore’s law, 104, 141
Morocco, 156
mosquito- like nanobots, 6, 7
“mother of all bombs,” 11
mqm- 105 Aquilas, 83
munitions, nano- enhanced, 61
mussels, 17– 18
mutually assured destruction (mad), 43, 
74, 95, 109, 146, 147, 186
mutually assured extinction, 147– 48, 152
“nano,” word of, 35
nanobiosensors, 48
nanobiotechnology, 25
nanobots, xiii; autonomous, artificially 
intelligent, and self- replicating, 7– 8, 
108– 10, 140, 142, 162, 163, 184– 86, 187; 
defensive smart, 134– 35, 163; evolution 
of, 79– 85, 88; expectations of, 87– 89, 
148; mosquito- like, 6, 7; nanomedi-
cine and, 42– 43, 85– 87; in scenarios, 
74, 75– 77, 88, 123– 33, 174– 77; swarm-
ing, 92– 97
nanobubbles, 18
nanoceramic coatings, 52– 53
nanoelectromechanical systems, 25
nanoelectronic integrated circuits, 46– 
47, 159– 60
nanoelectronic processors, 63, 70, 71, 140
nanoenergetics, 59
nanofactories, 88– 89
nanolithography, 24, 25, 49
nanomanufacturing, 38– 40, 43
nanomaterials, defined, 29
nanomedicine: commercial use of, 40– 43, 
96; military use of, 47, 57, 160; nano-
bots and, 85– 87, 96– 97, 135; Singularity 
Computers and, 139– 40
nanoparticles, 13, 25, 26; commercial 
nanotechnology applications and, 29, 
31, 35, 36, 37, 41; manufacture of, 49; 
medicine and, 41, 86; in nature, 17, 19; 
toxicity and health hazard of, 13– 15, 22– 
23, 35, 41; weaponry and, 47, 49, 56, 59, 
60, 63, 70, 160
nano processes, 17– 20
nanorobotics, 40, 42– 43, 49, 161. See also 
nanobots
nanoscale, 21– 22, 25– 26, 30– 31, 39
nanoscale proteins, 19– 20
“Nanoscience and Nanotechnologies” 
(Royal Society and Royal Academy of 
Engineering) report, 22– 23
nanosensors, 48– 49, 60, 160
nanosilver- impregnated bandages, 160

240 
index
nanosystems, 31– 32
Nanosystems (Drexler), 10
Nanotech Impact Factor, 66– 67
nanotechnology: approaches to build-
ing in, 24– 25, 38, 51; budgets, xii, 8– 9, 
23, 35, 65– 67; categories of, 29– 30, 31– 
32; complexity of, 172, 173; control of, 
xiii, 178; as enablers, 30, 49; environ-
mental impact of, 35– 36, 41; molecular, 
xi, 32; nanobots and, 88, 97, 135; Sin-
gularity Computers and, 151, 167, 173; 
defined, 21– 22, 29– 30, 159; environ-
mental impact of, 35– 36, 41; interest 
and market for, 22– 23, 32, 42, 121; mar-
ket for, 32, 42, 121; natural, 17– 20; over-
view of military use of, 43– 44; products, 
classifying of, 29– 30, 31– 32; regulation 
of, xii, 14, 23, 35, 50, 142; spending for, 
xii, 8– 9, 23, 35, 65– 67, 112. See also nan-
otechnology, commercial uses of; nan-
otechnology, control of; research and 
development of nanotechnology; spe-
cific aspects of
nanotechnology, commercial uses of, 
23; consumer products, 30, 32– 36, 49; 
industrial products, 30, 36– 40, 49, 160;  
in manufacturing, 38– 40; medical, 
40– 43, 96; overview of, 29– 32; prod-
uct categories, 29– 30, 31– 32; transfer to 
nanoweaponry, 46– 47, 49, 65, 160
Nanotechnology Consumer Products 
Inventory (cpi), 32– 33
“Nanotechnology Funding: A Global Per-
spective” (Harper), 66, 193, 195, 196, 
198
Nanotechnology Impact Factor (nif), 
193– 94, 195– 98
nano war, 159– 66
nanoweapons: attack scenarios with, 3– 6, 
75– 76, 108– 10, 125– 33, 174– 77; aware-
ness of, 8– 9, 10, 13, 166, 181– 82; cat-
egories of, 159– 63; cloak of secrecy 
about, xiv, 10, 40, 45– 46, 64, 148, 182; 
countermeasures to, 134– 36; defined, 
53, 159; design of, 107– 8, 110, 148– 49; 
ethical issues of, 43, 106– 7; detection 
of, xiii, 13, 14, 48– 49, 108, 119; foreign 
development of, 64– 77; manufactur-
ing of, 35, 49– 50, 51, 75, 119, 121, 136; 
nuclear weapons safety compared to, 
147– 48; as the ultimate threat, 178; use 
of to increase awareness of, 10, 173– 
77; warfare application of, 163– 64; as 
weapons of choice, 118– 19. See also 
arms race, nanoweapons; nations and 
nanoweapons capability; specific aspects 
and types of
“Nanoweapons Offensive Capability of 
Nations” (nocon), 113– 18, 141– 42, 193– 
203; conclusions and rationale of, 200– 
203; methodology of, 193– 98; results of, 
198– 200; summary of, 113– 18
nanowerk.com, xii, 54
Nanowerk News, 57– 58
nasturtium flowers, 19
National Nanotechnology Initiative 
(nni), xii, 8, 21– 23, 35, 38– 40, 46, 65– 
66, 193
National Nanotechnology Initiative Work-
shop, 193
nations and nanoweapons capability, 113– 
18, 193– 203. See also specific nations
nato, 201; Kosovo conflict and, 83; 
nuclear attack and, 108; superpower 
projections and, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147
natural nanotechnology, 17– 20
“Naval Science & Technology Strategy,” 52
new arms race. See arms race, nanoweapons
new cold wars, 119– 21, 146, 148– 49, 151– 
52, 167, 185
Next Big Future, 85– 86
Nixon, Richard, 43– 44
nni. See National Nanotechnology Initia-
tive (nni)
nocon (“Nanoweapons Offensive Capa-
bility of Nations”). See “Nanoweap-
ons Offensive Capability of Nations” 
(nocon)
Non- Proliferation Treaty, 113, 116, 144, 
164– 65, 185, 187
North Korea, 75– 76, 113, 114, 117, 119, 146, 
164, 186

index 
241
Northrop Grumman, 59, 83
nuclear attacks, 108
nuclear fallout, 13, 63– 64, 165, 171, 179
Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty, 113, 116, 
144, 164– 65, 185, 187
nuclear weapons, 43, 63, 75, 76, 93; det-
onation of, 147– 48; information on, 
10, 113; manufacturing of, 49– 50, 136; 
nanoweapons compared to, 108– 9, 
119, 121, 179; nations with, 113; Non- 
Proliferation Treaty on, 113, 116, 144, 
164, 185, 187; Singularity Computers 
and, 141, 147. See also specific types
offensive strategic nanoweapons, 162– 64, 
167. See also specific types
offensive tactical nanoweapons, 160– 61, 
163– 64. See also specific types
Office of Naval Research, 52, 53, 54
oil, 118, 120, 145
Oppenheimer, Andy, 73
oq- 1s, 81– 82
organs, artificial, 140
override of Singularity Computers, 178
oxygen, 19, 20, 94
Pakistan, 113, 118, 148, 164
passive nanomaterials, 56
passive nanostructures, 31
passive nanoweapons, 159– 60, 163– 64
patents, 32, 37, 65, 67
peace, 153
Persian Gulf, 118
Persian Gulf War, 83
Pfizer, 85– 86
pharmaceuticals, 139
phone link between U.S. and Russia, 123
political interest in nanotechnology, 23
Ponce, uss, 11– 12, 12
portability of nanoweapons, 121
power, self- generating, 109
power control systems, 53– 54
ppp (purchasing power parity), 194– 95
prevention of extinction of humanity 
strategies, 164, 185– 86
processing capability of human brain, 
102– 3
processing power, computer, 102– 4
profiles of terrorists, 120– 21
projectiles, 48, 55– 56, 58, 59– 60
Project on Emerging Nanotechnolo-
gies, 32
proliferation of nanoweapons, 119
proliferation of nuclear weapons, 113, 116, 
144, 164, 185, 187
propaganda, 148
prosthetics, smart, 140
proteins, nanoscale, 19– 20
public, informed, 165, 166, 181– 83
public information on nanoweapons, 
9– 11
Purchasing Power Parity (ppp), 66, 
194– 95
Putin, Vladimir, 68, 72, 158
quantum mechanics, 21, 25– 26, 31
quantum nanoscience, 26
ra- 115s, 75
radiation- hardened integrated circuits, 
8– 9, 47, 49
radioactive fallout, 13, 63– 64, 165, 171, 179
raw materials for Singularity Comput-
ers, 149
regulation of nanotechnology, xii, 14, 23, 
35, 50, 142
religious unification against nanoweap-
ons, 146
remote controlled vehicles, 79, 80– 83, 84. 
See also drones
research and development of nanotech-
nology: artificial intelligence and, 61– 
62, 102– 5, 107, 136; Department of 
Defense and, 11, 46, 47– 48, 50– 52, 60– 
63, 159; nanomedicine and, 86– 87; 
National Nanotechnology Initiative and, 
xii, 8, 21– 23, 35, 38– 40, 46, 65– 66; over-
view of, xii– xiii, xiv, 22– 24, 26– 27; Sin-
gularity Computers and, 141; U.S. Air 
Force and, 60– 62; U.S. Army and, 55– 
60, 85, 189– 92; U.S. Navy and, 50– 54
research category of nanotechnology, 
22– 24
resists, 25, 38– 39

242 
index
revolutionary nature of nanotechnology, 
30– 31, 38
robotic drone, 81. See also Dennynmites; 
Goliath track mines; Kettering Bugs; 
oq- 1s; vb- 1 Azons, mqm- 105 Aquilas; 
rq- 1 Predators; rq- 4 Global Hawks; 
Sprengbootes
Rogozin, Dmitry, 72
Rohrer, Heinrich, 21
Royal Academy of Engineering, 22
Royal Society, 22, 103
rq- 1 Predators, 83– 84
rq- 4 Global Hawks, 83– 84
“Runaround” (Asimov), 151
Rusnano, 67– 69
Russia, 95, 105, 113, 158, 185; arms 
race and, 5– 6; autonomous weapons 
and, 84, 106; Chinese trade with, 71– 
72; Crimean war and, 157– 58; future 
cold wars and, 119– 20, 146, 147; nan-
otechnology development and, 11, 
12– 13, 23, 62– 64, 71– 75, 84; nano-
technology spending of, 65– 67, 194– 
95; as a nanoweapons power, 115, 142, 
145; Rusnano and, 67– 69; in scenar-
ios, 76, 106– 7, 123– 33. See also Soviet 
Union
Russian Corporation of Nanotechnolo-
gies, 23, 67– 68. See also Rusnano
Russian Strategic Missile Forces, 84, 106
satellites, 70– 71, 108, 136, 148
Saudi Arabia, 117– 18, 145
Sause, Brittany, 48
sc- 19s, 70
scanning tunneling microscopes (stm), 
21, 24
scenarios of nanoweapons attacks, 3– 6, 
75– 76, 109– 10, 125– 33, 174– 77
Scientific American, 11
secrecy of nanoweapons, xiv, 10, 40, 45– 
46, 64, 148, 182
self- connecting stem cells, 140
self- powered nanobots, 109
self preservation of nanotechnology, 149– 
50, 151
self- replicating smart nanobots (ssn), xiii, 
8, 110, 140– 42, 162, 163, 184– 85, 187
self- steering bullets, 58
sensors, 24, 40, 48– 49, 51, 56– 57, 60, 
140, 160
s- 400 Missile Defense Systems, 72
silicon on insulator (soi), 47
silver, 33, 41
singularity, 110, 139, 140
Singularity Computers: capabilities of, 
139– 41; China and, 143; control of, 167, 
173, 178; development of, 148– 49; dis-
ruptions of, 141– 46; interfacing of, 143– 
44, 151; military prowess and, 150– 51; 
raw materials and energy for, 149; Rus-
sia and, 145; self preservation of, 149– 50
size and nanotechnologies, xiii, 6, 22, 26, 
30– 31, 73
smart artillery, 59– 60, 160– 61
smart bombs, 101, 105
smart bullets, 55, 58– 59, 160
smart drugs, 41
smart nanomaterials, 56
smart phones, 101
smart projectiles, 56, 60
smart prosthetics, 140
smart robots, 105– 6. See also nanobots
smuggling, 74– 75
snipers, 55, 84, 160, 161
software, 84, 102– 3, 104
soi. See silicon on insulator (soi)
Sopwith ats, 80
South Korea, 65, 117, 119, 195– 98
South Sudan, 164
Soviet Union, 80– 81, 111, 164, 165
Spain, 156
Spanish flu pandemic, 92
spectrum of conflict, 153– 59
Sprengbootes, 80
ssns (self- replicating smart nanobots), 
xiii, 8, 110, 140– 42, 162, 163, 184– 85, 
187
stealth aircraft, 9
stealth destroyers, 54
stealth weapons, 62– 63, 108, 141, 143
steel, 30, 36– 38, 49, 58, 160, 161– 62

index 
243
stem cell repair, 140
stm (scanning tunneling microscopes), 
21, 24
Stockholm International Peace Research 
Institute, 113
Strachan, Hew, 153
Strategic Command, 62
strategic research areas (sras), 55, 
189– 92
“Studies on Nano- additive for the Substitu-
tion of Hazardous Chemical Substances 
in Antifouling Coatings for the Protec-
tion of Ship Hulls” (X. Zhao et al), 53
submarines, xiv, 4, 53, 75– 76, 110, 161, 
174. See also boomers
supercomputers, 102– 3, 140. See also Sin-
gularity Computers
superintelligence race, 148– 49
superpowers: characteristics of new, 111, 
119, 136, 141; year 2050 ranking of, 
142– 46
superthermites, 59, 63
surveillance: drone, 61, 85, 87, 161; satel-
lite, 70, 71, 148
swarming, 91– 97
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 
experiment, 149– 50
synthetic chemistry, 25
Taiwan, 65, 195– 98
tank armor, 30, 55, 59, 134
tanks, 59, 80– 81, 134
T- cells, 86– 87
technological life- forms, 184
technological singularities, 139– 41. See 
also Singularity Computers
telecutters, 81
telephonelink between U.S. and Russia, 123
teleplanes, 81
teletanks, 80– 81
terrorists: in future cold war, 120– 21; sce-
narios on, 109– 10, 123– 33; targeting, 
87– 88
“There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom” 
(Feynman), 10
3- d printers, 140
Three Laws of Robotics, 151
3tags.org, 86
Tianhe- 2 supercomputers, 102– 3, 143
Tianhe- 3 Singularity Computers, 143
top- down approach to building nanotech-
nology, 24, 25, 38– 39
top secret classification of nanoweapons, 
xii, 8– 9, 10, 45– 46
torpedoes, 79– 80
Torpex, 82– 83
toxicity of nano- based products, 13– 15, 35, 41
treaty extension to nanoweapons, 184– 
86, 187
Treaty of Brussels, 116, 144, 201
Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Secu-
rity, 117, 202
Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons, 113, 116, 144, 164– 
65, 185, 187
Trinity atom bomb test, 15
Turing, Alan, 103
Turing test, 103, 104
uavs (unmanned aerial vehicles). See 
drones
Umbrella Murder, 6– 7
un Commission for Conventional Arma-
ments, 183
unintentional missile launches, 186
United Kingdom: future cold wars and, 
119– 20; nanoweapons and, 115– 16, 143– 
44, 195, 198; nuclear weapons and, 113, 
165; World War I weapons of, 80. See 
also Great Britain
United Nations: arms reduction and con-
trol and, 107, 146, 164, 179, 185– 86; 
in scenarios, 174, 176– 77; wmd defini-
tion of, 183
United States: nanotechnology arms race 
and, 5– 6, 11, 12– 13, 63, 111; nanotechnol-
ogy spending of, 66– 67, 194– 95, 197; 
nanoweapon capabilities of, 45– 46, 114, 
142; overview of nuclear weapons of, 
95; overview of past weaponry develop-
ment of, 79– 84. See also specific agencies, 
events, and programs of

244 
index
“Universal Computing by dna Origami 
Robots in a Living Animal,” 96
University at Buffalo, 54
University of California Berkeley, 57
University of Massachusetts Amherst, 
49– 50
unmanned aerial vehicles (uavs). See 
drones
unmanned helicopters, 84, 161
unmanned surface vehicles (usvs), 84
U.S. Air Force, 60– 64, 82, 83, 161
U.S. Army, 55– 60, 82– 83, 84, 85, 160– 
62, 189– 92
U.S. Army Posture Statement, 157
U.S. Army Research Office, 56
U.S. Energy Department, 111– 12
U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, 50– 51, 52
U.S. Navy, xiv; laser weapons and, 11– 12; 
nanotechnology and, 47, 50– 54, 160; 
torpedoes and, 79– 80; unmanned vehi-
cles use by, 83, 84
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, 67
uss Zumwalt, 54
usvs (unmanned surface vehicles), 84
uv radiation, 147
v- 1 cruise missiles, 81
v- 2 ballistic missiles, 81
vacuums, 93– 94
Vance, Marina E., 33
Vasilevich, Valery, 84
vb- 1 Azons, 83
Vejerano, Eric P., 33
viruses, 19, 41, 92, 97, 134– 35
vision for the blind, 140
Vita- More, Natasha, 29
von Clausewitz, Carl, 154
Wall Street Journal, 62
war: binary perception of, 153– 54; defined, 
153– 54; deterrence of, 74, 146, 186; lim-
ited conventional, 154; truisms of, 43, 
134; types of, 154– 59. See also specific 
wars and types of
weapon delivery systems, 13, 74– 75, 119, 136
weapons of choice, nanoweapons as, 
118– 19
weapons of mass destruction (wmd): 
autonomous smart nanobots as, 162, 
187; defined, 183; nanoweapons classifi-
cation as, 182, 183– 85; literature on, 182; 
nuclear weapons as, 43. See also spe-
cific types
wearable nanomaterials, 35, 55, 56– 57, 
72, 160
weight reduction, 55, 56– 57, 59
Whitesides, George M., 22
Wickersham Land Torpedoes, 80
wmd. See weapons of mass destruction 
(wmd)
Woodrow Wilson International Center for 
Scholars, 32
Work, Robert, 84
World War I, 80, 83, 134, 166
World War II, 13, 80– 83, 111, 165
wu- 14s, 63, 69– 70, 75
year 2050 envisionment, 139– 52; cold 
war and, 148– 49; disruption in, 141– 42, 
146– 47; new superpower ranking of, 
141, 142– 46; Singularity Computer mil-
itary prowess and self preservation in, 
149– 51; summary of, 151– 52; technologi-
cal singularities of, 139– 41
Yu- 71s, 63

Other works by Louis A. Del Monte
The Artificial Intelligence Revolution: Will Artificial Intelligence Serve Us 
or Replace Us?
How to Time Travel: Explore the Science, Paradoxes, and Evidence
Unraveling the Universe’s Mysteries: Explore Science’s Most Baffling Mysteries, 
Including the Big Bang’s Origin, Time Travel, Dark Energy, Humankind’s 
Fate, and More

