
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

There are many reasons for reading a book, but the best reason is because you want to
read it. Although you are probably reading this first page because you were required to
do so by your instructor, my hope is that in a short while you will be reading this book
because you want to read it. I wrote this book for people who think they don’t like math-
ematics, or people who think they can’t work math problems, or people who think they
are never going to use math. The common thread in this book is problem solving—that
is, strengthening your ability to solve problems—not in the classroom, but outside the
classroom. (From the Overview of Chapter 1.)
As you begin your trip through this book, I wish you a BON VOYAGE!
Getting Help with the material in this book.
Important terms are in boldface and are listed at the end of each chapter and in the
glossary.
Important ideas are reviewed at the end of each chapter.
Types of problems are listed at the end of each chapter.
The Student’s Survival Manual lists the new terms for each chapter and enumerates
the types of problems in each chapter.
Road signs are used to help you with your journey through the book:
This stop sign means that you should stop and pay attention to this idea,
since it will be used as you travel through the rest of the book.
Caution means that you will need to proceed more slowly to understand
this material.
A bump symbol means to watch out, because you are coming to some
difficult material.
WWW means you should check this out on the Web. The Web site for this
book is www.mathnature.com. You will find homework hints, essential ideas,
search engines, projects, and links to related topics.
I also use this special font to speak to you directly out of the context of the regulartex-
tual material. I call these author’s notes, and they are comments that I might say to
you if we were chatting in my office about the content this book.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Nature of Mathematics
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Nature of Mathematics
KARL J. SMITH
Santa Rosa Junior College
TWELFTH EDITION
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions, some third party content may 
be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall 
learning experience. The publisher reserves the right to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights 
restrictions require it. For valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and 
alternate formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.

      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For product information and technology assistance, contact us at 
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product, 
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
The Nature of Mathematics, Twelfth Edition
Karl J. Smith
Acquisitions Editor: Marc Bove
Development Editor: Stefanie Beeck
Assistant Editor: Shaun Williams
Editorial Assistant: Kyle O’Laughlin
Media Editor: Guanglei Zhang
Marketing Manager: Ashley Pickering
Marketing Assistant: Angelia Kim
Marketing Communications Manager: Mary 
Ann Payumo
Content Project Management: PreMediaGlobal
Design Director: Rob Hugel
Art Director: Vernon Boes
Print Buyer: Mary Beth Hennebury
Rights Acquisitions Specialist (Photo): Don
Schlotman
Rights Acquisitions Specialist (Text): Roberta
Broyer
Production Service: PreMediaGlobal
Photo Researcher: PreMediaGlobal
Cover Designer: Paula Goldstein
Cover Image: Don Klumpp/Getty Images
Compositor: PreMediaGlobal
© 2012, 2007 Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying,
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks,
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under 
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior
written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2010941376
Student Edition:
ISBN-13: 978-0-538-73758-6
ISBN-10: 0-538-73758-1
Brooks/Cole
20 Davis Drive
Belmont, CA 94002-3098
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with 
office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom, 
Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at 
www.cengage.com/global
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Brooks/Cole, visit www.cengage.com/brookscole
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred
online store www.cengagebrain.com
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 14 13 12 11 10
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Prologue: Why Math? A Historical Overview 
THE NATURE OF PROBLEM SOLVING
2
1.1
Problem Solving
3
1.2
Inductive and Deductive Reasoning
18
1.3
Scientific Notation and Estimation
28
1.4
Chapter 1 Summary
43
THE NATURE OF SETS
48
2.1
Sets, Subsets, and Venn Diagrams
49
2.2
Operations with Sets
59
2.3
Applications of Sets
64
2.4
Finite and Infinite Sets
72
2.5
Chapter 2 Summary
79
THE NATURE OF LOGIC
82
3.1
Deductive Reasoning
83
3.2
Truth Tables and the Conditional
91
3.3
Operators and Laws of Logic
100
3.4
The Nature of Proof
107
3.5
Problem Solving Using Logic
116
3.6
Logic Circuits
124
3.7
Chapter 3 Summary
129
THE NATURE OF NUMERATION SYSTEMS
134
4.1
Early Numeration Systems
135
4.2
Hindu-Arabic Numeration System
144
4.3
Different Numeration Systems
148
4.4
Binary Numeration System
154
4.5
History of Calculating Devices
159
4.6
Chapter 4 Summary
170
Contents
1
2
3
4
*
*
*Optional sections.
v
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THE NATURE OF NUMBERS
174
5.1
Natural Numbers
175
5.2
Prime Numbers
183
5.3
Integers
197
5.4
Rational Numbers
205
5.5
Irrational Numbers
211
5.6
Groups, Fields, and Real Numbers
220
5.7
Discrete Mathematics
231
5.8
Cryptography
240
5.9
Chapter 5 Summary
245
THE NATURE OF ALGEBRA
250
6.1
Polynomials
251
6.2
Factoring
258
6.3
Evaluation, Applications, and Spreadsheets
264
6.4
Equations
274
GUEST ESSAY: “CHAOS”
6.5
Inequalities
283
6.6
Algebra in Problem Solving
288
6.7
Ratios, Proportions, and Problem Solving
300
6.8
Percents
308
6.9
Modeling Uncategorized Problems
317
6.10
Chapter 6 Summary
326
THE NATURE OF GEOMETRY
330
7.1
Geometry
331
7.2
Polygons and Angles
340
7.3
Triangles
349
7.4
Similar Triangles
356
7.5
Right-Triangle Trigonometry
363
7.6
Mathematics, Art, and Non-Euclidean Geometries
370
7.7
Chapter 7 Summary
384
THE NATURE OF NETWORKS AND GRAPH THEORY
388
8.1
Euler Circuits and Hamiltonian Cycles
389
8.2
Trees and Minimum Spanning Trees
402
8.3
Topology and Fractals
413
GUEST ESSAY: “WHAT GOOD ARE FRACTALS?”
8.4
Chapter 8 Summary
421
vi
Contents
5
6
7
8
*
*
*
*Optional sections.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THE NATURE OF MEASUREMENT
426
9.1
Perimeter
427
9.2
Area
435
9.3
Surface Area, Volume, and Capacity
445
9.4
Miscellaneous Measurements
456
9.5
U.S.–Metric Conversions
467
9.6
Chapter 9 Summary
468
THE NATURE OF GROWTH
472
10.1
Exponential Equations
473
10.2
Logarithmic Equations
482
10.3
Applications of Growth and Decay
490
10.4
Chapter 10 Summary
500
THE NATURE OF FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
502
11.1
Interest
503
11.2
Installment Buying
517
11.3
Sequences
526
11.4
Series
538
11.5
Annuities
548
11.6
Amortization
555
11.7
Summary of Financial Formulas
562
11.8
Chapter 11 Summary
567
THE NATURE OF COUNTING
572
12.1
Permutations
573
12.2
Combinations
582
12.3
Counting without Counting
590
12.4
Rubik’s Cube and Instant Insanity
598
12.5
Chapter 12 Summary
602
Contents
vii
9
10
11
12
*
*
*Optional sections.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THE NATURE OF PROBABILITY
606
13.1
Introduction to Probability
607
13.2
Mathematical Expectation
618
13.3
Probability Models
627
13.4
Calculated Probabilities
636
13.5
The Binomial Distribution
648
GUEST ESSAY: “EXTRASENSORY PERCEPTION”
13.6
Chapter 13 Summary
655
THE NATURE OF STATISTICS
660
14.1
Frequency Distributions and Graphs
661
14.2
Descriptive Statistics
673
14.3
The Normal Curve
685
14.4
Correlation and Regression
694
14.5
Sampling
702
14.6
Chapter 14 Summary
709
THE NATURE OF GRAPHS AND FUNCTIONS
714
15.1
Cartesian Coordinates and Graphing Lines
715
15.2
Graphing Half-Planes
724
15.3
Graphing Curves
726
15.4
Conic Sections
732
15.5
Functions
745
15.6
Chapter 15 Summary
753
THE NATURE OF MATHEMATICAL SYSTEMS
756
16.1
Systems of Linear Equations
757
16.2
Problem Solving with Systems
762
16.3
Matrix Solution of a System of Equations
773
16.4
Inverse Matrices
783
16.5
Modeling with Linear Programming
796
16.6
Chapter 16 Summary
807
viii
Contents
14
15
16
*Optional sections.
*
*
*
13
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THE NATURE OF VOTING AND APPORTIONMENT
812
17.1
Voting
813
17.2
Voting Dilemmas
824
17.3
Apportionment
841
17.4
Apportionment Paradoxes
858
17.5
Chapter 17 Summary
865
THE NATURE OF CALCULUS
870
18.1
What Is Calculus?
871
18.2
Limits
880
18.3
Derivatives
886
18.4
Integrals
897
18.5
Chapter 18 Summary
905
Epilogue: Why Not Math? Mathematics in the Natural Sciences,
Social Sciences, and in the Humanities.
Appendices
A. Glossary
G1
B. Selected Answers
A1
C. Index
I1
Contents
ix
17
*18
*Optional chapter.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I dedicate this book to my wife,
Linda.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I
frequently encounter people who tell me about their unpleasant experiences with
mathematics. I have a true sympathy for those people, and I recall one of my elemen-
tary school teachers who assigned additional arithmetic problems as punishment.
This can only create negative attitudes toward mathematics, which is indeed unfortunate.
If elementary school teachers and parents have positive attitudes toward mathematics,
their children cannot help but see some of the beauty of the subject. I want students to
come away from this course with the feeling that mathematics can be pleasant, useful,
and practical—and enjoyed for its own sake.
Since the first edition, my goal has been, and continues to be, to create a positive atti-
tude toward mathematics. But the world, the students, and the professors are very differ-
ent today than they were when I began writing this book. This is a very different book
from its first printing, and this edition is very different from the previous edition. The
world of knowledge is more accessible today (via the Internet) than at any time in history.
Supplementary help is available on the World Wide Web, and can be accessed at the fol-
lowing Web address: www.mathnature.com
All of the Web addresses mentioned in this book are linked to the above Web
address. If you have access to a computer and the world wide Web, check out this Web
address. You will find links to several search engines, history, and reference topics. You
will find, for each section, homework hints, and a listing of essential ideas, projects, and
links to related information on the Web.
This book was written for students who need a mathematics course to satisfy the gen-
eral university competency requirement in mathematics. Because of the university
requirement, many students enrolling in a course that uses my book have postponed tak-
ing this course as long as possible. They dread the experience, and come to class with a
great deal of anxiety. Rather than simply presenting the technical details needed to pro-
ceed to the next course, I have attempted to give insight into what mathematics is, what it
accomplishes, and how it is pursued as a human enterprise. However, at the same time, in
this eleventh edition I have included a great deal of material to help students estimate, cal-
culate, and solve problems outside the classroom or textbook setting.
This book was written to meet the needs of all students and schools. How did I
accomplish that goal? First, the chapters are almost independent of one another, and can
be covered in any order appropriate to a particular audience. Second, the problems are
designed as the core of the course. There are problems that every student will find easy
and this will provide the opportunity for success; there are also problems that are very
challenging. Much interesting material appears in the problems, and students should get
into the habit of reading (not necessarily working) all the problems whether or not they
are assigned.
Level 1: Mechanical or drill problems
Level 2: Problems that require understanding of the concepts
Level 3: Problems that require problem solving skills or original thinking
What Are the Major Themes of This Book?
The major themes of this book are problem solving and estimation in the context of
presenting the great ideas in the history of mathematics.
Preface
Like almost every subject of human
interest, mathematics is as easy or
as difficult as we choose to make it.
Following this Preface, I have included a
Fable, and have addressed it directly
to you, the student. I hope you will take
the time to read it, and then ponder
why I call it a fable.
You will notice street sign
symbols used throughout
this book. I use this stop
sign to mean that you
should stop and pay 
attention to this idea,
since it will be used as you
travel through the rest
of the book.
Caution means that you
will need to proceed more
slowly to understand this
material.
A bump symbol means to
watch out, because you
are coming to some 
difficult material.
WWW means you should
check this out on the Web.
I also use this special font to speak to
you directly out of the context of the
regular textual material. I call these
author’s notes; they are comments 
that I might say to you if we were
chatting in my office about the 
content in this book.
xiii
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Historical
Karl Gauss 
(1777–1855)
Along with Archimedes and Isaac
Newton, Gauss is considered one of
the three greatest mathematicians 
of all time. When he was 3 years 
old, he corrected an error in his 
father’s payroll calculations. By the
time he was 21 he had contributed
more to mathematics than most do
in a lifetime.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
I believe that learning to solve problems is the principal reason for
studying mathematics. Problem solving is the process of applying previously
acquired knowledge to new and unfamiliar situations. Solving word problems
in most textbooks is one form of problem solving, but students also should be
faced with non-text-type problems. In the first section of this edition I intro-
duce students to Pólya’s problem-solving techniques, and these techniques
are used throughout the book to solve non-text-type problems. Problem-
solving examples are found throughout the book (marked as PÓLYA’S
METHOD examples).
You will find problems in each section that require Pólya’s method for
problem solving, and then you can practice your problem-solving skills with
problems that are marked: Level 3, Problem Solving.
Students should learn the language and notation of mathematics. Most
students who have trouble with mathematics do not realize that mathematics
does require hard work. The usual pattern for most mathematics students is
to open the book to the assigned page of problems, and begin working. Only
after getting “stuck” is an attempt made to “find it in the book.” The final
resort is reading the text. In this book students are asked not only to “do math
problems,” but also to “experience mathematics.” This means it is necessary
to become involved with the concepts being presented, not “just get
answers.” In fact, the advertising slogan “Mathematics Is Not a Spectator
Sport” is an invitation which suggests that the only way to succeed in mathe-
matics is to become involved with it.
Students will learn to receive mathematical ideas through listening, read-
ing, and visualizing. They are expected to present mathematical ideas by speak-
ing, writing, drawing pictures and graphs, and demonstrating with concrete
models. There is a category of problems in each section which is designated IN
YOUR OWN WORDS, and which provides practice in communication skills.
Students should view mathematics in historical perspective. There is no
argument that mathematics has been a driving force in the history of civiliza-
tion. In order to bring students closer to this history, I’ve included not only
Historical Notes, but a new category of problems called Historical Quest
problems.
Students should learn to think critically. Many colleges have a broad
educational goal of increasing critical thinking skills. Wikipedia defines
critical thinking as “purposeful and reflective judgment about what to
believe or do in response to observations, experience, verbal or written
expressions or arguments.” Critical thinking might involve determining the
meaning and significance of what is observed or expressed, or, concerning
a given inference or argument, determining whether there is adequate jus-
tification to accept the conclusion as true. Critical thinking begins in
earnest in Section 1.1 when we introduce Pólya’s problem solving method.
These Pólya examples found throughout the book are not the usual “fol-
low-the-leader”-type problems, but attempt, slowly, but surely, to teach
critical thinking. The Problem Solving problems in almost every section
continue this theme. The following sections are especially appropriate to
teaching critical thinking skills: Problem Solving (1.1), Problem Solving
with Logic (3.5), Cryptography (5.3), Modeling Uncategorized Problems
(6.9), Summary of Financial Formulas (11.7), Probability Models (13.3),
Voting Dilemmas (17.2), Apportionment Paradoxes (17.4), and What Is
Calculus? (18.1).
xiv
Preface
Example
14
Make your child a millionaire
Your first child has just been born. You want to give her 1 million 
dollars when she retires at age 65. If you invest your money on the day of her birth,
how much do you need to invest so that she will have $1,000,000 on her 65th birthday?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. You want to make a single deposit and let it be compounded
for 65 years, so that at the end of that time there will be 1 million dollars. Neither the
Pólya’s 
Method
Monday, March 1, 1982
6-mo.
adjustable
rate
17.5%
Tuesday, March 1, 1983
6-mo.
adjustable
rate
12.5%
Friday, March 1, 1985
3-mo.
adjustable
rate
10.5%
Monday, March 1, 1993
3 mo.
adjustable
rate
4.5%
Tuesday, March 1, 1994
3-mo.
adjustable
rate
3.0%
Friday, March 1, 1996
3-mo.
adjustable
rate
4.9%
Wednesday, March 1, 2000
3-mo.
adjustable
rate
5.2%
Saturday, March 1, 2003
6-mo.
adjustable
rate
1.6%
Monday, March 1, 2010
3-mo.
adjustable
rate
0.9%
rate of return nor the compounding period is specified. We assume daily compounding,
a constant rate of return over the time period, and we need to determine whether we can
find an investment to meet our goals. 
Devise a Plan. With daily compounding,
. We will use the present value
formula, and experiment with different interest rates:
Carry Out the Plan. We determine the present values based on the different interest
rates using a calculator and display the results in tabular form.
Interest Rate
Formula
Value of P
2%
272,541.63
5%
38,782.96
8%
5,519.75
12%
410.27
20%
2.27
Look Back. Look down the list of interest rates and compare the rates with the amount
of deposit necessary. Generally, the greater the risk of an investment, the higher the rate.
Insured savings accounts may pay lower rates, bonds may pay higher rates for long-term
investments, and other investments in stamps, coins, or real estate may pay the highest
rates. The amount of the investment necessary to build an estate of 1 million dollars is
dramatic!
1,000,000 11 1 0.20
360 2 21360 # 652
1,000,000 11 1 0.12
360 2 21360 # 652
1,000,000 11 1 0.08
360 2 21360 # 652
1,000,000 11 1 0.05
360 2 21360 # 652
1,000,000 11 1 0.02
360 2 21360 # 652
P 5 1,000,000a1 1
r
360b
21360 # 652
n  360
9. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
It has been said that “computers in-
fluence our lives increasingly every year, and the trend will
continue.” Do you see this as a benefit or a detriment to
humanity? Explain your reasons.
10. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
A heated controversy rages about the
possibility of a computer actually thinking. Do you believe that
is possible? Do you think a computer can eventually be taught
to be truly creative?
Level 3
52. In 2009, the U.S. national soared to 11.0 trillion dollars. 
a. If this debt is shared equally by the 300 million U.S.
citizens, how much would it cost each of us (rounded 
to the nearest thousand dollars)?
b. If the interest rate is 6%, what is the interest on the national
debt each second? Assume a 365-day year.
You can check on the current national debt at
http://www.brillig.com/debt_clock/ This link, 
as usual, can be accessed through www
.mathnature.com
through without violating the rule?
57. HISTORICAL QUEST
The Historical Note on page 222
introduces the great mathematician Karl Gauss. Gauss kept a
scientific diary containing 146 entries, some of which were
independently discovered and published by others. On July 10,
1796, he wrote
What do you think this meant? Illustrate with some numerical
examples.
EUREKA!
NUM =            +         +
Level 3 Problem
Pólya’s Method
In Your Own Words
Historical 
Note
Historical Quest
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface
xv
A Note for Instructors
The prerequisites for this course vary considerably, as do the backgrounds of students.
Some schools have no prerequisites, while other schools have an intermediate algebra
prerequisite. The students, as well, have heterogeneous backgrounds. Some have little or
no mathematics skills; others have had a great deal of mathematics. Even though the
usual prerequisite for using this book is intermediate algebra, a careful selection of topics
and chapters would allow a class with a beginning algebra prerequisite to study the mate-
rial effectively.
Feel free to arrange the material in a different order from that presented in the text. I
have written the chapters to be as independent of one another as possible. There is much
more material than could be covered in a single course. This book can be used in classes
designed for liberal arts, teacher training, finite mathematics, college algebra, or a combi-
nation of these.
Over the years, many instructors from all over the country have told me that they love
the material, love to teach from this book, but complain that there is just too much mate-
rial in this book to cover in one, or even two, semesters. In response to these requests, I
have divided some of the material into two separate volumes:
The Nature of Problem Solving in Geometry and Probability
The Nature of Problem Solving in Algebra
The first volume, The Nature of Geometry and Probability
includes chapters 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, and 13 from this text.
The second volume, The Nature of Algebra includes chapters 
1, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 14, 15, 16, and 17 from this text.
Since the first edition of this book, I have attempted to make the chapters as inde-
pendent as possible to allow instructors to “pick and choose” the chapters to custom
design the course. Because of advances in technology, it is now possible to design your
own book for your class. The publisher offers a digital library, TextChoice, which helps
you build your own custom version of The Nature of Mathematics. The details are
included on the endpapers of this book.
One of the advantages of using a textbook that has traveled through many editions is
that it is well seasoned. Errors are minimal, pedagogy is excellent, and it is easy to use; in
other words, it works. For example, you will find that the sections and chapters are about
the right length... each section will take about one classroom day. The problem sets are
graded so that you can teach the course at different levels of difficulty, depending on the
assigned problems. The problem sets are uniform in length (60 problems each), which
facilitates the assigning of problems from day-to-day. The chapter reviews are complete
and lead students to the type of review they will need to prepare for an examination.
Changes from the Previous Edition
As a result of extensive reviewer feedback, there are many new ideas and changes in this
edition.
The examples throughout the book have been redesigned. Each example now includes a
title as well as a fresh easy-to read format.
Each chapter now has a Chapter Challenge as an added problem-solving practice.
These problems are out of context in order to give students additional challenge.
Mathematical history has been an integral feature of this book since its inception, and
we have long used Historical Notes to bring the human story into our venture through
this text. In the last edition we experimented with a new type of problem called an
Historical Quest and it has proved to be an overwhelming success, so we have greatly
expanded its use in this edition. These problems are designed to involve the student in
the historical development of the great ideas in mathematical history.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The chapter openings have been redesigned, but continue to offer the
popular “What in the World?” introduction. They use common conversa-
tions between two students to introduce chapter material, helping to con-
nect the content with students’ lives.
The prologue and epilogue have been redesigned and offer unique
“bookends” to the material in the book. The prologue asks, “Why Math?”.
This prologue not only puts mathematics into a historical perspective, but
also is designed to get students thinking about problem solving. The prob-
lems accompanying this prologue could serve as a pre-test or diagnostic
test, but I use these prologue problems to let the students know that this
book will not be like other math books they may have used in the past. The
epilogue, “Why Not Math?”, is designed to tie together many parts of the
book (which may or may not have been covered in the class) to show that
there are many rooms in the mansion known as mathematics. The problems
accompanying this epilogue could serve as a review to show that it would
be difficult to choose a course of study in college without somehow being
touched by mathematics. When have you seen a mathematics textbook that
asks, “Why study mathematics?” and then actually produces an example to
show it?*
xvi
Preface
What in the World?
*See Example 2, Section 11.5, 551.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
1.1 Problem Solving
3
A word of encouragement, hints for
success, writing mathematics, journals,
individual research, group research,
guidelines for problem solving, problem
solving by patterns
1.4 Chapter Summary
43
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
1.2 Inductive and Deductive
Reasoning
18
A pattern of nines, order of operations,
inductive reasoning, deductive
reasoning, Euler circles
1.3 Scientific Notation 
and Estimation
28
Exponential notation, scientific notation,
calculators, estimation, laws of
exponents, comprehending large
numbers
THE NATURE OF
PROBLEM SOLVING
1
Outline
What in the World?
“Hey, Tom, what are you taking this semester?”
asked Susan. “I’m taking English, history, and math.
I can’t believe my math teacher,” responded Tom.
“The first day we were there, she walked in, wrote
her name on the board, and then she asked, ‘How
much space would you have if you, along with
everyone else in the world, moved to California?’
What a stupid question ... I would not have enough
Overview
There are many reasons for reading a book, but the best
reason is because you want to read it. Although you are
probably reading this first page because you were required to
do so by your instructor, it is my hope that in a short while
you will be reading this book because you want to read it. It
was written for people who think they don’t like mathemat-
ics, or people who think they can’t work math problems, or
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Acknowledgments
I also appreciate the suggestions of the reviewers of this edition: 
Vincent Edward Castellana, Eastern Kentucky University
Beth Greene Costner, Winthrop University
Charles Allen Matthews, Southeastern Oklahoma State University
James Waichiro Miller, Chaminade University of Honolulu
Tammy Potter, Gadsen State Community College
Jill S. Rafael, Sierra College
Leonora DePiola Smook, Suffolk Community College
Lynda Zenati, Robert Morris College
One of the nicest things about writing a successful book is all of the letters and sug-
gestions I’ve received. I would like to thank the following people who gave suggestions
for previous editions of this book: Jeffery Allbritten, Brenda Allen, Richard C. Andrews,
Nancy Angle, Peter R. Atwood, John August, Charles Baker, V. Sagar Bakhshi, Jerald T.
Ball, Carol Bauer, George Berzsenyi, Daniel C. Biles, Jan Boal, Elaine Bouldin, Kolman
Brand, Chris C. Braunschweiger, Barry Brenin, T. A. Bronikowski, Charles M. Bundrick,
T. W. Buquoi, Eugene Callahan, Michael W. Carroll, Joseph M. Cavanaugh, Rose Cavin,
Peter Chen, James R. Choike, Mark Christie, Gerald Church, Robert Cicenia, Wil Clarke,
Lynn Cleaveland, Penelope Ann Coe, Thomas C. Craven, Gladys C. Cummings, C.E.
Davis, Steven W. Davis, Tony F. DeLia, Stephen DeLong, Ralph De Marr, Robbin Dengler,
Carolyn Detmer, Maureen Dion, Charles Downey, Mickle Duggan, Samuel L. Dunn,
Robert Dwarika, Beva Eastman, William J. Eccles, Gentil Estevez, Ernest Fandreyer,
Loyal Farmer, Gregory N. Fiore, Robert Fliess, Richard Freitag, Gerald E. Gannon, Ralph
Gellar, Sanford Geraci, Gary Gislason, Lourdes M. Gonzalez, Mark Greenhalgh, Martin
Haines, Abdul Rahim Halabieh, Ward Heilman, John J. Hanevy, Michaael Helinger,
Robert L. Hoburg, Caroline Hollingsworth, Scott Holm, Libby W. Holt, Peter Hovanec,
M. Kay Hudspeth, Carol M. Hurwitz, James J. Jackson, Kind Jamison, Vernon H. Jantz,
Josephine Johansen, Charles E. Johnson, Nancy J. Johnson, Judith M. Jones, Michael
Jones, Martha C. Jordan, Ravindra N. Kalia, Judy D. Kennedy, Linda H. Kodama, Daniel
Koral, Helen Kriegsman, Frances J. Lane, C. Deborah Laughton, William Leahey, John
LeDuc, Richard Leedy, William A. Leonard, Beth Long, Adolf Mader, Winifred A.
Mallam, John Martin, Maria M. Maspons, Cherry F. May, Paul McCombs, Cynthia L.
McGinnis, George McNulty, Carol McVey, Max Melnikov, Valerie Melvin, Charles C.
Miles, Allen D. Miller, Clifford D. Miller, Elaine I. Miller, Ronald H. Moore, John Mullen,
Charles W. Nelson, Ann Ostberg, Barbara Ostrick, John Palumbo, Joanne V. Peeples, Gary
Peterson, Michael Petricig, Mary Anne C. Petruska, Michael Pinter, Susan K. Puckett,
Laurie Poe, Joan Raines, James V. Rauff, Richard Rempel, Pat Rhodes, Paul M. Riggs,
Jane Rood, Peter Ross, O. Sassian, Mickey G. Settle, James R. Smart, Andrew Simoson,
Glen T. Smith, Donald G. Spencer, Barb Tanzyus, Gustavo Valadez-Ortiz, John Vangor,
Arnold Villone, Clifford H. Wagner, James Walters, Steve Warner, Steve Watnik, Pangyen
Ben Weng, Barbara Williams, Carol E. Williams, Stephen S. Willoughby, Mary C. Woest-
man, Jean Woody, and Bruce Yoshiwara.
The creation of a textbook is really a team effort. My thanks to Beth Kluckhohn, Abi-
gail Perrine, Carly Bergey, and Shaun Williams who led me through the process effort-
lessly. And I especially express my appreciation to Jack Morrell for carefully reading the
entire manuscript while all the time offering me valuable suggestions.
I would especially like to thank Joe Salvati, from New School University in Manhat-
tan, Robert J. Wisner of New Mexico State for his countless suggestions and ideas over
the many editions of this book; Marc Bove, Shona Burke, John-Paul Ramin, Craig Barth,
Jeremy Hayhurst, Paula Heighton, Gary Ostedt, and Bob Pirtle of Brooks/Cole; as well
as Jack Thornton, for the sterling leadership and inspiration he has been to me from the
inception of this book to the present.
Preface
xvii
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Finally, my thanks go to my wife, Linda, who has always been there for me. Without
her this book would exist only in my dreams, and I would never have embarked as an
author.
Karl J. Smith
Sebastopol, CA
smithkjs@mathnature.com
xviii
Preface
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For the Student
For the Instructor
Student Survival and Solutions Manual
AUTHOR:  Karl Smith
ISBN:  0538495286
The Student Survival and Solutions Manual provides
helpful study aids and fully worked-out solutions to all of
the odd-numbered exercises in the text. It’s a great way to
check your answers and ensure that you took the correct
steps to arrive at an answer.
Enhanced WebAssign
ISBN: 0538738103
Enhanced Webassign, used by over one million students
at more than 1100 institutions, allows you to assign, col-
lect, grade, and record homework assignments via the
web. This proven and reliable homework system includes
thousands of algorithmically generated homework prob-
lems, an eBook, links to relevant textbook sections, video
examples, problem specific tutorials, and more.
Annotated Instructor’s Edition 
AUTHOR:  Karl Smith
ISBN:  0538738693
The Annotated Instructor’s Edition features an appendix
containing the answers to all problems in the book as well as
icons denoting which problems can be found in Enhanced
WebAssign.
Instructor’s Manual 
AUTHOR:  Karl Smith
ISBN:  0538495278
Written by author Karl Smith, the Instructor’s Manual
provides worked-out solutions to all of the problems in the
text. For instructors only.  
Text-Specific DVDs 
AUTHOR:  Dana Mosely
ISBN:  1111571252
Hosted by Dana Mosley, these text-specific instructional
videos provide students with visual reinforcement of
concepts and explanations, presented in easy-to-understand
terms with detailed examples and sample problems. A flexi-
ble format offers versatility for quickly accessing topics or
catering lectures to self-paced, online, or hybrid courses.
Closed captioning is provided for the hearing impaired.
Enhanced WebAssign
ISBN: 0538738103
Enhanced WebAssign, used by over one million students at
more than 1,100 institutions, allows you to assign, collect,
grade, and record homework assignments via the web. This
proven and reliable homework system includes thousands of
algorithmically generated homework problems, links to
relevant textbook sections, video examples, problem-specific
tutorials, and more.
New! Personal Study Plans and a Premium eBook
Diagnostic quizzing for each chapter identifies concepts that
students still need to master, and directs them to the
appropriate review material. Students will appreciate the
interactive Premium eBook, which offers search, highlight-
ing, and note-taking functionality, as well as links to multi-
media resources, all available to students when you choose
Enhanced WebAssign.
Note that the WebAssign problems for this text are
highlighted by a ➤.
Supplements
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PowerLecture with ExamView®
ISBN: 0840053304
This CD-ROM provides the instructor with dynamic media
tools for teaching. Create, deliver, and customize tests (both
print and online) in minutes with ExamView®
Computerized Testing Featuring Algorithmic Equations.
Easily build solution sets for homework or exams using
Solution Builder’s online solutions manual. Microsoft®
PowerPoint® lecture slides and figures from the book are
also included on this CD-ROM. 
Solution Builder 
This online solutions manual allows instructors to create
customizable solutions that they can print out to distribute or
post as needed. This is a convenient and expedient way to
deliver solutions to specific homework sets. Visit www.cen-
gage.com/solutionbuilder.
Math Study Skills Workbook, 4th Edition
AUTHOR: Paul Nolting
ISBN-13: 978-0-840-05309-1
Paul Nolting’s workbook will help you identify your
strengths, weaknesses, and personal learning styles in math.
Nolting offers proven study tips, test-taking strategies, a
homework system, and recommendations for reducing anxi-
ety and improving grades.
Book-companion Web site at www.mathnature.com
Author: Karl Smith
Created and updated by Karl Smith, the Web site offers sup-
plementary help and practice for students. All of the Web
addresses mentioned in the book are linked to the above
Web address. You will find links to several search engines,
history, and reference topics. You will find, for each section,
homework hints, and a listing of essential ideas, projects,
and links to related information on the Web.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To the Student
A FABLE
If people do not believe that mathematics is simple, it is
only because they do not realize how complicated life is.
JOHN VAN NEUMANN
O
nce upon a time, two young ladies, Shelley and Cindy, came to a town called
Mathematics. People had warned them that this was a particularly confusing
town. Many people who arrived in Mathematics were very enthusiastic, but
could not find their way around, became frustrated, gave up, and left town.
Shelley was strongly determined to succeed. She was going to learn her way through the
town. For example, in order to learn how to go from her dorm to class, she concentrated
on memorizing this clearly essential information: she had to walk 325 steps south, then
253 steps west, then 129 steps in a diagonal (south-west), and finally 86 steps north. It
was not easy to remember all of that, but fortunately she had a very good instructor who
helped her to walk this same path 50 times. In order to stick to the strictly necessary
information, she ignored much of the beauty along the route, such as the color of the
adjacent buildings or the existence of trees, bushes, and nearby flowers. She always
walked blindfolded. After repeated exercising, she succeeded in learning her way to
class and also to the cafeteria. But she could not learn the way to the grocery store, the
bus station, or a nice restaurant; there were just too many routes to memorize. It was so
overwhelming! Finally, she gave up and left town; Mathematics was too complicated 
for her.
Cindy, on the other hand, was of a much less serious nature. To the dismay of her
instructor, she did not even intend to memorize the number of steps of her walks. Neither
did she use the standard blindfold which students need for learning. She was always
curious, looking at the different buildings, trees, bushes, and nearby flowers or anything
else not necessarily related to her walk. Sometimes she walked down dead-end alleys in
order to find out where they were leading, even if this was obviously superfluous. Curi-
ously, Cindy succeeded in learning how to walk from one place to another. She even
found it easy and enjoyed the scenery. She eventually built a building on a vacant lot in
the city of Mathematics.*
*My thanks to Emilio Roxin of the University of Rhode Island for the idea for this fable.
xxi
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Prologue: Why Math?
A HISTORICAL OVERVIEW
W
hether you love or loathe mathematics, it is hard
to deny its importance in the development of the
main ideas of this world! Read the BON VOYAGE
invitation on the inside front cover. The goal of this text is
to help you to discover an answer to the question, “Why
study math?”
The study of mathematics can be organized as a history
or story of the development of mathematical ideas, or it can
be organized by topic. The intended audience of this book
dictates that the development should be by topic, but mathe-
matics involves real people with real stories, so you will
find this text to be very historical in its presentation. This
overview rearranges the material you will encounter in the
text into a historical timeline. It is not intended to be read as
a history of mathematics, but rather as an overview to make
you want to do further investigation. Sit back, relax, and use
this overview as a starting place to expand your knowledge
about the beginnings of some of the greatest ideas in the his-
tory of the world!
We have divided this history of mathematics into seven
chronological periods:
Babylonian, Egyptian, and Native 
American Period
3000 B.C. to 601 B.C.
Greek, Chinese, and Roman Periods
600 B.C. to A.D. 499
Hindu and Persian Period
500 to 1199
Transition Period
1200 to 1599
Age of Reason
1600 to 1699
Early Modern Period
1700 to 1799
Modern Period
1800 to present
Babylonian, Egyptian, and 
Native American Period: 
3000 B.C. to 601 B.C.
Mesopotamia is an ancient
region located in southwest
Asia between the lower Tigris
and Euphrates Rivers and is
historically known as the birth-
place of civilization. It is part
of modern Iraq. Mesopotamian
mathematics refers to the
mathematics of the ancient
Babylonians, and this mathe-
matics is sometimes referred to
as Sumerian mathematics. Over 50,000 tablets from
Mesopotamia have been found and are exhibited at major
museums around the world.
Sumerian clay tablet
© Gianni Dagli Orit/CORBIS
3000 BC
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
Babylonian, Egyptian, and Native American Period: 3000 BC to 601 BC
Mathematical Events
First Dynasty of the Ancient Kingdom of Egypt (3000 BC)
The Great Pyramid (2800 BC)
Cheops' Pyramid (2580 BC)
Isis and Osiris cult in Egypt (2500 BC)
Epic of Gilgamesh (1900 BC)
Stonehenge (1700 BC)
First alphabets created (1500 BC)
Obelisk of Thothmes at Karnak (1495 BC)
Approximate beginning of Iron Age (1300 BC)
Moses leads exodus from Egypt (1250 BC)
Trojan War (1200 BC)
Phoenicians invent alphabet (1000 BC)
Homer: Iliad and Odyssey (850 BC)
Rome founded (753 BC)
Cultural Events
(3000 BC) Chinese arithmetic and astronomy under Huang-ti 
(2900 BC) Egyptian scribes use hieratic script 
(2850 BC) Egyptian simple grouping system 
(2200 BC) Mathematical tablets of Nippur: 
   example of a magic square 
(1850 BC) Moscow papyrus: 25 mathematical problems 
(1650 BC) Early Babylonian tablet (Plimpton 322) 
(1650 BC) Egyptian Astrological signs 
(1350 BC) Rollins papyrus: elaborate mathematical problem 
(1105 BC) The Chou-pei, major Chinese text on mathematics 
P1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Why Math? A Historical Overview
P2
call seconds. The Greek astronomer Ptolemy (A.D. 85–165)
used this Babylonian system, which no doubt is why we
have minutes, seconds, and degree measurement today.
The Egyptian civilization existed from about 4000 B.C.,
and was less influenced by foreign powers than was the
Babylonian civilization. Egypt was divided into two king-
doms until about 3000 B.C., when the ruler Menes unified
Egypt and consequently became known as the founder
of the first dynasty in 2500 B.C. This was the egyptians’
pyramid-building period, and the Great Pyramid of Cheops
was built around 2600 B.C. (Chapter 7, p. 369; see The Rid-
dle of the Pyramids).
The Egyptians developed their own pictorial way of
writing, called hieroglyphics, and their numeration system
was consequently very pictorial (Chapter 4).
The Egyptian numeration system is an example of a
simple grouping system. Although the Egyptians were able
to write fractions, they used only unit fractions. Like the
Babylonians, they had not developed a symbol for zero.
Since the writing of the Egyptians was on papyrus, and not
on tablets as with the Babylonians, most of the written his-
tory has been lost. Our information comes from the Rhind
papyrus, discovered in 1858 and dated to about 1700 B.C.,
and the Moscow papyrus, which has been dated to about the
same time period.
The mathematics of the Egyptians remained remark-
ably unchanged from the time of the first dynasty to the
time of Alexander the Great who conquered Egypt in
332 B.C. The Egyptians did surveying using a unique
method of stretching rope, so they referred to their survey-
ors as “rope stretchers.” The basic unit used by the Egyp-
tians for measuring length was the cubit, which was the
distance from a person’s elbow to the end of the middle fin-
ger. A khet was defined to equal 100 cubits; khets were used
Interesting readings about Babylon can be found in a
book on the history of mathematics, such as An Introduction
to the History of Mathematics, 6th edition, by Howard Eves
(New York: Saunders, 1990), or by looking at the many
sources on the World Wide Web. You can find links to such
Web sites, as well as all Web sites in this book, by looking
at the Web page for this text: 
This Web page allows you to access a world of information
by using the links provided.
The mathematics of this period was very practical and
it was used in construction, surveying, recordkeeping, and
in the creation of calendars. The culture of the Babylonians
reached its height about 2500 B.C., and about 1700 B.C. King
Hammurabi formulated a famous code of law. In 330 B.C.,
Alexander the Great conquered Asia Minor, ending the
great, Persian (Achaemenid) Empire. Even though there
was a great deal of political and social upheaval during this
period, there was a continuity in the development of mathe-
matics from ancient time to the time of Alexander.
The main information we have about the civilization
and mathematics of the Babylonians is their numeration
system, which we introduce in the text in Section 4.1
(p. 140). The Babylonian numeration system was positional
with base 60. It did not have a 0 symbol, but it did represent
fractions, squares, square roots, cubes, and cube roots. We
have evidence that the Babylonians knew the quadratic for-
mula and they had stated algebraic problems verbally. The
base 60 system of the Babylonians led to the division of a
circle into 360 equal parts that today we call degrees, and
each degree was in turn divided into 360 parts that today we
www.mathnature.com
Egyptian hieroglyphics: Inscription and relief from the grave of Prince Rahdep (ca. 2800 B.C.)
@Bettmann/CORBIS
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

by the Egyptians when land was surveyed. The Egyptians
did not have the concept of a variable, and all of their prob-
lems were verbal or arithmetic. Even though they solved
many equations, they used the word AHA or heap in place
of the variable. For an example of an Egyptian problem, see
Ahmes’ dilemma in Chapter 1 and the statement of the
problem in terms of Thoth, an ancient Egyptian god of wis-
dom and learning.
The Egyptians had formulas for the area of a circle and
the volume of a cube, box, cylinder, and other figures. Partic-
ularly remarkable is their formula for the volume of a trun-
cated pyramid of a square base, which in modern notation is
where h is the height and a and b are the sides of the top and
bottom. Even though we are not certain the Egyptians knew
of the Pythagorean theorem, we believe they did because the
rope stretchers had knots on their ropes that would form
right triangles. They had a very good reckoning of the cal-
endar, and knew that a solar year was approximately 
days long. They chose as the first day of their year the day
on which the Nile would flood.
Contemporaneous with the great civilizations in
Mesopotamia was the great Mayan civilization in what is
now Mexico. A Mayan timeline is shown in Figure 1.
3651
4
V 5 h
3Aa2 1 ab 1 b2B
Greek, Chinese, and Roman
Periods: 600 B.C. to A.D. 499
Greek mathematics began in 585 B.C. when Thales, the first of
the Seven Sages of Greece (625–547 B.C.) traveled to Egypt.*
The Greek civilization was most influential in our history
of mathematics. So striking was its influence that the histo-
rian Morris Kline declares, “One of the great problems of the
history of civilization is how to account for the brilliance and
creativity of the ancient Greeks.”† The Greeks settled in Asia
Minor, modern Greece, southern Italy, Sicily, Crete, and
North Africa. They replaced the various hieroglyphic systems
with the Phoenician alphabet, and with that they were able to
become more literate and more capable of recording history
and ideas. The Greeks had their own numeration system.
They had fractions and some irrational numbers, including 
The great mathematical contributions of the Greeks are
Euclid’s Elements and Apollonius’ Conic Sections (p. 732,
Figure 15.26). Greek knowledge developed in several cen-
ters or schools. (See Figure 3 on page P5 for depiction of one
of these centers of learning.) The first was founded by Thales
(ca. 640–546 B.C.) and known as the Ionian in Miletus. It is
reported that while he was traveling and studying in Egypt,
Thales calculated the heights of the pyramids by using simi-
lar triangles (see Section 7.4). You can read about these great
Greek mathematicians in Mathematics Thought from Ancient
to Modern Times, by Morris Kline.‡ You can also refer to the
World Wide Web at www.mathnature.com.
Between 585 B.C. and 352 B.C., schools flourished and
established the foundations for the way knowledge is organ-
ized today. Figure 2 shows each of the seven major schools,
along with each school’s most notable contribution. Links
to textual discussion are shown within each school of
thought, along with the principal person for each of these
schools. Books have been written about the importance of
each of these Greek schools, and several links can be found
at www.mathnature.com.
One of the three greatest mathematicians in the entire his-
tory of mathematics was Archimedes (287–212 B.C.). His ac-
complishments are truly remarkable, and you should seek out
other sources about the magnitude of his accomplishments. He
invented a pump (the Archimedean screw), military engines
and weapons, and catapults; in addition, he used a parabolic
mirror as a weapon by concentrating the sun’s rays on the in-
vading Roman ships. “The most famous of the stories about
Archimedes is his discovery of the method of testing the
debasement of a crown of gold. The king of Syracuse had
ordered the crown. When it was delivered, he suspected that it
was filled with baser metals and sent it to Archimedes to
p.
P3
Prologue
FIGURE 1 Mayan timeline
(1800–900 BC) Early Preclassic Maya 
(1200–1000 BC) Olmec 
(900–300 BC) Middle Preclassic Maya 
(300 BC– AD 250) Late Preclassic Maya
(AD 250–600) Early Classic Maya 
(AD 699–900) Late Classic Maya 
(AD 900–1500) Post Classic Maya 
(AD 1500–1800) Colonial period 
(AD 1821– present) Mexico 
2000
1500
1000
500
500
1000
1500
2000
AD
BC
Just as with the Mesopotamian civilizations, the
Olmeca and Mayan civilizations lie between two great
rivers, in this case the Grijalva and Papaloapan Rivers.
Sometimes the Olmecas are referred to as the Tenocelome.
The Olmeca culture is considered the mother culture of the
Americas. What we know about the Olmecas centers around
their art. We do know they were a farming community. The
Mayan civilization began around 2600 B.C. and gave rise to
the Olmecas. The Olmecas had developed a written hiero-
glyphic language by 700 B.C., and they had a very accurate
solar calendar. The Mayan culture had developed a posi-
tional numeration system.
You will find the influences from this period discussed
throughout the book.
*The Seven Sages in Greek history refer to Thales of Miletus, Bias of Priene, Chilo
of Sparta, Cleobulus of Rhodes, Periander of Corinth, Pittacus of Mitylene, and
Solon of Athens; they were famous because of their practical knowledge about the
world and how things work.
†p. 24, Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times by Morris Kline (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1972).
‡ New York: Oxford University Press, 1972.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Why Math? A Historical Overview
P4
devise some method of testing the contents without, of course,
destroying the workmanship. Archimedes pondered the prob-
lem; one day while bathing he observed that his body was
partly buoyed up by the water and suddenly grasped the prin-
ciple that enabled him to solve the problem. He was so excited
by this discovery that he ran out into the street naked shouting,
`Eureka!’ (’I have found it!’) He had discovered that a body
immersed in water is buoyed up by a force equal to the weight
of the water displaced, and by means of this principle was able
to determine the contents of the crown.”*
The Romans conquered the world, but their mathemati-
cal contributions were minor. We introduce the Roman
numerals in Section 4.1, their fractions were based on a
duodecimal (base 12) system and are still used today in
certain circumstances. The unit of weight was the as and
one-twelfth of this was the uncia, from which we get our
measurements of ounce and inch, respectively. The Romans
improved on our calendar, and set up the notion of leap year
every four years. The Julian calendar was adopted in 45 B.C.
The Romans conquered Greece and Mesopotamia, and in
47 B.C., they set fire to the Egyptian fleet in the harbor of
Alexandria. The fire spread to the city and burned the
library, destroying two and a half centuries of book-collecting,
including all the important knowledge of the time.
Another great world civilization existed in China and also
developed a decimal numeration system and used a decimal
system with symbols 1, 2, 3, 
, 9, 10, 100, 1000, and 10000.
Calculations were performed using small bamboo counting
rods, which eventually evolved into the abacus. Our first histori-
cal reference to the Chinese culture is the yin-yang symbol,
which has its roots in ancient cosmology. The original meaning
is representative of the mountains, both the bright side and the
dark side. The “yin” represents the female, or shaded, aspect,
the earth, the darkness, the moon, and passivity. The “yang”
represents the male, light, sun, heaven, and the active principle
in nature. These words can be traced back to the Shang and
Chou Dynasty (1550–1050 B.C.), but most scholars credit them
to the Han Dynasty (220–206 B.C.). One of the first examples
of a magic square comes from Lo River around 200 B.C., where
legend tells us that the emperor Yu of the Shang dynasty
received a magic square on the back of a tortoise’s shell.
From 100 B.C. to A.D. 100 the Chinese described the mo-
tion of the planets, as well as what is the earliest known proof
of the Pythagorean theorem. The longest surviving and most
influential Chinese math book is dated from the beginning of
the Han Dynasty around A.D. 50. It includes measurement and
area problems, proportions, volumes, and some approximations
for 
Sun Zi (ca. A.D. 250) wrote his mathematical manual,
which included the “Chinese remainder problem”: Find n so
that upon division by 3 you obtain a remainder of 2; upon
division by 5 a remainder of 3; and upon division by 7 you get
a remainder of 2. His solution: Add 140, 63, 30 to obtain 233,
p.
c
600
500
400
300
200
100
100
200
300
400
500
Greek, Chinese, and Roman Period: 600 BC to AD 499
Mathematical Events
Cultural Events
(585 BC) Thales, founder of Greek geometry
(540 BC) The teachings of Pythagoras
(500 BC) Sulvasutras: Pythagorean numbers
(450 BC) Zeno: paradoxes of motion
(425 BC) Theodorus of Cyrene: irrational numbers
(384 BC) Aristotle: logic
(380 BC) Plato's Academy: logic
(323 BC) Euclid: geometry, perfect numbers
(300 BC) First use of Hindu numeration system
(230 BC) Sieve of Eratosthenes
(225 BC) Archimedes: circle, pi, curves, series
(180 BC) Hypsicles: number theory
(60 BC) Geminus: parallel postulate
(AD 50) Negative numbers used in China
(AD 75) Heron: measurements, roots, surveying
(AD 100) Nichomachus: number theory
(AD 150) Ptolemy: trigonometry
(AD 200) Mayan calendar
(AD 250) Diophantus: number theory, algebra
(AD 300) Pappus: Mathematical Collection
(AD 410) Hypatia of Alexandria: first woman mentioned
    in the history of mathematics
(AD 480) Tsu Ch’ung-chi approximates    as 355/113
AD
BC
Persians capture Babylon (538 BC)
Pindar's Odes (500 BC)
Siddhartha, the Buddha, delivers his
sermons in Deer Park (480 BC)   
Alexander the Great completes his conquest
of the known world (323 BC)   
Hannibal crosses the Alps (218 BC)
Rosetta Stone engraved (200 BC)
Birth of Julius Caesar (100 BC)
Virgil: Aeneid (20 BC)
Birth of Christ (4 BC)
Goths invade Asia Minor (AD 200)
Founding of Constantinople (AD 324)
Augustine, Confessions (AD 400)
Fall of Rome (AD 476)
*pp. 105–106, Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times by Morris
Kline (New York: Oxford University Press, 1972).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P5
Prologue
Studied number theory, 
music, geometry, and 
astronomy (quadrivium)
Logic, grammar and rhetoric 
(trivium)
Studied the Pythagorean  
theorem (Sec. 5.5, Sec. 7.3)
Pythagoreans
Start of liberal arts
Pythagoras (569–475 B.C.)
Studied a precursor to 
the notion of a limit; 
motion paradoxes; 
Zeno's paradox
(Sec. 5.6, Sec. 18.1)
Eleatic School
Oneness and immutability
of reality
Parmenides (C. 540 B.C.)
Platonic School
Five regular polyhedra
Plato (427–347 B.C.)
Studied philosophy; 
proved the existence 
of irrational numbers; 
studied conic sections
(Sec. 15.4)
Greek Schools (585–352 BC)
Studied astronomy; 
developed a precursor 
of calculus called the 
method of exhaustion; 
studied ratio and 
proportion (Sec. 6.7)
Eudoxus (408–355 B.C.)
School of Eudoxus
Thought was organized on
the basis of axioms
Studied the nature of 
the physical world
Heights of pyramids 
using similar triangles 
(Sec. 7.4)
Ionian School
Physical world regulated
by natural, not divine, laws
Thales (640–546 B.C.)
Studied some 
problems that were 
proved impossible: 
squaring a circle and 
trisecting an angle 
(Sec. 7.1)
Sophist School
Prodicus (460?–399? B.C.)
Divided science into 
three categories:  
theoretical, productive, 
and practical
Began the study of logic  
(Sec. 3.1)
Lyceum
Applied and theoretical
were separated; logic was
derived from mathematics
Aristotle (384–322 B.C.)
FIGURE 2 Greek schools from 585 B.C. to 352 B.C.
FIGURE 3 The School at Athens by Raphael, 1509. This fresco includes portraits of Raphael’s contemporaries and
demonstrates the use of perspective. Note the figures in the lower right, who are, no doubt, discussing mathematics.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Why Math? A Historical Overview
P6
and subtract 210 to obtain 23. Zhang Qiujian (ca. A.D. 450)
wrote a mathematics manual that included a formula for sum-
ming the terms of an arithmetic sequence, along with the solu-
tion to a system of two linear equations in three unknowns.
The problem is the “One Hundred Fowl Problem,” and is in-
cluded in Problem Set 5.7 (p. 240). At the end of this historic
period, the mathematician and astronomer Wang Xiaotong
(ca. A.D. 626) solved cubic equations by generalization of an
algorithm for finding the cube root.
Check www.mathnature.com for links to many excel-
lent sites on Greek mathematics.
Hindu and Persian Period: 
500 to 1199
Much of the mathematics that we read in contemporary math-
ematics textbooks ignores the rich history of this period. In-
cluded on the World Wide Web are some very good sources
for this period. Check our Web site www.mathnature.com
for some links. The Hindu civilization dates back to 2000 B.C.,
but the first recorded mathematics was during the ´Sulvas–utra
period from 800 B.C. to 200 A.D. In the third century, Brahmi
symbols were used for 1, 2, 3, 
, 9 and are significant be-
cause there was a single symbol for each number. There was
no zero or positional notation at this time, but by A.D. 600 the
c
Hindus used the Brahmi symbols with positional notation. In
Chapter 4, we will discuss a numeration system that eventu-
ally evolved from these Brahmi symbols. For fractions, the
Hindus used sexagesimal positional notation in astronomy, but
in other applications they used a ratio of integers and wrote 
(without the fractional bar we use today). The first mathemati-
cally important period was the second period, A.D. 200–1200.
The important mathematicians of this period are A¯ ryabhata
(A.D. 476–550), Brahmagupta (A.D. 598–670), Mah¯avı¯ra (9th
century), and Bh¯askara (1114–1185). In Chapter 6, we include
some historical questions from Bh¯askara and Brahmagupta.
The Hindus developed arithmetic independently of geom-
etry and had a fairly good knowledge of rudimentary algebra.
They knew that quadratic equations had two solutions, and they
had a fairly good approximation for 
Astronomy motivated
their study of trigonometry. Around 1200, scientific activity in
India declined, and mathematical progress ceased and did not
revive until the British conquered India in the 18th century.
The Persians invited Hindu scientists to settle in Baghdad,
and when Plato’s Academy closed in A.D. 529, many scholars
traveled to Persia and became part of the Iranian tradition of
science and mathematics. Omar Khayyám (1048–1122) and
Nasîr-Eddin (1201–1274), both renowned Persian scholars,
worked freely with irrationals, which contrasts with the
Greek idea of number. What we call Pascal’s triangle dates
p.
3
4
First plans of the Vatican Palace in Rome (500)
Mohammed's vision (610)
Northern Irish submit to Catholicism (697)
Charlemagne crowned emperor of Holy Roman Empire (800)
Utrecht Psalter (832)
Beginning of Carolinian dynasties (832)
First printed book (870)
Alfred the Great (871)
Schism of the Church (871)
Vikings discover Greenland (900)
Emperor Otto I (The Great Emperor) (912–973)
Beginning of the Dark Ages (950)
Emperor Otto II (973–983)
Development of systematic musical notation (990)
First canonization of saints (993)
Leif Erickson crosses Atlantic to Vinland (1003)
World's first novel, Tale of Genji (1008)
School of Chartres (1028)
Normans penetrate England (1050)
Macbeth defeated at Dunsinane (1054)
Consecration of Westminster Abbey (1065)
Chinese use movable type to print books (1086)
First modern university (1088)
Start of first Crusade (1096)
Chinese invent playing card (1110)
Commencement of troubadour music (1125)
Beginning of Plantagenet reign (1154)
Maimonides: Mishneh Torah (1165)
Domesday Book; tax census ordered
   by William the Conqueror (1186)
(630) Brahmagupta: algebra, astronomy
(710) Bede: calendar, finger arithmetic
(750) First use of zero symbol
(810) Mohammed ibn Mûsâ al-Khwârizmî coins term algebra
(810) Hindu numerals
(850) Mahavira: arithmetic, algebra
(870) Iâbit ibn Qorra: algebra, magic squares, amicable numbers
(900) Abû Kâmil: Algebra, Bakhshali manuscript
(976) Oldest example of written numerals in Europe
(980) Abu’wefa: constructions, trig tables
(999) Pope Sylvester II (Gerbert): arithmetic, 
   pi approximated as √8≈2.83
(1000) Sridhara recognizes the importance of zero
(1020) Al-Karkhî: algebra
(1075) Game of rithmomachia
(1110) Persian scholar Omar Khayyám: cubic equations, Pascal's Triangle 
(1125) Earliest account of mariner's compass
(1175) Averroës: trigonometry, astronomy
(1120) Bhaskara
(1150) Bhaskara: algebra
AD 500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
Hindu and Arabian Period: AD 500 to 1199
Mathematical Events
Cultural Events
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P7
Prologue
back to this period. The word algebra comes from the
Persians in a book by the Persian astronomer Mohammed
ibn Musa al-Khâwarizmî (780–850) entitled Hisâb al-jabr
w’al muqâbala. Due to the Arab conquest of Persia, Persian
scholars (notably Nasir-Eddin and al-Khwarizmi) were
obliged to publish their works in the Arabic language and
not Persian, causing many historians to falsely label the texts
as products of Arab scholars. Al-Khwarizmi solved quad-
ratic equations and knew there are two roots, and even
though the Persians gave algebraic solutions of quadratic
equations, they explained their work geometrically. They
solved some cubics, but could solve only simple trigonometric
problems. 
Check www.mathnature.com for links to many excel-
lent sites on Hindu and Arabian mathematics.
Transition Period: 1200 to 1599
Mathematics during the Middle Ages was transitional
between the great early civilizations and the Renaissance.
1200
1250
1300
1350
1400
1450
1500
1550
1600
Transition Period: 1200 to 1599
Mathematical Events
Cultural Events
Ghenghis Khan becomes chief prince of the Mongols (1206)
Francis of Assisi initiates brotherhood (1209)
Start of the Papal inquisition (1233)
Amiens Cathedral rebuilt (1240)
Thomas Aquinas: Summa Theologicae (1273)
Moses de Leon: Zohar, major source for the cabala (1275)
Florentine bankers are forbidden to use Hindu numerals (1299)
Dante: Divine Comedy (1307–21)
Chaucer (1321)
The pope forbids the use of counterpoint in church music (1322)
Approximately 75 million die of the Black Death (1347–51)
Aztecs build Tenochtitlán (1364)
Beginning of the Great Schism (1378)
Chaucer: Canterbury Tales (1390)
Metal type used for printing (1396)
End of Great Schism (1417)
Gutenberg and Kostner invent printer with movable type (1420)
Joan of Arc raises siege of Orleans (1429)
Rogier Van der Weyden (1435)
Fra Angelico begins frescoes at San Marco (1436)
Florence is center of Renaissance (1450)
Gutenberg prints Bible (1454)
First printed music (1465)
First illustrated books (1470)
First book printed in English (1474)
Botticelli: Birth of Venus (1484)
Columbus discovers America (1492)
Vasco da Gama rounds Cape of Good Hope (1497)
Michelangelo: David (1497)
Leonardo da Vinci begins Leda and the Swan (1507)
Machiavelli: The Prince (1513)
Luther launches Reformation (1517)
Magellan discovers the straits; Luther excommunicated (1520)
Henry VIII becomes head of the Church of England (1534)
Publication of Copernicus' work (1543)
Elizabeth crowned Queen of England (1558)
Bothwell abducts Mary Queen of Scots (1567)
Tycho Brahe begins construction of 19-foot quadrant (1569)
Francis Drake sees Pacific Ocean (1573)
Pope Gregory XIII creates new calendar (1583)
England defeats Spanish Armada (1588)
Discovery of the Marquesas (1596)
(1202) Fibonacci: arithmetic, algebra, geometry, sequences, 
   Liber Abaci
(1250) Sacrobosco: Hindu-Arabic numerals
(1260) Campanus translates Euclid
(1267) Roger Bacon: Opus
(1280) Geometry used as the basis of painting
(1281) Li Yeh introduces notation for negative numbers
(1303) Chu Shi-Kie: algebra, solutions of equations, Pascal's triangle
(1325) Thomas Bradwardine: arithmetic, geometry, star polygons
(1360) Nicole Oresme: coordinates, fractal exponents
(1400) In Florence, commercial activity results in several books on 
   mercantile arithmetic
(1425) Use of perspective gives depth to Renaissance painting
(1435) Ulugh Beg: trig tables
(1460) Georg von Peurbach: arithmetic, table of sines
(1464) Regiomontanus: establishes trigonometry
(1470) First printed arithmetic book
(1482) First printing Euclid's Elements
(1489) Johann Widmann: first use of + and – signs
(1492) Pellos: use of decimal point
(1505) Leonardo da Vinci: geometry, art, optics
(1506) Scipione dal Ferro: cubic equations
(1510) Albrecht Dürer: perspective, polyhedra, curves
(1514) Dürer's Melancholia contains magic squares
(1525) Stifel: number mysticism; Rudolff: algebra, decimals
(1527) Petrus Apianus; Pascal's triangle
(1530) Copernicus: astronomy, trigonometry
(1540) Gemma Frisius: arithmetic
(1545) Tartaglia: cubic equations, arithmetic
(1545) Ferrari: quartic equations
(1550) Cardano: Ars Magna
(1550) Schubel: algebra  
(1550) Adam Riese: originator of the radical sign
(1557) Robert Recorde: arithmetic, algebra, first use of = sign
(1564) Galileo Galilei born
(1572) Bombelli: algebra, cubic equations
(1579) Viète: advocated use of decimal notation
(1580) Viète: algebra, geometry, much modern notation
(1583) Clavius: arithmetic, algebra, geometry
(1593) Adrianus Romanus: value of 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Why Math? A Historical Overview
P8
In the 1400s the Black Death killed over 
of the
European population. The Turks conquered Constantino-
ple, and many Eastern scholars traveled to Europe, spread-
ing Greek knowledge as they traveled. The period from
1400 to 1600, known as the Renaissance, forever changed
the intellectual outlook in Europe and raised up mathemat-
ical thinking to new levels. Johann Gutenberg’s invention
of printing with movable type in 1450 changed the com-
plexion of the world. Linen and cotton paper, which the
Europeans learned about from the Chinese through the
Arabians, came at precisely the right historical moment.
The first printed edition of Euclid’s Elements in a Latin
translation appeared in 1482. Other early printed books
were Apollonius’ Conic Sections, Pappus’ works, and Dio-
phantus’ Arithmetica.
The first breakthrough in mathematics was by artists
who discovered mathematical perspective. The theoretical
genius in mathematical perspective was Leone Alberti
(1404–1472). He was a secretary in the Papal Chancery writ-
ing biographies of the saints, but his work Della Pictura on
the laws of perspective (1435) was a masterpiece. He said,
“Nothing pleases me so much as mathematical investigations
and demonstrations, especially when I can turn them into
some useful practice drawing from mathematics and the prin-
ciples of painting perspective and some amazing propositions
on the moving of weights.” He collaborated with Toscanelli,
who supplied Columbus with maps for his first voyage. The
best mathematician among the Renaissance artists was
70%
Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528). The most significant develop-
ment of the Renaissance was the breakthrough in astronomi-
cal theory by Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543) and Johannes
Kepler (1571–1630). There were no really significant new
results in mathematics during this period of history.
It is interesting to tie together some of the previous
timelines to trace the history of algebra. It began around
2000 B.C. in Egypt and Babylon. This knowledge was incor-
porated into the mathematics of Greece between 500 B.C.
and A.D. 320, as well as into the Persian civilization and
Indian mathematics around A.D. 1000. By the Transition
Period, the great ideas of algebra had made their way to
Europe, as shown in Figure 4. Additional information can
be found on the World Wide Web; check our Web page at
www.mathnature.com.
Age of Reason 1600 to 1699
From Shakespeare and Galileo to Peter the Great and the
great Bernoulli family, this period, also called the Age of
Genius, marks the growth of intellectual endeavors; both
technology and knowledge grew as never seen before in his-
tory. A great deal of the content of this book focuses on dis-
coveries from this period of time, so instead of providing a
commentary in this overview, we will simply list the refer-
ences to this period in world history. Other sources and links
are found on our Web page www.mathnature.com.
Shakespeare: Hamlet (1600)
Pocahontas saves John Smith (1609)
King James Bible published (1611)
Beginning of the Thirty Years War (1618)
Pilgrims land at Plymouth (1620)
Harvard College founded, the first American College (1636)
Moliere founds Theatre de la Comedie Française (1643)
Building of the Taj Mahal (1646)
Cromwell abolishes English monarchy (1649)
Coronation of Louis XIV of France (1654)
Birth of Alessandro Scarlatti (1659)
Great Plague in London kills 75,000 (1665)
Newton's experiments on gravitation (1665)
La Fontaine: Fables (1668)
Spinoza: Ethics (1677)
Stradivari makes the first cello (1680)
First public museum (1683)
J.S. Bach and Handel born (1685)
Peter the Great becomes Czar of Russia (1689)
(1600) Galileo: Physics, astronomy, projectiles
(1610) Kepler: astronomy, continuity
(1617) Napier: logarithms, Napier's rods
(1621) Diophantus: Arithmetica published
(1630) Mersenne: number theory
(1631) Oughtred: first table of natural logs
(1635) Cavalieri: number theory
(1637) Descartes: Discourse on Method, analytic geometry
(1637) Fermat's Last Theorem stated in the margin of a book
(1640) Desargues: projective geometry
(1650) Pascal: conics, probability, computing machines,
   Pascal's triangle, John Wallis
(1654) Pascal-Fermat correspondence begins study of probability
(1658) Huygens invents the pendulum clock–theory of curves
(1670) Sir Christopher Wren: architecture, imaginary numbers
(1678) Ceva: nature of concurrency
(1680) Sir Issac Newton: calculus, gravitation, series, hydrodynamics
(1682) Gottfried Leibniz: calculus, determinants, symbolic logic,
   notation, computing machines
(1690) Nicolaus Bernoulli: probability curves
 
1600
1610
1620
1630
1640
1650
1660
1670
1680
1690
1700
Age of Reason: 1600 to 1699
Mathematical Events
Cultural Events
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P9
Prologue
Early Modern Period:
1700 to 1799
This period marks the dawn of modern
mathematics. The Early Modern Period
was characterized by experimentation and
formalization of the ideas germinated in
the previous century. There is so much
that we could say about the period from
1700 to 1799. The mathematics that you
studied in high school represents, for the
most part, the ideas formulated during
this period. Take a look at the mathemat-
ical events in the following timeline, and
you will see an abundance of discoveries,
often embodied in the contents of entire
books. One of the best sources of infor-
mation about this period is found at these
Web sites:
www.mathnature.com and
www-history.mcs.st-and.ac.uk/
~history/Indexes/Full_Chron.html
FIGURE 4 Mainstreams in the flow of algebra
BABYLONIA
EGYPT
Alexandria
Baghdad
ARABIA
Syracuse
Khwarizm
INDIA
PERSIA
Athens
Rome
1450
1202
1700
1600
1572
1545
1494
1100
825
628
–300
–500
–1650
Diophantus
Pappus
GREECE II
GREECE I
EGYPT
Pythagoreans
Rhind papyrus
Clay tablets
Euclid
Archimedes
Apollonius
+250
350
Stop
?
INDIA
Brahmagupta
Bhaskara
PERSIA
(Iran)
al-Khwârizmí
Omar Khayyám
Fibonacci's Liber abaci
Printing
Pacioli's Süma
Ferrari, Tartaglia, Cardano
Bombelli
Viète
Newton
EUROPE
BABYLONIA
Bach, Two-part invention no. 5 (1705)
Halley predicts return of 1682 comet (1705)
Benjamin Franklin born (1706)
Leibniz: Théodicée (1710)
Last execution for witchcraft in England (1712)
Jonathan Swift: Gulliver's Travels (1726)
Bach: Mass in B minor (1736)
Accession of Frederick the Great; Israel Baal (1740)
Shem Toh founds Hasidism (1740)
Handel: The Messiah (1742)
The Seven Years War (1756–63)
Voltaire: Candide (1759)
Rousseau: Social Contract (1762)
Paris Pantheon started (1764)
Isaac Watts: steam engine (1767)
American Declaration of Independence (1776)
Mozart: Don Giovanni (1779)
French Revolution (1789)
Smallpox vaccine (1796)
Napoleon rules France (1799)
(1700) Jacob and Johann Bernoulli: applied calculus, probability
(1715) Brook Taylor: series, geometry, calculus of finite differences
(1720) Abraham de Moivre: probability, calculus, complex numbers
(1733) Saccheri: beginnings of analytic geometry
(1735) Emilie de Breteuil: Newtonian studies
(1740) Colin Maclaurin: series, physics, higher plane curves
(1748) Maria Agnesi: analysis, geometry
(1750) Leonhard Euler: number theory, applied mathematics
(1760) Comte de Buffon: connection between probability and 
(1761) Johann Peter: population statistics
(1770) Johann Lambert: irrationality of , non-Euclidean geometry, 
   map projections
(1780) Lagrange: calculus, number theory
(1790) Metric system invented
(1796) Karl Gauss: Num = D + D + D
(1797) Caroline Herschel: astronomy
(1799) Metric system adopted in France
1700
1710
1720
1730
1740
1750
1760
1770
1780
1790
1800
Early Modern Period: 1700 to 1799
Mathematical Events
Cultural Events
There are a multitude of historical refer-
ences to this period documented through-
out the book.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Why Math? A Historical Overview
P10
Modern Period: 1800 to Present
What we call the Modern Period includes all of the discov-
eries of the last two centuries. Students often think that all
1800
1810
1820
1830
1840
1850
1860
1870
Mathematical Events
Cultural Events
Beethoven: Eroica symphony: (1804)
Haiti independence (1804)
Goethe: Faust, Part 1 (1808)
Goya: The Disasters of War (1810)
First mechanical press (1811)
Canned food (1812)
Battle of Waterloo (1815)
Rosetta Stone deciphered (1821)
First photograph (1826)
Alexander Dumas: The Three Musketeers (1828)
Simon Bolivar liberates South America (1830)
Karl Marx: Communist Manifesto (1848)
Herman Melville: Moby Dick (1851)
Walt Whitman: Leaves of Grass (1855)
Charles Darwin: On the Origin of Species (1859)
Gregor Mendel: genetics (1860)
American Civil War (1861)
Louis Pasteur: germ theory of infection (1862)
Dodgson: Alice in Wonderland (1865)
Alfred Nobel: invents dynamite (1866)
Suez Canal opens (1869)
(1805) Laplace: probability, differential equations, method 
   of least squares, integrals
(1805) Punched cards to operate jacquard loom
(1815) George Boole born
(1820) Sophie Germain: theory of numbers
(1822) Feuerbach: geometry of the triangle
(1824) Abel: elliptic functions, equations, series, calculus
(1825) Bolyai and Lobachevski: non-Euclidean geometry
(1830) Cauchy: calculus, complex variables
(1832) Babbage: calculating machines; Galois: groups, theory of equations
(1837) Trisection of an angle and duplication of the cube proved impossible
(1843) Hamilton: quaternions
(1849) De Morgan: probability, logic
(1850) Cayley: invariants, hyperspace, matrices and determinants
ry
(1854) Riemann: calculus; Boole: logic, Laws of Thought
(1855) Dirichlet: number theory
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Alexander Graham Bell invents telephone (1876)
Thomas Edison invents light bulb (1879)
Rodin: The Thinker (1880)
Coca-Cola bottled (1886)
Eastman develops the box camera (1888)
Spanish-American war (1898)
Freud's theories (1900)
First powered aircraft (1903)
Henr
World War I Begins (1914)
Russian Revolution (1917)
U.S. women gain the right to vote (1920)
Penicillin (1928)
Stock market crash (1929)
Gandhi leads march to the Salt sea (1930)
Hitler takes power (1933)
Mao heads Chinese Revolution (1934)
World War II Begins (1939)
Japan bombs Pearl Harbor (1941)
First controlled nuclear chain reaction (1942)
United States drops atomic bomb on Hiroshima (1945)
United Nations formed (1945)
India declares independence (1947)
Korean War begins (1950)
Watson and Crick discover double
helix structure of DNA (1950)   
Birth of rock and roll (1954)
Salk polio vaccine developed (1955)
U.S. involvement in Vietnam War begins (1963)
First human heart transplant (1967)
Physicists discover the "Charmed Quark" (1976)
Viking mission lands on Mars (1977)
Smallpox declared extinct (1980)
Voyager 2 sends back pictures from Saturn (1981)
October stock market crash (1987)
AIDS becomes worldwide epidemic (1988)
Voyager 2 sends back pictures from Neptune (1989)
 lands on Mars (1997)
Terrorist attack on U.S. (2001)
(1872) Dedekind: irrational numbers
(1873) Brocard: geometry of the triangle
(1879) Sylvester: theory of numbers, theory of invariants
(1879) Dodgson: Euclidean studies
(1880) Georg Cantor: irrational numbers
(1882) Lindemann:  a transcendental number
(1886) W
(1888) George Pólya born
(1890) Peano: axioms for natural numbers
(1895) Poincare: analysis
(1896) Hadamard and Pousson: proof of prime number theorem
(1899) Hilbert: calculus
(1900) Hilbert: twenty-three famous problems
(1900) Russell and Whitehead: Principia Mathematica, logic
(1900) Cezanne orients paintings around the cone, sphere, and cube
(1906) Frechet: abstract spaces
(1916) Einstein: general theory of relativity
(1917) Hardy and Ramanujan; analytic number theory
(1930) Emmy Noether: algebra
(1931) Godel's theorem
(1934) Fields Medal established
(1946) First electronic computer: Bourbaki: Elements
U.S. PhD's in mathematics
(1950) Norbert Wiener: cybernetics
(1952) John von Neumann: game theory
(1955) Homological algebra
(1956) Turing: developed Turing Test for computer intelligence
(1963) Cohen: continuum hypothesis
(1965) John Kemeny and Thomas Kurtz develop BASIC
(1976) Appel and Haken solve four-color problem
(1977) Apple II personal computer introduced (price: $1799)
(1980) Rubik's cube sweeps the world
(1984) Mertens Conjecture disproved; Bieberbach Conjecture proved
(1994) RSA: "unbreakable" encryption; Fermat's Last Theorem proved
INTERNET TIMELINE; see page 163
the important mathematics has been done, and there is noth-
ing new to be discovered, but this is not true. Mathematics
is alive and constantly changing. There is no way a short
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P11
Prologue
Prologue Problem Set
1. HISTORICAL QUEST
What are the seven chronological
periods into which the prologue divided history? Which
period seems the most interesting to you, and why?
2. HISTORICAL QUEST
Select what you believe to be the
most interesting cultural event and the most interesting mathe-
matical event of the Babylonian, Egyptian, and Native Ameri-
can Period.
3. HISTORICAL QUEST
Select what you believe to 
be the most interesting cultural event and the most 
interesting mathematical event of the Greek, Chinese, 
and Roman Period.
4. HISTORICAL QUEST
Select what you believe to be the
most interesting cultural event and the most interesting mathe-
matical event of the Hindu and Persian Period.
5. HISTORICAL QUEST
Select what you believe to be the
most interesting cultural event and the most interesting mathe-
matical event of the Transition Period.
6. HISTORICAL QUEST
Select what you believe to be the
most interesting cultural event and the most interesting mathe-
matical event of the Age of Reason.
7. HISTORICAL QUEST
Select what you believe to be the
most interesting cultural event and the most interesting mathe-
matical event of the Early Modern Period.
8. HISTORICAL QUEST
Select what you believe to be the
most interesting cultural event and the most interesting mathe-
matical event of the Modern Period.
9. A long, straight fence having a pole every 8 ft is 1,440 ft long.
How many fence poles are needed for the fence?
10. How many cards must you draw from a deck of 52 playing cards
to be sure that at least two are from the same suit?
11. How many people must be in a room to be sure that at least four
of them have the same birthday (not necessarily the same year)?
12. Find the units digit of 
13. If a year had two consecutive months with a Friday the
thirteenth, which months would they have to be?
32007 2 22007.
commentary or overview can convey the richness or impli-
cations of the mathematical discoveries of this period. As
we enter the new millennium, we can only imagine and
dream about what is to come!
One of the major themes of this text is problem solving.
The following problem set is a potpourri of problems that
14. On Saturday evenings, a favorite pastime of the high school
students in Santa Rosa, California, is to cruise certain streets.
The selected routes are shown in the following illustration. Is
it possible to choose a route so that all of the permitted streets
are traveled exactly once?
Santa Rosa street problem
15. What is the largest number that is a divisor of both 210 and 330?
16. The News Clip shows a letter printed in the “Ask Marilyn”
column of Parade magazine (Sept. 27, 1992). How would you
answer it?
Hint: We won’t give you the answer, but we will quote one line
from Marilyn’s answer: “So the question should be not why
the smaller one yields that much, but why it yields that little.”
17. If the population of the world on October 12, 2002 was 6.248
billion, when do you think the world population will reach
7 billion? Calculate the date (to the nearest month) using the
information that the world population reached 6 billion on
October 12, 1999.
Dear Marilyn,
I recently purchased a tube of 
caulking and it says a 1/4-inch 
bead will yield about 30 feet.  
But it says a 1/8-inch bead will 
yield about 96 feet — more than 
three times as much.  I'm not a 
math genius, but it seems that 
because 1/8 inch is half of 1/4 
inch, the smaller bead should 
yield only twice as much.  Can 
you explain it? 
Norm Bean, St. Louis, Mo.
Pacific Ave.
College Ave.
Santa Rosa
Junior
College
Coffee
Shop
City Hall
Ice cream
stand
4th St.
Mendocino Ave.
B St.
Bryden Lane
Healdsburg Ave.
Armory Dr.
Elliot Ave.
should give you a foretaste of the variety of ideas and con-
cepts that we will consider in this book. Although none of
these problems is to be considered routine, you might wish to
attempt to work some of them before you begin, and then re-
turn to these problems at the end of your study in this book.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Prologue Problem Set
P12
18. The Pacific 12 football conference consists of the following
schools:
Arizona
Arizona State
Cal Berkeley
Colorado 
Oregon 
Oregon State 
Stanford (CA) 
UCLA 
USC
Utah 
Washington 
Washington State 
a. Is it possible to visit each of these schools by crossing each
common state border exactly once? If so, show the path.
b. Is it possible to start the trip in any given state, cross each
common state border exactly once, and end the trip in the
state in which you started?
19. If (a, b)  a  b  a  b, what is the value of ((1, 2), (3, 4))?
20. If it is known that all Angelenos are Venusians and all Venu-
sians are Los Angeles residents, then what must necessarily
be the conclusion?
21. If 1 is the first odd number, what is the 473rd odd number?
22. If
, what is the sum of the first
100,000 counting numbers beginning with 1?
23. A four-inch cube is painted red on all sides. It is then cut into
one-inch cubes. What fraction of all the one-inch cubes are
painted on one side only?
24. If slot machines had two arms and people had one arm, then it
is probable that our number system would be based on the
digits 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 only. How would the number we know
as 18 be written in such a number system?
25. If M(a, b) stands for the larger number in the parentheses, and
m(a, b) stands for the lesser number in the parentheses, what
is the value of M(m(1, 2), m(2, 3))?
26. If a group of 50 persons consists of 20 males, 12 children, and
25 women, how many men are in the group?
27. There are only five regular polyhedra, and Figure 5 shows the
patterns that give those polyhedra. Name the polyhedron
obtained from each of the patterns shown. 
1 1 2 1 3 1 c1 n 5 n1n 1 12
2
in 10 minutes. If Jack and Jill start at the same time and at the
same place, and continue to exercise around the lake until
they return to the starting point at the same time, how long
will they be exercising?
29. What is the 1,000th positive integer that is not divisible by 3?
30. A frugal man allows himself a glass of wine before dinner on
every third day, an after-dinner chocolate every fifth day, and
a steak dinner once a week. If it happens that he enjoys all
three luxuries on March 31, what will be the date of the next
steak dinner that is preceded by wine and followed by an
after-dinner chocolate?
31. How many trees must be cut to make a trillion one-dollar
bills? To answer this question you need to make some
assumptions. Assume that a pound of paper is equal to a
pound of wood, and also assume that a dollar bill weighs
about one gram. This implies that a pound of wood yields
about 450 dollar bills. Furthermore, estimate that an average
tree has a height of 50 ft and a diameter of 12 inches. Finally,
assume that wood yields about 50 lb/ft3.
32. Estimate the volume of beer in the six-pack shown in the 
photograph.
WA
OR
CA
AZ
UT
CO
FIGURE 5 Five regular polyhedra patterns
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
33. You are given a square with sides equal to 8 inches, with two
inscribed semicircles of radius 4. What is the area of the
shaded region?
34. Critique the statement given in the News Clip.
Smoking ban
Judy Green, owner of the White 
Restaurant and an adamant 
opponent of a smoking ban, 
went so far as to survey 
numerous restaurants.  She cited 
one restaurant that suffered a 
75% decline in business after 
the smoking ban was activated.
28. Jack and Jill decided to exercise together. Jack walks around
their favorite lake in 16 minutes and Jill jogs around the lake
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P13
Prologue
35. The two small circles have radii of 2 and 3. Find the ratio of the
area of the smallest circle to the area of the shaded region.
36. A large container filled with water is to be drained, and you
would like to drain it as quickly as possible. You can drain
the container with either one 1-in. diameter hose or two 
-in.-diameter hoses. Which do you think would be faster (one
1-in. drain or two -in. drains), and why?
37. A gambler went to the horse races two days in a row. On the first
day, she doubled her money and spent $30. On the second day,
she tripled her money and spent $20, after which she had what
she started with the first day. How much did she start with?
38. The map shows the percent of children age 19–35 months
who are immunized by the state. What conclusions can you
draw from this map?
1
2
1
2
WA
ID
MT
ND
NE
KS
OK
TX
LA
AR
MO
IA
MN
WI
MI
IL
IN OH
PA
NY
ME
KY
TN
MS
AL
FL
HI
AK
GA
SC
NC
VA
WV
SD
WY
UT
CO
OR
NV
NM
AZ
VT
NJ
DE
CT
RI
MD
DC
MA
NH
67%–78%
79%–80%
80%–82%
82%–93%
CA
Source: Centers for Disease Control
www.cdc.gov/Vaccines/states-surv/his/tables/07/tab03_atigen_state.xls.
39. A charter flight has signed up 100 travelers. The travelers are told
that if they can sign up an additional 25 persons, they can save $78
each. What is the cost per person if 100 persons make the trip?
40. Find 
.
41. Suppose that it costs $450 to enroll your child in a 10-week
summer recreational program. If this cost is prorated (that is,
reduced linearly over the 10-week period), express the cost as a
function of the number of weeks that have elapsed since the
start of the 10-week session. Draw a graph to show the cost at
any time for the duration of the session.
42. Candidates Rameriz (R), Smith (S), and Tillem (T) are running
for office. According to public opinion polls, the preferences
are (percentages rounded to the nearest percent):
Ranking
38%
29%
24%
10%
1st choice
R
S
T
R 
2nd choice
S
R
S
T 
3rd choice
T
T
R
S
A1 1 1
nBn
lim
nS`
a. Who will win the plurality vote?
b. Who will win Borda count?
c. Does a strategy exist that the voters in the 24% column
could use to vote insincerely to keep Rameriz from winning? 
43. Suppose the percentage of alcohol in the blood t hours after
consumption is given by 
What is the rate at which the percentage of alcohol is chang-
ing with respect to time?
44. If a megamile is one million miles and a kilomile is one
thousand miles, how many kilomiles are there in
2.376 megamiles?
45. A map of a small village is shown in Figure 6. To walk from
A to B, Sarah obviously must walk at least 7 blocks (all the
blocks are the same length). What is the number of shortest
paths from A to B?
FIGURE 6 A village map
46. A hospital wishes to provide for its patients a diet that has
a minimum of 100 g of carbohydrates, 60 g of protein, and
40 g of fats per day. These requirements can be met with
two foods:
Food
Carbohydrates
Protein
Fats
A
6 g/oz
3 g/oz
1 g/oz
B
2 g/oz
2 g/oz 
2 g/oz
It is also important to minimize costs; food A costs $0.14 per
ounce and food B costs $0.06 per ounce. How many ounces of
each food should be bought for each patient per day to meet
the minimum daily requirements at the lowest cost?
47. On July 24, 2010, the U.S. national debt was $13 trillion 
and on that date there were 308.1 million people. How long
would it take to pay off this debt if every person pays $1 
per day?
48. Find the smallest number of operations needed to build up to
the number 100 if you start at 0 and use only two operations:
doubling or increasing by 1. Challenge: Answer the same
question for the positive integer n.
49. If log2 x  log4 x  logb x, what is b?
50. Supply the missing number in the following sequence: 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 22, 24, 
, 100, 121, 10,000.
A
B
C1t2 5 0.3e2t/2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Prologue Problem Set
P14
56. What is the maximum number of points of intersection of n
distinct lines?
57. The equation P  153,000e0.05t represents the population of a
city t years after 2000. What is the population in the year
2000? Show a graph of the city’s population for the next
20 years.
58. The Egyptians had an interesting, pictorial numeration
system. Here is how you would count using Egyptian
numerals: 
|, ||, |||,||||, |||||, ||||||, |||||||, ||||||||, |||||||||,
, |, ||, |||, . . .
Write down your age using Egyptian numerals. The symbol
“|” is called a stroke, and the “” is called a heel bone. The
Egyptians used a scroll for 100, a lotus flower for 1,000, a
pointing finger for 10,000, a polliwog for 100,000, and an
astonished man for the number 1,000,000. Without doing any
research, write what you think today’s date would look like
using Egyptian numerals.
59. If you start with $1 and double your money each day, how
much money would you have in 30 days?
60. Consider two experiments and events defined as follows:
Experiment A: Roll one die 4 times and keep a record of
how many times you obtain at least one 6. Event 
E  {obtain at least one 6 in 4 rolls of a single die} 
Experiment B: Roll a pair of dice 24 times and keep
a record of how many times you obtain at least one 12.
Event F  {obtain at least one 12 in 24 rolls of a pair of
dice}
Do you think event E or event F is more likely? You might wish
to experiment by rolling dice.
51. How many different configurations can you see in Figure 7?
52. Answer the question asked in the News Clip from the “Ask
Marilyn” column of Parade magazine (July 16, 1995).
FIGURE 7 Count the cubes
Dear Marilyn,
Three safari hunters are captured 
by a sadistic tribe of natives and 
forced to participate in a duel to 
the death.  Each is given a pistol 
and tied to a post the same 
distance from the other two.  
They must take turns shooting at 
each other, one shot per turn.  
The worst shot of the three 
hunters (1 in 3 accuracy) must 
shoot first.  The second turn goes 
to the hunter with 50–50 (1 in 2) 
accuracy.  And (if he's still alive!) 
the third turn goes to the crack 
shot (100% accuracy).  The 
rotation continues until only one 
hunter remains, who is then 
rewarded with his freedom.  
Which hunter has the best chance
of surviving, and why? 
From “Ask Marilyn,” by Marilyn vos Savant,
Parade Magazine, July 16, 1992. Reprinted with
permission from Parade, © 1995.
55. The Kabbalah is a body of mystical teachings from the Torah.
One medieval inscription is shown at the left: 
4
9
2
3
5
7
8
1
6
The inscription on the left shows Hebrew characters that can
be translated into numbers, as shown at the right. What can
you say about this pattern of numbers?
53. Five cards are drawn at random from a pack of cards that have
been numbered consecutively from 1 to 104 and have been thor-
oughly shuffled. What is the probability that the numbers on the
cards as drawn are in increasing order of magnitude?
54.What is the sum of the counting numbers from 1 to 104?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
1.1 Problem Solving
3
A word of encouragement, hints for
success, writing mathematics, journals,
individual research, group research,
guidelines for problem solving, problem
solving by patterns
1.4 Chapter Summary
43
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
1.2 Inductive and Deductive
Reasoning
18
A pattern of nines, order of operations,
inductive reasoning, deductive
reasoning, Euler circles
1.3 Scientific Notation 
and Estimation
28
Exponential notation, scientific notation,
calculators, estimation, laws of
exponents, comprehending large
numbers
THE NATURE OF
PROBLEM SOLVING
1
Outline
What in the World?
“Hey, Tom, what are you taking this semester?”
asked Susan. “I’m taking English, history, and math.
I can’t believe my math teacher,” responded Tom.
“The first day we were there, she walked in, wrote
her name on the board, and then she asked, ‘How
much space would you have if you, along with
everyone else in the world, moved to California?’
What a stupid question ... I would not have enough
room to turn around!”
“Oh, I had that math class last semester,” said
Susan. “It isn’t so bad. The whole idea is to give
you the ability to solve problems outside the class. 
I want to get a good job when I graduate, and I’ve
read that because of the economy, employers are
looking for people with problem-solving skills. I
hear that working smarter is more important than
working harder.”
Overview
There are many reasons for reading a book, but the best
reason is because you want to read it. Although you are
probably reading this first page because you were required to
do so by your instructor, it is my hope that in a short while
you will be reading this book because you want to read it. It
was written for people who think they don’t like mathemat-
ics, or people who think they can’t work math problems, or
people who think they are never going to use math. The com-
mon thread in this book is problem solving—that is,
strengthening your ability to solve problems—not in the
classroom, but outside the classroom. This first chapter is de-
signed to introduce you to the nature of problem solving.
Notice the first thing you see on this page is the question,
“What in the world?” Each chapter begins with such a real
world question that appears later in the chapter. This first one
is considered in Problem 59, page 43.
As you begin your trip through this book, I wish you a
BON VOYAGE! 
     Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.1
Problem Solving
3
1.1  Problem Solving
The idea that aptitude for mathematics is rarer than aptitude for
other subjects is merely an illusion which is caused by belated or
neglected beginners.
J.F. HERBART
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
At the beginning of each
chapter we present a puzzle
which represents some
pattern. See if you can fill
in the question mark.
A Word of Encouragement
Do you think of mathematics as a difficult, foreboding subject that was invented hundreds
of years ago? Do you think that you will never be able (or even want) to use mathemat-
ics? If you answered “yes” to either of these questions, then I want you to know that
I have written this book for you. I have tried to give you some insight into how mathe-
matics is developed and to introduce you to some of the people behind the mathematics.
In this book, I will present some of the great ideas of mathematics, and then we will look
at how these ideas can be used in an everyday setting to build your problem-solving
abilities. The most important prerequisite for this course is an openness to try out new
ideas—a willingness to experience the suggested activities rather than to sit on the side-
line as a spectator. I have attempted to make this material interesting by putting it
together differently from the way you might have had mathematics presented in the past.
You will find this book difficult if you wait for the book or the teacher to give you
answers—instead, be willing to guess, experiment, estimate, and manipulate, and try out
problems without fear of being wrong!
There is a common belief that mathematics is to be pursued only in a clear-cut logi-
cal fashion. This belief is perpetuated by the way mathematics is presented in most text-
books. Often it is reduced to a series of definitions, methods to solve various types of
problems, and theorems. These theorems are justified by means of proofs and deductive
reasoning. I do not mean to minimize the importance of proof in mathematics, for it is
the very thing that gives mathematics its strength. But the power of the imagination is
every bit as important as the power of deductive reasoning. As the mathematician
Augustus De Morgan once said, “The power of mathematical invention is not reasoning
but imagination.”
Hints for Success
Mathematics is different from other subjects. One topic builds upon another, and you
need to make sure that you understand each topic before progressing to the next one.
You must make a commitment to attend each class. Obviously, unforeseen circum-
stances can come up, but you must plan to attend class regularly. Pay attention to what
G 1 J 5
F 1 H 5 N
B 1 C 5 E
A 1 C 5 D
A 1 B 5 C
MATH
is not a
spectator
sport
P
A
C
I
FI
C
G
R
O
V
E
,
CA
L
I
F
O
R
NI
A
B
R
O
O
K
S
/
C
O
L
E
P
U
B
L
I
SH
IN
G
C
O
M
P
A
N
Y
Doug Menuez/Photodisc/Getty Images
?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

your teacher says and does, and take notes. If you must miss class, write an outline of the
text corresponding to the missed material, including working out each text example on
your notebook paper.
You must make a commitment to daily work. Do not expect to save up and do your
mathematics work once or twice a week. It will take a daily commitment on your part,
and you will find mathematics difficult if you try to “get it done” in spurts. You could not
expect to become proficient in tennis, soccer, or playing the piano by practicing once a
week, and the same is true of mathematics. Try to schedule a regular time to study mathe-
matics each day.
Read the text carefully. Many students expect to get through a mathematics course
by beginning with the homework problems, then reading some examples, and reading the
text only as a desperate attempt to find an answer. This procedure is backward; do your
homework only after reading the text.
Writing Mathematics
The fundamental objective of education has always been to prepare students for life.
A measure of your success with this book is a measure of its usefulness to you in your
life. What are the basics for your knowledge “in life”? In this information age with 
access to a world of knowledge on the Internet, we still would respond by saying that
the basics remain “reading, ’riting, and ’rithmetic.” As you progress through the mate-
rial in this book, we will give you opportunities to read mathematics and to consider
some of the great ideas in the history of civilization, to develop your problem-solving
skills (’rithmetic), and to communicate mathematical ideas to others (’riting). Perhaps
you think of mathematics as “working problems” and “getting answers,” but it is so
much more. Mathematics is a way of thought that includes all three Rs, and to
strengthen your skills you will be asked to communicate your knowledge in written
form.
Journals
To begin building your skills in writing mathematics, you might keep a journal sum-
marizing each day’s work. Keep a record of your feelings and perceptions about what
happened in class. Ask yourself, “How long did the homework take?” “What time of
the day or night did I spend working and studying mathematics?” “What is the most
important idea that I should remember from the day’s lesson?” To help you with your
journals or writing of mathematics, you will find problems in this text designated
“IN YOUR OWN WORDS.” (For example, look at Problems 1–4 of the problem set
at the end of this section.) There are no right answers or wrong answers to this type of
problem, but you are encouraged to look at these for ideas of what you might write in
your journal.
4
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Write in your journal every day.
Include important ideas.
Include new words, ideas, formulas, or concepts.
Include questions that you want to ask later.
If possible, carry your journal with you so you can write in it anytime you
get an idea.
Reasons for Keeping a Journal
It will record ideas you might otherwise forget.
It will keep a record of your progress.
If you have trouble later, it may help you diagnose areas for change or improvement.
It will build your writing skills.
Journal Ideas
Mathematics is one
component of any plan
for liberal education.
Mother of all the sci-
ences, it is a builder of
the imagination, a
weaver of patterns of
sheer thought, an in-
tuitive dreamer, a
poet. The study of
mathematics cannot
be replaced by any
other activity...
American Mathematical Monthly, Volume 56, 1949, p. 19.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.1
Problem Solving
5
Individual Research
At the end of each chapter you will find problems requiring some library research. I hope
that as you progress through the course you will find one or more topics that interest you
so much that you will want to do additional reading on that topic, even if it is not assigned.
Your instructor may assign one or more of these as term papers. One of the best ways
for you to become aware of all the books and periodicals that are available is to log onto
the Internet, or visit the library to research specific topics.
Preparing a mathematics paper or project can give you interesting and worthwhile
experiences. In preparing a paper or project, you will get experience in using resources to
find information, in doing independent work, in organizing your presentation, and in
communicating ideas orally, in writing, and in visual demonstrations. You will broaden
your background in mathematics and encounter new mathematical topics that you never
before knew existed. In setting up an exhibit you will experience the satisfaction of
demonstrating what you have accomplished. It may be a way of satisfying your curiosity
and your desire to be creative. It is an opportunity for developing originality, craftsman-
ship, and new mathematical understandings. If you are requested to do some individual
research problems, here are some suggestions.
1. Select a topic that has interest potential. Do not do a project on a topic that does not
interest you. Suggestions are given on the Web at www.mathnature.com.
2. Find as much information about the topic as possible. Many of the Individual
Research problems have one or two references to get you started. In addition, check
the following sources:
Periodicals: The Mathematics Teacher, Teaching Children Mathematics (formerly
Arithmetic Teacher), and Scientific American; each of these has its own cumulative
index; also check the Reader’s Guide.
Source books: The World of Mathematics by James R. Newman is a gold mine of
ideas. Mathematics, a Time-Life book by David Bergamini, may provide you with
many ideas. Encyclopedias can be consulted after you have some project ideas;
however, I do not have in mind that the term project necessarily be a term paper.
Internet: Use one or more search engines on the Internet for information on a par-
ticular topic. The more specific you can be in describing what you are looking for,
the better the engine will be able to find material on your topic. The most widely
used search engine is Google, but there are others that you might use. You may also
check the Web address for this book to find specific computer links:
www.mathnature.com 
If you do not have a computer or a modem, then you may need to visit your college
or local library for access to this research information.
3. Prepare and organize your material into a concise, interesting report. Include draw-
ings in color, pictures, applications, and examples to get the reader’s attention and add
meaning to your report.
4. Build an exhibit that will tell the story of your topic. Remember the science projects in
high school? That type of presentation might be appropriate. Use models, applications,
and charts that lend variety. Give your paper or exhibit a catchy, descriptive title.
5. A term project cannot be done in one or two evenings.
Group Research
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and being able to work
with others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill to learn. At the end of
each chapter is a list of suggested group projects, and you are encouraged to work with
three or four others to submit a single report.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Guidelines for Problem Solving
We begin this study of problem solving by looking at the process of problem solving. As
a mathematics teacher, I often hear the comment, “I can do mathematics, but I can’t solve
word problems.” There is a great fear and avoidance of “real-life” problems because they
do not fit into the same mold as the “examples in the book.” Few practical problems from
everyday life come in the same form as those you study in school.
To compound the difficulty, learning to solve problems takes time. All too often, the
mathematics curriculum is so packed with content that the real process of problem solv-
ing is slighted and, because of time limitations, becomes an exercise in mimicking the in-
structor’s steps instead of developing into an approach that can be used long after the final
examination is over.
Before we build problem-solving skills, it is necessary to build certain prerequisite
skills necessary for problem solving. It is my goal to develop your skills in the mechanics
of mathematics, in understanding the important concepts, and finally in applying those
skills to solve a new type of problem. I have segregated the problems in this book to help
you build these different skills:
IN YOUR OWN WORDS
This type of problem asks you to discuss or rephrase main
ideas or procedures using your own words.
Level 1 Problems
These are mechanical and drill problems, and are directly
related to an example in the book.
Level 2 Problems
These problems require an understanding of the concepts
and are loosely related to an example in the book.
Level 3 Problems
These problems are extensions of the examples, but gener-
ally do not have corresponding examples.
Problem Solving
These require problem-solving skills or original thinking
and generally do not have direct examples in the book.
These should be considered Level 3 problems.
Research Problems
These problems require Internet research or library work.
Most are intended for individual research but a few are
group research projects. You will find these problems for re-
search in the chapter summary and at the Web address for
this book:
6
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Historical
George Pólya
(1887–1985)
Born in Hungary, Pólya attended
the universities of Budapest,
Vienna, Göttingen, and Paris. He
was a professor of mathematics at
Stanford University. Pólya’s
research and winning personality
earned him a place of honor not
only among mathematicians, but
among students and teachers as
well. His discoveries spanned an
impressive range of mathematics,
real and complex analysis, proba-
bility, combinatorics, number the-
ory, and geometry. Pólya’s How to
Solve It has been translated into
15 languages. His books have a
clarity and elegance seldom seen
in mathematics, making them a
joy to read. For example, here is
his explanation of why he was a
mathematician: “It is a little short-
ened but not quite wrong to say: 
I thought I am not good enough
for physics and I am too good for
philosophy. Mathematics is in
between.”
NOTE
Karl Smith library
www.mathnature.com 
Step 1
Understand the problem. Ask questions, experiment, or otherwise rephrase
the question in your own words.
Step 2 Devise a plan. Find the connection between the data and the unknown.
Look for patterns, relate to a previously solved problem or a known
formula, or simplify the given information to give you an easier problem.
Step 3
Carry out the plan. Check the steps as you go.
Step 4 Look back. Examine the solution obtained. In other words, check your
answer.
Guidelines for Problem Solving
The model for problem solving that we will use was first published in 1945 by the
great, charismatic mathematician George Pólya. His book How to Solve It (Princeton
University Press, 1973) has become a classic. In Pólya’s book you will find this problem-
solving model as well as a treasure trove of strategy, know-how, rules of thumb, good ad-
vice, anecdotes, history, and problems at all levels of mathematics. His problem-solving
model is as follows.
Author’s
Pay attention to boxes that
look like this—they are used
to tell you about important
procedures that are used
throughout the book.
NOTE
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Pólya’s original statement of this procedure is reprinted in the following box.*
Section 1.1
Problem Solving
7
*This is taken word for word as it was written by Pólya in 1941. It was printed in How to Solve It (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1973).
Greyhound
Bus Depot
Post
Office
Mission Street
Seventh Street
Howard Street
Sixth Street
Fifth Street
Market Street
Brooks
Hall
State
Building
Old U.S. Mint
Golden Gate Avenue
YMCA
Fulton Street
McAllister Street
Federal
Building
Turk Street
Eddy Street
Ellis Street
O’Farrel Street
Geary Street
Leavenworth Street
Hyde Street
Jones Street
Taylor Street
Post Street
Sutter Street
Bush Street
Pine Street
St. Francis
Hotel
Union
Square
Mason Street
Stockton Street
Powell Street
Macy’s
Grant Avenue
YWCA
A
B
C
D
M
Larkin Street
UNDERSTANDING THE PROBLEM
DEVISING A PLAN
CARRYING OUT THE PLAN
LOOKING BACK
First
You have to understand
the problem.
Second
Find the connection
between the data and
the unknown.  You may
be obliged to consider
auxiliary problems
if an immediate
connection cannot
be found.
Third
Carry out your plan.
Fourth
Examine the solution.
What is the unknown?  What are the data?  What is the condition? Is it possible to satisfy the condition?  
Is the condition sufficient to determine the unknown?  Or is it insufficient?  Or redundant?  Or 
contradictory?
Draw a figure. Introduce a suitable notation.
Separate the various parts of the condition.  Can you write them down?
Have you seen it before?  Or have you seen the same problem in a slightly different form?
Do you know a related problem?  Do you know a theorem that could be useful?
Look at the unknown!  And try to think of a familiar problem having the same or a similar unknown.
Is the problem related to one you have solved before?  Could you use it?
Could you use its result?  Could you use its method?  Should you introduce some auxiliary element in 
order to make its use possible?
Could you restate the problem?  Could you restate it still differently?  Go back to definitions.
If you cannot solve the proposed problem try to solve first some related problem.  Could you imagine a 
more accessible related problem?  A more general problem?  A more special problem?  An analogous 
problem?  Could you solve a part of the problem?  Keep only a part of the condition, drop the other part; 
how far is the unknown then determined, how can it vary?  Could you derive something useful from the 
data?  Could you think of other data appropriate to determine the unknown?  Could you change the 
unknown or the data, or both if necessary, so that the new unknown and the new data are nearer to each 
other?  Did you use all the data?  Did you see the whole condition?  Have you taken into account all 
essential notions involved in the problem?
Carrying out your plan of the solution, check each step.  Can you see clearly that the step is correct?  Can 
you prove that it is correct?  
Can you check the result?  Can you check the argument?
Can you derive the result differently?  Can you see it at a glance?
Let’s apply this procedure for problem solving to the map shown in Figure 1.1; we
refer to this problem as the street problem. Melissa lives at the YWCA (point A) and
works at Macy’s (point B). She usually walks to work. How many different routes can
Melissa take?
FIGURE 1.1 Portion of a map of San Francisco
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Where would you begin with this problem?
Step 1
Understand the Problem. Can you restate it in your own words? Can you trace
out one or two possible paths? What assumptions are reasonable? We assume
that Melissa will not do any backtracking—that is, she always travels toward
her destination. We also assume that she travels along the city streets—she
cannot cut diagonally across a lot or a block.
Step 2
Devise a Plan. Simplify the question asked. Consider the simplified drawing
shown in Figure 1.2.
Step 3
Carry Out the Plan. Count the number of ways it is possible to arrive at each
point, or, as it is sometimes called, a vertex.
Mason St.
Taylor St.
A
B
Sutter St.
Post St.
Geary St.
O’Farrell St.
Stockton St.
Powell St.
FIGURE 1.2 Simplified portion of
Figure 1.1
2
U
S
This means one way to arrive
at this point.
1
A
How many ways to this point? Do you
see why the answer is 2 1 1 5 3 ways?
Remember
, 
no backtracking is allowed,
so you must get here from point V  or
from point T.
This means two ways
of arriving at this point
(from point S or point U ).
1
V
W
T
1
B
2
A
1
1
111
3
1
211
4
1
311
10
614
20
10110
10
416
4
113
3
112
6
313
1
1
FIGURE 1.3 Map with solution
Now fill in all the possibilities on Figure 1.3, as shown by the above procedure.
Step 4
Look Back. Does the answer “20 different routes” make sense? Do you think
you could fill in all of them?
Example
1
Problem solving—from here to there
In how many different ways could Melissa get from the YWCA
(point A) to the St. Francis Hotel (point C in Figure 1.1), using
the method of Figure 1.3?
Solution
Draw a simplified version of Figure 1.3, as shown.
There are 6 different paths.
1
1
1
A
C
Sutter St.
Post St.
Powell St.
1
1
2
6
3
3
Mason St.
Taylor St.
Geary St.
A
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
4
6
4
111
313
311
113
112
211
Problem Solving by Patterns
Let’s formulate a general solution. Consider a map with a starting point A:
In the Sherlock Holmes
mystery The Final Solution,
Moriarty is a mathematician
who wrote a treatise on
Pascal's triangle.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.1
Problem Solving
9
Right Diagonals
Left Diagonals
Rows
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
4
6
4
5
10
10
5
6
15
20
6
15
7
7
21
35
35
21
8
28
56
70
56
28
8
9
9
36
36
84
126
126
84
10
10
45
45
120
120
210
210
252
11
11
55
55
165
165
330
330
462
462
12
12
66
66
220
220
495
495
792
792
924
13
13
78
78
286
286
715
715 1287
1287
1716
1716
14
14
91
91
364
364
1001 2002 3003 3432 3003 2002 1001
15
15
105
105
455
455
1365
1365
3003
3003 5005
5005
6435
6435
Each row begins with
a one and ends with a one.
EXAMPLE: Add numbers above
(364 1 91) to obtain additional numbers.
Do you see the pattern for building this figure? Each new row is found by adding the two
previous numbers, as shown by the arrows. This pattern is known as Pascal’s triangle. In
Figure 1.4 the rows and diagonals are numbered for easy reference.
Dale Seymour Publications, Palo Alto, CA
www.mathnature.com 
There is an online interactive
version of Pascal’s triangle.
FIGURE 1.4 Pascal’s triangle
How does this pattern apply to Melissa’s trip from the YWCA to Macy’s? It is
3 blocks down and 3 blocks over. Look at Figure 1.4 and count out these blocks, as shown
in Figure 1.5.
3 OVER
START HERE
Number of paths
from YWCA to Macy's
1
3 DOWN
1
1
2
1
3
3
1
1
6
4
1
5
10
5
1
1
6
15
15
6
1
1
1
1
4
10
20
FIGURE 1.5 Using Pascal’s triangle to solve the street problem
Historical
Blaise Pascal
(1623–1662)
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Described as “the greatest ‘might-have-been’ in the history of mathematics,” Pascal was a person 
of frail health, and because he needed to conserve his energy, he was forbidden to study mathemat-
ics. This aroused his curiosity and forced him to acquire most of his knowledge of the subject by
himself. At 18, he had invented one of the first calculating machines. However, at 27, because of
his health, he promised God that he would abandon mathematics and spend his time in religious
study. Three years later he broke this promise and wrote Traite du triangle arithmétique, in which he
investigated what we today call Pascal’s triangle. The very next year he was almost killed when his
runaway horse jumped an embankment. He took this to be a sign of God’s displeasure with him and
again gave up mathematics—this time permanently.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

There are 52 paths from point A to point M (if, as usual, we do not allow backtracking).
10
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Sixth
Fifth Street
Market Street
Old U.S. Mint
Turk Street
Eddy Street
Ellis Street
O’Farrel Street
Geary Street
Taylor Street
Post Street
St. Francis
Hotel
Union
Square
Mason Street
Stockton Street
Powell Street
Macy’s
YWCA
A
M
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
6
3
4 7
13
5
25
6
7
12
18 43
50
51
52
We see that there are 120 paths.
Pascal’s triangle applies to the street problem only if the streets are rectangular. If the
map shows irregularities (for example, diagonal streets or obstructions), then you must
revert back to numbering the vertices.
Example
3
Travel with irregular paths
In how many different ways could Melissa get from the YWCA (point A) to the Old
U.S. Mint (point M)?
Solution
If the streets are irregular or if there are obstructions, you cannot use
Pascal’s triangle, but you can still count the blocks in the same fashion, as shown in the
figure.
Historical
The title page of an arithmetic
book by Petrus Apianus in 1527 
is reproduced above. It was the
first time Pascal’s triangle
appeared in print.
NOTE
Example
2
Pascal’s triangle to track paths
In how many different ways could Melissa get from the YWCA (point A in Figure 1.1)
to the YMCA (point D)?
Solution
Look at Figure 1.1; from point A to point D is 7 blocks down and 3 blocks
left. Use Figure 1.4 as follows:
0
1
2
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
4
6
4
5
10
10
5
6
15
20
6
15
7
7
21
35
35
21
8
28
56
70
56
28
8
9
9
36
36
84
126
126
84
10
10
45
45
120
120
210
210
252
11
11
55
55
165
165
330
330
462
462
Right Diagonals
Left Diagonals
Rows
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
7 BLOCKS DOWN
3 OVER
START
Bettmann/CORBIS
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.1
Problem Solving
11
No. of chickens
No. of cows
No. of heads
No. of feet
0
13
13
52
Do you see why we started here? The problem says we must have 13 heads. There are
other possible starting places (13 chickens and 0 cows, for example), but an important
aspect of problem solving is to start with some plan.
No. of chickens
No. of cows
No. of heads
No. of feet
1
12
13
50
2
11
13
48
3
10
13
46
4
9
13
44
Problem solving is a difficult task to master, and you are not expected to master it
after one section of this book (or even after several chapters of this book). However, you
must make building your problem-solving skills an ongoing process. One of the most
important aspects of problem solving is to relate new problems to old problems. The
problem-solving techniques outlined here should be applied when you are faced with a
new problem. When you are faced with a problem similar to one you have already
worked, you can apply previously developed techniques (as we did in Examples 1–3).
Now, because Example 4 seems to be a new type of problem, we again apply the guide-
lines for problem solving.
Example
4
Cows and chickens
A jokester tells you that he has a group of cows and chickens and that 
he counted 13 heads and 36 feet. How many cows and chickens does he have?
Solution
Let’s use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines.
Understand the Problem. A good way to make sure you understand a problem is to
attempt to phrase it in a simpler setting:
one chicken and one cow:
2 heads and 6 feet (chickens have two feet; cows
have four)
two chickens and one cow:
3 heads and 8 feet
one chicken and two cows:
3 heads and 10 feet
Devise a Plan. How you organize the material is often important in problem solving.
Let’s organize the information into a table:
Pólya’s 
Method
Carry Out the Plan. Now, look for patterns. Do you see that as the number of cows
decreases by one and the number of chickens increases by one, the number of feet must
decrease by two? Does this make sense to you? Remember, step 1 requires that you not
just push numbers around, but that you understand what you are doing. Since we need
36 feet for the solution to this problem, we see
so the number of chickens must increase by an additional four. The answer is 8 chick-
ens and 5 cows.
Look Back.
44 2 36 5 8
No. of chickens
No. of cows
No. of heads
No. of feet
8
5
13
36
Check: 8 chickens have 16 feet and 5 cows have 20 feet, so the total number of heads is
and the number of feet is 36.
8 1 5 5 13,
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Example
5
Number of birth orders
If a family has 5 children, in how many different birth orders could the
parents have a 3-boy, 2-girl family?
Solution
Understand the Problem. Part of understanding the problem might involve estimation.
For example, if a family has 1 child, there are 2 possible orders (B or G). If a family has
2 children, there are 4 orders (BB, BG, GB, GG); for 3 children, 8 orders; for 4 children,
16 orders; and for 5 children, a total of 32 orders. This means, for example, that an
answer of 140 possible orders is an unreasonable answer.
Devise a Plan. You might begin by enumeration:
BBBGG, BBGBG, BBGGB, . . .
This would seem to be too tedious. Instead, rewrite this as a simpler problem and look
for a pattern.
1 child:
2 children:
BG
GB
3 children:
BBG
BGB
GBB
BGG
BGG
GGB
GGG
Look at the possibilities:
1 child
1B
1G
2 children
1BB
2
1GG
c
ways for 1 boy and 1 girl
3 children 1BBB
3
3
1GGG
Look familiar? 
c
c
ways for 1 boy and 2 girls
ways for 2 boys and 1 girl
Look at Pascal’s triangle in Figure 1.4; for 5 children, look at row 5.
Carry Out the Plan.
1
5
10
10
5
1
c
c
c
c
c
c
4 boys and
3 boys and
2 boys and
1 boy and
5 boys
1 girl
2 girls
3 girls
4 girls
5 girls
The family could have 3 boys and 2 girls in a total of 10 ways.
Look Back. We predicted that there are a total of 32 ways a family could have 5 children;
let’s sum the number of possibilities we found in carrying out the plan to see if it totals 32:
1 1 5 1 10 1 10 1 5 1 1 5 32
d one way
BBB d one way
GG d one way
G d one way
BB d one way
B d one way
Pólya’s 
Method
1424
43
142443
1243
d two ways
d three ways
d three ways
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.1
Problem Solving
13
Example
6
Birthday dilemma
“I’m nine years old,” says Adam.
“I’m ten years old,” says Eve.
“My tenth birthday is tomorrow,” says Adam.
“My tenth birthday was yesterday,” says Eve.
“But I’m older than Eve,” says Adam.
How is this possible if both children are telling the truth?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. What do we mean by the words of the problem? A birthday is
the celebration of the day of one’s birth. Is a person’s age always the same as the num-
ber of birthdays?
Devise a Plan. The only time the number of birthdays is different from the person’s age
is when we are dealing with a leap year. Let’s suppose that the day of this conversation
is in a leap year on February 29.
Carry Out the Plan. Eve was born ten years ago (a nonleap year) on February 28 and
Adam was born ten years ago on March 1. But if someone is born on March 1 then that
person is younger than someone born on February 28, right? Not necessarily! Suppose
Adam was born in New York City just after midnight on March 1 and that Eve was born
before 9:00 P.M in Los Angeles on February 28.
Look Back. Since Adam was born before 9:00 P.M on February 28, he is older than Eve,
even though his birthday is on March 1.
Pólya’s 
Method
Example
7
Meet for dinner
Nick and Marsha are driving from Santa Rosa, CA, to Los Angeles, a 
distance of 460 miles. They leave at 11:00 A.M. and average 50 mph. On the other hand,
Mary and Dan leave at 1:00 P.M in Dan’s sports car. Who is closer to Los Angeles when
they meet for dinner in San Luis Obispo at 5:00 P.M.?
Solution
Understand the Problem. If they are sitting in the same restaurant, then they are all the
same distance from Los Angeles.
Pólya’s 
Method
The following example illustrates the necessity of carefully reading the question.
The last example of this section illustrates that problem solving may require that you
change the conceptual mode.
Example
8
Pascal’s triangle—first time in print
If you have been reading the historical notes in the margins, you may have noticed that
Blaise Pascal was born in 1623 and died in 1662. You may also have noticed that the first
time Pascal’s triangle appeared in print was in 1527. How can this be?
In this book, we are concerned about the thought process and not just typical
“manipulative” mathematics. Using common sense is part of that thought process, and the
following example illustrates how you can use common sense to analyze a given situation.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
It was a reviewer of this book who brought this apparent discrepancy to my
attention. However, the facts are all correct. How could Pascal’s triangle have been in
print almost 100 years before he was born? The fact is, the number pattern we call
Pascal’s triangle is named after Pascal, but was not discovered by Pascal. This number
pattern seems to have been discovered several times, by Johann Scheubel in the 16th
century and by the Chinese mathematician Nakone Genjun; and recent research has
traced the triangle pattern as far back as Omar Khayyám (1048–1122).
“Wait!” you exclaim. “How was I to answer the question in Example 8—I don’t
know all those facts about the triangle.” You are not expected to know these facts, but you
are expected to begin to think critically about the information you are given and the as-
sumptions you are making. It was never stated that Blaise Pascal was the first to think of
or publish Pascal’s triangle!
14
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
In the text it was stated that “the
most important prerequisite for this course is an openness to
try out new ideas—a willingness to experience the suggested
activities rather than to sit on the sideline as a spectator.” Do
you agree or disagree that this is the most important
prerequisite? Discuss.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do you thin the primary goal of
mathematics education should be? What do you think it is in
the United States? Discuss the differences between what it is
and what you think it should be.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
In the chapter overview (did
you read it?), it was pointed out that this book was written
for people who think they don’t like mathematics, or
people who think they can’t work math problems, or
people who think they are never going to use math. Do
any of those descriptions apply to you or to someone you
know? Discuss.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
At the beginning of this section,
three hints for success were listed. Discuss each of these from
your perspective. Are there any other hints that you might add
to this list?
5. Describe the location of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . . in
Pascal’s triangle.
6. Describe the location of the numbers 1, 4, 10, 20, 35, . . . in
Pascal’s triangle.
7. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
In Example 2, the solution was 
found by going 7 blocks down and 3 blocks over. Could the
solution also have been obtained by going 3 blocks over 
and 7 blocks down? Would this Pascal’s triangle solution 
end up in a different location? Describe a property of Pascal’s
triangle that is relevant to an answer for this
question.
8.
a. If a family has 5 children, in how many ways could the
parents have 2 boys and 3 girls?
b. If a family has 6 children, in how many ways could the
parents have 3 boys and 3 girls?
9. a. If a family has 7 children, in how many ways could the
parents have 4 boys and 3 girls?
b. If a family has 8 children, in how many ways could the
parents have 3 boys and 5 girls?
In Problems 10–13, what is the number of direct routes from point
A to point B?
10.
11.
12.
A
B
A
B
A
B
Problem Set 1.1
© Tony Freeman/PhotoEdit
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13.
Use the map in Figure 1.6 to determine the number of different
paths from point A to the point indicated in Problems 14–17.
Remember, no backtracking is allowed.
A
B
Section 1.1
Problem Solving
15
Seventh Street
Greyhound
Bus Depot
Post
Office
Mission Street
Howard Street
Sixth Street
Fifth Street
Market Street
Brooks
Hall
State
Building
Old U.S. Mint
Golden Gate Avenue
YMCA
Fulton Street
McAllister Street
Federal
Building
Turk Street
Eddy Street
Ellis Street
O’Farrel Street
Geary Street
Leavenworth Street
Hyde Street
Larkin Street
Jones Street
Taylor Street
Post Street
Sutter Street
Bush Street
Pine Street
St. Francis
Hotel
Union
Square
Mason Street
Stockton Street
Powell Street
Macy’s
Grant Avenue
YWCA
Kearny Street
Polk Street
Van Ness Avenue
A
I
E
G
K
L
J
F
H
FIGURE 1.6 Map of a portion of San Francisco
14. E
15. F
16. G
17. H
Level  2
18. If an island’s only residents are penguins and bears, 
and if there are 16 heads and 34 feet on the island,
how many penguins and how many bears are on the
island?
19. Below are listed three problems. Do not solve these problems;
simply tell which one you think is most like Problem 18.
a. A penguin in a tub weighs 8 lb, and a bear in a tub weighs
800 lb. If the penguin and the bear together weigh 802 lb,
how much does the tub weigh?
b. A bottle and a cork cost $1.10, and the bottle is a dollar
more than the cork. How much does the cork cost?
c. Bob has 15 roses and 22 carnations. Carol has twice as
many roses and half as many carnations. How many flowers
does Carol have?
20. Ten full crates of walnuts weigh 410 pounds, whereas an
empty crate weighs 10 pounds. How much do the walnuts
alone weigh?
21. There are three separate, equal-size boxes, and inside each box
there are two separate small boxes, and inside each of the
small boxes there are three even smaller boxes. How many
boxes are there all together?
22. Jerry’s mother has three children. The oldest is a boy named
Harry, who has brown eyes. Everyone says he is a math
whiz. The next younger is a girl named Henrietta. Everyone
calls her Mary because she hates her name. The youngest
child has green eyes and can wiggle his ears. What is his
first name?
23. A deaf-mute walks into a stationery store and wants to
purchase a pencil sharpener. To communicate this need,
the customer pantomimes by sticking a finger in one ear and
rotating the other hand around the other ear. The very next
customer is a blind person who needs a pair of scissors.
How should this customer communicate this idea to the
clerk?
24. If you expect to get 50,000 miles on each tire from a set of five
tires (four and one spare), how should you rotate the tires so
that each tire gets the same amount of wear, and how far can
you drive before buying a new set of tires?
25. a. What is the sum of the numbers in row 1 of Pascal’s
triangle?
b. What is the sum of the numbers in row 2 of Pascal’s 
triangle?
c. What is the sum of the numbers in row 3 of Pascal’s 
triangle?
d. What is the sum of the numbers in row 4 of
Pascal’s triangle?
26. What is the sum of the numbers in row n of Pascal’s
triangle?
Use the map in Figure 1.6 to determine the number of different
paths from point A to the point indicated in Problems 27–30.
Remember, no backtracking is allowed.
27. J
28. I
29. L
30. K
Problems 31–44 are not typical math problems but are problems
that require only common sense (and sometimes creative thinking).
31. How many 3-cent stamps are there in a dozen?
32. Which weighs more—a ton of coal or a ton of feathers?
33. If you take 7 cards from a deck of 52 cards, how many cards
do you have?
34. Oak Park cemetery in Oak Park, New Jersey, will not bury any-
one living west of the Mississippi. Why?
35. If posts are spaced 10 feet apart, how many posts are needed
for 100 feet of straight-line fence?
36. At six o’clock the grandfather clock struck 6 times. If it was
30 seconds between the first and last strokes, how long will it
take the same clock to strike noon?
37. A person arrives at home just in time to hear one chime from
the grandfather clock. A half-hour later it strikes once. Another
half-hour later it chimes once. Still another half-hour later it
chimes once. What time did the person arrive home?
38. Two girls were born on the same day of the same month of the
same year to the same parents, but they are not twins. Explain
how this is possible.
39. How many outs are there in a baseball game that lasts the full 
9 innings?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40. Two U.S. coins total $0.30, yet one of these coins is not
a nickel. What are the coins?
41. Two volumes of Newman’s The World of Mathematics stand
side by side, in order, on a shelf. A bookworm starts at page i 
of Volume I and bores its way in a straight line to the last page
of Volume II. Each cover is 2 mm thick, and the first volume is 
as thick as the second volume. The first volume is 38 mm 
thick without its cover. How far does the bookworm travel?
17
19
16
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
remember how to do long division. Discuss your alternatives to
come up with the answer to your problem.
47. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
You have 10 items in your grocery
cart. Six people are waiting in the express lane (10 items or
less); one person is waiting in the first checkout stand and two
people are waiting in another checkout stand. The other
checkout stands are closed. What additional information do
you need in order to decide which lane to enter?
48. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
You drive up to your bank and see
five cars in front of you waiting for two lanes of the drive-
through banking services. What additional information do you
need in order to decide whether to drive through or park your
car and enter the bank to do your banking?
49. A boy cyclist and a girl cyclist are 10 miles apart and pedaling
toward each other. The boy’s rate is 6 miles per hour, and the
girl’s rate is 4 miles per hour. There is also a friendly fly
zooming continuously back and forth from one bike to the
other. If the fly’s rate is 20 miles per hour, by the time the
cyclists reach each other, how far does the fly fly?
43. Can you place ten lumps of sugar in three empty cups so that
there is an odd number of lumps in each cup?
44. Six glasses are standing in a row. The first three are
empty, and the last three are full of water. By handling and
moving only one glass, it is possible to change this arrange-
ment so that no empty glass is next to another empty one and
no full glass is next to another full glass. How can this be
done?
Level  3
45. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Suppose you have a long list of
numbers to add, and you have misplaced your calculator.
Discuss the different approaches that could be used for adding
this column of numbers.
46. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
You are faced with a long division
problem, and you have misplaced your calculator. You do not
42. A farmer has to get a fox, a goose, and a bag of corn across a
river in a boat that is large enough only for him and one of
these three items. If he leaves the fox alone with the goose, the
fox will eat the goose. If he leaves the goose alone with the
corn, the goose will eat the corn. How does he get all the items
across the river?
VOL.
I
The World of Mathematics
VOL.
II
The World of Mathematics
A friendly fly
10 miles
50. Two race cars face each other on a single 30-mile track, and
each is moving at 60 mph. A fly on the front of one car flies
back and forth on a zigzagging path between the cars until they
meet. If the fly travels at 25 mph, how far will it have traveled
when the cars collide?
51. Alex, Beverly, and Cal live on the same straight road. Alex
lives 10 miles from Beverly and Cal lives 2 miles from
Beverly. How far does Alex live from Cal?
52. In a different language, liro cas means “red tomato.” The
meaning of dum cas dan is “big red barn” and xer dan means
“big horse.” What are the words for “red barn” in this
language?
53. Assume that the first “gh” sound in ghghgh is pronounced
as in hiccough, the second “gh” as in Edinburgh, and the
third “gh” as in laugh. How should the word ghghgh be
pronounced?
54. Write down a three-digit number. Write the number in reverse
order. Subtract the smaller of the two numbers from the larger
to obtain a new number. Write down the new number. Reverse
the digits again, but add the numbers this time. Complete this
process for another three-digit number. Do you notice a
pattern, and does your pattern work for all three-digit
numbers?
55. Start with a common fraction between 0 and 1. Form a new
fraction, using the following rules: New denominator: Add
the numerator and denominator of the original fraction.
New numerator: Add the new denominator to the original
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

numerator. Write the new fraction and use a calculator to find a
decimal equivalent to four decimal places. Repeat these steps
again, this time calling the new fraction the original. Continue
the process until a pattern appears about the decimal equivalent.
What is the decimal equivalent (correct to two decimal
places)?
56. The number 6 has four divisors—namely, 1, 2, 3, and 6.
List all numbers less than 20 that have exactly four
divisors.
Problem Solving  3
Each section of the book has one or more problems designated by
“Problem Solving.” These problems may require additional insight,
information, or effort to solve. True problem-solving ability comes
from solving problems that “are not like the examples” but rather
require independent thinking. I hope you will make it a habit to
read these problems and attempt to work those that interest you,
even though they may not be part of your regular class assignment.
57. Consider the routes from A to B and notice that there is now a
barricade blocking the path. Work out a general solution for
the number of paths with a blockade, and then illustrate your
general solution by giving the number of paths for each of the
following street patterns.
a.
b.
c.
58. HISTORICAL QUEST
Thoth, an ancient Egyptian god of
wisdom and learning, has abducted Ahmes, a famous Egypt-
ian scribe, in order to assess his intellectual prowess. Thoth
places Ahmes before a large funnel set in the ground (see
Figure 1.7). It has a circular opening 1,000 ft in diameter, and
its walls are quite slippery. If Ahmes attempts to enter the fun-
nel, he will slip down the wall. At the bottom of the funnel is
a sleep-inducing liquid that will instantly put Ahmes to sleep
for eight hours if he touches it.* Thoth hands Ahmes two
objects: a rope 1,006.28 ft in length and the skull of a chicken.
Thoth says to Ahmes, “If you are able to get to the central
tower and touch it, we will live in harmony for the next
millennium. If not, I will detain you for further testing. Please
note that with each passing hour, I will decrease the rope’s
length by a foot.” How can Ahmes reach the central ankh
tower and touch it?
A
B
A
B
A
B
Section 1.1
Problem Solving
17
*From “The Thoth Maneuver,” by Clifford A. Pickover, Discover, March 1996,
p. 108. Clifford Pickover © 1996. Reprinted with permission of Discover Magazine.
Nenad Jakesevic and Sonja Lamut © 1996. Reprinted with permission of Discover
Magazine.
Pile #1
Remainder of pile #2
goes on top of pile #1.
Pile #2
Show the 7th
card to audience.
59. A magician divides a deck of cards into two equal piles,
counts down from the top of the first pile to the seventh card,
and shows it to the audience without looking at it herself.
These seven cards are replaced faced down in the same order
on top of the first pile. She then picks up the other pile and
deals the top three cards up in a row in front of her. If the first
card is a six, then she starts counting with “six” and counts 
to ten, thus placing four more cards on this pile as shown. 
In turn, the magician does the same for the next two cards. 
If the card is a ten or a face card, then no additional cards 
are added. The remainder of this pile is placed on top of the
first pile.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Image not available due to copyright restrictions

1.2  Inductive and Deductive Reasoning
Studying numerical patterns is one frequently used technique of problem solving.
Magic Squares
A magic square is an arrangement of numbers in the shape of a square with the sums of
each vertical column, each horizontal row, and each diagonal all equal. One of the most
famous ones appeared in a 1514 engraving Melancholia by Dürer, as shown in Figure 1.8.
(Notice that the date appears in the magic square).
Next, the magician adds the values of the three face-up cards
(
for this illustration) and counts down in the first
deck this number of cards. That card is the card that was origi-
nally shown to the audience. Explain why this trick works.
60. A very magical teacher had a student select a two-digit number
between 50 and 100 and write it on the board out of view of
the instructor. Next, the student was asked to add 76 to the
6 1 10 1 7
number, producing a three-digit sum. If the digit in the
hundreds place is added to the remaining two-digit number and
this result is subtracted from the original number, the answer is
23, which was predicted by the instructor. How did the instruc-
tor know the answer would be 23? Note: This problem is dedi-
cated to my friend Bill Leonard of Cal State, Fullerton. His
favorite number is 23.
Historical
Burstein Collection/CORBIS
Burstein Collection/CORBIS
NOTE
Magic squares can be constructed using the first 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, and 81 consec-
utive numbers. You may want to try some of them. One with the first 25 numbers is
shown here.
23
12
1
20
9
4
18
7
21
15
10
24
13
2
16
11
5
19
8
22
17
6
25
14
3
FIGURE 1.8 Early magic squares
18
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Melancholia by Albrecht Dürer
Detail of Melancholia
IXOHOXI
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.2
Inductive and Deductive Reasoning
19
There are formal methods for finding magic squares, but we will not describe them here.
Figure 1.8 shows a rather interesting magic square called IXOHOXI because it is a magic
square when it is turned upside down and also when it is reflected in a mirror. You are asked
to find another magic square that can be turned upside down and is still a magic square.
Let’s consider some other simple patterns.
A Pattern of Nines
A very familiar pattern is found in the ordinary “times tables.” By pointing out patterns,
teachers can make it easier for children to learn some of their multiplication tables. For
example, consider the multiplication table for 9s:
What patterns do you notice? You should be able to see many number relationships by
looking at the totals. For example, notice that the sum of the digits to the right of the
equality is 9 in all the examples (
and so on). Will this
always be the case for multiplication by 9? (Consider 
The sum of the dig-
its is 18. However, notice the result if you add the digits of 18.) Do you see any other pat-
terns? Can you explain why they “work”? This pattern of adding after multiplying by
9 generates a sequence of numbers: 
. . . . We call this the nine pattern. The two
number tricks described in the news clip in the margin use this nine pattern.
9, 9, 9,
11 3 9 5 99.
1 1 8 5 9, 2 1 7 5 9, 3 1 6 5 9,
 10 3 9 5 90
 9 3 9 5 81
 8 3 9 5 72
 7 3 9 5 63
 6 3 9 5 54
 5 3 9 5 45
 4 3 9 5 36
 3 3 9 5 27
 2 3 9 5 18
 1 3 9 5 9
Example
1
Eight pattern
Find the eight pattern.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. What do we mean by the eight pattern? Do you understand
the example for the nine pattern?
Devise a Plan. We will carry out the multiplications of successive counting numbers by
8 and if there is more than a single-digit answer, we add the digits.* What we are look-
ing for is a pattern for these single-digit numerals (shown in blue).
Carry Out the Plan.
1  8  8,
2  8  16,
3  8  24,
4  8  32,
5  8  40, . . .
T
T
T
T
T
8
1  6  7
2  4  6
3  2  5
4  0  4
Continue with some additional terms:
Pólya’s 
Method
*Counting numbers are the numbers we use for counting—namely, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . . Sometimes they are also called natural
numbers. The integers are the counting numbers, their opposites, and 0, namely, . . . , 3, 2, 1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . . We assume
a knowledge of these numbers.
6
6
6
6
and
and
and
and
1 1 1 5 2
5 1 6 5 11
7 3 8 5 56
1 1 2 5 3
4 1 8 5 12
6 3 8 5 48
Nine is one of the most
fascinating of all numbers.
Here are two interesting
tricks that involve the
number nine.  You need a 
calculator for these.
      Mix up the serial
number on a dollar bill.  You
now have two numbers, the
original serial number and
the mixed-up one.  Subtract
the smaller from the larger.
If you add the digits of the
answer, you will obtain a 9 or
a number larger than 9; if it
is larger than 9, add the
digits of this answer again.
Repeat the process until you
obtain a single digit as with
the nine pattern.  That digit
will always be 9.
      Here is another trick.
Using a calculator keyboard
or push-button phone, choose
any three-digit column, row,
or diagonal, and arrange
these digits in any order.
Multiply this number by
another row, column, or
diagonal.  If you repeatedly
add the digits the answer will
always be nine.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Step 1
Perform any operations enclosed in parentheses.
Step 2
Perform multiplications and divisions as they occur by working from
left to right.
Step 3
Perform additions and subtractions as they occur by working from
left to right.
Order of Operations
Thus, the correct result for 
is 11. Also,
5 1 1,234 3 9 5 5 1 11,106 5 11,111
4 1 123 3 9 5 4 1 1,107 5 1,111
3 1 12 3 9 5 3 1 108 5 111
2 1 1 3 9
This is important! Take time
looking at what this says.
and
and
and
and
We now see the eight pattern: 
. . . .
Look Back. Let’s do more than check the arithmetic, since this pattern seems clear. The
problem seems to be asking whether we understand the concept of a nine pattern or an
eight pattern. Verify that the seven pattern is 7, 5, 3, 1, 8, 6, 4, 2, 9, 7, 5, 3, 1, . . . .
Order of Operations
Complicated arithmetic problems can sometimes be solved by using patterns. Given a
difficult problem, a problem solver will often try to solve a simpler, but similar, problem.
The second suggestion for solving using Pólya’s problem-solving procedure stated,
“If you cannot solve the proposed problem, look around for an appropriate related
problem (a simpler one, if possible).” For example, suppose we wish to compute the fol-
lowing number:
Instead of doing a lot of arithmetic, let’s study the following pattern:
Do you see the next entry in this pattern? Do you see that if we continue the pattern we
will eventually reach the desired expression of 
Using Pólya’s
strategy, we begin by working these easier problems. Thus, we begin with 
There is a possibility of ambiguity in calculating this number:
Left to right
Multiplication first
Although either of these might be acceptable in certain situations, it is not acceptable to
get two different answers to the same problem. We therefore agree to do a problem like
this by multiplying first. If we wish to change this order, we use parentheses, as in
We summarize with a procedure known as the order-of-operations
agreement.
12 1 12 3 9 5 27.
2 1 1 3 9 5 2 1 9 5 11
2 1 1 3 9 5 3 3 9 5 27
2 1 1 3 9.
10 1 123,456,789 3 9?
4 1 123 3 9
3 1 12 3 9
2 1 1 3 9
10 1 123,456,789 3 9
8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 9, 8, 7, 6,
8 1 0 5 8
10 3 8 5 80
7 1 2 5 9
9 3 8 5 72
1 1 0 5 1
6 1 4 5 10
8 3 8 5 64
Imagination is a 
sort of faint
perception.
Aristotle
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Do you see a pattern? If so, then make a prediction about the desired result.
If you do not see a pattern, continue with this pattern to see more terms, or go back
and try another pattern. For this example, we predict
The most difficult part of this type of problem solving is coming up with a correct pat-
tern. For this example, you might guess that
leads to 
Calculating, we find
If you begin a pattern and it does not lead to a pattern of answers, then you need to
remember that part of Pólya’s problem-solving procedure is to work both backward and
forward. Be willing to give up one pattern and begin another.
We also point out that the patterns you find are not necessarily unique. One last time,
we try a pattern for 
:
We do see a pattern here (although not quite as easily as the one we found with the
first pattern for this example):
Inductive Reasoning
The type of reasoning used here and in the first sections of this book—first observing
patterns and then predicting answers for more complicated problems—is called 
inductive reasoning. It is a very important method of thought and is sometimes called
the scientific method. It involves reasoning from particular facts or individual cases to
a general conjecture—a statement you think may be true. That is, a generalization is
made on the basis of some observed occurrences. The more individual occurrences we
observe, the better able we are to make a correct generalization. Peter in the B.C. car-
toon makes the mistake of generalizing on the basis of a single observation.
10 1 123,456,789 3 9 5 1,111,111,111
(
10 1 1,234 3 9 5 10 1 11,106 5 11,116
10 1 123 3 9 5 10 1 1,107 5 1,117
10 1 12 3 9 5 10 1 108 5 118
10 1 1 3 9 5 10 1 9 5 19
10 1 123,456,789 3 9
5 1 1,234 3 4 5 5 1 4,936 5 4,941
4 1 123 3 3 5 4 1 369 5 373
3 1 12 3 2 5 3 1 24 5 27
2 1 1 3 1 5 2 1 1 5 3
10 1 1123,456,789 3 92.
(
5 1 1,234 3 4
4 1 123 3 3
3 1 12 3 2
2 1 1 3 1
10 1 123,456,789 3 9 5 1,111,111,111
Section 1.2
Inductive and Deductive Reasoning
21
B. C. reprinted by permission of Johnny Hart and Creators Syndicate.
Example
2
Sum of 100 odd numbers
What is the sum of the first 100 consecutive odd numbers?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Understand the Problem. Do you know what the terms mean? Odd numbers are 
1, 3, 5, . . . , and sum indicates addition:
1 1 3 1 5 1 c1 ?
22
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
The first thing you need to understand is
what the last term will be, so you will know
when you have reached 100 consecutive odd
numbers. 
1 + 3 is two terms. 
1 + 3 + 5 is three terms. 
1 + 3 + 5 +7 is four terms.
c
It seems as if the last term is always one less than twice the number of terms. Thus, the
sum of the first 100 consecutive odd numbers is
c
This is one less than 2(100). 
Devise a Plan. The plan we will use is to look for a pattern:
1  1
One term
1  3  4
Sum of two terms
1  3  5  9
Sum of three terms
Do you see a pattern yet? If not, continue:
1  3  5  7  16
1  3  5  7  9  25
Carry Out the Plan. It appears that the sum of 2 terms is 
; of 3 terms, 
; of
4 terms, 
; and so on. The sum of the first 100 consecutive odd numbers is therefore
Looking Back. Does 
seem correct?
The numbers 
and 
from Example 2 are usually written as
and 
. The number 
means 
and is pronounced b squared, and the
number 
means 
and is pronounced b cubed. The process of repeated multiplica-
tion is called exponentiation. Numbers that are multiplied are called factors, so we note
that b2 means we have two factors and one multiplication, where as b3 indicates three
factors (two multiplications).
Deductive Reasoning
Another method of reasoning used in mathematics is called deductive reasoning. This
method of reasoning produces results that are certain within the logical system being de-
veloped. That is, deductive reasoning involves reaching a conclusion by using a formal
structure based on a set of undefined terms and a set of accepted unproved axioms or
premises. For example, consider the following argument:
1. If you read the Times, then you are well informed.
2. You read the Times.
3. Therefore, you are well informed.
Statements 1 and 2 are the premises of the argument; statement 3 is called the conclusion.
If you accept statements 1 and 2 as true, then you must accept statement 3 as true. Such
reasoning is called deductive reasoning; and if the conclusion follows from the premises,
the reasoning is said to be valid.
b # b # b
b3
b # b
b2
1002
22, 32, 42,
100 # 100
2 # 2, 3 # 3, 4 # 4,
100 # 100 5 10,000
100 # 100.
4 # 4
3 # 3
2 # 2
1 1 3 1 5 1 c1 195 1 197 1 199
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Reasoning that is not valid is called invalid reasoning. Logic accepts no conclusions
except those that are inescapable. This is possible because of the strict way in which con-
cepts are defined. Difficulty in simplifying arguments may arise because of their length,
the vagueness of the words used, the literary style, or the possible emotional impact of
the words used.
Consider the following two arguments:
1. If George Washington was assassinated, then he is dead. Therefore, if he is dead, he
was assassinated.
2. If you use heroin, then you first used marijuana. Therefore, if you use marijuana, then
you will use heroin.
Logically, these two arguments are exactly the same, and both are invalid forms of
reasoning. Nearly everyone would agree that the first is invalid, but many people see the
second as valid. The reason lies in the emotional appeal of the words used.
To avoid these difficulties, we look at the form of the arguments and not at the
independent truth or falsity of the statements. One type of logic problem is called a
syllogism. A syllogism has three parts: two premises, or hypotheses, and a conclusion.
The premises give us information from which we form a conclusion. With the syllo-
gism, we are interested in knowing whether the conclusion necessarily follows from the
premises. If it does, it is called a valid syllogism; if not, it is called invalid. Consider
the following examples:
Valid Forms of Reasoning
Invalid Forms of Reasoning
All Chevrolets are automobiles.
Premise
Some people are nice.
All automobiles have four wheels.
Premise
Some people are broke.
All Chevrolets have four wheels.
Conclusion
There are some nice broke people.
All teachers are crazy.
Premise
All dodos are extinct.
Karl Smith is a teacher.
Premise
No dinosaurs are dodos.
Karl Smith is crazy.
Conclusion
Therefore, all dinosaurs are extinct.
To analyze such arguments, we need to have a systematic method of approach. We
will use Euler circles, named after one of the most famous mathematicians in all of math-
ematics, Leonhard Euler.
For two sets p and q, we make the interpretations shown in Figure 1.9.
Section 1.2
Inductive and Deductive Reasoning
23
q
p
x
q
p
q
p
Some p is q.
(x means that intersection is not empty)
No p are q.
Disjoint sets
All p are q.
Subsets
FIGURE 1.9 Euler circles for syllogisms
Deductive reasoning consists of reaching a conclusion by using a formal structure
based on a set of undefined terms and on a set of accepted unproved axioms or
premises. The conclusions are said to be proved and are called theorems.
Deductive Reasoning
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Example
3
Testing for valid arguments
Test the validity of the following arguments.
a. All dictionaries are books.
This is a dictionary.
Therefore, this is a book.
b. If you like potato chips, then you will like Krinkles.
You do not like potato chips.
Therefore, you do not like Krinkles.
Solution
a. Begin by drawing Euler circles showing the first 
premise:
All dictionaries are books.
Let
p: dictionaries
q: books 
For the second premise, we place x (this object) inside the circle of dictionaries
(labeled p). The conclusion, “This object is a book,” cannot be avoided (since x must
be in q), so it is valid.
b. Again, begin by using Euler circles:
If you like potato chips, then you will like Krinkles.
The first premise is the same as
All people who like potato chips like Krinkles.
Let
p: people who like potato chips
q: people who like krinkles
For the second premise, you will place the x (you) outside the circle labeled p. No-
tice that you are not forced to place x into a single region; it could be placed in either
of two places—those labeled 
and 
Since the stated conclusion is not forced, the
argument is not valid.
x2.
x1
p
x
q
p
x1
x2
q
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the nature of inductive and
deductive reasoning.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain what is meant by the seven
pattern.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by order of
operations?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the scientific
method?
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain inductive reasoning. Give an
original example of an occasion when you have used inductive
reasoning or heard it being used.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain deductive reasoning. Give an
original example of an occasion when you have used deductive
reasoning or heard it being used.
Perform the operations in Problems 7–18.
7. a.
b.
8. a.
b.
9. a.
b.
10. a.
b.
11. a.
b.
12. a.
b.
13. a.
b.
14. a.
b.
15. a.
b. 4 1 3 3 8 1 6 1 4 3 5
10 1 5 3 2 1 6 3 3
3 1 6 3 2 1 8 1 4 3 3
1 1 3 3 2 1 4 1 3 3 6
20/12 # 52
20/2 # 5
450 1 550
10
450 1 550/10
112 1 62/3
12 1 6/3
8 1 6 4 2
18 1 62 4 2
318 1 72
3 3 8 1 3 3 7
30 4 5 3 2
14 1 6 3 3
7 1 3 3 2
5 1 2 3 6
Problem Set 1.2
Historical
Leonhard Euler
(1707–1783)
Euler’s name is attached to
every branch of mathematics,
and we will visit his work many
times in this book. His name is
pronounced “Oiler” and it is
sometimes joked that if you want
to give a student a one-word
mathematics test, just ask the
student to pronounce Leonhard’s
last name. He was the most
prolific writer on the subject of
mathematics, and his
mathematical textbooks were
masterfully written. His writing
was not at all slowed down by 
his total blindness for the last 
17 years of his life. He possessed
a phenomenal memory, had
almost total recall, and could men-
tally calculate long and
complicated problems.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16. a.
b.
17. a.
b.
18. a.
b.
19. Does the B.C. cartoon illustrate inductive or deductive
reasoning? Explain your answer.
3 13 1 92 4 13 3 22 4 1 3 12 3 62 4 34
3 1 3 19 4 32 3 24 1 3 12 3 62 4 34
3 13 1 92 4 34 3 2 1 3 12 3 62 4 34
3 1 9 4 3 3 2 1 2 3 6 4 3
25 2 4112 2 2 3 62 1 3
8 1 213 1 122 2 5 3 3
Section 1.2
Inductive and Deductive Reasoning
25
27. HISTORICAL QUEST
The first known example of a
magic square comes from China. Legend tells us that around
the year 200 B.C. the emperor Yu of the Shang dynasty
received the following magic square etched on the back of a
tortoise’s shell:
The incident supposedly took place along the Lo River, so
this magic square has come to be known as the Lo-shu magic
square. The even numbers are black (female numbers) and the
odd numbers are white (male numbers). Translate this magic
square into modern symbols.
This same magic square (called wafq in Arabic) appears in
Islamic literature in the 10th century A.D. and is attributed to
Jabir ibn Hayyan.
28. Consider the square shown in Figure 1.10.
B.C. reprinted by permission of Johnny Hart and Creators Syndicate.
20. Does the news clip below illustrate inductive or deductive
reasoning? Explain your answer.
Problems 21–24 are modeled after Example 1.
Find the requested pattern.
21. three pattern
22. four pattern
23. five pattern
24. six pattern
25. a. What is the sum of the first 25 consecutive
odd numbers?
b. What is the sum of the first 250 consecutive
odd numbers?
26. a. What is the sum of the first 50 consecutive
odd numbers?
b. What is the sum of the first 1,000 consecutive
odd numbers?
The old fellow in charge of the checkroom in a large
hotel was noted for his memory.  He never used checks or
marks of any sort to help him return coats to their rightful
owners.
    Thinking to test him, a frequent hotel guest asked him
as he received his coat, "Sam, how did you know this is
my coat?"
   "I don't, sir," was the calm response.
   "Then why did you give it to me?" asked the guest.
   "Because," said Sam, "it's the one you gave me, sir."
10
7
8
11
14
11
12
15
13
10
11
14
15
12
13
16
a. Is this a magic square?
b. Circle any number; cross out all the numbers in the same 
row and column. Then circle any remaining number and
cross out all the numbers in the same row and column.
Circle the remaining number. The sum of the circled numbers
is 48. Why?
Level  2
Use Euler circles to check the validity of the arguments in
Problems 29–40.
29. All mathematicians are eccentrics.
All eccentrics are rich.
Therefore, all mathematicians are rich.
30. All snarks are fribbles.
All fribbles are ugly.
Therefore, all snarks are ugly.
31. All cats are animals.
This is not an animal.
Therefore, this is not a cat.
FIGURE 1.10 Magic square?
Lucille J. Goodyear
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

49. Which direction is the bus traveling?*
32. All bachelors are handsome.
Some bachelors do not drink lemonade.
Therefore, some handsome men do not drink 
lemonade.
33. No students are enthusiastic.
You are enthusiastic.
Therefore, you are not a student.
34. No politicians are honest.
Some dishonest people are found out.
Therefore, some politicians are found out.
35. All candy is fattening.
All candy is delicious.
Therefore, all fattening food is delicious.
36. All parallelograms are rectangles.
All rectangles are polygons.
Therefore, all parallelograms are polygons.
37. No professors are ignorant.
All ignorant people are vain.
Therefore, no professors are vain.
38. No monkeys are soldiers.
All monkeys are mischievous.
Therefore, some mischievous creatures are not soldiers.
39. All lions are fierce.
Some lions do not drink coffee.
Therefore, some creatures that drink coffee are not fierce.
40. All red hair is pretty.
No pretty things are valuable.
Therefore, no red hair is valuable.
Level  3
Problems 41–44 refer to the lyrics of “By the Time I Get to
Phoenix.” Tell whether each answer you give is arrived at
inductively or deductively.
26
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
By the Time I Get to Phoenix
By the time I get to Phoenix she'll be risin'.
She'll find the note I left hangin' on her door.
She'll laugh when she reads the part that says I'm leavin',
'Cause I've left that girl so many times before.
By the time I make Albuquerque she'll be workin'.
She'll probably stop at lunch and give me a call.
But she'll just hear that phone keep on ringin'
Off the wall, that's all.
By the time I make Oklahoma she'll be sleepin'.
She'll turn softly and call my name out low.
And she'll cry just to think I'd really leave her,
'tho' time and time I've tried to tell her so,
She just didn't know
I would really go.
Ode to Billy Joe
It was the third of June, another sleepy, dusty, delta day.
I was choppin' cotton and my brother was balin' hay.
And at dinnertime we stopped and walked back to the house to eat,
And Mama hollered at the back door, "Y'all remember to wipe your feet."
Then she said, "I got some news this mornin' from Choctaw Ridge,
Today Billy Joe McAllister jumped off the Tallahatchee Bridge."
Papa said to Mama, as he passed around the black-eyed peas,
"Well, Billy Joe never had a lick o' sense, pass the biscuits please,
There's five more acres in the lower forty I've got to plow,"
And Mama said it was a shame about Billy Joe anyhow.
Seems like nothin' ever comes to no good up on Choctaw Ridge,
And now Billy Joe McAllister's jumped off the Tallahatchee Bridge.
Brother said he recollected when he and Tom and Billy Joe,
Put a frog down my back at the Carroll County picture show,
And wasn't I talkin' to him after church last Sunday night,
"I'll have another piece of apple pie, you know, it don't seem right,
I saw him at the sawmill yesterday on Choctaw Ridge,
And now you tell me Billy Joe's jumped off the Tallahatchee Bridge."
Mama said to me, "Child, what's happened to your appetite?
I been cookin' all mornin' and you haven't touched a single bite,
That nice young preacher Brother Taylor dropped by today,
Said he'd be pleased to have dinner on Sunday, Oh, by the way,
He said he saw a girl that looked a lot like you up on Choctaw Ridge
And she an' Billy Joe was throwin' somethin' off the Tallahatchee Bridge."
A year has come and gone since we heard the news 'bout Billy Joe,
Brother married Becky Thompson, they bought a store in Tupelo,
There was a virus goin' round, Papa caught it and he died last spring.
And now Mama doesn't seem to want to do much of anything.
And me I spend a lot of time pickin' flowers up on Choctaw Ridge,
And drop them into the muddy water off the Tallahatchee Bridge.
Lyrics for “By the Time I get to Phoenix.” Words and music by Jimmy Webb. Copyright 
© 1967 (renewed 1995) EMI Sosaha Music Inc. and Jonathan Three music. All rights reserved.
International copyright secured. Used by permission. 
43. What is the probable starting point of this
journey?
44. List five facts you know about each person involved.
Problems 45–48 refer to the lyrics of “Ode to Billy Joe.” Tell whether
each answer you give is arrived at inductively or deductively.
45. How many people are involved in this story? List them by
name and/or description.
46. Who “saw him at the sawmill yesterday”?
47. In which state is the Tallahatchee Bridge located?
48. On what day or days of the week could the death not have
taken place?
On what day of the week was the death most probable?
Lyrics for “Ode to Billy Joe” by Bobbie Gentry. © 1967 by Universal Music Corp. on behalf
of Northridge Music Co./ASCAP. Used by permission. International copyright secured. All
rights reserved.
Did you arrive at your answer using inductive or deductive
reasoning?
*“My Favorite Brain Teasers” by Martin Gardner, Games Magazine, October 1997, p. 46.
41. In what basic direction (north, south, east, or west) is the
person traveling?
42. What method of transportation or travel is the person using?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.2
Inductive and Deductive Reasoning
27
50. Which is larger—the number of all seven-letter English words
ending in ing, or the number of seven-letter words with “i” as
the fifth letter?† Did you arrive at your answer using inductive
or deductive reasoning?
51. Consider the following pattern:
a. Use this pattern and inductive reasoning to find the next
problem and the next answer in the sequence.
b. Use this pattern to find
c. Use this pattern to find
52. Consider the following pattern:
a. Use this pattern and inductive reasoning to find the next
problem and the next answer in the sequence.
b. Use this pattern to find
c. Use this pattern to find
53. What is the sum of the digits in
Did you arrive at your answer using inductive or deductive
reasoning?
54. Enter 999999 into your calculator, then divide it by
seven. Now toss a die (or randomly pick a number from
1 through 6) and multiply this number by the displayed
calculator number. Arrange the digits of the product from
lowest to highest (from left to right). What is this 
six-digit number?
Explain how you arrived at your answer, and discuss
whether you arrived at your result empirically, by induction, or
by deduction.
3333333342
123,456,789 3 81,000
123,456,789 3 9,000
 123,456,789 3 27 5 3,333,333,303
 123,456,789 3 18 5 2,222,222,202
 123,456,789 3 9 5 1,111,111,101
9 3 10,987,654,321 2 1
9 3 987,654,321 2 1
 9 3 4,321 2 1 5 38,888
 9 3 321 2 1 5 2,888
 9 3 21 2 1 5 188
 9 3 1 2 1 5 8
Problem Solving 3   
55. How many squares are there in Figure 1.11?
FIGURE 1.11 How many squares?
†Ibid., p. 46.
58.
In 1987 Martin Gardner (long-time math buff and past editor
of the “Mathematical Games” department of Scientific Ameri-
can) offered $100 to anyone who could find a 
magic
square made with consecutive primes. The prize was won by
Harry Nelson of Lawrence Livermore Laboratories. He
produced the following simplest such square:
3 3 3
57. You have 9 coins, but you are told that one of the coins is
counterfeit and weighs just a little more than an authentic
coin. How can you determine the counterfeit with 2 weighings
on a two-pan balance scale? (This problem is discussed in
Chapter 2). 
Hint:
56. How many triangles are there in Figure 1.12?
1 1-by-1 square 
TOTAL: 1 
4
1-by-1 squares 
1
2-by-2 square 
TOTAL: 5 (by addition) 
9
1-by-1 squares 
4
2-by-2 squares 
1
3-by-3 square 
TOTAL: 14 (by addition)
FIGURE 1.12 How many triangles?
1,480,028,201 
1,480,028,129
1,480,028,183
1,480,028,153
1,480,028,171
1,480,028,189
1,480,028,159
1,480,028,213
1,480,028,141
Prove this is a magic square.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
59.
Now, a real $100 offer: Find a 
magic square with nine
distinct square numbers. If you find such a magic square, write
to me and I will include it in the next edition and pay you 
a $100 reward . Show that the following magic squares do not
win the award.
3 3 3
352
34952
29582
36422
21252
17852
27752
20582
30052
1272
462
582
22
1132
942
742
822
972
a.
b.
60. Find a 
magic square whose magic number is 44.
That is, the sum of the rows, columns, and diagonals is 44.
Furthermore, the square can be turned upside down without
changing this property. Hint: The magic number is XLIV, and
the entries of the square use Roman numerals.
5 3 5
1.3  Scientific Notation and Estimation
“How Big Is the Cosmos?” There is a dynamic Web site demonstrating the answer to this
question (go to “Powers of Ten” at www.mathnature.com). Figure 1.13 illustrates the
size of the known cosmos.
FIGURE 1.13 Size of the universe.* Each successive cube is a thousand times as wide and a billion times as voluminous as the one
before it.
Earth: 7,927 miles
Earth-Moon:
920,000 miles
Inner planets:
920,000,000 miles
Solar neighborhood:
920,000,000,000 miles
Nearby stars:
920,000,000,000,000 miles
Milky Way: 920,000,000,000,000,000 miles
Nearby galaxies:
920,000,000,000,000,000,000 miles
How can the human mind comprehend such numbers? Scientists often work with
very large numbers. Distances such as those in Figure 1.13 are measured in terms of the
distance that light, moving at 186,000 miles per second, travels in a year. In this section,
we turn to patterns to see if there is an easy way to deal with very large and very small
numbers. We will also discuss estimation as a problem-solving technique.
*Illustration is adapted from The Universe, Life Nature Library (1962).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Exponential Notation
We often encounter expressions that comprise multiplication of the same numbers. For
example,
or
or
These numbers can be written more concisely using what is called exponential notation:
1442443
14444
442444443
3 factors
7 factors
How would you use exponential notation for the product of the 15s?
Answer: 1514.
6 # 6 # 6 # 6 # 6 # 6 # 6 5 67
10 # 10 # 10 5 103
15 # 15 # 15 # 15 # 15 # 15 # 15 # 15 # 15 # 15 # 15 # 15 # 15 # 15
6 # 6 # 6 # 6 # 6 # 6 # 6
10 # 10 # 10
For any nonzero number b and any counting number n,
14442443
n factors
The number b is called the base, the number n in bn is called the
exponent, and the number bn is called a power or exponential.
bn 5 b # b # b # c# b, b0 5 1, b2n 5 1
bn
Exponential Notation
Example
1
Write numbers without exponents
Write without exponents.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
Solution
a.
b.
c.
or 16,807
d.
1444442444443
63 factors
Note: You are not expected to find the form at the right; the factored form is acceptable.
e.
f.
By definition, any nonzero number to the zero power is 1.
8.90 5 1
322 5 1
32 5 1
9
263 5 2 # 2 # 2 # c# 2 # 2 or 9,223,372,036,854,775,808
75 5 7 # 7 # 7 # 7 # 7
62 5 6 # 6 5 36
105 5 10 # 10 # 10 # 10 # 10 5 100,000
8.90
322
263
75
62
105
Note: 
is not five
multiplications, but
rather five factors of
10.
105
Since an exponent indicates a multiplication, the proper procedure is first to simplify
the exponent, and then to carry out the multiplication. This leads to an extended order-
of-operations agreement.
Step 1
Perform any operations enclosed in parentheses.
Step 2
Perform any operations that involve raising to a power.
Step 3
Perform multiplications and divisions as they occur by working from 
left to right.
Step 4
Perform additions and subtractions as they occur by working from 
left to right.
Extended Order of Operations
Section 1.3
Scientific Notation and Estimation
29
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Do you see that the same pattern also holds for multiplying by 10 with a negative expo-
nent? Can you multiply the following without direct calculation?
c
T
Moved six places to the left
These patterns lead to a useful way for writing large and small numbers, called scientific
notation.
9.42 3 1026 5 0. 000009 42
30
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Example
2
Write in scientific notation
Write the given numbers in scientific notation.
a. 123,400
Scientific Notation
There is a similar pattern for multiplications of any number by a power of 10. Consider
the following examples, and notice what happens to the decimal point.
We find these answers by direct multiplication.
Do you see the pattern? Look at the decimal point (which is included for emphasis). If
we multiply 
how many places to the right will the decimal point be moved?
T
c
5 places to the right
Using this pattern, can you multiply the following without direct calculation?
This answer is found by observing the pattern, not by direct multiplication.
The pattern also extends to smaller numbers:
These numbers are found by direct multiplication.
For example,
9.42 3 1022 5 9.42 3
1
100 5 9.42 3 0.01 5 0.0942
 9.42 3 1023 5 0.00942
 9.42 3 1022 5 0.0942
 9.42 3 1021 5 0.942
9.42 3 1012 5 9,420,000,000,000
9.42 3 105 5 9 42,000.
9.42 3 105,
 9.42 3 104 5 94,200.
 9.42 3 103 5 9,420.
 9.42 3 102 5 942.
 9.42 3 101 5 94.2
¶
b. 0.000035
c. 1,000,000,000,000
d. 7.35
Solution
a.
b.
c.
technically, this is 
with the 1 understood.
d. 7.35 or 
is in scientific notation.
2
7.35 3 100
1
1 3 1012
1,000,000,000,000 5 1012;
0.000035 5 3.5 3 1025
123,400 5 1.234 3 105
The scientific notation for a nonzero number is that number
written as a power of 10 times another number x, such that x is
between 1 and 10, including 1; that is, 1 # x , 10.
Scientific Notation
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.3
Scientific Notation and Estimation
31
Example
3
Miles in a light-year
Assuming that light travels at 186,000 miles per second, what is the distance (in miles)
that light travels in 1 year? This is the unit of length known as a light-year. Give your
answer in scientific notation.
Solution
Since light travels 186,000 miles each second and there are 31,557,600 seconds in
1 year, we have
Thus, light travels about 
miles in 1 year.
5.87 3 1012
186,000 3 31,557,600 5 5,869,713,600,000 < 5.87 3 1012
 5 31,557,600 seconds
 5 365.25 3 24 3 60 3 60 seconds
 5 365.25 3 24 3 60 minutes
 One year is 365.25 days 5 365.25 3 24 hours
NASA/JPL/Caltech/R. Hurt (SSC)
Calculators
Throughout the book we will include calculator comments for those of you who have
(or expect to have) a calculator. Calculators are classified according to their ability to
perform different types of calculations, as well as by the type of logic they use to do the
calculations. The problem of selecting a calculator is further complicated by the multi-
plicity of brands from which to choose. Therefore, choosing a calculator and learning to
use it require some sort of instruction.
For most nonscientific purposes, a four-function calculator with memory is sufficient
for everyday use. If you anticipate taking several mathematics and/or science courses,
you will find that a scientific calculator is a worthwhile investment. These calculators use
essentially three types of logic: arithmetic, algebraic, and RPN. In the previous section,
we discussed the correct order of operations, according to which the correct value for
is 14 (multiply first). An algebraic calculator will “know” this and will give the correct
answer, whereas an arithmetic calculator will simply work from left to right and obtain
the incorrect answer, 20. Therefore, if you have an arithmetic-logic calculator, you will
need to be careful about the order of operations. Some arithmetic-logic calculators pro-
vide parentheses, 
, so that operations can be grouped, as in
but then you must remember to insert the parentheses.
The last type of logic is RPN. A calculator using this logic is characterized by
or 
keys and does not have an equal key 
. With an RPN calculator,
the operation symbol is entered after the numbers have been entered. These three types of
logic can be illustrated by the problem 
Arithmetic logic:
Input to match order of operations.
Algebraic logic:
input is the same as the problem.
RPN logic:
Operations input last.
In this book, we will illustrate the examples using algebraic logic. If you have a calcu-
lator with RPN logic, you can use your owner’s manual to change the examples to RPN.
We do not recommend using an arithmetic logic calculator. We will also indicate the keys
to be pushed by drawing boxes around the numerals and operational signs as shown.


4
ENTER
3
ENTER
2

4

3

2

2


4

3
2 1 3 3 4:

SAVE
ENTER

)
4

3
(

2
)
(
2 1 3 3 4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Example
4
Calculator addition
Show the calculator steps for 
Solution
Be sure to turn your calculator on, or clear the machine if it is already on. A
clear button is designated by 
, and the display will show 0 after the clear button is
pushed. You will need to check these steps every time you use your calculator, but after
a while it becomes automatic. We will not remind you of this in each example.
C
14 1 38.
Press
Display
1
1
4
14

14
38
38

52
Here we show each numeral in a single box, which means you key
in one numeral at a time, as shown.
From now on, this will be shown as 
.
Some calculators display all of keystrokes: 14 1 38
14
After completing Example 4, you can either continue with the same problem or start
a new problem. If the next button pressed is an operation button, the result 52 will be car-
ried over to the new problem. If the next button pressed is a numeral, the 52 will be lost
and a new problem started. For this reason, it is not necessary to press 
to clear between
problems. The button 
is called the clear entry key and is used if you make a mistake
keying in a number and do not want to start over with the problem. For example, if you
want 
and accidentally push 
you can then push 
to obtain the cor-
rect answer. This is especially helpful if you are in the middle of a long calculation. Some
models have a 
key instead of a 
key.
CE
d

3
CE
4

2
2 1 3
CE
C
Example
5
Mixed operations using a calculator
Show the calculator steps and display for 
Solution
Press:
or
Display:
4
4 43
43
43 5 43 5 43 57
12
If you have an algebraic-logic calculator, your machine will perform the correct order
of operations. If it is an arithmetic-logic calculator, it will give the incorrect answer 28
unless you input the numbers using the order-of-operations agreement.
#
#
#
#
ENTER

7

5

3

4
4 1 3 3 5 2 7.
Example
6
Calculator multiplication
Repeat Example 3 using a calculator; that is, find
Solution
When you press these calculator keys and then press 
the display will
probably show something that looks like:
This display is a form of scientific notation. The 12 or 
at the right (separated by
one or two blank spaces) is the exponent on the 10 when the number in the display is
written in scientific notation. That is,
5.86971 12 means 5.86971 3 1012
112
5.86971 12  or 5.86971 1 12 or 5.86971E12

365.25 3 24 3 60 3 60 3 186,000
Everybody Counts, p. 61.
Polls show that the public
generally thinks that, in
mathematics education,
calculators are bad while
computers are good.  People
believe that calculators will 
prevent children from
mastering arithmetic, an
important burden which their
parents remember bearing
with courage and pride.
Computers, on the other
hand, are not perceived as
shortcuts to undermine school
traditions, but as new tools
necessary to society that
children who understand
mathematics must learn to
use.  What the public fails 
to recognize is that both
calculators and computers are
equally essential to mathematics
education and have equal 
potential for wise use or 
for abuse.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.3
Scientific Notation and Estimation
33
Example
7
Find scientific and calculator notation
Write each given number in scientific notation and in calculator notation.
a. 745 
Suppose you have a particularly large number that you wish to input into a
calculator—say, 920,000,000,000,000,000,000 miles divided by 7,927 miles (from
Figure 1.13). You can input 7,927, but if you attempt to input the larger number you will
be stuck when you fill up the display (9 or 12 digits). Instead, you will need to write
This may be entered by pressing an 
, 
, or 
key:
Display: 1.160590387E 17
This means that the last cube in Figure 1.13 is about 
times larger than the
earth.
Scientific notation is represented in a slightly different form on many calculators and
computers, and this new form is sometimes called floating-point form. When represent-
ing very large or very small answers, most calculators will automatically output the an-
swers in floating-point notation. The following example compares the different forms for
large and small numbers with which you should be familiar.
1.2 3 1017

7927

20
EE
9.2
EXP
EEx
EE
920,000,000,000,000,000,000 5 9.2 3 1020
Do not confuse the sci-
entific notation keys on
your calculator with the
exponent key. Exponent
keys are labeled  y x , ^
and key or 10x .
b. 1,230,000,000 
c. 0.00573 
d. 0.00000 06239
Solution
The form given in this example is sometimes called fixed-point form or
decimal notation to distinguish it from the other forms.
Fixed-Point
Scientific Notation
Floating-Point 
a. 745
7.45  102
7.45 02
b. 1,230,000,000
1.23  109
1.23 09
c. 0.00573
5.73  103
5.73 03
d. 0.00000 06239
6.239  107
6.239 07
Estimation
The scientist in Figure 1.14 is making an estimate of the velocity of the stream.
Part of problem solving is using common sense about the answers you obtain. This is
even more important when using a calculator, because there is a misconception that if a
calculator or computer displays an answer, “it must be correct.” Reading and understand-
ing the problem are parts of the process of problem solving.
When problem solving, you must ask whether the answer you have found is reason-
able. If I ask for the amount of rent you must pay for an apartment, and you do a calcula-
tion and arrive at an answer of $16.25, you know that you have made a mistake. Likewise,
an answer of $135,000 would not be reasonable. As we progress through this course you
will be using a calculator for many of your calculations, and with a calculator you can
easily press the wrong button and come up with an outrageous answer. One aspect of
looking back is using common sense to make sure the answer is reasonable. The ability to
recognize the difference between reasonable answers and unreasonable ones is important
not only in mathematics, but whenever you are problem solving. This ability is even more
important when you use a calculator, because pressing the incorrect key can often cause
outrageously unreasonable answers.
Whenever you try to find an answer, you should ask yourself whether the answer
is reasonable. How do you decide whether an answer is reasonable? One way is to
estimate an answer. Webster’s New World Dictionary tells us that as a verb, to esti-
mate means “to form an opinion or a judgment about” or to calculate “approximately.”
FIGURE 1.14 Estimating the
velocity of a stream
Photograph by Jeffrey Deacon, U.S. Geological Survey
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics emphases the importance of
estimation:
The broad mathematical context for an estimate is usually one of the following
types:
A. An exact value is known but for some reason an estimate is used.
B. An exact value is possible but is not known and an estimate is used.
C. An exact value is impossible.
We will work on building your estimation skills throughout this book.
Example
8
Estimate annual salary
If your salary is $14.75 per hour, your annual salary is approximately
A. $5,000
Example
9
Estimate map distance
Use the map in Figure 1.15 to estimate the distance from Orlando International Airport
to Disney World.
B. $10,000
C. $15,000
D. $30,000
E. $45,000
Solution
Problem solving often requires some assumptions about the problem. For
this problem, we are not told how many hours per week you work, or how many weeks
per year you are paid. We assume a 40-hour work-week, and we also assume that you are
paid for 52 weeks per year. Estimate: Your hourly salary is about $15 per hour. A 40-hour
week gives us 
per week. For the estimate, we calculate the wages for
50 weeks instead of 52: 50 weeks yields 
The answer is D.
50 3 $600 5 $30,000.
40 3 $15 5 $600
Lake
Apopka
Walt
Disney
World
Resort
Orlando
Int’l
Airport
4
Orlando
Florida’s Turnpike
92
441
17
192
5
miles
0
10
FIGURE 1.15 Map around Walt Disney World
Solution
Note that the scale is 10 miles to 1 in. Looking at the map, you will note
that it is approximately 1.5 in. from the airport to Disney World. This means that we
estimate the distance to be 15 miles.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.3
Scientific Notation and Estimation
35
There are two important reasons for estimation: (1) to form a reasonable opinion or
(2) to check the reasonableness of an answer. We will consider estimation for measure-
ments in Chapter 9; if reason (1) is our motive, we should not think it necessary to follow
an estimation by direct calculation. To do so would defeat the purpose of the estimation.
On the other hand, if we are using the estimate for reason (2)—to see whether an answer
is reasonable—we might perform the estimate as a check on the calculated answer for Ex-
ample 3 (the problem about the speed of light):
and
one year
4  102 days
4  102  2  10  6  10  6  10
14243
14243
14243
14243
days
hr per day
min per hr
sec per hr
4  2  6  6  105
2
1
<
<
<
186,000 miles per second < 2 3 105 miles per second
144444424444443
seconds per year
10  36  105
2
1
<
3.6  107
Thus, one light year is about
This estimate seems to confirm the reasonableness of the answer 
we 
obtained in Example 3.
Laws of Exponents
In working out the previous estimation for Example 3, we used some properties of expo-
nents that we can derive by, once again, turning to some patterns. Consider
and
When we multiply powers of the same base, we add exponents. This is called the addi-
tion law of exponents.
Suppose we wish to raise a power to a power. We can apply the addition law of expo-
nents. Consider
When we raise a power to a power, we multiply the exponents. This is called the multi-
plication law of exponents.
A third law is needed to raise products to powers. Consider
Thus, 12 # 32 2 5 22 # 32.
 5 22 # 32
 5 12 # 22 # 13 # 32
 12 # 32 2 5 12 # 32 # 12 # 32
 11022 3 5 102 # 102 # 102 5 1021212 5 103 #  2 5 106
 1232 2 5 23 # 23 5 2313 5 22#3 5 26
 5 27
 5 2314
 23 # 24 5 12 # 2 # 22 # 12 # 2 # 2 # 22
102 # 103 5 110 # 102 # 110 # 10 # 102 5 105
10 # 10 # 10 # 10 # 10 5 105
5.87 3 1012
a2 3 105 miles
secondb a3.6 3 107 seconds
year
b < 7.2 3 1012 miles
year
<
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Addition law:
Multiplication law:
Subtraction law:
Distributive laws:
aa
bb
m
5 am
bm
1ab2 m 5 ambm
bm
bn 5 bm2n
1bn2 m 5 bmn
bm # bn 5 bm1n
Laws of Exponents
*You may be familiar with these laws of exponents from algebra. They hold with certain restrictions; for example, division by
zero is excluded. We will discuss different sets of numbers in Chapter 5.
†Star Trek, The Next Generation (episode that first aired the week of May 15, 1993).
Theorems and laws of
mathematics are
highlighted in a box that
looks like this.
Example
10
Estimate a speed
Under impulse power, the starship Enterprise will travel 1 million 
kilometers (km) in 3 minutes. Compare full impulse power with the speed of light,
which is approximately 
kilometers per hour (km/hr).
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example. 
Understand the Problem. You might say, “I don’t know anything about Star Trek,” but
with most problem solving in the real world, the problems you are asked to solve are of-
ten about situations with which you are unfamiliar. Finding the necessary information
to understand the question is part of the process. We assume that full impulse is the
same as 1 impulse power, so that if we multiply impulse power by we will obtain
full impulse power.
Devise a Plan. We will calculate the distance traveled (in kilometers) in one hour under
power, and then will multiply that result by to obtain the distance in kilometers per
hour under full impulse power.
Carry Out the Plan.
Given
Multiply by 1 
to change 3 minutes to 60 minutes.
We now multiply both sides by to find the distance under full impulse.
 < 2.666666667 # 107 km/hr
 full impulse power 5 8
3 # 107 km/hr
 4
3a3
4
  impulse powerb 5 4
3 # 2 # 107 km/hr
4
3
 5 2 # 107 km/hr
 5 2 # 107 km
1 hr
 5 106 # 2 # 10 km
60 min
20
20
 5 106 km
3 min # 20
20
 3
4
  impulse power 5 1,000,000 km
3 min
4
3
3
4
A3
4 # 4
3 5 1B
4
3
3
4
1.08 # 109
†
3
4
Pólya’s 
Method
Another result, called the distributive law of exponents, says that to raise a product
to a power, raise each factor to that power and then multiply. For example,
Similar patterns can be observed for quotients. 
We now summarize the five laws of exponents.*
13 # 1042 2 5 32 # 11042 2 5 32 # 108 5 9 # 108
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.3
Scientific Notation and Estimation
37
Comparing this to the speed of light, we see
Look Back. We see that full impulse power is about 2.5% of the speed of light.
impulse speed
speed of light 5 2.666666667 # 107
1.08 # 109
5 2.666666667
1.08
# 10729 < 0.025
Comprehending Large Numbers
We began this section by looking at the size of the cosmos. But just how large is large?
Most of us are accustomed to hearing about millions, billions (budgets or costs of disas-
ters), or even trillions (the national debt is about $15 trillion), but how do we really un-
derstand the magnitude of these numbers?
ABC Photo Archives/© ABC/Getty Images
You may have seen the worldwide show,
Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?
A million is a fairly modest number, 
Yet if we were to count one number per
second, nonstop, it would take us about 278 hours or approximately 
days to count to
a million. Not a million days have elapsed since the birth of Christ (a million days is
about 2,700 years). A large book of about 700 pages contains about a million letters.
How large a room would it take to hold 1,000,000 inflated balloons?
The next big number is a billion, which is defined to be 1,000 millions.
However, with the U.S. government bailout in early 2009 we have entered the age of
trillions. How large is a trillion? How long would it take you to count to a trillion?
111
2
106.
Graffiti: © United Feature Syndicate, Inc.
AP Photo/Lauren Victoria Burke.
Congressional leaders said that as much as $1 trillion will
be needed to avoid an imminent meltdown in the U.S.
financial system.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

38
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Go ahead—make a guess. To get some idea about how large a trillion is, let’s com-
pare it to some familiar units:
If you gave away $1,000,000 per day, it would take you more than 2,700 years to give
away a trillion dollars.
A stack of a trillion $1 bills would be more than 59,000 miles high.
At 5% interest, a trillion dollars would earn you $219,178,080 interest per day!
A trillion seconds ago, Neanderthals walked the earth (31,710 years ago).
But a trillion is only 1012, a mere nothing when compared with the real giants. Keep
these magnitudes (sizes) in mind. Earlier in this section we noticed that a cube containing
our solar neighborhood is 9.2  1011 miles on a side. (See Figure 1.13.) This is less than
a billion times the size of the earth. (Actually, it is 
)
There is an old story of a king who, being under obligation to one of his subjects, of-
fered to reward him in any way the subject desired. Being of mathematical mind and
modest tastes, the subject simply asked for a chessboard with one grain of wheat on the
first square, two on the second, four on the third, and so forth. The old king was delighted
with this modest request! Alas, the king was soon sorry he granted the request.
9.2 # 1011 4 7,927 < 1.2 3 108.
Example
11
Estimate a large number
Estimate the magnitude of the grains of wheat on the last square of 
a chessboard.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guide-
lines for this example.*
Understand the Problem. Each square on the chess-
board has grains of wheat placed on it. To answer this
question you need to know that a chessboard has 64
squares. The first square has 
grains, the next
has 
grains, the next 
and so on. Thus, he needed 
grains of wheat for the
last square alone. We showed this number in Example 1d.
Devise a Plan. We know (from Example 1) that 
We need to find
the size of a grain of wheat, and then convert 
grains into bushels. Finally, we need to
state this answer in terms we can understand.
Carry Out the Plan. I went to a health food store, purchased some raw wheat, and found
that there are about 250 grains per cubic inch (in. ). I also went to a dictionary and found
that a bushel is 2,150 in.
Thus, the number of grains of wheat in a bushel is
To find the number of bushels in 
grains, we need to divide:
Look Back. This answer does not mean a thing without looking back and putting it in
terms we can understand. I googled “U.S. wheat production” and found that in 2001 the
U.S. wheat production was 2,281,763,000 bushels. To find the number of years it would
take the United States to produce the necessary wheat for the last square of the chess-
board, we need to divide the production into the amount needed:
This is 7,500 years!
1.72 3 1013
2.28 3 109 5 1.72
2.28 3 101329 < 0.75 3 104 or 7.5 3 103
 < 1.72 3 1013
 A9.922337 3 1018B 4 A5.375 3 105B 5 9.22337
5.375
3 101825
263
2,150 3 250 5 537,500 5 5.375 3 105
3.
3
263
263 < 9.22337 3 1018.
263
4 5 22,
2 5 21
1 5 20
Pólya’s 
Method
*A chessboard has 64 alternating black and red squares arranged into an 8-by-8 pattern.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.3
Scientific Notation and Estimation
39
What is the name of the largest number you know?  Go ahead—answer this question.
Recently we have heard about the national debt, which exceeds $15 trillion. Table 1.1
shows some large numbers.
TABLE 1.1
Some Large Numbers
Number Name
Meaning 
1
one
1
Basic counting unit
d
2
two
2
Number of computer states (on/off)
d
23
byte
8
A basic unit on a computer; a string of eight binary digits
d
10
ten
10
Number of fingers on two normal hands
d
102
hundred
100
Number of pennies in a dollar
d
103
thousand
1,000
About 5,000 of these dots 
would fit 50 per row on this page
d
210
kilobyte
1,024
Computer term for 1,024 bytes, abbreviated K
d
106
million
1,000,000
Number of letters in a large book.
d
220
megabyte 1,048,576
A unit of computer storage capacity; MB
d
109
billion
1,000,000,000
Discussed in text
d
230
gigabyte
1,073,741,824
Approximately 1,000 MB; abbreviated GB
d
1012
trillion
1,000,000,000,000
National debt is about $15 trillion
d
1015
quadrillion 1,000,000,000,000,000
Number of words ever printed
d
1018
quintillion 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
Estimated number of insects in the world
d
1021
sextillion
1,000,000,000,000,000,000
Cups of water in all the oceans
d
1063
vigintillion 1 followed by 63 zeros
Chessboard problem; cubic inches in Milky Way
d
10100
googol
1 followed by 100 zeros
10128 is the number of neutrons in the universe.
d
10googol
googolplex 10 to the power of a googol
This is really too large to comprehend.
d
Do Things Really Change?
"Students today can't prepare bark to calculate their problems.  They depend upon their slates
which are more expensive.  What will they do when their slate is dropped and it breaks?  They
will be unable to write!"
"Students depend upon paper too much.  They don't know how to write on slate without chalk
dust all over themselves.  They can't clean a slate properly.  What will they do when they run
out of paper?"
"Students today depend too much upon ink.  They don't know how to use a pen knife to
sharpen a pencil.  Pen and ink will never replace the pencil."
"Students today depend upon store bought ink.  They don't know how to make their own.
When they run out of ink they will be unable to write word or ciphers until their next trip to
the settlement.  This is a sad commentary on modern education."
"Students today depend upon these expensive fountain pens.  They can no longer write with a
straight pen and nib (not to mention sharpening their own quills).  We parents must not allow 
them to wallow in such luxury to the detriment of learning how to cope in the real business
world, which is not so extravagant."
"Ball point pens will be the ruin of education in our country.  Students use these devices and
then throw them away.  The American virtues of thrift and frugality are being discarded.
Business and banks will never allow such expensive luxuries."
"Students today depend too much on hand-held calculators."  
Teacher's Conference, 1703
Principal's Association, 1815
National Association of Teachers, 1907
The Rural American Teacher, 1929
PTA Gazette, 1941
Federal Teacher, 1950
Anonymous, 1995
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by exponent?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Define scientific notation and discuss
why it is useful.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Do you plan to use a calculator for
working the problems in this book? If so, what type of logic
does it use?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the differences in evaluat-
ing exponents and using scientific notation on a calculator.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the largest number whose
name you know? Describe the size of this number.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a trillion? Do not simply 
define this number, but discuss its magnitude (size) in terms
that are easy to understand.
Write each of the numbers in Problems 7–10 in scientific notation and
in floating-point notation (as on a calculator).
7. a. 3,200
b. 0.0004
c. 64,000,000,000
8. a. 23.79
b. 0.000001
c. 35,000,000,000
9. a. 5,629
b. 630,000
c. 0.00000 0034
10. a. googol
b. 1,200,300
c. 0.00000 123
Write each of the numbers in Problems 11–14 in fixed-point notation.
11. a.
b.
c. 4.56 
12. a.
b.
c. 4.07 
13. a.
b.
c.
14. a.
b.
c. 8.89 
Write each of the numbers in Problems15–18 in scientific notation
15.
211
3.217 3 107
622
4.8 27
4.1 3 1027
63
1 4
2.1 3 1023
26
1 3
7.2 3 1010
72
Problem Set 1.3
16. The velocity of light in a vacuum is about 30,000,000,000 
cm sec.
17. The distance between Earth and Mars (220,000,000 miles)
when drawn to scale is 0.00000 25 in.
/
18. In 2010, the national debt was approximately $12 trillion. It
has been proposed that this number be used to define a new
monetary unit, a light buck. That is, one light buck is the
amount necessary to generate domestic goods and services at
the rate of $186,000 per second. What is the national debt in
terms of light bucks?
Write each of the numbers in Problems 19–22 in fixed-point 
notation.
19. A kilowatt-hour is about 
joules.
20. A ton is about 
kilograms.
21. The volume of a typical neuron is about 
22. If the sun were a light bulb, it would be rated at 
watts.
23. Estimate the distance from Los Angeles International Airport
to Disneyland.
3.8 3 1025
3 3 1028 cm3.
9.06 3 102
3.6 3 106
Los Angeles
Anaheim
Disneyland
710
110
405
605
5
1
L.A.
Int’l
Airport
2
10
39
60
90
42
Scale:
1 inch  15 miles
Fish Camp
Yosemite
Village
120
120
140
49
41
0
5
10
15 miles
B.C. reprinted by permission of Johnny Hart and Creators Syndicate
24. Estimate the distance from Fish Camp to Yosemite Village in
Yosemite National Park.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.3
Scientific Notation and Estimation
41
In Problems 25–30, first estimate your answer and then calculate
the exact answer.
25. How many pages are necessary to make 1,850 copies of 
a manuscript that is 487 pages long? (Print on one 
side only.)
26. If you are paid $16.25 per hour, what is your annual 
salary?
27. If your car gets 23 miles per gallon, how far can you go on 
15 gallons of gas?
28. If your car travels 280 miles and uses 10.2 gallons, how many
miles per gallon did you get?
29. In the musical Rent there is a song called “Seasons of 
Love” that uses the number 525,600 minutes. How long 
is this?
30. It has been estimated that there are 107 billion pieces of mail
per year. If the postage rates are raised 2¢, how much extra
revenue does that generate?
Level  2
Compute the results in Problems 31–36. Leave your answers in
scientific notation.
31. a.
b.
32. a.
b.
33. a.
b.
34. a.
b.
35. a.
b.
36. a.
b. 0.0348 3 0.00000 00000 00002
0.000058 3 0.03
4,500,000,000,000 3 0.00001
50 3 0.0003
15,000 3 0.0000004
0.005
0.00016 3 500
2,000,000
x2y12x3y252
222x4y28
12xy222 1221x21y42
x22y2
12.5 3 1032 16.6 3 1082
8.25 3 104
16 3 1072 14.8 3 10262
2.4 3 105
16 3 10232 17 3 1082
3 3 107
15 3 1042 18 3 1052
4 3 106
6 3 105
2 3 103
16 3 1052 12 3 1032
klenger/iStockphoto.com
Lori Sparkia, 2010/Used under license
from Shutterstock.com
Estimate the number of items in each photograph in
Problems 37–40.
37.
38.
39.
Alan Schein Photography/Corbis Edge/Corbis
Robert F. Sisson/National Geographic/Getty Images
40.
In Problems 41–48, you need to make some assumptions before
you estimate your answer. State your assumptions and then calcu-
late the exact answer.
41. How many classrooms would be necessary to hold 1,000,000
inflated balloons?
42. Carrie Dashow, the “say hello” woman, is trying to 
personally greet 1,000,000 people. In her first year, which
ended on January 3, 2000, she had greeted 13,688 people. 
At this rate, how long will it take her to greet one million 
people?
43. Approximately how high would a stack of 1 million $1 bills be?
(Assume there are 233 new $1 bills per inch.)
44. Estimate how many pennies it would take to make a stack 1 in.
high. Approximately how high would a stack of 1 million
pennies be?
45. If the U.S. annual production of sugar is 30,000,000 tons,
estimate the number of grains of sugar produced in a year in
the United States. Use scientific notation. (Note: There are
2,000 lb per ton; assume there are 2,260,000 grains in a pound
of sugar.)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

42
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
46. The San Francisco Examiner (Feb. 6, 2000, Travel Section)
reported that David Phillips, a civil engineer at University of
California, Davis, was pushing his shopping cart when he
noticed a promotion of Healthy Choice®.
23,451,789 yards long, 5,642,732 yards wide, and 54,465
yards thick. Estimate this answer on your calculator. You 
will use scientific notation because of the limitations of your
calculator, but remember that Jedidiah gave the exact answer
by working the problem in his head.
52. HISTORICAL QUEST
George Bidder (1806–1878) not
only possessed exceptional power at calculations but also went
on to obtain a good education. He could give immediate
answers to problems of compound interest and annuities. One
question he was asked was, If the moon is 238,000 miles from
the earth and sound travels at the rate of 4 miles per minute,
how long would it be before the inhabitants of the moon could
hear the Battle of Waterloo? By calculating mentally, he gave
the answer in less than one minute! First make an estimate, and
then use your calculator to give the answer in days, hours, and
minutes, to the nearest minute.
53. Estimate the number of bricks required to build a solid wall
100 ft by 10 ft by 1 ft.
54. A sheet of notebook paper is approximately 0.003 in. thick.
Tear the sheet in half so that there are 2 sheets. Repeat so that
there are 4 sheets. If you repeat again, there will be a pile of 
8 sheets. Continue in this fashion until the paper has been
halved 50 times. If it were possible to complete the process,
how high would you guess the final pile would be? After you
have guessed, compute the height.
He could earn 1,000 airline miles for every 10 bar codes from
Healthy Choice products he sent to the company by the end of
the month. Frozen entries are about $2 apiece, but with a little
work he found individual servings of chocolate pudding for 25
cents each. He was able to accumulate 1,215,000 airline miles.
How much did it cost him?
47. A school in Oakland, California, spent $100,000 in changing its
mascot sign. If the school had used this amount of money for
chalk, estimate the length of the chalk laid end-to-end.
48. “Each year Delta serves 9 million cans of Coke®. Laid end-to-end,
they would stretch from Atlanta to Chicago.”* Is this a reasonable
estimate? What is the actual length of 9 million Coke cans laid
end-to-end?
Level  3
49. a. What is the largest number you can represent on your 
calculator?
b. What is the largest number you can think of using only
three digits?
c. Use scientific notation to estimate this number. Your calcu-
lator may help, but will probably not give you the answer
directly.
50. HISTORICAL QUEST
Zerah Colburn (1804–1840) toured
America when he was 6 years old to display his calculating abil-
ity. He could instantaneously give the square and cube roots of
large numbers. It is reported that it took him only a few seconds
to find 
Use your calculator to help you find this number
exactly (not in scientific notation).
51. HISTORICAL QUEST
Jedidiah Buxion (1707–1772) never
learned to write, but given any distance he could tell you the
number of inches, and given any length of time he could tell
you the number of seconds. If he listened to a speech or a
sermon, he could tell the number of words or syllables in it. It
reportedly took him only a few moments to mentally calculate
the number of cubic inches in a right-angle block of stone
816.
*From Delta Air Lines Monitor, May 18, 2000.
Eric Francis/Bloomberg via Getty Images.
Problem Solving 3   
55. If it takes one second to write down each digit, how 
long will it take to write down all the numbers from 
1 to 1,000? 
56. If it takes one second to write down each digit, how 
long will it take to write down all the numbers from 
1 to 1,000,000? 
57. Imagine that you have written down the numbers from 
1 to 1,000. What is the total number of zeros you have
recorded?
58. Imagine that you have written down the numbers from 1 to
1,000,000. What is the total number of zeros you have
recorded?
59. a. If the entire population of the world moved to California
and each person were given an equal amount of area, how
much space would you guess that each person would have
(multiple choice)?
A. 7 
B. 7 
C. 70 
D. 700 
E. 1 
b. If California is 158,600 
and the world population is 6.3
billion, calculate the answer to part a.
mi2
mi2
ft2
ft2
ft2
in.2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.4
Chapter Summary
43
60. It is known that a person’s body has about one gallon of blood
in it, and that a cubic foot will hold about 7.5 gallons of liquid.
It is also known that Central Park in New York has an area of
840 acres. If walls were built around the park, how tall would
those walls need to be to contain the blood of all
6,300,000,000 people in the world?
© Rafael Macia/Photo Researchers
1.4
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Guidelines for problem solving [1.1]
Order of operations [1.2]
Extended order of operations [1.3]
Laws of exponents [1.3]
Inductive vs deductive reasoning [1.3]
Euler circles [1.3]
Numeracy is the ability
to cope confidently with
the mathematical
demands of adult life.
MATHEMATICS COUNTS
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
the listed important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes in this chapter.
If you look online, you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as
well as the types of problems that were introduced in this chapter. You will maximize
your understanding of this chapter by working the problems in this section only after you
have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test
help in studying for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
Chapter
1
Review Questions
1. In your own words, describe Pólya’s problem-solving 
model.
2. In how many ways can a person walk 5 blocks north and 
4 blocks west, if the streets are arranged in a standard rectan-
gular arrangement?
3. A chessboard consists of 64 squares, as shown in Figure 1.17.
The rook can move one or more squares horizontally or verti-
cally. Suppose a rook is in the upper-left-hand corner of a
chessboard. Tell how many ways the rook can reach the point
marked “X”. Assume that the rook always moves toward its
destination.
FIGURE 1.17 Chessboard
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

44
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
4. Compute 
Do not use direct
multiplication; show all your work.
5. What is meant by “order of operations”?
6. What is scientific notation?
7. Does the story in the news clip illustrate inductive or deduc-
tive reasoning?
111,111,111 3 111,111,111.
11. In 1995, it was reported that an iceberg separated from
Antarctica. The size of this iceberg was reported 
equal to to 
ice cubes. Convert this size to meaning-
ful units.
7 3 1016
8. Show the calculator keys you would press as well as the cal-
culator display for the result. Also state the brand and model
of the calculator you are using.
a.
b.
9. Assume that there is a $281.9 billion budget “windfall.”
Which of the following choices would come closest to liqui-
dating this windfall?
A. Buy the entire U.S. population a steak dinner.
B. Burn one dollar per second for the next 1,000 years.
C. Give $80,000 to every resident of San Francisco and use
the remainder of the money to buy a $200 iPod for every
resident of China.
10. What is wrong, if anything, with the following “Great Tapes”
advertisement?
9.22 3 1018
6.34 3 10
6
263
12. The national debt in 2010 soared to $13,800,000,000,000.
Write this number in scientific notation. Suppose that in 2010
there were 310,000,000 people in the United States. If the
debt is divided equally among these people, how much is
each person’s share?
13. Rearrange the cards in the formulation shown here so that
each horizontal, vertical, and diagonal line of three adds up
to 15.
14. Assume that your classroom is 
If you fill this room with dollar bills (assume that a 
stack of 233 dollar bills is 1 in. tall), how many
classrooms would it take to contain the 2010 national debt 
of $13,800,000,000,000?
20 ft 3 30 ft 3 10 ft.
Paul & Lindamarie Ambrose/Taxi/Getty Images
Q: What has 18 legs and
      catches flies?
A: I don't know, what?
Q: A baseball team.  What
     has 36 legs and catches
     flies?
A: I don't know that, either.
Q: Two baseball teams.  If
     the United States has 100
     senators, and each state has 
     2 senators, what does...
A: I know this one!
Q: Good.  What does each
     state have?
A: Three baseball teams!
Instead of reading the 100 greatest books of all time, buy these beautifully
transcribed books on tape.  If you listen to only one 45-minute tape per
day, you will complete the greatest books of all time in only one year.
9
9
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
A
A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.4
Chapter Summary
45
Use Euler circles to check the validity of each of the arguments
given in Problems 15–18.
15. All birds have wings.
All flies have wings.
Therefore, some flies are birds.
16. No apples are bananas.
All apples are fruit.
Therefore, no bananas are fruit.
17. All artists are creative.
Some musicians are artists.
Therefore, some musicians are creative.
18. All rectangles are polygons.
All squares are rectangles.
Therefore, all squares are polygons.
19. Consider the following pattern:
1 is happy.
10 is happy because 
which is happy.
13 is happy because 
which is happy.
19 is happy because 
and 
and 
and 
which is happy.
12 1 02 1 02 5 1,
62 1 82 5 100
82 1 22 5 68
11 1 92 5 82
12 1 32 5 10,
12 1 02 5 1,
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on one of these books:
Mathematical Magic Show, Martin Gardner (New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 1977).
How to Solve It: A New Aspect of Mathematical
Method, George Pólya (New Jersey: Princeton University
Press, 1945, 1973).
On the other hand,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 are unhappy.
11 is unhappy because 
which is unhappy.
12 is unhappy because 
which is unhappy.
Find one unhappy number as well as one happy 
number.
20. Suppose you could write out 
What is the last digit?
71000.
12 1 22 5 5,
12 1 12 5 2,
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46
CHAPTER 1
The Nature of Problem Solving
Multiples of 2
Multiples of 3
FIGURE 1.18 Patterns in Pascal’s triangle
REFERENCES
James N. Boyd, “Pascal’s Triangle,” Mathematics Teacher,
November 1983, pp. 559–560. 
Dale Seymour, Visual Patterns in Pascal’s Triangle, (Palo Alto, CA: Dale Seymour
Publications, 1986).
Karl J. Smith, “Pascal’s Triangle,” Two-Year College Mathematics Journal, Volume 4,
pp. 1–13 (Winter 1973).
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G1.
It is stated in the Prologue that “Mathematics is alive and constantly changing.” As
we complete the second decade of this century, we stand on the threshold of major
changes in the mathematics curriculum in the United States. 
Report on some of these recent changes. 
REFERENCES
Lynn Steen, Everybody Counts: A Report to the Nation 
on the Future of Mathematics Education (Washington, DC: National Academy 
Press, 1989). See also Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School 
Mathematics from the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (Reston, 
VA: NCTM, 1989). A reassessment of these standards was done by Kenneth A.
Ross, The MAA and the New NCTM Standards (© 2000 The Mathematical 
Association of America.)
G2.
Do some research on Pascal’s triangle, and see how many properties you can
discover. You might begin by answering these questions:
a. What are the successive powers of 11?
b. Where are the natural numbers found in Pascal’s triangle?
c. What are triangular numbers and how are they found in Pascal’s triangle?
d. What are the tetrahedral numbers and how are they found in Pascal’s triangle?
e. What relationships do the patterns in Figure 1.18 have to Pascal’s triangle?
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.4
Chapter Summary
47
Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas in this chapter. You can find references
to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 1.1 Find some puzzles, tricks, or magic stunts that are based on mathematics.
PROJECT 1.2 Write a short paper about the construction of magic squares. Figure 1.19
shows a magic square created by Benjamin Franklin.
www.mathnature.com 
52
61
4
13
20
29
36
45
14
3
62
51
46
35
30
19
53
60
5
12
21
28
37
44
11
6
59
54
43
38
27
22
55
58
7
10
23
26
39
42
9
8
57
56
41
40
25
24
50
63
2
15
18
31
34
47
16
1
64
49
48
33
32
17
PROJECT 1.3 Design a piece of art based on a magic square.
PROJECT 1.4 An alphamagic square, invented by Lee Sallows, is a magic square so that
not only do the numbers spelled out in words form a magic square, but the numbers
of letters of the words also form a magic square. For example,
FIGURE 1.19 Benjamin Franklin magic square*
five
twenty-two
eighteen 
twenty-eight
fifteen
two 
twelve
eight
twenty-five 
gives rise to two magic squares:
5
22
18
28
15
2
12
8
25
4
9
8
11
7
3
6
5
10
and
The first magic square comes from the numbers represented by the words in the
alphamagic square, and the second magic square comes from the numbers of letters
in the words of the alphamagic square.
a. Verify that this is an alphamagic square.
b. Find another alphamagic square.
PROJECT 1.5 Answer the question posed in Problem 59, Section 1.3 for your own state.
If you live in California, then use Florida.
PROJECT 1.6 Read the article “Mathematics at the Turn of the Millennium,” by Philip A.
Griffiths, The American Mathematical Monthly, January 2000, pp. 1–14. Briefly de-
scribe each of these famous problems:
a. Fermat’s last theorem
b. Kepler’s sphere packing conjecture
c. The four-color problem
Which of these problems are discussed later in this text, and where?
The objective of this article was to communicate something about mathematics to a
general audience. How well did it succeed with you? Discuss.
*“How Many Squares Are There, Mr. Franklin?” by Maya Mohsin Ahmed, The Mathematical Monthly, May 2004, p. 394.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
2.1 Sets, Subsets, and Venn
Diagrams
49
Denoting sets, equal and equivalent
sets, universal and empty sets, Venn 
diagrams, subsets and proper subsets
2.2 Operations with Sets
59
Fundamental operators, cardinality 
of intersections and unions
2.3 Applications of Sets
64
Combined operations with sets, 
De Morgan’s laws Venn diagrams with
three sets, survey problems
2.4 Finite and Infinite Sets
72
Infinite sets, Cartesian product of sets
2.5 Chapter Summary
79
Important terms, types of problems, 
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
project
THE NATURE OF SETS
2
Outline
What in the World?
“Hey, James!” said Tony. “Have you made up your
mind yet where you are going next year?”
“Nah, my folks are on my case, but I’m in no hurry,”
James responded. “There are plenty of spots for me in
college. I know I will get in someplace.”
Many states, including California, Florida, and
Kentucky, have state-mandated assessment
programs. The following question is found on
the California Assessment Program Test as an 
open-ended problem. We consider it in 
Problem Set 2.2, Problem 2.
Overview
Sets are considered to be one of the most fundamental build-
ing blocks of mathematics. In fact, most mathematics books
from basic arithmetic to calculus must introduce the concept
early in the book. Small children learn to categorize sets
when they learn numbers, colors, shapes, and sizes. The
PBS show Sesame Street teaches the concept of set building
with the song, “One of These Things Is Not Like the Oth-
ers.” A quick search of the Internet will show you that the
ideas of set theory can be as elementary as counting and as
complex as logic, calculus, and abstract algebra. In this
chapter we will consider the basic ideas of set theory and of
counting. 
© Norbert von der Groeben/The Image Works 
Shelter Gate, UC Berkeley Campus
A Question of Thinking: A First Look at Students Performance on Open-ended Questions in Mathematics
James knows that half the students from his school are
accepted at the public university nearby. Also, half are
accepted at the local private college. James thinks that this
adds up to 100%, so he will surely be accepted at one or the
other institution. Explain why James may be wrong. If
possible, use a diagram in your explanation.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.1
Sets, Subsets, and Venn Diagrams
49
2.1  Sets, Subsets, and Venn Diagrams
The first time I met eminent proof theorist Gaisi Takeuti I asked
him what set theory was really about. “We are trying to get [an] 
exact description of thoughts of infinite mind,” he said. And then
he laughed, as if filled with happiness by this impossible task.
RUDY RUCKER
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
A fundamental concept in mathematics—and in life, for that matter—is the sorting of objects
into similar groupings. Every language has an abundance of words that mean “a collection” or
“a grouping.” For example, we speak of a herd of cattle, a flock of birds, a school of fish, a
track team, a stamp collection, and a set of dishes. All these grouping words serve the same
purpose, and in mathematics we use the word set to refer to any collection of objects.
2
7
9
5
4
0
7
11
?
The study of sets is sometimes called set theory, and the first person to formally study
sets was Georg Cantor (1845–1918). In this chapter, we introduce many of Cantor’s ideas.
Denoting Sets
In Section 1.2 we introduced the idea of undefined terms. The word set is a perfect exam-
ple of why there must be some undefined terms. Every definition requires other terms, so
some undefined terms are necessary to get us started. To illustrate this idea, let’s try to
define the word set by using dictionary definitions:
“Set: a collection of objects.” What is a collection?
“Collection: an accumulation.” What is an accumulation?
“Accumulation: a collection, a pile, or a heap.” We see that the word collection gives
us a circular definition. What is a pile?
“Pile: a heap.” What is a heap?
“Heap: a pile.”
© Roy Rainford/Getty Images
A herd of buffalo at Yellowstone National Park is an
example of a set.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Do you see that a dictionary leads us in circles? In mathematics, we do not allow cir-
cular definitions, and this forces us to accept some words without definition. The term set
is undefined. Remember, the fact that we do not define set does not prevent us from
having an intuitive grasp of how to use the word.
Sets are usually specified in one of two ways. The first is by description, and the
other is by the roster method. In the description method, we specify the set by describ-
ing it in such a way that we know exactly which elements belong to it. An example is the
set of 50 states in the United States of America. We say that this set is well defined, since
there is no doubt that the state of California belongs to it and that the state of Germany
does not; neither does the state of confusion. Lack of confusion, in fact, is necessary in
using sets. The distinctive property that determines the inclusion or exclusion of a partic-
ular element is called the defining property of the set.
Consider the example of the set of good students in this class. This set is not well
defined, since it is a matter of opinion whether a student is a “good” student. If we agree,
however, on the meaning of the words good students, then the set is said to be well
defined. A better (and more precise) formulation is usually required—for example, the
set of all students in this class who received a C or better on the first examination. This is
well defined, since it can be clearly determined exactly which students received a C or
better on the first test.
In the roster method, the set is defined by listing the members. The objects in a set
are called members or elements of the set and are said to belong to or be contained in
the set. For example, instead of defining a set as the set of all students in this class who
received a C or better on the first examination, we might simply define the set by listing
its members: {Howie, Mary, Larry}.
Sets are usually denoted by capital letters, and the notation used for sets is braces.
Thus, the expression
means that A is the name for the set whose members are the numbers 4, 5, and 6.
Sometimes we use braces with a defining property, as in the following examples:
5all students in this class who received an A on the first test6
5states in the United States of America6
A 5 54, 5, 66
50
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
Example
1
Set member notation
Let 
. Use set
membership notation to describe relations among a, b, and C.
Solution
a [ C; b o C
C 5 cities in California, a 5 city of Anaheim, and b 5 city of Berlin
A common use of set terminology is to refer to certain sets of numbers. In Chapter 5,
we will discuss certain sets of numbers, which we list here:
  {1, 2, 3, 4, . . .}
Set of natural, or counting, numbers
  {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . .}
Set of whole numbers
  {. . . , 2, 1, 0, 1, 2, . . .}
Set of integers
 
Set of rational numbers
The notation we use for the set of rational numbers may be new to you. If we try to list the
set of rational numbers by roster, we will find that this is a difficult task (see Problem 56).
b a
b `  a [ , b [ , b 2 0r
If S is a set, we write 
if a is a member of the set S, and we write 
if b is
not a member of the set S. Thus, “a  ” means that the variable a is an integer, and the
statement “b  , b  0” means that the variable b is a nonzero integer.
b o S
a [ S
Historical
Georg Cantor
(1845–1918)
When Cantor first published 
his paper on the theory of sets
in 1874, it was controversial 
because it was innovative and 
because it differed from
established mathematical 
thinking. Cantor believed that 
“the essence of mathematics 
lies in its freedom.” But, in the 
final analysis, he was not able to
withstand the pressure from 
his teachers and peers; he 
underwent a series of mental
breakdowns and died in a mental
hospital in 1918.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A new notation called set-builder notation was invented to allow us to combine both the
roster and the description methods. Consider:
The set of all x
{ x ƒ x is an even counting number}
c
such that
Section 2.1
Sets, Subsets, and Venn Diagrams
51
Example
2
Writing sets by roster
Specify the given sets by roster. If the set is not well defined, say so.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Solution
a.
Notice that between does not include the first and last numbers.
b.
Notice that ellipses (three dots) are used to denote some missing numbers. When
using ellipses, you must be careful to list enough elements so that someone looking
at the set can see the intended pattern.
c.
Notice that distinct means “different”, so we do not list two ps.
d.
e. Not well defined
5Washington, Adams, Jefferson, c , Clinton, Bush, Obama6
5h, a, p, y6
5219, 218, 217, p , 17, 18, 196
511, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 196
5good U.S. presidents6
5U.S. presidents arranged in chronological order6
5distinct letters in the word happy6
5x k x is an integer between 220 and 206
5counting numbers between 10 and 206
We now use set-builder notation for the set of rational numbers:
Read this as: “The set of all such that a is an integer and b is a nonzero integer.”
a
b
Ea
b k a is an integer and b is a nonzero integerF
Example
3
Writing sets by description
Specify the given sets by description.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
Solution
Answers may vary.
a. Counting (or natural) numbers
b. Whole numbers
c. We would read this as “The set of all x such that x belongs to the set of integers.”
More simply, the answer is integers.
d.
e.
f. 5Distinct letters in the word mathematics6
5Counting numbers whose digits consist of fours only6
5Even numbers between 10 and 1006
5m, a, t, h, e, i, c, s6
54, 44, 444, 4444, .  .  . 6
512, 14, 16, p , 986
5x k x [ 6
50, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, p 6
51, 2, 3, 4, 5, p 6
{
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
Equal and Equivalent Sets
We say that two sets A and B are equal, written 
, if the sets contain exactly the
same elements. Thus, if 
, then
{x ƒ x is an even counting number}  {x ƒ x  E}
The order in which you represent elements in a set has no effect on set membership. Thus,
Also, if an element appears in a set more than once, it is not generally listed more than a
single time. For example,
{1, 2, 3, 3}  {1, 2, 3}
Another possible relationship between sets is that of equivalence. Two sets A and B
are equivalent, written 
, if they have the same number of elements. Don’t confuse
this concept with equality. Equivalent sets do not need to be equal sets, but equal sets are
always equivalent.
A 4 B
51, 2, 36 5 53, 1, 26 5 52, 1, 36 5 . . .
E 5 52, 4, 6, 8, . . . 6
A 5 B
Example
4
Equal and equivalent sets
Which of the following sets are equivalent? Are any equal?
{~, ^, n, }}, {5, 8, 11, 14}, {♥, ♣, ♦, ♠}, {•, }, ★,    }, {1, 2, 3, 4}
Solution
All of the given sets are equivalent. Notice that no two of them are equal,
but they all share the property of “fourness.”
Example
5
Finding cardinality
Find the cardinality of each of the following sets.
a. R  {5, ^, , }
b.
c. T  {states of the United States} 
Solution
a. The cardinality of R is 4, so we write 
b. The cardinality of S (the empty set) is 0, so we write 
c. The cardinality of T is 50, or 0T0 5 50.
0S0 5 0.
0R0 5 4.
S 5 5 6
Y
The number of elements in a set is often called its cardinality. The cardinality of
the sets in Example 4 is 4; that is, the common property of the sets is the cardinal
number of the set. The cardinality of a set S is denoted by 
. Equivalent sets with four
elements each have in common the property of “fourness,” and thus we would say that
their cardinality is 4.
0S0
Universal and Empty Sets
We now consider two important sets in set theory. The first is the set that contains every
element under consideration, and the second is the set that contains no elements. A uni-
versal set, denoted by U, contains all the elements under consideration in a given discus-
sion; and the empty set contains no elements, and thus has cardinality 0. The empty set 
is denoted by 
or 
. Do not confuse the notations 
, 0, and 
. The symbol [
5[6
[
[
5 6
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

denotes a set with no elements; the symbol 0 denotes a number; and the symbol 
is a
set with one element 
For example, if 
, then all sets we would be considering
would have elements only among the elements of U. No set could contain the number 10,
since 10 is not in that agreed-upon universe.
For every problem, a universal set must be specified or implied, and it must remain
fixed for that problem. However, when a new problem is begun, a new universal set can
be specified.
Notice that we defined a universal set and the empty set; that is, a universal set may
vary from problem to problem, but there is only one empty set. After all, it doesn’t matter
whether the empty set contains no numbers or no people—it is still empty. The following
are examples of descriptions of the empty set:
Venn Diagrams
A set is a collection, and a useful way to depict a set is to draw a circle or an oval as a rep-
resentation for the set. The elements are depicted inside the circle, and objects not in the
set are shown outside the circle. The universal set contains all the elements under consid-
eration in a given discussion and is depicted as a rectangle. This representation of a set is
called a Venn diagram, after John Venn (1834–1923). As we saw in Chapter 1, the Swiss
mathematician Leonhard Euler (1707–1783) also used circles to illustrate principles of
logic, so sometimes these diagrams are called Euler circles, which we discussed in Chap-
ter 1. However, Venn was the first to use them in a general way.
5counting numbers less than 16
5living saber-toothed tigers6
U 5 51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 96
1namely, the set containing [2.
5[6
Section 2.1
Sets, Subsets, and Venn Diagrams
53
Example
6
Venn diagram for a given set
Let the universal set be all of the cards in a deck of cards.* Draw a Venn diagram for the
set of hearts.
Solution
It is customary to represent the universal set as a rectangle (labeled U) and
the set of hearts (labeled H) as a circle, as shown in Figure 2.1. Note that
H 5  51A, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 110, 1J, 1Q, 1K6
U
2
2
4
A
3
H
FIGURE 2.1 Venn diagram for a deck of cards
In the Venn diagram, the sets involved are too large to list all of the elements indi-
vidually in either H or U, but we can say that the two of hearts (labeled 
) is a
member of H, whereas the two of diamonds (labeled 
) is not a member of H. We
write
12 [  H, whereas 2 2 o H
2 2
12
*See Figure 12.2, p. 584 if you are not familiar with a deck of cards.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
B
U
A
B
U
B
A
U
A, B
U
A
a. A # B
b. B # A
c. A 5B
d. A and B are disjoint
U
S
I
II
The set of elements that are not in H is referred to as the complement of H, and this
is written using an overbar. In Example 6, 
. A Venn dia-
gram for complement is shown in Figure 2.2.
H 5 5spades, diamonds, clubs6
U
a. To represent a set S, shade the interior
   of S; the answer is everything shaded 
   (shown as a color screen).
U
S
b. To represent a set S, shade S; the answer
    is everything not shaded (shown as a 
    color screen).
W
S
S
FIGURE 2.2 Venn diagrams for a set and for its complement
Notice that any set S divides the universe into two regions as shown in Figure 2.3.
FIGURE 2.3 General representation of a set S
Notice that the cardinality of the deck of cards in Example 6 is 52, and the cardinal-
ity of H is 13. Since the deck of cards is the universal set for Example 6, we can symbol-
ize the cardinality of these sets as follows:
and
Note that 
. In words, a set is not the same as its cardinality.
Subsets and Proper Subsets
Most applications will involve more than one set, so we begin by considering the rela-
tionships between two sets A and B. The various possible relationships are shown in
Figure 2.4. We say that A is a subset of B, which in set theory is written 
, if every
element of A is also an element of B (see Figure 2.4a). Similarly, 
if every element
of B is also an element of A (Figure 2.4b). Figure 2.4c shows two equal sets. Finally, A
and B are disjoint if they have no elements in common (Figure 2.4d).
B # A
A # B
H 2 0H0
0U0 5 52
0H0 5 13
FIGURE 2.4 Relationships between two sets A and B
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.1
Sets, Subsets, and Venn Diagrams
55
Example
7
Set notation
Answer each of the given true/false questions.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
Solution
a. “A is a subset of C” is false because there is at least one American manufactured
automobile—say the Cadillac—that is not listed in the set C.
b. “C is a subset of A” is true because each element of C is also an element of A.
c. “Chevrolet is a subset of A” is false since “Chevrolet” is an element, not a set.
d. “Red is an element of the set R” is true. Contrast the notation in parts c and d. If part
c were 
, it would have been true.
e. “The set consisting of the color red is an element of the set R” is false since, even
though the color red is an element of R (see part d), the set containing red—namely,
—is not an element of R.
f. “R is a subset of S” is true since every color of the rainbow is listed in the set S.
g. “R is a proper subset of S” is false because 
. To be a proper subset, there must
be some element of S that is not in the set R.
h. “The empty set is a subset of A” is true, since the empty set is a subset of every set.
i. “The empty set is a proper subset of C” is true. The empty set is a proper subset of
every nonempty set. 
is false, but 
is true.
j. “The set containing the empty set is a subset of R” is false since 
is not listed
inside the set R.
“[”
[ # [
[ (  [
R 5 S
“5red6”
5Chevrolet6 # A
5[6 ( R
5 6 (  C
[ # A
R ( S
R # S
5red6 [ R
red [ R
Chevrolet # A
C # A
A # C
 S 5 5red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet6
 R 5 5Colors in the rainbow6
  C 5 5Chevrolet, Cobolt, Corvette6
 A 5 5American manufactured automobiles6
This might seem like a
simple example, but it
shows some technical 
differences in the symbol-
ism of set theory. Do not
skip over this example.
Example
8
Subsets of a given set
Find all possible subsets of 
Solution
are obvious subsets.
is also a subset, since both 5 and 7 are elements of C.
is also a subset of C. It is a subset because all of its elements belong to C. Stated a
different way, if it were not a subset of C, we would have to be able to find an element
of 
that is not in C. Since we cannot find such an element, we say that the empty
set is a subset of C (and, in fact, the empty set is a subset of every set).
5  6
5 6
55, 76
556, 576
C 5 55, 76.
We see that there are four subsets of C from Example 8, even though C has only two
elements. We must therefore be careful to distinguish between a subset and an element.
Remember, 5 and 
mean different things.
The subsets of C can be classified into two categories: proper and improper. Since
every set is a subset of itself, we immediately know one subset for any given set: the set
itself. A proper subset is a subset that is not equal to the original set; that is, A is a proper
subset of a subset B, written 
, if A is a subset of B and 
. An improper subset
of a set A is the set A.
We see there are three proper subsets of 
. There is one
improper subset of 
.
C :  55, 76
C 5 55, 76 :  [, 556, and  576
A 2 B
A (  B
556
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

From Example 8, we see that a set of 2 elements has 4 subsets, and from Example 9,
we note that a set of cardinality four has 16 subsets. In Problems 31–32, the following
property is discovered.
56
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
U
VIII
A
C
B
I
II
III
V
VII
IV
VI
U
X
Y
Region
I
Region
II
Region
IV
Reg.
III
Example
9
Classifying proper and improper subsets
Find the proper and improper subsets of 
. What is the cardinality of A?
Solution
The cardinality of A is 4 (because there are 4 elements in A). There is one
improper subset: 
The proper subsets are as follows:
,
,
,
52, 4, 66, 52, 4, 86, 52, 6, 86, 54, 6, 86
52, 46 52, 66, 52, 86, 54, 66, 54, 86, 56, 86
526, 546, 566, 586
5 6
52, 4, 6, 86.
A 5 52, 4, 6, 86
Example
10
Regions in a Venn diagram
Name the regions in Figure 2.6 described by each of the following.
a. A
b. C
c.
d.
e.
f. A and C are disjoint
A # B
B
A
The number of subsets of a set of size n is
2n
Number of Subsets
Sometimes we are given two sets X and Y, and we know nothing about the way they
are related. In this situation, we draw a general figure, such as the one shown in Figure 2.5.
X is regions II and III.
Y is regions III and IV.
is regions I and IV.
is regions I and II.
If 
, then region II is empty. 
If 
, then region IV is empty. 
If 
, then regions II and IV are empty. 
If X and Y are disjoint, then region III is empty.
X 5 Y
Y # X
X # Y
Y
X
FIGURE 2.5 General Venn diagram for two sets
We can generalize for more sets. The general Venn diagram for three sets divides the
universe into eight regions, as shown in Figure 2.6.
FIGURE 2.6 General Venn diagram for three sets
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.1
Sets, Subsets, and Venn Diagrams
57
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Why do you think mathematics 
accepts the word set as an undefined term?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Distinguish between equal and
equivalent sets.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a universal set?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the empty set?
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give three descriptions of the 
empty set.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give an example of a set with 
cardinality 0.
7. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give an example of a set with 
cardinality greater than 1 thousand, but less than 
1 million.
8. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give an example of a set with 
cardinality greater than 1 million.
Tell whether each set in Problems 9–12 is well defined. If it is not
well defined, change it so that it is well defined.
9. a. The set of students attending the University of 
California
b. {Grains of sand on earth}
10. a. The set of counting numbers between 3 and 4
b. The set of happy people in your country
11. a. {Good bets on the next race at Hialeah}
b. {Years that will be bumper years for growing 
corn in Iowa}
12. a. The set of people with pointed ears
Problem Set 2.1
b. {Counting numbers less than 0}
Specify the sets in Problems 13–18 by roster.
13. a. {Distinct letters in the word Mathematics}
b. {Current U.S. president}
14. a. {Odd counting numbers less than 11}
b. {Positive multiples of 3}
15. a.
b.
16. a.
b.
17. a. {Distinct letters in the word pipe}
b. {Counting numbers greater than 150}
18. a. {Counting numbers containing only 1s}
b. {Even counting numbers between 5 and 15}
Specify the sets in Problems 19–24 by description.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
Write out in words the description of the sets given in Problems
25–30, and then list each set in roster form.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
where 
31. List all possible subsets of the given set.
a.
b.
c.
d.
.
e.
.
E 5 51, 2, 3, 46
D 5 51, 2, 36
C 5 51, 26.
B 5 516
A 5 [
E 5 52, 4, 6, . . .6
5x 0 x [ , x o E6
5x 0 x [ , x ,  86
5x 0 x [ , x # 86
5x 0 x [ , x 2  86
5x 0 x is a natural number between 1 and 106
5x 0 x is an odd counting number6
5m, i, s, p6
5101, 103, 105, . . . , 1696
550, 500, 5000, . . .6
510, 20, 30, . . . , 1006
51, 11, 121, 1331, 14641, . . .6
51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 96
5B k B is an integer less than 66
5C k C is an integer greater than 66
5B k B is a counting number less than 66
5A k A is a counting number greater than 66
Photos 12 / Alamy   
Zachary Quinto as Spock
Solution
a. A is regions I, IV, V, and VII.
b. C is regions III, IV, VI, and VII.
c.
is regions II, III, VI, and VIII.
d.
is regions I, III, IV, and VIII.
e.
means that regions I and IV are empty.
f. A and C are disjoint means that regions IV and VII are empty.
A # B
B
A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

42. a.
b.
43. a.
b.
44. a.
b.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54. 5[6 5 5 6
[ 5 5 6
0 5 5 6
516 ( 5516, 526, 536, 5466
516 [ 5516, 526, 536, 5466
1 [ 5516, 526, 536, 5466
516 [ 51, 2, 3, 4, 56
1 [ 51, 2, 3, 4, 56
5 6 # 5Jeff, Maureen, Terry6
5math, history6 ( 5high school subjects6
5white6 [ 5colors of the U.S. flag6
5white6 [ 5colors of the rainbow6
5m, a, t, h6 (  5h, t, a, m6
5m, a, t, h6 # 5h, t, a, m6
5m6 [ 5m, a, t, h6
 m [  5m, a, t, h6
32. List all possible subsets of the set given set.
a.
b.
.
c.
,
d.
e.
33. Look for a pattern in Problems 31. Can you guess how many
subsets the set 
has? Does this guess match
the formula?
34. Look for a pattern in Problem 32. Can you guess how many
subsets the set 
has? Does this guess match
the formula?
L 5 56, 7, 8, 9, 106
F 5 51, 2, 3, 4, 56
K 5 56, 7, 8, 96
J 5 56, 7, 86
I 5 56, 76
H 5 566
G 5 [
58
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
Level 2
35. Draw a Venn diagram showing people who are over 30, people
who are 30 or under, and people who drive a car.
36. Draw a Venn diagram showing males, females, and those 
people who ride bicycles.
37. Draw a Venn diagram showing that all Chevrolets are 
automobiles.
38. Draw a Venn diagram showing that all cell phones are 
communication devices.
39. Consider the sets
a. What is the cardinality of each set? 
b. Which of the sets are equivalent?
c. Which of the given sets are equal?
40. Consider the sets
a. What is the cardinality of each set 
b. Which of the sets are equivalent?
c. Which of the given sets are equal?
Decide whether each statement in Problems 41–54 is true or false.
Give reasons for your answers.
41. a.
b. 5math6 [ 5m, a, t, h6
5m, a, t, h6 # 5 m, a, t, h, e, i, c, s6
E 5 52, 56
 
D 5 5256
C 5 510, 66
 
B 5 510 1 66
 
A 5 5166
 
F 5 536
E 5 5three6
D 5 52 1 16
C 5 5p, i, e6
B 5 546
A 5 5distinct letters in the word pipe6
Level 3
55. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give an example of a set that cannot
be written using the roster method.
56. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Is it possible to list the set of rational
numbers between 0 and 1 by roster? If you think so, then list
them, and if you do not think so, explain why.
57. Five people plan to meet after school, and if they all
show up, there will be one group of five people. However,
if only four of them show up, in how many ways is this
possible?
58. Five people plan to meet after school, and if they all show
up, there will be one group of five people. However, if
only three of them show up, in how many ways is this
possible?
Problem Solving 3   
59. In Section 1.2 we used Euler circles to represent expressions such
as “All Chevrolets are automobiles.” Rephrase this using set ter-
minology.
60. In Section 1.2 we used Euler circles to represent expressions
such as “Some people are nice.” Represent this relationship 
using Venn diagrams. Be sure to label the circles and the 
universe.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.2
Operations with Sets
59
2.2  Operations with Sets
Fundamental Operations
Suppose we consider two general sets, B and Y, as shown in Figure 2.7. If we show the set
Y using a yellow highlighter and the set B using a blue highlighter, it is easy to visualize
two operations. The intersection of the sets is the region shown in green (the parts that are
both yellow and blue). We see this is region III, and we describe this using the word “and.”
The union of the sets is the part shown in any color (the parts that are yellow or blue or
green). We see this is regions II, III, and IV, and we describe this using the word “or.”
U
B
Y
Region I
Region
II
Region
IV
Reg.
III
FIGURE 2.7 Venn diagram showing intersection and union
Example
1
Venn diagram for union and intersection
Draw Venn diagrams for union and intersection.
a. B ¨ Y
b. B ´ Y
Solution
Highlighter pens work well when drawing Venn diagrams, but instead of
using two colors as shown in Figure 2.7, we use one highlighter (any color) to indicate
the final result as shown in this example.
a. “B ¨ Y” is the intersection of the sets B and Y. Draw two circles as shown in
Figure 2.8. First shade B using horizontal lines, and then shade the second set, Y,
using vertical lines. 
Intersection (¨) is
translated as and, and
union (´) as or.
U
B > Y
B
Y
FIGURE 2.8 Intersection of two sets
The intersection is all parts that are shaded twice (both horizontal and vertical), as
shown with the pink highlighter.
The intersection of sets A and B, denoted by 
, is the set consisting of all
elements common to A and B. The union of sets A and B, denoted by A ´ B, is the
set consisting of all elements of A or B or both.
A d B
Operations on Sets: Intersection and Union
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
b. “B ´ Y” is the union of the sets B and Y. In Figure 2.9, first shade B using horizontal
lines and then shade the second set, Y, using vertical lines.
U
B > Y
B
Y
The union is all parts that are shaded (either once or twice), as shown with the pink
highlighter.
FIGURE 2.9 Union of two sets
In the next example we are given more than two sets.
Example
2
Venn diagram with three sets
Let U  {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}, A  {2, 4, 6, 8}, B  {1, 3, 5, 7}, and C  {5, 7}. A
Venn diagram showing these sets is shown in Figure 2.10.
U
A
C
B
2, 4
6, 8
1, 3
5, 7
9
FIGURE 2.10 Venn diagram showing three sets
Find: a. A ´ C
b. B ´ C
c. B ¨ C
d. A ¨ C
Solution
a. A ´ C  {2, 4, 6, 8} ´ {5, 7}
 {2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}
Notice that the union consists of all elements in A or in C or in both. Also note that
the order in which the elements are listed is not important. 
b. B ´ C  {1, 3, 5, 7} ´ {5, 7}
 {1, 3, 5, 7}
Notice that, even though the elements 5 and 7 appear in both sets, they are listed only
once. That is, the sets {1, 3, 5, 7} and {1, 3, 5, 5, 7, 7} are equal (exactly the same).
Notice that the resulting set has a name (it is called B), and we write
B ´ C  B
c. B ¨ C  {1, 3, 5, 7} ¨ {5, 7}
 {5, 7}
The intersection contains the elements common to both sets.
 C
d. A ¨ C  {2, 4, 6, 8} ¨ {5, 7}  {
} 
These sets have no elements in common, so we write { } or .
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.2
Operations with Sets
61
Suppose we consider the cardinality of the various sets in Example 2: 
ƒ U ƒ  9,
ƒ A ƒ  4,
ƒ B ƒ  4,
and
ƒ C ƒ  2
ƒ A ´ C ƒ  6
(part a) 
ƒ B ´ C ƒ  4
(part b) 
ƒ B ¨ C ƒ  2
(part c) 
ƒ A ¨ C ƒ  0
(part d) 
ƒ  ƒ  0
(part d) 
Consider the set S formed from the sets in Example 2: 
S  {U, A, B, C, } 
This is a set of sets; there are five sets in S, so ƒ S ƒ  5. Furthermore, if we remove sets
from S, one-by-one, we find
T  {A, B, C, },
so
ƒ T ƒ  4 
U  {B, C, },
so
ƒ U ƒ  3 
V  {C, },
so
ƒ V ƒ  2 
Finally, 
W  {},
so
ƒ W ƒ  1 
Thus ƒ {}ƒ  1, but ƒ  ƒ  0, so {}  .
Cardinality of Intersections and Unions
The cardinality of an intersection is easy; it is found by looking at the number of ele-
ments in the intersection.
The cardinality of a union is a bit more difficult. For sets with small cardinalities, we
can find the cardinality of the unions by direct counting, but if the sets have large cardi-
nalities, it might not be easy to find the union and then the cardinality by direct counting.
Some students might want to find ƒ B ´ C ƒ by adding ƒ B ƒ and ƒ C ƒ , but you can see from
Example 2 that ƒ B ´ C ƒ  ƒ B ƒ  ƒ C ƒ . However, if you look at the Venn diagram for the
number of elements in the union of two sets, the situation becomes quite clear, as shown
in Figure 2.11.
Did you get that? 
{}  
U
X
Y
X > Y
X 1 Y
adds this
region twice
FIGURE 2.11 Venn diagram for the number of elements in the union of two sets
For any two sets X and Y,
ƒ X ´ Y ƒ

ƒ X ƒ  ƒY ƒ

ƒ X ¨ Y ƒ
14
42443
14243
The elements in
This corrects for the “error”
the intersection
introduced by counting those
are counted twice.
elements in the intersection twice.
Formula for the Cardinality of the Union of Two Sets
This formula will be used
later in the book.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
Example
3
Cardinality of a union
Suppose a survey indicates that 45 students are taking mathematics and 41 are taking
English. How many students are taking math or English?
Solution
At first, it might seem that all you do is add 41 and 45, but such is not the
case. Let 
and E 5 5persons taking English6.
M 5 5persons taking math6
33
29
M
E
12
M
E
E  = 41
M  = 45
To find out how many students are taking math and
English, we need to know the number in this intersection.
As you can see, you need further information. Problem solving requires that you not
only recognize what known information is needed when answering a question, but also
recognize when additional information is needed. Suppose 12 students are taking both
math and English. In this case we see that
By diagram:
By formula: 
First, fill in 12 in M ¨ E. Then,
ƒ M ´ E ƒ  ƒ M ƒ  ƒ E ƒ  ƒ M ¨ E ƒ
ƒ M ƒ  45, so fill in 33 since 45  12  33
 45  41  12
ƒ E ƒ  41, so fill in 29 since 41  12  29
 74
The total number is 33  12  29  74.
Example 3 looks very much like the open-ended examination question we posed at
the beginning of this chapter. You will find that open-ended question in the problem set.
In the next section, we will consider survey questions that involve more than two sets.
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by the operations
of union, intersection, and complementation?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
This section began with an open-
ended question from the 1987 Examination of the California
Assessment Program:
James knows that half the students from his school are
accepted at the public university nearby. Also, half are
accepted at the local private college. James thinks that
this adds up to 100%, so he will surely be accepted at one
or the other institution. Explain why James may be wrong.
If possible, use a diagram in your explanation. 
3. a. What English word is used to describe union?
b. What English word is used to describe intersection?
c. What English word is used to describe complement?
Problem Set 2.2
4. State formulas for: 
a. cardinality of an intersection
b. cardinality of a union
Perform the given set operations in Problems 5–18. 
Let U  {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}.
5. {2, 6, 8} ´ {6, 8 10}
6. {2, 6, 8} ¨ {6, 8, 10}
7. {2, 5, 8} ´ {3, 6, 9}
8. {2, 5, 8} ¨ {3, 6, 9}
9. {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} ¨ {3, 4, 5, 6, 7}
10. {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} ´ {3, 4, 5, 6, 7}
11.
12. 51, 2, 5, 7, 96
52, 8, 96
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13.
14.
15. {x ƒ x is a multiple of 2} ´ {x is a multiple of 3}
16. {x ƒ x is a multiple of 2} ¨ {x ƒ is a multiple of 3}
17.
18.
Perform the given set operations in Problems 19–28.
19. {x ƒ x is a positive integer} ´ {x ƒ x is a negative integer} 
20. {x ƒ x is a positive integer} ¨ {x ƒ x is a negative integer}
21.  ´ 
22.  ¨ 
23.
24.
25.
for any set X
26. X ´  for any set X
27. U ´ 
28. U ¨ 
Let U {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}, A  {1, 2, 3, 4}, B  {1, 2, 5, 6},
and C  {3, 5, 7}. List all the members of each of the sets in
Problems 29–44.
29. A ´ B
30. A ¨ B
31. A ´ C
32. A ¨ C
33. B ¨ C
34. B ´ C
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41. {x ƒ x is less than 5} ´ {xƒ x is greater than 5}
42. {x ƒ x is less than 5}¨ {xƒ x is greater than 5}
43.  ´ A
44.  ¨ B
In Problems 45–48, use set notation to identify the shaded region. 
45.
46.
5y  0   y is  between 4 and 106
5x 0  x is  greater  than  46
U
C
B
A
X  

U
5y 0  y is odd6
5x 0 x is  even6
52, 4, 6, 8, 106  
51, 3, 5, 7, 96  
Section 2.2
Operations with Sets
63
U
A
B
U
A
B
U
A
B
U
A
B
47.
48.
Draw Venn diagrams for each of the relationships in
Problems 49–52.
49. X ´ Y
50. X ¨ Z
51.
52.
Level  2
53. Montgomery College has a 50-piece band and a 36-piece
orchestra. If 14 people are members of both the band and
the orchestra, can the band and orchestra travel in two 
40-passenger buses?
Z
Y
Cengage Learning
54. From a survey of 100 college students, a marketing research
company found that 75 students owned Ipods, 45 owned cars,
and 35 owned both cars and Ipods. 
a. How many students owned either a car or an Ipod (but not
both)?
b. How many students do not own either a car or an Ipod?
55. In a survey of a TriDelt chapter with 50 members, 18 were tak-
ing mathematics, 35 were taking English, and 6 were taking
both. How many were not taking either of these subjects?
56. In a senior class at Rancho Cotati High School, there were 
25 football players and 16 basketball players. If 7 persons
played both sports, how many different people played in
these sports?
57. The fire department wants to send booklets on fire hazards to
all teachers and homeowners in town. How many booklets
does it need, using these statistics? 
50,000 homeowners 
4,000 teachers 
3,000 teachers who own their own homes
58. Santa Rosa Junior College enrolled 29,000 students in the fall
of 1999. It was reported that of that number, 58% were female
and 42% were male. In addition, 62% were over the age of 25.
How many students were there in each category if 40% of
those over the age of 25 were male? Draw a Venn diagram
showing these relationships.
Problem Solving 3   
59. The general Venn diagram for two sets has four regions
(Figure 2.7), and the one for three sets has eight regions 
(Figure 2.10). Use patterns to develop a formula for the
number of regions in a Venn diagram with n sets.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.3  Applications of Sets
In the previous section, we introduced three operations: intersection, union, and comple-
ment. These are known as the fundamental set operations. In this section, we consider
mixed operations with more than two sets, as well as some additional applications with sets.
Combined Operations with Sets
For sets, we perform operations from left to right; however, if there are parentheses, we
perform operations within them first.
Example
1
Order of operations
Verbalize the correct order of operations and then illustrate the combined set operations
using Venn diagrams:
a.
b.
Solution
a. This is a combined operation that should be read from left to right. First find the com-
plements of A and B and then find the union. This is called a union of complements.
Step 1
Shade 
(vertical lines), then shade 
(horizontal lines).
B
A
A ´ B
A ´ B
B
WA (vertical lines)
WA with WB (horizontal lines)
U
U
A
B
A
Step 2
is every portion that is shaded with horizontal or vertical lines.
We show that here using a color highlighter.
A ´ B
WA < BW
U
A
B
64
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
60. Each of the circles in Figure 2.12 is identified by a letter, each
having a number value from 1 to 9. Where the circles overlap,
the number is the sum of the values of the letters in the
overlapping circles. What is the number value for each letter?*
A
B
C
D
E
H
F
G
I
9
7
14
17
11
9
FIGURE 2.12 Circle intersection puzzle
* From “Perception Puzzles,” by Jean Moyer, Sky, January 1995, p. 120. Math
Puzzles and Logic Problems © 1995 Dell Magazines, a division of Penny Marketing
Limited Partnership, reprinted by permission of Dell Magazines.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.3
Applications of Sets
65
b. This is a combined operation that should be interpreted to mean (
), which is
the complement of the union. First find A
B (vertical lines), and then find the com-
plement (color highlighter). This is called the complement of a union. We show only
the final result. 
´
A ´ B
WWWW
A < B
U
A
B
De Morgan’s Laws
Notice from Example 1 that 
. If they were equal, the final highlighted
color portions of the Venn diagrams would be the same. The next example takes us a step
further by showing what 
does equal.
A ´ B
A ´ B 2 A ´ B
Look Back. They are the same, so we have proved 
.
The result proved in Example 2 is called De Morgan’s law for sets. In the problem
set you are asked to prove the second part of De Morgan’s law.
A ´ B 5 A d B
Example
2
DE MORGAN’S LAW
Prove 
 
¨ . 
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. We wish to prove the given statement is true for all sets A and
B, so we cannot work with a particular example.
Devise a Plan. The procedure is to draw separate Venn diagrams for the left and the
right sides, and then to compare them to see if they are identical.
Carry Out the Plan.
Step 1
Draw a diagram for the expression on the left side of the equal sign, namely
The final result is shown with color highlighter. (See Example 1 for
details.)
Step 2
Draw a diagram for the expression on the right side of the equal sign. First
draw 
(vertical lines) and then 
(horizontal lines). The final result, 
, is
the part with both vertical and horizontal lines (as shown with the color high-
lighter) in the right portion of Figure 2.13.
Step 3
Compare the portions shaded by the color highlighter in the two 
Venn diagrams.
A d B
B
A
A ´ B.
B
A
A ´ B
Pólya’s 
Method
U
A
B
U
A
B
5
WA > BW
WWWW
A < B
FIGURE 2.13 De Morgan’s Law
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Venn Diagrams with Three Sets
Next, we find the regions described by some combined operations for three sets.
66
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
De Morgan’s Laws for Sets
Historical
The photo shows the
frontispiece of a book
written by Augustus De
Morgan (1806–1871) in 1838.
Not only was Augustus De
Morgan a distinguished
mathematician and logician, but in
1845 he suggested the slanted
line we sometimes use when writ-
ing fractions, such as 
. De
Morgan also used a formula
involving 
when explaining to an
actuary the probability of a certain
group being alive at a given time.
(The number 
is defined as the
ratio of the circumference of a cir-
cle to its diameter.) The actuary
was astonished and responded:
“That must be a delusion. What
can a circle have to do with the
number of people alive at a given
time?” Of course, actuaries today
are more sophisticated. The num-
ber 
is used in a wide variety of
applications.
p
p
p
1
2 or 2
3
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Example
3
Operations with three sets
Using the eight regions labeled in Figure 2.14, describe each of the following sets.
U
VIII
A
C
B
I
II
III
V
VII
IV
VI
FIGURE 2.14 Venn diagram for three general sets showing eight regions
a.
b. A ¨ C
c. B ¨ C
d.
e.
f. A ¨ B ¨ C
g. A ´ (B ¨ C)
h.
¨ C
Solution
a. A (vertical lines); B (horizontal lines); A ´ B is everything shaded and is highlighted,
as shown in Figure 2.15a. Compare with Figure 2.14 to see the answer is Regions I,
II, IV, V, VI, and VII. 
b. A (vertical lines); C (horizontal lines); A ¨ C is everything shaded twice and is high-
lighted, as shown in Figure 2.15b. Compare with Figure 2.14; Regions IV and VII.
c. B (vertical lines); C (horizontal lines); B ¨ C is everything shaded twice, as high-
lighted in Figure 2.15c. Compare with Figure 2.14; Regions VI and VII.
d. A (vertical lines); 
is everything not shaded, as highlighted in Figure 2.15d.
Compare with Figure 2.14; Regions II, III, VI, and VIII.
A
A ´ B
A ´ B
A
A ´ B
C
U
A
B
A
C
B
U
a. 
b. A d C
A ´ B
For any sets X and Y
X d Y 5 X ´ Y
X ´  Y 5 X d Y
FIGURE 2.15
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.3
Applications of Sets
67
A
C
B
U
A
C
B
U
A
C
B
U
A
C
B
U
A
C
B
U
A
B
U
C
FIGURE 2.15 Working with Venn diagrams
c. 
d. 2.15
B d C
e. 
f. A d B d C
A ´ B
g.
h. A ´ B d C
A ´ 1B d C2
e. A ´ B (vertical lines); 
is everything not shaded, as highlighted in Figure 15e.
Compare with Figure 2.14; Regions III and VIII.
f.
is 
¨ C, so we show 
(vertical lines) and C (horizontal
lines); highlight regions shaded twice, as shown in Figure 2.15f. Compare with
Figure 2.14; Region VII.
g. Parentheses first, 
(vertical lines); A (horizontal lines); A ´ (B ¨ C) is every-
thing shaded, as highlighted in Figure 2.15g. Compare with Figure 2.14; Regions
I, IV, V, VI, and VII.
h.
(vertical lines); and C (horizontal lines); everything shaded twice is high-
lighted in Figure 2.15h. Compare with Figure 2.14; Region III.
A ´ B
B d C
A d B
1A d B2
A d B d C
A ´ B
Example
4
Union is associative
If (P
Q)
R  P
(Q
R), we say that the operation of union is 
associative. Is the operation of union for sets an associative operation? 
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example. 
Understand the Problem. Even though we cannot answer this question by using a particu-
lar example, we can use one to help us understand the question. Let U  {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10}, P  {1, 4, 7}, Q  {2, 4, 9, 10}, and R  {6, 7, 8, 9}. Is the following true?
5 51, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 106
P ´ 1Q ´ R2 5 51, 4, 76 ´ 52, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 106
5 51, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 106
1P ´ Q2 ´ R 5 51, 2, 4, 7, 9, 106 ´ 56, 7, 8, 96
1P ´ Q2 ´ R 5 P ´ 1Q ´ R2?
´
´
´
´
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
P
Q
R
P
Q
R
(P < Q) < R
P < (Q < R)
For this example, the operation of union for sets is associative. If we had observed
(P
Q)
R
P
(Q
R), then we would have had a counterexample. Although
they are equal in this example, we cannot say that the property is true for all possibili-
ties. However, all is not lost because it did help us to understand the question. 
Devise a Plan. Use Venn diagrams.
Carry Out the Plan. Recall that the union is the entire shaded area.
´
´
2
´
´
Look Back. The operation of union for sets is an associative operation since the parts
shaded in yellow are the same for both diagrams.
Survey Problems
In the previous section, we used the property of the cardinality of a union to find the num-
ber of elements in various regions formed by two sets. For three sets, the situation is a lit-
tle more involved. There is a formula for the number of elements, but it is easier to use
Venn diagrams, as illustrated by Example 5. Remember, the usual procedure is to fill in
the number in the innermost region first and work your way outward through the Venn
diagram using subtraction.
Example
5
Survey problem
A survey of 100 randomly selected students gave the following information.
Pólya’s 
Method
45 students are taking mathematics.
41 students are taking English.
40 students are taking history.
15 students are taking math and English.
18 students are taking math and history.
17 students are taking English and history.
7 students are taking all three.
Justin Sullivan/Getty Images  
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.3
Applications of Sets
69
a. How many are taking only mathematics?
b. How many are taking only English?
c. How many are taking only history?
d. How many are not taking any of these courses?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. We are considering students who are members of one or more
of three sets. If U represents the universe, then 
We also define the three sets: 
0U0 5 100.
M
H
E
7
FIGURE 2.16a First step is inner region
FIGURE 2.16b Second step is two-region intersections
Step 2
Fill in the other inner portions.
but 7 have previously been accounted for, so an additional 10 
members 
are added to the Venn diagram (see Figure 2.16b).
fill in 
; fill in 15 2 7 5  8.
18 2 7 5 11; 0M d E0 5 15
0M d H0 5 18;
117 2 7 5 102
0E d H0 5 17,
M
H
E
7
11
10
8
FIGURE 2.16c Third step is the one-region parts 
M
H
E
7
11
10
8
19
16
12
17
Step 3
Fill in the other regions (see Figure 2.16c).
but 28 have previously been accounted for in the set H, so there are 
an additional 12 members 
; fill in
fill in 45 2 11 2 7 2 8 5 19.
41 2 8 2 7 2 10 5 16; 0M0 5 45;
0E0 5 41
140 2 11 2 7 2 10 5 122.
0H0 5 40,
M  {students taking mathematics}, E  {students taking English}, H  {students
taking history}.
Devise a Plan. The plan is to draw a Venn diagram, and then to fill in the various regions.
We fill in the innermost region first, and then work our way outward (using subtraction)
until the numbers of elements of the eight regions formed by the three sets are known.
Carry Out the Plan.
Step 1
We note 
in Figure 2.16a.
0M d E d H0 5 7
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Step 4
Add all the numbers listed in the sets of the Venn diagram to see that
83 students have been accounted for. Since 100 students were surveyed, we
see that 17 are not taking any of the three courses. (We also filled this number
in Figure 16c.) We now have the answers to the questions directly from the
Venn diagram: a. 19
b. 16
c. 12
d. 17
Look Back. Does our answer make sense? Add all the numbers in the Venn diagram as
a check to see that we have accounted for the 100 students.
70
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
Level  1
1. What do we mean by De Morgan’s laws?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the general procedure for
drawing a Venn diagram for a survey problem? 
Let U  {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}, A  {1, 2, 3, 4}, B  {1, 2, 5, 6}, 
and C  {3, 5, 7}. List all the members of each of the sets in
Problems 3–10. 
3. (A
B) 
C
4. A
(B
C)
5.
C
6. A
7.
(B
C)
8. (A
B)
9.
10.
(
)
Consider the sets X and Y. Write each of the statements in
Problems 11–18 in symbols.
11. A union of complements
12. A complement of a union
13. A complement of an intersection
14. An intersection of complements
15. The complement of the union of X and Y
16. The union of the complements of X and Y
17. The intersection of the complements of X and Y
18. The complement of the intersection of X and Y
Level  2
Draw Venn diagrams for each of the relationships in 
Problems 19–34.
19.
B
20. A
21.
22. A ´ B
A d B
 d B
A ´
B d C
A ´
1A ´ B2 d C
 d C
´
 d 
A ´
B d C
´
 d 
A ´ B
 d 
´
d
´
23. A
(B
C)
24. A
(B
C) 
25. A
26.
C
27.
C
28. A
29.
(B
C)
30. (A
B)
31.
32.
(
)
33.
34. (A
B)
(A 
C)
35. Draw a Venn diagram showing the relationship among cats,
dogs, and animals.
36. Draw a Venn diagram showing the relationship among trucks,
buses, and cars.
37. Draw a Venn diagram showing people in a classroom wearing
some black, people wearing some blue, and people wearing
some brown.
38. Draw a Venn diagram showing birds, bees, and living creatures.
39. In 1995 the United States population was approximately 263
million. It was reported that of that number, 79% were
white, 12% were black, and 9% were Hispanic. If % have 
one black and one white parent, 2% have one black and one
Hispanic parent, and 1% have one white and one Hispanic
parent, how many people are there in each category? Draw a
Venn diagram showing these relationships. 
40. Here are the results of the voting by eight senators on voting
by three bills in the U.S. Senate during the 107th Congress,
second session (2002):
Senator
Bill A
Bill B
Bill C
S. 2414
H.R. 2356
Amen. 3017
Clinton (D)
yea
yea
yea 
Kennedy (D)
yea
yea
yea 
Bayh (D)
nay
yea
nay 
Inouye (D)
yea
yea
nay 
Campbell (R)
yea
nay
nay 
Helms (R)
yea
nay
nay 
Thurmond (R)
yea
nay
nay 
Lott (R)
yea
nay
nay 
Place each senator in the appropriate region of Figure 2.17. 
A “yea” vote is recorded as supporting the bill and
consequently places the senator inside the circle
representing that particular bill.
1
2
d
´
 d 
1A ´ B2 ´ C
B d C
A ´
1A ´ B2 d C
 d C
´
 d 
A ´
´ B d C
A ´ B d 
A ´ B ´
 d B ´ C
´
´
´
 d 
Problem Set 2.3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

41. Listed below are five female and five male Wimbledon tennis
champions, along with their country of citizenship and
handedness.
Female
Male 
Stephi Graf, Germany, right
Michael Stich, Germany, right
Martina Navratilova, U.S., left
Stefan Edberg, Sweden, right
Chris Evert Lloyd, U.S., right
Boris Becker, Germany, right
Evonne Goolagong, Australia, right
Pat Cash, Australia, right
Virginia Wade, Britain, right
John McEnroe, U.S., left
Using Figure 2.18, indicate in which region each of the above
individuals would be placed.
Section 2.3
Applications of Sets
71
U
VIII
I
II
III
V
VII
IV
VI
Citizen of
United States
Right-
handed
Male
FIGURE 2.18 Wimbledon tennis champions
In Problems 42–45, use set notation to identify the shaded region.
42.
43.
44.
45.
A
C
B
U
A
C
B
U
U
A
B
U
A
B
In Problems 46–51, use Venn diagrams to prove or disprove each
statement. Remember to draw a diagram for the left side of the
equation and another for the right side. If the final shaded portions
are the same, then you have proved the result. If the final shaded
portions are not identical, then you have disproved the result.
46.
47.
48. (A
B)
C  A
(B
C)
49. A
(B
C)  (A
B)
(A
C)
50. A
(B
C)  (A
B)
(A
C)
51.
52. In a recent survey of 100 persons, the following information
was gathered:
59 use shampoo A.
51 use shampoo B.
35 use shampoo C.
24 use shampoos A and B.
19 use shampoos A and C.
13 use shampoos B and C.
11 use all three. 
Let
A  {persons who use shampoo A}
B  {persons who use shampoo B} 
C  {persons who use shampoo C} 
Use a Venn diagram to show how many persons are in each of
the eight possible categories.
53. Matt E. Matic was applying for a job. To determine whether he
could handle the job, the personnel manager sent him out to
poll 100 people about their favorite types of TV shows. His
data were as follows:
59 preferred comedies.
38 preferred variety shows.
42 preferred serious drama.
18 preferred comedies and variety programs.
12 preferred variety and serious drama.
16 preferred comedies and serious drama. 
7 preferred all types.
2 did not like any of these TV show types.
If you were the personnel manager, would you hire Matt on the
basis of this survey? Why or why not?
54. A poll was taken of 100 students at a commuter campus to find
out how they got to campus. The results were as follows:
42 said they drove alone.
28 rode in a carpool.
31 rode public transportation.
9 used both carpools and public transportation.
10 used both a carpool and sometimes their own cars.
6 used buses as well as their own cars.
4 used all three methods.
How many used none of the above-mentioned means of
transportation?
5 X ´ Y
X d Y
 d 
 d 
 d 
´
 d 
´
´
´
´
´
 d 
 d 
 d 
 d 
 A d B 5 A ´ B
5 X ´ Y
X ´ Y
U
VIII
A
C
B
I
II
III
V
VII
IV
VI
FIGURE 2.17 Senatorial votes
 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

55. In an interview of 50 students,
12 liked Proposition 8 and Proposition 13.
18 liked Proposition 8, but not Proposition 5.
4 liked Proposition 8, Proposition 13, and Proposition 5.
25 liked Proposition 8.
15 liked Proposition 13.
10 liked Proposition 5, but not Proposition 8 nor
Proposition 13.
1 liked Proposition 13 and Proposition 5, but not
Proposition 8.
a. Show the completed Venn diagram.
b. Of those surveyed, how many did not like any of the three
propositions?
c. How many liked Proposition 8 and Proposition 5?
Problem Solving 3   
56. HISTORICAL QUEST
On the NBC Nightly News on
Thursday, May 25, 1995, Tom Brokaw read a brief report on
computer use in the United States. The story compared
computer users by ethnic background, and Brokaw reported
that 14% of blacks and 13% of Hispanics use computers, but
27% of whites use computers. Brokaw then commented that
computer use by whites was equal to that of blacks and
Hispanics combined.
a. Draw a Venn diagram showing the white, black, Hispanic,
Asian, and Native American populations of the United
States, along with U.S. computer users.
b. Use the Venn diagram from part a to show that percentages
cannot be added as was done by Brokaw.
57. Draw a Venn diagram for four sets, and label the 
16 regions.
58. The Venn diagram in Figure 2.19 shows five sets. It was drawn
by Allen J. Schwenk of the U.S. Naval Academy. As you can
see, there are 32 separate regions. Describe the following
regions:
72
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
A
B
C
D
E
1
6
11
22
7
31
8
12
13
3
9
15
5
4
14
10
2
32
27
26
21
30
25
20
16
19
29 24
18
28
23
17
FIGURE 2.19 General Venn diagram for five sets
a. 1
b. 11
c. 21
d. 31
e. 16
59. Using the Venn diagram in Figure 2.19, specify which region
is described by
a.
b.
60. Human blood is typed Rh+ (positive blood) or Rh– (negative
blood). This Rh factor is called an antigen. There are two other
antigens known as A and B types. Blood lacking both A and B
types is called type O. Sketch a Venn diagram showing the
three types of antigens A, B, and Rh, and label each of the
eight regions. For example, O+ is inside the Rh set (anything in
Rh is positive) but outside both A and B. On the other hand, 
O– is that region outside all three circles.
A d B ´ C ´ D ´ E
A ´ B ´ C ´ D ´ E
2.4  Finite and Infinite Sets
In Chapter 1, we discussed some very large numbers. In Problem 5 of Section 1.3, we
asked, “What is the largest number whose name you know?” No matter what your
answer, we can find a larger number by adding 1 to that “largest number.” Somehow we
know that “there is no end,” but we need to introduce some notation and terminology to
tackle the “really big” numbers!
Trajano Paiva/Alamy
Photo with infinitely many reflections
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Infinite Sets
Certain sets, such as , , ,  and A  {1000, 2000, 3000, . . .}, have a common
property. We call these infinite sets. If the cardinality of a set is 0 or a counting number,
we say the set is finite. Otherwise, we say it is infinite. We can also say that a set is finite
if it has a cardinality less than some counting number, even though we may not know its
precise cardinality. For example, we can safely assert that the set of students attending
the University of Hawaii is finite even though we may not know its cardinality, because
the cardinality is certainly less than a million.
You use the ideas of cardinality and of equivalent sets every time you count some-
thing, even though you don’t use the term cardinality. For example, a set of sheep is
counted by finding a set of consecutive counting numbers starting with 1 that has the same
cardinality as the set of sheep. These equivalent sets are found by using an idea called one-
to-one correspondence. If the set of sheep is placed into a one-to-one correspondence
with a set of pebbles, the set of pebbles can then be used to represent the set of sheep.
Section 2.4
Finite and Infinite Sets
73
Example
1
Finding a one-to-one correspondence
Which of the following sets can be placed into a one-to-one correspondence?
K  {3, 4}, L  {4}, M  {3}, N  {three}, P  {♥, ♣, ♦, ♠}, Q  {t, h, r, e}
Solution
Notice that
L  {4}
P  {♥, ♣, ♦, ♠}
D
D D D D
M  {3}
Q  {t, h, r, e}
D
N  {three}
We see that L, M, and N all have the same cardinality, and using that knowledge we see
that any pair of them can be placed into a one-to-one correspondence; we write 
L 4 M, L 4 N, and M 4 N. We also see that P and Q can be placed into a one-to-one
correspondence.
Since infinity is not a number, we cannot correctly say that the cardinality of the
counting numbers is infinity. In the late 18th century, Georg Cantor assigned a cardinal
number 
(pronounced “aleph-naught”) to the set of counting numbers. That is, 
is the
cardinality of the set of counting numbers
  {1, 2, 3, 4, . . .}
The set
E  {2, 4, 6, 8, . . .}
u 0
u 0
Two sets A and B are said to be in a one-to-one correspondence if we can find a
pairing so that
1. Each element of A is paired with precisely one element of B; and
2. Each element of B is paired with precisely one element of A.
One-to-One Correspondence 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

also has cardinality 
, since it can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with set :
  {1, 2, 3, 4, . . . , n, . . .}
D D D D
D
E  {2, 4, 6, 8, . . . , 2n, . . .}
Notice that all elements of E are elements of the set , and that E  . Recall that in
such a case, we say that E is a proper subset of . Cantor used this property as a defining
property for infinite sets.
u 0
74
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
Example
2
Infinite set
Show that the set of integers    {. . . , 3, 2, 1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .} is infinite.
Solution
We can show that the set of integers can be placed into a one-to-one corre-
spondence with the set of counting numbers:
  {1,
2, 
3,
4, 
5,
6, 
7, . . . ,
2n, 2n  1, . . .}
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
  {0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3, . . . , n,
n, . . .} 
Since  is a proper subset of , we see that the set of integers is infinite.
Example 2 shows not only that the set of integers is infinite, but also that the cardinality
of  is 
You might think that 
, but Example 2 shows that the cardinality
of the integers is the same as the cardinality of the set of counting numbers; similarly, the set
of counting numbers has the same cardinality as the set of negative counting numbers, so
or
If a set is finite or if it has cardinality 
, we say that the set is countable. Thus, both
the set of counting numbers and the set of integers are countable. A set that is not counta-
ble is said to be uncountable. We have shown that  and  are countable, and in the prob-
lem set you are asked to show that  is countable. We can now show that  is countable.
u 0
2u 0 5 u 0
u 0 1 u 0 5 u 0
u 0 1 u 0 5 2u 0
u 0.
Example
3
Show that rationals are countable
Show that the set of rational numbers is countable.
Solution
What we need to is to put the set of rationals into a one-to-one correspon-
dence with the set of counting numbers. This is not an easy task, it was first done by
Georg Cantor (see Historical Note on page 50).
First, consider the positive rational numbers and arrange them in rows so that all
the numbers with denominators of 1 are written in row 1, those with denominator 2 are
written in row 2, and so on. Notice that some numbers are highlighted because those
numbers, when reduced, are found somewhere else in the list.
We see that every nonnegative rational number will appear on this list. For 
example, 103/879 will appear in row 103 and column 879. To set up a one-to-one corre-
spondence between the set of nonnegative rationals and the set of counting numbers, we
follow the path shown below:
(
(
(
(
(
(
(
1
7
2
7
3
7
4
7
5
7
6
7
7
7
c
1
6
2
6
3
6
4
6
5
6
6
6
7
6
c
1
5
2
5
3
5
4
5
5
5
6
5
7
5
c
1
4
2
4
3
4
4
4
5
4
6
4
7
4
c
1
3
2
3
3
3
4
3
5
3
6
3
7
3
c
1
2
2
2
3
2
4
2
5
2
6
2
7
2
c
0
1
1
1
2
1
3
1
4
1
5
1
6
1
7
1
c
An infinite set is a set that can be placed into a one-to-one correspondence with a
proper subset of itself.
Infinite Set
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

S
S
S
S
b
c
T
c
T
c
S
b
Q
b
Q
b
Q
T
Q
b
Q
b
Q
b
Q
b
Q
T
Q
b
Q
b
Q
S
Now we set up the one-to-one correspondence: 
(we skip 
because it is equal to , and is already in our list), 
. Do you see the pat-
tern? What we have shown is that the set of positive rational numbers has cardinality 
.
Finally, we use the method shown in Example 2; that is, we let each negative num-
ber follow its positive counterpart, so we can extend this correspondence to include all
negative rational numbers. Thus, the set of all rational numbers has cardinality 
and is
therefore countable.
You may be saying to yourself, “All infinite sets are countable” (that is, have cardi-
nality 
). This is not the case, as we see in the next example, where we show that the set
of real numbers is uncountable.
u 0
u 0
u 0
1
4 4 5, 2
3 4 6, . . .
1
1
2
2
0
1 4 1, 1
1 4 2, 1
2 4 3, 1
3 4 4
(
(
(
(
(
(
(
c
7
7
6
7
5
7
4
7
3
7
2
7
1
7
c
7
6
6
6
5
6
4
6
3
6
2
6
1
6
c
7
5
6
5
5
5
4
5
3
5
2
5
1
5
c
7
4
6
4
5
4
4
4
3
4
2
4
1
4
c
7
3
6
3
5
3
4
3
3
3
2
3
1
3
c
7
2
6
2
5
2
4
2
3
2
2
2
1
2
c
7
1
6
1
5
1
4
1
3
1
2
1
1
1
0
1
Section 2.4
Finite and Infinite Sets
75
Example
4
Show that reals are uncountable
Show that the set of real numbers is uncountable.
Solution
In Chapter 5, we will see that the set of real numbers, , can be
characterized as the set of all possible repeating and terminat-
ing decimals. In order to prove that the set of real numbers is
uncountable, we note that every set is either countable or
uncountable. We will assume that the set is countable, and then we will arrive at a con-
tradiction. This contradiction, in turn, leads us to the conclusion that our assumption is
incorrect, thus establishing that the set is uncountable. This process is called proof by
contradiction.
Let’s suppose that  is countable. Then, there is some one-to-one correspondence
between  and , say:
1 4
5.285938 . . .
2 4 1,200.444444 . . .
3 4
630.500000 . . .
4 4
0.123456 . . .
o
Read the first
paragraph of the
solution. Do you
understand what is
going on here? If not,
ask some questions.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now, if we assume that there is a one-to-one correspondence between  and , then
every decimal number is in the above list. To show this is not possible, we construct a
new decimal as follows. The first digit of this new decimal is any digit different from
the first digit of the entry corresponding to the first correspondence. (That is, anything
other than 2 using the above-listed correspondence). The second digit is any digit differ-
ent from the second digit of the entry corresponding to the second correspondence (4 in
this example). Do the same for all the numbers in the one-to-one correspondence.
Because of the way we have constructed this new number, it is not on the list. But we
began by assuming that all numbers are on the list (i.e., that all decimal numbers are part
of the one-to-one correspondence). Since both these statements cannot be true, the orig-
inal assumption has led to a contradiction. This forces us to accept the only possible al-
ternative to the original assumption. That is, it is not possible to set up a one-to-one
correspondence between  and , which means that  is uncountable.
76
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
Example
5
Cardinality of a Cartesian product
How many elements are in the Cartesian product of the given sets?
a. A  {Frank, George, Hazel} and B  {Alfie, Bogie, Calvin, Doug, Ernie} 
b. C  {U.S. Senators} and D  {U.S. President, U.S. Vice President, Secretary of State}
Solution 
a. One of the ways to find a Cartesian product is to represent the sets as an array.
A  B
Alfie, a
Bogie, b
Calvin, c
Doug, d
Ernie, e
Frank, f
( f, a)
(f, b)
(f, c)
(f, d)
(f, e)
George, g
(g, a)
(g, b)
(g, c)
(g, d)
(g, e)
Hazel, h
(h, a)
(h, b)
(h, c)
(h, d)
(h, e)
Since a Cartesian product can be arranged as a rectangular array, we see that the num-
ber of elements is the product of the number of elements in the sets. That is, since
and 
, we see 
.
0  A 3 B 0 5 3 3 5 5 15
0  B 0 5 5
0  A 0 5 3
It can also be shown that the irrational numbers (real numbers that are not rational)
are uncountable. Furthermore, the set 
where a and D are any real num-
bers, is also uncountable. Individual Project 2.4 considers this set for a particular choice
of a and b. What we have done here is to show that there are cardinalities that are greater
than 
. Cantor called the cardinality of the real numbers c, which is greater than 
and is
sometimes called the power of the continuum. The cardinality c is sometimes called 
,
because there is speculation (yet unproved) that there is no set with cardinality between
that of  and . Cantor was able to show, however, that there are even larger orders of in-
finity, and, in fact, infinitely many larger alephs.
u 1
u 0
u 0
5x 0 a # x # b6,
Cartesian Product of Sets
There is an operation of sets called the Cartesian product that provides a way of generat-
ing new sets when given the elements of two sets. Suppose we have the sets
A  {a, b, c}
and
B  {1, 2} 
The Cartesian product of sets A and B, denoted by A  B, is the set of all ordered pairs
(x, y) where x  A and y  B. For this example, 
A  B  {(a, 1), (a, 2), (b, 1), (b, 2), (c, 1), (c, 2)}
Notice that A  B
B  A.
2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b. We are looking for |C  D |, but we see it is not practical to form the rectangular
array because |C |  100 and | D |  3. We still can visualize the size of the array
even without writing it out, so we conclude
We will frequently find it convenient to use the multiplication principle illus-
trated in Example 5, so we restate it as a general property, called the fundamental
counting principle.
0  C 3 D 0 5 0  C 0 3 0  D 0 5 100 3 3 5 300
Section 2.4
Finite and Infinite Sets
77
The fundamental counting principle gives the number of ways of performing two or
more tasks. If task A can be performed in m ways, and if after task A is performed, a
second task B can be performed in n ways, then task A followed by task B can be
performed in 
ways.
m 3 n
Fundamental Counting Principle
Example
6
Classify as finite or infinite
Classify each of the sets as finite or infinite.
a. Set of people on Earth
b. Set of license plates that can be issued using three letters followed by three numerals
c. Set of drops of water in all the oceans of the world 
Solution 
a. We do not know the size of this set, but we do know that there are fewer than 10 billion
people on Earth. If the cardinality of a set is less than a finite number (and 10 billion is
finite), then it must be a finite set.
b. We can use the fundamental counting principle to calculate the number of possible
license plates:
Note that each “26” counts the number of letters of the alphabet, and each “10”
counts the number of numerals in each position. Since this is a particular number, we
see that this set of license plates is finite.
c. Certainly this must be an infinite set . . . who could count the number of drops? Let’s
consider this a bit more carefully. What is a drop? Is that well defined? If you are told
by your doctor to use two drops to dilate the pupils of your eyes, can you do that?
You have a device called an “eyedropper” and you squeeze out two drops. Now, there
is a finite number of drops that make up an ounce, and there are a certain number of
ounces in a gallon, and a certain number of gallons in a cubic foot. The earth will fit
entirely inside a cube of a certain size, and if this cube were filled with water, it
would contain a finite number of gallons. The number of drops of water in all the
oceans of the world is certainly less than this number, and hence the set is finite.
26 3 26 3 26 3 10 3 10 3 10 5 17,576,000
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Why do you think the fundamental
counting principle is so “fundamental”?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe your preconceived notions
about “infinity.” Next, describe your understanding of “infin-
ity” in light of the material in this section.
Problem Set 2.4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32. Do the following sets have the same cardinality?
{48, 49, 50, . . . , 783, 784}
{485, 487, 489, . . . , 2053, 2055}
33. Classify the following sets as finite or infinite. 
a. The set of stars in the Milky Way
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the Cartesian product of two
sets?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does the cardinality of the
Cartesian product have to do with the fundamental counting
principle?
Find the Cartesian product of the sets given in Problems 5–10.
5. A  {c, d, f} and B  {w, x}; find A  B. 
6. A  {c, d, f} and B  {w, x}; find B  A.  
7. F  {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and C  {a, b, c}; find F  C.
8. F  {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and C  {a, b, c}; find C  F.
9. X  {xƒ x  , x is between 1 and 5} and V  {vƒv is a
vowel}; find X  V.
10. X  {xƒ x  , x is between 1 and 5} and V  {vƒv is a
vowel}; find V  X.
Give the cardinality of each set in Problems 11–24. 
11. {48, 49, . . . , 189, 190}
12. {16, 20, 24, . . . , 400, 404}
13. {42, 41, . . . , 41, 42}
14. {998, 997, . . . , 85, 86}
15. {c, d, e, . . . , v, w}
16. {0}
17. 
18. {}
19. {100, 200, 300, . . .}
20. {
}
21. T  W where T  {1, 2, . . . ,19, 20}, W  {a, b, . . . , v, w}
22. S  V where S  {U.S. states}, V  {a, b, c}
23. {x|x is an odd integer}
24. {y|y is an even integer}
Level 2
25. If A  {letters of the alphabet} and B  {0, 1, 2, . . . , 9}, what
is ƒ A  B ƒ ?
26. If A  {letters of the alphabet}, what is ƒ A  A ƒ?
27. If C  {500, 501, 502, . . . , 599} and D  {U.S. state
capitals}, what is ƒC  Dƒ?
28. If M  {distinct letters in the word mathematics} and 
N  {distinct letters in the word nevertheless}, what is 
ƒ M  N ƒ?
29. Show that there is more than one one-to-one correspondence
between the sets {m, a, t} and {1, 2, 3}. 
30. Show that the following sets have the same cardinality, by
placing the elements into a one-to-one correspondence.
{1, 2, 3, 4, . . . , 999, 1000}
{7964, 7965, 7966, 7967, . . . , 8962, 8963}
31. Show that the following sets do not have the same cardinality.
{1, 2, 3, 4, . . . , 586, 587}
{550, 551, 552, 553, . . . , 902, 903}
1
2, 1
3, 1
4, 1
5, c
78
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
NASA/JPL-Caltech    
Milky Way Galaxy
b. The set of counting numbers greater than one million
34. Classify the following sets as finite or infinite.
a. The set of people who are living or who have ever lived.
b. The set of grains of sand on all the beaches on Earth
Level  3
Show that each set in Problems 35–44 has cardinality
.
35. {1, 2, 3, . . .}
36. {1000, 3000, 5000, . . .}
37. {
}
38. {y ƒ y   and is divisible by 2}
39. 
40. 
41. Set of odd counting numbers
42. Set of positive multiples of 5
43. {1, 3, 9, 27, 81, . . .}
44. {85, 80, 75, . . .}
Show that each set in Problems 45–48 is infinite by placing it into
a one-to-one correspondence with a proper subset of itself.
45. 
46. 
47.
48.
An infinite set is said to be countably infinite if it can be placed
into a one-to-one correspondence with the set of counting
numbers, . If the set cannot be placed into such a
correspondence, it is said to be uncountably infinite. Decide
whether the sets in Problems 49–54 are countably infinite.
49. Set of whole numbers
50. Set of integers
54, 44, 444, 4444, . . .6
512, 14, 16, . . .6
1
x  0
 x [
u 0
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.5
Chapter Summary
79
51. Set of rationals
52. Set of reals
53.
54.
Determine whether each statement in Problems 55–58 is true or
false. Give reasons for your answers.
55. All uncountable sets are infinite.
56. All infinite sets are uncountable.
57. If two sets are infinite, then they are equivalent.
58. If two sets are equivalent, then they are infinite.
51, 4, 9, 16, 25, c6
52, 4, 8, 16, 32, c6
Problem Solving 3   
59. Make up an example to show that

 
60. Insert “” or “”  in each box.
a.
n
 
b.
n
 
 u 0
u 0
u 0
2u 0
u 0
u 0
u 0
u 0
u 0
u 0
2.5
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Denoting sets [2.1]
Sets of numbers [2.1]
Universal and empty sets [2.1]
Equal and equivalent sets [2.1]
Venn diagrams [2.1]
Operations with sets [2.1, 2.2, 2.3]
Cardinality of unions and intersections [2.2]
De Morgan’s laws [2.3]
Survey problems [2.3]
One-to-one correspondence [2.4]
Fundamental counting principle [2.4]
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
the listed important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look
online, you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the
types of problems that were introduced in this chapter. You will maximize your under-
standing of this chapter by working the problems in this section only after you have stud-
ied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test help in studying
for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
Numeracy is the ability
to cope confidently with
the mathematical
demands of adult life.
MATHEMATICS COUNTS
c.
 2 n
 2
d. ƒ ƒ n u 0
u 0
u 0
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80
CHAPTER 2
The Nature of Sets
Chapter
2
Review Questions
In Problems 1–8, let U  {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10},
A {1, 3, 5, 7, 9}, and B  {2, 4, 6, 9, 10}. Find:
1. a. A ´ B
b. A ¨ B
2. a.
b. ƒ ƒ
3. a. ƒUƒ
b. ƒ Aƒ
4. a. ƒA  Bƒ
b. ƒU  Bƒ
5. a.
b.
c. Does 
? Why or why not?
6.
7.
(B
A)
8. Replace the question mark with one of the symbols 
, (, , or  to make the statement true. 
a. {2} ? B
b. 2 ? B
c.
? {
}
d. {5, 3, 7, 9, 1}? A
e. B ? U
9. If U  {1, 2, 3, . . . , 49, 50}, N  {odd numbers}, and 
P  {two-digit numbers}, find: 
a. ƒ Nƒ
b. ƒ P ƒ
c. ƒ N ¨ Pƒ
d. ƒ N ´ P ƒ
Draw Venn diagrams for the sets in Problems 10–13.
10. a.
b.
11. a.
b.
12. a.
Y
b.
13. a.
b. (
Prove or disprove the statements given in
Problems 14–15.
14. A
(B
C)  (A
B)
C
15. (A
B)
C  (A
C)
(B
C)
16. The set of rational numbers is   {
a
, b
}.
a. Write this statement in words.
b. Give an example for the number q where q  .
17. Show that the set F  {5, 10, 15, 20, 25, . . .} is infinite.
18. a. Write the set {1, 2, 3, . . .} using set-builder
notation.
b. Show that this set has cardinality 
.
19. A survey of 70 college students showed the following data: 
42 had a car; 50 had a TV; 30 had a bicycle; 17 had a car
and a bicycle; 35 had a car and a TV; 25 had a TV and a
bicycle; 15 had all three 
How many students had none of the three items?
u0
[
[
0
a
b
 d 
´
 d 
 d 
´
 d 
´
 d 
´
X ´ Y2 d Z
1X d Y2 d Z
X ´ Y
X d 
X
X
X ´ Y
X d Y
[ 
´
A d 
1A ´ B2 d A
A ´ B
A d B 5
A ´ B
A d B
B
Recipient 
Donor
Blood Types
Blood Types
A
A, A, O, O
B
B, B, O, O
AB
A, A, B, B, 
AB, AB, O, O
O
O, O
A
A, O
B
B, O
AB
A, B, AB, O
O
O
a. List the eight possible blood types.
b. A universal donor is a person who can give blood to any of the
blood types, and this is a person with type 
blood. The rea-
son for this is that the region labeled 
includes all parts of
the Venn diagram outside the circle labeled 
. Name these
regions.
c. A universal recipient is a person who can receive blood from
any of the blood types, and this is a person with type 
blood. The reason for this is that the region labeled 
is in-
side all parts of the Venn diagram except the region labeled 
.
Name the regions in which AB+ is located.
O1
AB1
AB1
O1
O2
O2
FIGURE 2.20 The eight blood types and compatibility table
20. Human blood is typed Rh+ (positive blood) or Rh– (negative
blood). This Rh factor is called an antigen. There are two
other antigens known as A and B types. Blood lacking both A
and B types is called type O. In Problem 60 of Section 2.3,
you were asked to sketch a Venn diagram showing the three
types of antigens A, B, and Rh. One possible diagram is
shown in Figure 2.20.
A–
O+
O–
Blood types
Type A
Type B
Rh factor
B–
AB–
AB+
A+
B+
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on this book:
Innumeracy: Mathematical Illiteracy and Its
Consequences, John Allen Paulos (New York: Hill 
and Wang, 1988).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G3.
A teacher assigned five problems, A, B, C, D, and E. Not all students turned in
answers to all of the problems. Here is a tally of the percentage of students turning in
various combinations of problems: 
A; 46%
A, B; 25%
A, B, C; 13%
A, B, C, D; 7%
A, B, C, D, E; 4%
B; 40%
B, C; 26%
A, B, E; 19%
A, B, C, E; 8%
C; 43%
C, D; 26%
A, D, E; 16%
A, B, D, E; 9%
D; 38%
D, E; 22%
B, C, D; 12%
A, C, D, E; 11%
E; 41%
A, E; 30%
C, D, E; 14%
B, C, D, E; 6%
What percent of the students did not turn in any problems? Assume that no students
turned in combinations not listed. 
G4.
Symbolically name the 32 regions formed by a Venn diagram with five sets. 
G5.
HISTORICAL QUEST
A famous mathematician, Bertrand Russell, created a whole
series of paradoxes by considering situations such as the following barber’s rule:
“Suppose in the small California town of Ferndale it is the practice of many of the
men to be shaved by the barber. Now, the barber has a rule that has come to be
known as the barber’s rule: He shaves those men and only those men who do not
shave themselves. The question is: Does the barber shave himself?” If he does shave
himself, then, according to the barber’s rule, he does not shave himself. On the other
hand, if he does not shave himself, then, according to the barber’s rule, he shaves
himself. We can only conclude that there can be no such barber’s rule. But why not?
Write a paper explaining what is meant by a paradox. Use the Historical Note for
some suggestions about mathematicians who have done work in this area. You 
might begin with the links for this problem at www.mathnature.com.
Section 2.5
Chapter Summary
81
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas discussed in this chapter. You can find
references to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 2.1 What is the millionth positive integer that is not a square or a cube?
PROJECT 2.2 What is the millionth positive integer that is not a square, cube, or fifth power?
PROJECT 2.3 Write a report discussing the creation of colors using additive color mixing and
subtractive color mixing.
PROJECT 2.4 Prove that   {x ƒ x   and 0  x  1} is not a countable set.
www.mathnature.com 
Historical
About the time that Cantor’s work
began to gain acceptance, certain
inconsistencies began to appear.
One of these inconsistencies,
called Russell’s paradox, is what
Project G5 is about. Other famous
paradoxes in set theory have been
studied by many famous mathe-
maticians, including Zermelo,
Frankel, von Neumann, Bernays,
and Poincaré. These studies have
given rise to three main schools of
thought concerning the foundation
of mathematics.
NOTE
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
3.1 Deductive Reasoning
83
Terminology, conjunction, disjunction,
negation, order of operations
3.2 Truth Tables and the
Conditional
91
Constructing truth tables, conditional,
translations for the conditional
3.3 Operators and Laws of 
Logic
100
Biconditional, implication, logical equiva-
lence, laws of logic, negation of a com-
pound statement, miscellaneous operators
3.4 The Nature of Proof
107
Direct reasoning, indirect reasoning,
transitive reasoning, logical proof, falla-
cies: fallacy of the converse, fallacy of
the inverse, false chain pattern
3.7 Chapter Summary
129
Important terms, types of problems, 
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
3.5 Problem Solving Using 
Logic
116
3.6 Logic Circuits
124
THE NATURE OF LOGIC
3
Outline
What in the World?
“What’s up?” asked Shannon. “I’m going nuts filling
out these applications!” exclaimed Missy. “They
must make these forms obscure just to test us. Look
at this question on the residency questionnaire for
the California State University system.”
Complete and submit this residency questionnaire
only if your response to item 34a of Part A was other
than “California” or your response to item 37 was
“no.”
“Maybe I can help,” added Shannon.
“What are the questions in items 34a and 37?”
Missy responded. “Well, for what it’s worth, just
take a look.”
Question 34a: Were you born in California?
Answer yes or no. Question 37: . . .
“I quit!” shouted Missy.
“Wait a minute,” urged Shannon. “We know that
Question 34a can be answered by a yes or no
response, so we can figure this out. Let’s look at
the possibilities.”
Overview
In the first chapter we studied patterns that allow us to form
conjectures using inductive reasoning. Inductive reasoning
is the process of forming conjectures that are based on a
number of observations of specific instances.
There is, however, a type of reasoning that produces
certain results. It is based on accepting certain premises and
then deducing certain inescapable conclusions. Not only
much of mathematics, but also much of the reasoning we do
in the world, is based on the principles of logic introduced
in this chapter.
We begin with simple statements, which are either true
or false, and then we combine those statements using certain
connectives, such as and, or, not, because, either . . . or, nei-
ther . . . nor, and unless. These connected statements are
called compound statements, and we discover the truth or
falsity of compound statements using truth tables. The final
step in our journey through this chapter is to begin with an
argument, translate it into symbols, derive logical conclu-
sions, and then translate back into English to complete a
proof of a logical argument.
© Amy Etra/PhotoEdit
     Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.1
Deductive Reasoning
83
3.1  Deductive Reasoning
Symbolic Logic is Mathematics, Mathematics is Symbolic Logic,
the twain are one.
J. F. KEYSER
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
●
‡
—
—
‡
—
—
‡
■
■
?
Terminology
In Chapter 1, we introduced a type of reasoning that produces results based on certain
laws of logic. For example, consider the following argument.
1. All humans are mortal.
2. Socrates is a human.
3. Therefore, Socrates is mortal.
Statements 1, 2, and 3 are called an argument. If you accept statements 1 and 2 of
the argument as true, then you must accept statement 3 as true. Statements 1 and 2 are
called the hypotheses or premises of the argument, and statement 3 is called the conclu-
sion. Such reasoning is called deductive reasoning and, if the conclusion follows from
the hypotheses, the reasoning is said to be valid.
The purpose of this chapter is to build a logical foundation to aid you, not only in
your study of mathematics and other subjects, but also in your day-to-day contact with
others.
Logic is a method of reasoning that accepts only those conclusions that are in-
escapable. This is possible because of the strict way in which every concept is defined.
That is, everything must be defined in a way that leaves no doubt or vagueness in mean-
ing. Nothing can be taken for granted, and dictionary definitions are not usually suffi-
cient. For example, in English one often defines a sentence as “a word or group of words
stating, asking, commanding, requesting, or exclaiming something; a conventional unit of
connected speech or writing, usually containing a subject and predicate, beginning with a
capital letter, and ending with an end mark.” Symbolic logic uses symbols to represent
various logical ideas, and it bridges the gap between philosophy and logic. Philosophy
needs logic in order to establish that a philosophical doctrine is true. To demonstrate that
everyone would accept a proof that a particular position is true, the philosopher uses logic
and symbols.
We begin with tiny steps. In symbolic logic, the word statement refers to a declara-
tive sentence. 
Historical
Aristotle
(384–322 B.C.)
Logic began to flourish during the
classical Greek period. Aristotle
was the first person to study the
subject systematically, and he and
many other Greeks searched for
universal truths that were
irrefutable. The logic of this
period, referred to as Aristotelian
logic, is still used today and is
based on the syllogism, which we
will study later in this chapter.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
In Eastern culture, the yin-yang
symbol shows the duality of
nature: male-female, light-dark,
good-evil
A statement is a declarative sentence that is either true or false, but not both true
and false. A simple statement is one without any connective.
Statement
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

All of the following are statements, since they are either true or false.
1. School starts on Friday the 13th.
2.
3. Fish swim.
4. Mickey Mouse is president.
If the sentence is a question or a command, or if it is vague or nonsensical, then it cannot
be classified as true or false; thus, we would not call it a statement. For example:
5. Go away!
6. What are you doing?
7. This sentence is false.
These are not statements by our definition, since they cannot possibly be either true or
false. Difficulty in simplifying arguments may arise because of their length, the vague-
ness of the words used, the literary style, or the possible emotional impact of the words
used. Consider the following two arguments first stated in Chapter 1.
First Argument
Second Argument
If you use heroin, then you first used
If George Washington was assassinated,
marijuana.
then he is dead.
Therefore, if you use marijuana, then
Therefore, if he is dead, he was assassinated.
you will use heroin.
Logically, these two arguments are exactly the same, and both are invalid forms of
reasoning. Nearly everyone would agree that the second is invalid, but many people see
the first as valid, because of the emotional appeal of the words used.
One way of avoiding these difficulties is to use Euler circles as we did in Chapter 1.
Another is to set up an artificial symbolic language. This procedure was first suggested
by Leibniz in his search to unify all of mathematics. What we will do is invent a nota-
tional shorthand. We denote simple statements with letters such as p, q, r, s, . . . , and then
define certain connectives. The problem, then, is to translate the English statements into
symbolic form, simplify the symbolic form, and then translate the symbolic form back into
English statements.
The key to simplifying complicated logical arguments is to consider only simple
statements connected by certain operators (connectives), each of which is defined pre-
cisely. Some of these operators are not, and, or, neither . . . nor, if . . . then, unless, and
because.
A compound statement is formed by combining simple statements with one or
more of these operators. Because of our basic definition of a statement, we see that the
truth value of any statement is either true (T) or false (F), but we should point out that
the newest chapter of logic is presently being written. This new logic, called fuzzy logic,
defines gradations of “T” and “F” to describe real-world concepts that are, by nature, often
vague. The difference between the logic we study in this chapter and fuzzy logic is some-
thing Aristotle called the law of the excluded middle, which says that every statement is
either true or false (never both).
As we saw in Chapter 2, an object either does or does not belong to a set. There is
no middle ground: The number 5 belongs fully to the set of counting numbers or it does
not. This is true because of the law of the excluded middle. Sets that are fuzzy break
the law of the excluded middle, to some degree. The study of fuzzy logic requires con-
cepts of probability (Chapter 13), as well as an understanding of the logic we introduce
in this chapter. For purposes of this course, we accept the law of the excluded middle
as an axiom, and work within a framework that forces every statement to be either true
or false.
5 1 6 5 16
84
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Historical
Satoru Isaka
(1959– )
There are many jokes, mostly
political, about “fuzzy logic,” but it
is a serious topic for study. Satoru
Isaka is a researcher of fuzzy
logic, the most recent advance in
the study of logical systems.
Dr. Isaka specializes in control
systems and flexible machine
intelligence at OMRON Advanced
Systems in Santa Clara, California.
He is interested in applying
machine learning concepts to
biomedical and factory automation
systems.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

It is not sufficient to assume that we know the meanings of the operators and, or, not,
and so on, even though they may seem obvious and simple. The strength of logic is that it
does not leave any meanings to chance or to individual interpretation. In defining the truth
values of these words, we will, however, try to conform to common usage.
Conjunction
If p and q represent two simple statements, then “p and q” is the compound statement
using the operator called conjunction. The word and is symbolized by  . For example,
I have a penny and a quarter in my pocket.
When is this compound statement true? Let p and q represent two simple statements as
follows:
p: I have a penny
q: I have a quarter.
There are four logical possibilities (only one of which is true in any specific instance).
The four possibilities can be shown in table form:
p
q
1. I have a penny. I have a quarter.
1.
T
T 
2. I have a penny. I do not have a quarter.
2.
T
F 
3. I do not have a penny. I have a quarter.
3.
F
T 
4. I do not have a penny. I do not have a quarter.
4.
F
F 
If p and q are both true, we would certainly say that the compound statement is true;
otherwise, we say it is false. Thus, we define “p  q” according to Table 3.1. The com-
mon usage of the word and conforms to the technical definition of conjunction.
Section 3.1
Deductive Reasoning
85
Historical
Gottfried Leibniz
(1646–1716)
The second great period for logic
came with the use of symbols to
simplify complicated logical argu-
ments. This was first done when
the great German mathematician
Gottfried Leibniz, at the age of 14,
attempted to reform Aristotelian
logic. He called his logic the uni-
versal characteristic and wrote, in
1666, that he wanted to create a
general method in which truths of
reason would be reduced to a cal-
culation so that errors of thought
would appear as computational
errors.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
TABLE 3.1
Definition of Conjunction
p
q
p  q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
The definitions of con-
junction, disjunction,
and negation are
fundamental to under-
standing the material
of this chapter.
It is worth noting that statements p and q need not be related. For example,
Fish swim and there are 100 U.S. senators.
is a true compound statement.
The truth value of a simple statement is either true (T) or false (F). The truth value
of a compound statement is true or false and depends only on the truth values of its
simple component parts. It is determined by using the rules for connecting those parts
with well-defined operators.
Truth Value
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Disjunction
The operator or, denoted by , is called disjunction. The meaning of this simple word is
ambiguous, as we can see by considering the following examples.
I. I have a penny or a quarter in my pocket.
II. The president is speaking in New York or in California at 7:00 P.M. tonight.
Let’s represent four statements as follows:
p: I have a penny in my pocket.
q: I have a quarter in my pocket.
n: The president is speaking in New York at 7:00 P.M. tonight.
c: The president is speaking in California at 7:00 P.M. tonight.
In everyday terms, what do we mean by each of these examples? Statement I may mean:
I have a penny in my pocket. I have a quarter in my pocket.
I have both a penny and a quarter in my pocket.
Statement II may mean:
The president is speaking in New York at 7:00 P.M. tonight. 
The president is speaking in California at 7:00 P.M. tonight. 
It does not mean that he will do both.
These statements illustrate different usages of the word or. Now we are forced to
select a single meaning for the operator, so we choose a definition that conforms to
statement I. That is, “p  q” means “p or q, perhaps both.” Thus, we define “p  q”
according to Table 3.2.
86
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Historical
George Boole 
(1815–1864)
Gottfried Leibniz advanced
Aristotelian logic with his universal
characteristic. However, the world
took little notice of Leibniz’s logic
until George Boole completed his
book An Investigation of the Laws
of Thought. Boole considered vari-
ous mathematical operators by
separating them from the other
commonly used symbols. This
idea was popularized by Bertrand
Russell (1872–1970) and Alfred
North Whitehead (1861–1947) in
their monumental Principia Mathe-
matica. In this work, they began
with a few assumptions and three
undefined terms, and built a
system of symbolic logic. From
this, they then formally developed
the theory of arithmetic and
mathematics.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
TABLE 3.2
Definition of Disjunction
p
q
p  q
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
This definition should
be remembered.
In logic, the statement defined in Table 3.2 is called the inclusive or. The second
meaning of the word or (“p or q, but not both”) is called the exclusive or. In this book,
we will translate the exclusive or by using the operator either . . . or. Thus, in this book,
we would translate the two examples as:
I. I have a penny or a quarter in my pocket.
II. The president is speaking either in New York or in California at 7:00 P.M. tonight.
Negation
The operator not, denoted by , is called negation. In sign language, this operator is easy
to express, as shown in Figure 3.1. The sign can use either a polite double motion or a
firmer or definite single motion.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Table 3.3 serves as a straightforward definition of negation. The negation of a true
statement is false, and the negation of a false statement is true.
Section 3.1
Deductive Reasoning
87
TABLE 3.3
Definition of Negation
p
 p
T
F
F
T
This definition should
be remembered.
© 2006, www.Lifeprint.com, http://www.
lifeprint.com. Adapted by permission.
FIGURE 3.1 Sign language for “no”
Example
1
Finding the negation
For the statement t: Otto is telling the truth, translate t.
Solution
We can translate t as “It is not the case that Otto is telling the truth.”
In everyday language we use the words all, none, and some (at least one). You must be
careful when negating statements containing the words all, none, or some. For example,
write the negation of
All students have pencils.
Go ahead; write it down before reading on. Did you write “No students have pencils” or
“All students do not have pencils”? Remember that if a statement is false, then its nega-
tion must be true. The correct negations are:
It is not the case that all students have pencils.
Not all students have pencils.
At least one student does not have a pencil.
Some students do not have pencils.
In mathematics, the word some is used to mean “at least one.” Table 3.4 gives some
of the common negations.
TABLE 3.4
Negation of All, Some, and No
Statement
Negation
All
Some . . . not
Some
No
Some . . . not
All
No
Some
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

88
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Example
2
Finding the negation of all, some, and no
Write the negation of each statement.
a. All people have compassion.
b. Some animals are dirty.
c. Some students do not take Math 10.
d. No students are enthusiastic.
Solution
a. Some people do not have compassion.
b. No animal is dirty.
c. All students take Math 10.
d. Some students are enthusiastic.
We consider the negation of compound statements in the next section.
Order of Operations
Parentheses are used to indicate the order of operations. Thus, (n  c) means the negation
of the statement “n and c,” and is read as “it is not the case that n and c.” On the other hand,
n  c means “the negation of n and the statement c,” which is read “not n and c.”
Example
3
Translate into words
Translate the given statements into words.
a. p  q
b. p
c. (p  q)
d. p  q
e. (q)
Let
p: I eat spinach;
q: I am strong.
Solution
a. A translation of p  q is “I eat spinach and I am strong.”
b. A translation of p is “I do not eat spinach.”
c. A translation for (p  q) is “It is not the case that I eat spinach and am strong.”
d. A translation for p  q is “I do not eat spinach and I am strong.”
e. A translation of (q) is “I am not not strong” or, if we assume that “not strong” is
the same as “weak,” then we can translate this as “I am not weak.”
We can now consider the truth value of a compound statement using parentheses.
Example
4
Finding the truth value
Suppose n is a true statement, and c is a false statement. What is the truth value of the
compound statement (n  c)  (n  c)?
Solution
Begin with the symbolic statement, fill in the truth values given in the prob-
lem, and then simplify using the correct order of operations and the definitions in 
Tables 3.1–3.3.
(n  c)  (n  c)
Start with given statement.
(T  F)  (T  F)
Fill in the truth values.
T  F
Simplify.
T  T
T
Thus, the compound statement is true. This result does not depend on the particular
statements n and c. As long as n is true and c is false, the result of the compound state-
ment is the same—namely, true.
We conclude this section by finding the truth values for the statements in Example 3.
Part of the 
difficulty in
translating 
English into 
logical
statements is
the inaccuracy of
our language. For
example, how can
"fat chance" and
"slim chance"
mean the same
thing?
If you are a sports fan, you are 
used to statements that may be 
difficult to translate.  For 
example, "I don't think there's 
any chance that they won't 
decline the penalty."  Or, "San 
Francisco has been able to win 
this season by consistently 
outscoring their opponents."
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.1
Deductive Reasoning
89
Suppose that p is T and q is F. Find the truth values for the statements in Example 3.
a. p  q
b. p
c. (p  q)
d. p  q
e. (q)
Let
p: I eat spinach;
q: I am strong.
Solution
a. p  q
Given
T  F
Substitute truth values. 
F
Definition of conjunction
Thus, the statement “I eat spinach, and I am strong” is false when p (I eat spinach) is
true and q (I am strong) is false.
b. p
Given
T
Substitute truth value.
F
Definition of negation
The statement “I do not eat spinach” is false when p (I eat spinach) is true. 
c. (p  q)
Given
(T  F)
Substitute truth values.
F
Definition of conjunction
T
Definition of negation
The statement “It is not the case that I eat spinach and am strong” is true when p (I
eat spinach) is true and q (I am strong) is false. 
d. p  q
Given
T  F
Substitute truth values.
F  F
Definition of negation
F
Definition of conjunction
The statement “I do not eat spinach, and I am strong” is false when p (I eat spinach)
is true and q (I am strong) is false.
e. (q)
Given
(F)
Substitute truth values.
(T)
Definition of negation
F
Definition of negation again
The statement “I am not weak” is false when q (I am strong) is false.
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is an operator?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by conjunction?
Include as part of your answer the definition.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by disjunction?
Include as part of your answer the definition.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by negation? 
Include as part of your answer the definition.
According to the definition, which of the examples in Problems 5–8
are statements?
5. a. Hickory, Dickory, Dock, the mouse ran up the clock.
b. 3 1 5 5 9
c. Is John ugly?
d. John has a wart on the end of his nose.
6. a. March 18, 2011, is a Friday.
b. Division by zero is impossible.
c. Logic is difficult.
d.
7. a
b. Thomas Jefferson was the 23rd president.
c. Sit down and be quiet!
d. If wages continue to rise, then prices will also rise.
8. a. Dan and Mary were married on August 3, 1979.
b.
b. Do not read this sentence.
c. Do you have a cold?
6 1 12 2 10 1 8
6 1 9 2 7 1 8
4 2 6 5 2
Problem Set 3.1
Example
5
Truth values of compound statements
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In the children’s game called “Guess Who?”® the players are
asked to guess a card by asking questions about the faces. Answer
the questions in Problems 9–12 about the faces shown in 
Figure 3.2.
90
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
9. Who has glasses and a hat?
10. Who is male and wears a hat?
11. Who is bald or is blond?
12. Who is female or does not wear glasses?
Figure 3.3 shows some additional faces from the “Guess Who?”®
game. Decide whether each of the statements in Problems 13–19 
is true or false.
13. All are males or have blue eyes.
14. There are two faces that have white hair and blue eyes.
15. Not all faces have eyebrows.
16. At least one is a female.
17. No person has glasses and a mustache.
18. Not everyone has white hair.
19. No person does not have white hair.
Level  2
Write the negation of each statement in Problems 20–27.
20. All mathematicians are ogres.
21. All dogs have fleas.
22. No even integers are divisible by 5.
23. No triangles are squares.
24. All squares are rectangles.
25. All counting numbers are divisible by 1.
26. Some apples are rotten.
27. Some integers are not odd.
28. Let p: Prices will rise; q: Taxes will rise. Translate each of the
following statements into symbols.
a. Prices will rise, or taxes will not rise.
b. Prices will rise, and taxes will not rise.
c. Prices will rise, and taxes will rise.
d. Prices will not rise, and taxes will rise.
29. Assume that prices rise and taxes also rise. Under these
assumptions, which of the statements in Problem 28
are true?
30. Assume that prices rise and taxes do not rise. Under these 
assumptions, which of the statements in Problem 28 are true?
31. Let p: Prices will rise; q: Taxes will rise. Translate each of the
following statements into words.
a. p  q
b. p  q
c. p  q
d. p  q
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Image not available due to copyright restrictions
Image not available due to copyright restrictions
Image not available due to copyright restrictions

32. Let p: Today is Friday; q: There is homework tonight.
Translate each of the following statements into words.
a. p  q
b. p  q
c. p  q
d. p  q
33. Assume p is T and q is T. Under these assumptions, which of
the statements in Problem 31 are true?
34. Assume p is F and q is T. Under these assumptions, which of
the statements in Problem 32 are true?
Find the truth value for each of the compound statements in 
Problems 35–40.
35. Assume r is F, s is T, and t is T. 
a. (r  s)  t
b. (r  s)  t
36. Assume r is T, s is T, and t is T. 
a. r  (s  t)
b. (r  s)  (r  t)
37. Assume p is T, q is T, and r is F. 
a. (p  q)  r
b. (p  q)  r
38. Assume p is T, q is T, and r is T. 
a. p  (q  r)
b. (p  q)  (p  r)
39. Assume p is T, q is T, and r is T. 
a. (p  q)  (r  q)
b. (p)  (p  q)
40. Assume p is T, q is F, and r is T. 
a. (p  q)  (p  r)
b. (p  q)  p
Level 3
Translate the statements in Problems 41–49 into symbols. For each
simple statement, be sure to indicate the meanings of the symbols
you use. Answers are not unique.
41. W. C. Fields is eating, drinking, and having a good time.
42. Sam will not seek and will not accept the nomination.
Section 3.2
Truth Tables and the Conditional
91
43. Jack will not go tonight, and Rosamond will not go tomorrow.
44. Fat Albert lives to eat and does not eat to live.
45. The decision will depend on judgment or intuition, and not on
who paid the most.
46. The successful applicant for the job will have a B.A. degree in
liberal arts or psychology.
47. The winner must have an A.A. degree in drafting or three years
of professional experience.
48. a. Dinner includes soup and salad, or the vegetable of the day.
b. Dinner includes soup, and salad or the vegetable of the day.
49. a. Marsha finished the sign and table, or a pair of chairs.
b. Marsha finished the sign, and the table or a pair of chairs.
In Problems 50–57, find the truth value when p is T, q is F, 
and r is F.
50. (p  q)  r
51. p  (q  r)
52. (p  q)  (p  q)
53. (p  q)  (r  q)
54. (p)  (q  p)
55. (r  q)  (q  q)
56. (p  q)  [(p  q)  (r  p)]
57. (q  q)  [(p  q)  (r  r)]
Problem Solving 3   
58. Prove the law of double negation. That is, prove that for any
statement (p) has the same truth value as p.
59. Smith received the following note from Melissa: “Dr. Smith, 
I wish to explain that I was really joking when I told you that 
I didn’t mean what I said about reconsidering my decision not
to change my mind.” Did Melissa change her mind or didn’t
she?
60. Their are three errers in this item. See if you can find 
all three.
3.2  Truth Tables and the Conditional
In the last section, we defined the connectives and, or, and not by listing all possibilities
in the form of a table. We focus on and expand these ideas in this section.
© 1977 by Robert Mankoff/Cartoon Bank
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Constructing Truth Tables
The connectives and, or, and not are called the fundamental operators. To go beyond
these and consider additional operators, we need a device known in logic as a truth table.
A truth table shows how the truth values of compound statements depend on the funda-
mental operators. Tables 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 from the previous section should be memorized.
They are summarized here in Table 3.5.
Truth Table of the Fundamental Operators
p
q
Conjunction
p  q
Disjunction
p  q
Negation
 p
q
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
92
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
TABLE 3.5
Example
1
Find a truth table
Construct a truth table for the compound statement:
Alfie did not come last night and did not pick up his money.
Solution
First identify the operators: not . . . and . . . not. Next, choose variables to
represent the simple statements. Let p: Alfie came last night. q: Alfie picked up his
money. Translate the English statement into symbols:
.
Finally, construct a truth table. List all possible combinations of truth values for the
simple statements (see columns A and B).
A
B
p
q
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
Insert the truth values for and (see
p
q columns C and D)
A
B
C
D
p
q
p
q
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
Finally, insert the truth values for
(see column E).
A
B
C
D
E
p
q
p
q
p  q
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
The only time the compound statement is true is when both p and q are false.
, p ` , q
,
,
,
,
, p ` , q
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The following example provides a truth table solution for Problem 58 of the previous
problem set.
Section 3.2
Truth Tables and the Conditional
93
Example
2
Truth table for a double negative
Construct a truth table for (p).
Solution
There is a story about a logic 
professor who was telling her 
class that a double negative is 
known to mean a negative in 
some languages and a positive 
in others (as in English).  She 
continued by saying that there is 
no spoken language in which a 
double positive means a 
negative.  Just then she heard 
from the back of the room a 
sarcastic "Yeah, yeah."
p
p
(p)
T
F
T 
F
T
F
Notice from Example 2 that (p) and p have the same truth values. (See also
Problem 58 of Section 3.1.) If two statements have the same truth values, one can replace
the other in any logical expression; this is called the law of double negation. This means
that the double negation of a statement is the same as the original statement.
(p) may be replaced by p in any logical expression.
Law of Double Negation
Example
3
Translate a news statement
Use the law of double negation to rewrite the following statement made by an Iraq offi-
cial and reported on a national news report (December 3, 2002): “All that the U.S. has
said about Iraq is a false lie.”
Solution
If we assume that a lie is not the truth, then a “false lie” is the negation of
“not the truth.” This means a correct equivalent translation is “All that the U.S. has said
about Iraq is the truth.”
Example
4
Determine the truth of a statement
Construct a truth table to determine when the following statement is true.
(p  q)  [(p  q)  q]
Solution
We begin as before and move from left to right with parentheses taking
precedence, focusing our attention on no more than two columns at a time (refer to
Table 3.5 to find the correct entries).
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
p
q
p  q
(p  q)
p  q
(p  q)  q
(p  q)  [(p  q)  q]
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
The compound statement is true only when p is false and q is true.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Conditional
We can now use truth tables to prove certain useful results and to introduce some addi-
tional operators. The first one we’ll consider is called the conditional. The statement “if
p, then q” is called a conditional statement. It is symbolized by 
, where p is called
the antecedent, and q is called the consequent. There are several ways of using a condi-
tional, as illustrated by the following examples.
Uses of the IF-THEN format
1. We use “if-then” to indicate a logical relationship—one in which the consequent fol-
lows logically from the antecedent:
If (p) has the same truth value as p, then p can replace (p).
2. We can use “if-then” to indicate a causal relationship:
If John drops that rock, then it will land on my foot.
3. We can use “if-then” to report a decision on the part of the speaker:
If John drops that rock, then I will hit him.
4. We can use “if-then” when the consequent follows from the antecedent by the very
definition of the words used:
If John drives a Geo, then John drives a car.
5. Finally, we can use “if-then” to make a material implication. There is no logical,
causal, or definitional relationship between the antecedent and consequent; we use the
expression simply to convey humor or emphasis:
If John gets an A on that test, then I’m a monkey’s uncle. 
The consequent is obviously false, and the speaker wishes to emphasize that the
antecedent is also false.
Our task is to state a definition of the conditional that applies to all of these if-then
statements. We will approach the problem by asking under what circumstances a given
conditional would be false. Let’s consider another example. Suppose I make you a prom-
ise: “If I receive my check tomorrow, then I will pay you the $10 that I owe you.” If I keep
my promise, let’s agree to say the statement is true; if I don’t, then it is false. Let
p: I receive my check tomorrow.
q: I will pay you the $10 that I owe you.
We symbolize the promise by 
. There are four possibilities:
p
q
Case 1:
T
T
I receive my check tomorrow, and I pay you the $10. 
In this case, the promise, or conditional, is true: T S T is T.
Case 2:
T
F
I receive my check tomorrow, and I do not pay you the $10.
In this case, the conditional is false, since I did not fulfill my
promise: T S F is F.
Case 3:
F
T
I do not receive my check tomorrow, but I pay you the $10.
In this case, I certainly didn’t break my promise, so the
conditional is true: F S T is T.
Case 4:
F
F
I do not receive my check tomorrow, and I do not pay you the $10.
Here, again, I did not break my promise, so the conditional is true:
F S F is T.
Actually, the promise was not tested for cases 3 and 4, since I didn’t receive my
check. Assume the principle of “innocent until proven guilty.” The only time that I will
p S q
p S q
94
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Historical 
Albert Einstein 
(1879–1955)
In regard to the real nature of
scientific truth, Einstein said, “As
far as the laws of mathematics
refer to reality, they are not
certain, and as far as they are cer-
tain, they do not refer to reality.”
Einstein was one of the intellectual
giants of the 20th century. He was
a shy, unassuming man who was
told as a child that he would never
make a success of anything. How-
ever, he was able to use the tools
of logic and mathematical reason-
ing to change our understanding
of the universe.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Image not available due to 
copyright restrictions

have broken my promise is in case 2. The test for a conditional is to determine when it is
false. In symbols,
p S q is false whenever p  q is true (case 2)
or 
p S q is true whenever (p  q) is true.
Construct a truth table for (p  q). 
Definition of Conditional
p
q
p S q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
Add this to your list of
important definitions.
TABLE 3.6
Example
5
Variations of the conditional
Make up an example illustrating each of the four cases for the conditional. 
Solution
Examples can vary.
a. Case 1: T S T
If 7  14, then 7  2  14  2. 
This is true, since both component parts are true. 
b. Case 2: T S F
If 7  5  12, then 7  10  15. 
This is false, since the antecedent is true, but the consequent is
false. 
c. Case 3: F S T
If 7  5  15, then 8  2  10.
This is true, since the antecedent is false. 
d. Case 4: F S F
If 7  5  25, then 7  20. 
This is true, since the antecedent is false.
Example 5 shows that the conditional, in mathematics, does not mean that there is
any cause-and-effect relationship. Any two statements can be joined with the if-then con-
nective, and the result must be true or false.
A
B
C
D
E
p
q
q
p  q
(p  q)
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
Section 3.2
Truth Tables and the Conditional
95
Notice that the entries in column E are the same as those we found using the prom-
ise viewpoint. Thus, we use this truth table to define the conditional p
q as shown in
Table 3.6.
The following examples illustrate the definition of the conditional.
S
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. We need to rephrase, or analyze, this statement so that we can
determine an action to take under all possible circumstances.
Devise a Plan. We will translate the statement into symbolic form. It could then be ana-
lyzed using a truth table.
Carry Out the Plan. First identify the operators:
If you do not itemize deductions on Schedule A and you have charitable contri-
butions, then complete the worksheet on page 14 and enter the allowable part on
line 36b.
Next, assign variables to simple statements:
d: You itemize deductions on Schedule A.
c: You have charitable contributions.
w: You complete the worksheet on page 14.
b: You enter the allowable part on line 36b.
Rewrite the sentence, making substitutions for the variables:
If not d and c, then (w and b).
Complete the translation into symbols:
(d  c) S (w  b)
96
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Example
6
1040 tax form
The following sentence is found on a tax form:
If you do not itemize deductions on Schedule A and you have charitable contributions,
then complete the worksheet on page 14 and enter the allowable part on line 36b.
Use symbolic form to analyze this sentence.
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.2
Truth Tables and the Conditional
97
Look Back. We check, for example, to see whether the statement is true if d, c, w, and b
are all true. To check all the possible circumstances, we would construct a truth table
with 16 rows.
(d  c) S (w  b)
(T  T) S (T  T)
(F  T) S T
F S T
T
The given statement is true in this case.
Example
7
Find the converse, inverse, and contrapositive
Write the converse, inverse, and contrapositive of the statement:
If it is a 380Z, then it is a car.
Solution
Let p: It is a 380Z; q: It is a car. The given statement is symbolized as 
.
Converse: q S p
If it is a car, then it is a 380Z.
Inverse: p S q
If it is not a 380Z, then it is not a car.
Contrapositive: q S p
If it is not a car, then it is not a 380Z.
p S q
A conditional may always be replaced by its contrapositive without having its truth
value affected.
Law of Contraposition
Given the conditional 
, we define:
the converse is 
;
the inverse is 
;
the contrapositive is 
.
,q S ,p
,p S , q
q S p
p S q
Converse, Inverse, and Contrapositive
As you can see from Example 7, not all these statements are equivalent in meaning.
The converse and inverse always have the same truth values, as do the contrapositive and
the original statement. The latter result is called the law of contraposition, which is sum-
marized in the following box.
Translations for the Conditional 
The if part of a conditional need not be stated first. All of the following statements have
the same meaning:
Conditional Translation
Example
If p, then q.
If you are 18, then you can vote.
q, if p.
You can vote, if you are 18.
p, only if q
You are 18 only if you can vote.
All p are q.
All 18-year-olds can vote.
In addition to these translations for the conditional, there are related statements.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Table 3.7 shows truth tables for the converse, inverse, and contrapositive.
Truth Table for Variations of the Conditional
Statement
Converse
Inverse
Contrapositive
p
q
p
q
p S q
q S p
p S q
q S p
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
98
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
TABLE 3.7
Example
8
Converse, inverse, and contrapositive
Assume that the following statement is true:
p S q
If you obey the law, then you will not go to jail.
Write the converse, inverse, and contrapositive.
Solution
We note that p: You obey the law; q: You go to jail.
Converse: q S p
If you do not go to jail, then you obey the law. 
Inverse: p S q
If you do not obey the law, then you will go to jail.
Note: (q) is replaced by q (double negation).
Contrapositive: q S p
If you go to jail, then you did not obey the law. 
This has the same truth value as the given statement.
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a truth table?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a conditional? Discuss.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the law of double negation?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the law of contraposition?
Construct a truth table for the statements given in Problems 5–22.
5. p  q
6. p  q
7. (p  q)
8. r  s
9. (r)
10. (r  s)  s
11. p  q
12. p  q
13. (p  q)  q
14. (p  q)  p
15. p  (p S q)
16. (p  q) S p
17. [p  (p  q)] S p
18. [p  (p  q)] S p
19. (p  q)  r
20. (p  q)  r
21. [(p  q)  r]  r
22. [p  (q  p)]  r
23. If the sign on the left means no parking, what do you think the
sign on the right means?
Problem Set 3.2
P
No
Parking
24. Repeat Example 6, except this time assume that you 
do not complete the worksheet, but all other statements 
are true.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Level  2
Write the converse, inverse, and contrapositive of the statements in
Problems 25–30.
25. p S q
26. r S t
27. t S s
28. If you break the law, then you will go to jail.
29. I will go Saturday if I get paid.
30. If you brush your teeth with Smiles toothpaste, then you will
have fewer cavities.
Translate the sentences in Problems 31–38 into if-then form.
31. All triangles are polygons.
32. All prime numbers greater than 2 are odd numbers. 
33. All good people go to heaven. 
34. Everything happens to everybody sooner or later if there is
time enough. (G. B. Shaw)
35. We are not weak if we make a proper use of those means
which the God of Nature has placed in our power. (Patrick
Henry)
36. All useless life is an early death. (Goethe)
37. All work is noble. (Thomas Carlyle)
38. Everything’s got a moral if only you can find it. 
(Lewis Carroll)
First decide whether each simple statement in Problems 39–42 
is true or false. Then state whether the given compound statement
is true or false.
39. If 
, then 
.
40. The moon is made of green cheese only if Mickey Mouse is
president.
41. If 
, then the moon is made of green cheese. 
42.
only if water runs uphill.
Tell which of the statements in Problems 43–46 are true.
43. Let p: 
; q: 
.
12 2 7 5 5
2 1 3 5 5
3 # 2 5 6
1 1 1 5 10
15 2 10 5 3
5 1 10 5 16
Section 3.2
Truth Tables and the Conditional
99
Translate the statements in Problems 47–52 into symbolic form.
47. If the qualifying person is a child and not your dependent, 
enter this child’s name.
48. If the amount on line 31 is less than $26,673 and a child lives
with you, turn to page 27.
49. If line 32 is $86,025 or less, multiply $2,500 by the total num-
ber of exemptions claimed on line 6e.
50. If married and filing a joint return, enter your spouse’s earned
income.
51. If you are a student or disabled, see line 6 of instructions. 
52. If the income on line 1 was reported to you on Form W-2 and the
“Statutory employee” box on that form was checked, see instruc-
tions for line 1 (Schedule C) and check here.
Level  3
In Problems 53–58, fill in the blanks with a symbolic statement that
follows from the given statement.
53. The applicant for the position must have a two-year col-
lege degree in drafting or five years of experience in the 
field. Let
a: You are an applicant for the position.
q: You are qualified for the position.
e: You have a two-year college degree in drafting.
f: You have five years of experience in the field.
a. a S ________________ 
b. (a  e) S ________________
c. (a  f) S ________________ 
54. To qualify for a loan, the applicant must have a gross income
of at least $35,000 if single or combined income of $50,000 if
married. Let 
q: You qualify for a loan. 
m: You are married. 
i: You have an income of at least $35,000. 
b: Your spouse has an income of at least $35,000. 
a. (m  i) S ________________
b. (m  i) S ________________ 
c. [m  (i  b)] S ________________ 
55. To qualify for the special fare, you must fly on Monday, 
Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, and you must stay over a
Saturday evening. Let 
q: You qualify for the special fare. 
m: You fly on Monday. 
t: You fly on Tuesday. 
w: You fly on Wednesday. 
h: You fly on Thursday. 
s: You stay over a Saturday evening. 
________________ S q
a. p  q
b. p  q
c. (p  q)
44. Let p: 2 is prime; q: 1 is prime.
a. p  q
b. (p)
c. (p  q)  q
45. Let p: 5  8  10; q: 4  4  8.
a. (p  q)  p
b. p  (p S q)
c. (p  q) S p
46. Let p: 1  1  2; q: 9  3  5.
a. (p S q) S (q S p)
b. (p S q) S (q S p)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
3.3 Operators and Laws of Logic
In the previous sections of this chapter, we considered simple statements p and q and the
three fundamental operators and, or, and not. We also looked at an operator called the
conditional; in this section, we continue our investigation of the conditional.
Biconditional, Implication, and Logical 
Equivalence
In the previous section we took great care to point out that a general statement p S q and
its converse q S p do not have the same truth values. However, it may be the case that 
p S q and also q S p have the same truth values for specific instances of p and q. In this
case, we write 
p 4 q
and call this operator the biconditional. To determine the truth values of the bicondi-
tional, we construct a truth table for 
(p S q)  (q S p)
p
q
p S q
q S p
(p S q)  (q S p)
T
T
T
T
T 
T
F
F
T
F 
F
T
T
F
F 
F
F
T
T
T 
56. This contract is noncancellable by tenant for 60 days. Let
t: You are a tenant. 
d: It is within 60 days. 
c: This contract can be canceled. 
(t  d) S ________________ 
57. The tenant agrees to lease the premises for 12 months
beginning on September 1 and at a monthly rental charge of
$800. Let 
t: You are a tenant. 
m: You lease the premises for 12 months. 
s: You will begin on September 1. 
p: You will pay $800 per month. 
t S ________________
58. Utilities, except for water and garbage, are paid by the tenant. Let 
t: You are a tenant. 
w: You pay water. 
g: You pay garbage. 
u: You pay the other utilities. 
t S ________________
Problem Solving 3   
59. If Apollo can do anything, could he make an object that he
could not lift?
60. Decide about the truth or falsity of the following statement:
If wishes were horses, then beggars could ride.
Jack Sullivan/Alamy
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.3
Operators and Laws of Logic
101
TABLE 3.8
Definition of Biconditional
p
q
p 4 q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
Add this to your list
of important definitions.
This leads us to define the biconditional so that it is true only when both p and q are true
or when both p and q are false (that is, whenever they have the same truth values). This
definition is shown in Table 3.8. 
The biconditional can be a somewhat perplexing connective (see Figure 3.4), but in math-
ematics and logic, p 4 q is precisely defined and can be translated in several ways, all of
which have the same meaning:
Biconditional Translation 
1. p if and only if q
2. q if and only if p
3. If p then q, and conversely. 
4. If q then p, and conversely. 
Example
1
Write an “if and only if” statement
Rewrite the following as one statement:
1. If a polygon has three sides, then it is a triangle.
2. If a polygon is a triangle, then it has three sides.
Solution
A polygon is a triangle if and only if it has three sides.
FIGURE 3.4 What do these 
signs mean?
Photo by Gary L. Friedman,
www.FriedmanArchives.com 
The set of logical possibilities for which a given statement is true is called its truth
set. A logical statement which is necessarily true is called a tautology. This means that a
compound statement is a tautology if you obtain only Ts on a truth table.
Example
2
Verify a tautology
Is (p  q) S (q S p) a tautology?
Solution
p
q
p  q
q
q S p
(p  q) S (q S p)
T
T
T
F
T
T 
T
F
T
T
T
T 
F
T
T
F
T
T 
F
F
F
T
F
T 
Thus, the given statement is a tautology.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

102
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Notice the difference between the symbols S and 1 and between 4 and 3. The
conditional (S) and biconditional (4) are used as logical connectives and the truth val-
ues for these may be true or false. If, because of the statements being connected, the truth
table gives only true values, then we use the symbols 1 and 3 in place of S and 4 and
call them implication (1) and logical equivalence (3).
Example
3
Verify an equivalence
Show that (p S q) 3 (p  q).
Solution
We begin by constructing a truth table for
(p S q) 4 (p  q)
p
q
p S q
q
p  q
(p  q)
(p S q) 4 (p  q)
T
T
T
F
F
T
T 
T
F
F
T
T
F
T 
F
T
T
F
F
T
T 
F
F
T
T
F
T
T 
Since all possibilities are true (it is a tautology), we see it is a logical equivalence and
we write
(p S q) 3 (p  q)
(p  q) 3 p  q
(p  q) 3 p  q
De Morgan’s laws
If a conditional is a tautology, as in Example 2, then it is called an implication and is
symbolized by 1. That is, Example 2 can be written
(p  q) 1 ( q S p)
The implication symbol p 1 q is pronounced “p implies q.”
A biconditional statement p 4 q that is also a tautology (that is, always true) is a
logical equivalence, written p 3 q and read “p is logically equivalent to q.”
Laws of Logic
We can use the idea of logical equivalence to write two previously stated laws:
Law of double negation:
(p) 3 p
Law of contraposition:
(q S p) 3 (p S q)
You will be asked to prove these laws in the problem set. Other important laws are devel-
oped in the next section. Two additional laws, called De Morgan’s laws, will be consid-
ered in this section.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

There is a strong tie between set theory (Chapter 2) and symbolic logic, so it is no coin-
cidence that there are De Morgan’s laws both in set theory and in symbolic logic. We
prove the second one here and leave the first for the problem set. The proof, by truth
table, is shown:
p
q
p  q
(p  q)
p
q
p  q
(p  q) 4 (p  q)
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T 
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T 
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
T 
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T 
Since the last column is all Ts, we can write (p  q) 3 p  q.
Example
4
Negation of a compound
Write the negation of the compound statements.
a. John went to work or he went to bed.
b. Alfie didn’t come last night and didn’t pick up his money.
Solution
Begin by writing the statement in symbolic form, then find the negation,
and finally use the rules of logic to simplify before translating back into English.
a. Let w: John went to work; b: John went to bed. 
The symbolic form is:
w  b
Negation:
(w  b)
Simplify (De Morgan’s law):
w  b
Translate back into English: 
John did not go to work and he did not go to bed.
b. Let p: Alfie came last night; q: Alfie picked up his money. 
The symbolic form is:
p  q
Negation:
(p  q)
Simplify (De Morgan’s law):
(p)  (q)
Simplify (law of double negation):
p  q
Translate: Alfie came last night or he picked up his money.
Section 3.3
Operators and Laws of Logic
103
Historical
Galileo Galilei 
(1564–1642)
Galileo is best known for his
work in astronomy, but he should
be remembered as the father of
modern science in general, and
of physics in particular. Galileo
believed mathematics was the
basis for science. Using nature
as his teacher, he reasoned
deductively and described the
qualities of matter as quantities
of mathematics. He laid the
foundation of physics that
Newton would build upon almost
50 years later.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Sometimes it is necessary to find the negation of a conditional, p S q. It can be
shown (see Problem 41) that 
(p S q) 3 (p  q)
Therefore, the negation of p S q is equivalent to the negation of p  q: 
(p S q) 3 (p  q)
Given
3 (p)  q
De Morgan’s law
3 p  q
Law of double negation
(p S q) 3 (p  q)
Negation of a Conditional
Negation of a Compound Statement
De Morgan’s laws can be used to write the negation of a compound statement using con-
junction and disjunction.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

104
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
TABLE 3.9
Additional Operators
p
q
Either p or q
(p  q)  (p  q)
Neither p nor q
(p  q)
p unless q
 q S p
p because q
(p  q)  (q S p)
No p is q
p S q
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
Use this table for reference.
Example   6
Because as a conjunction
Show that the statement “p because q” as defined in Table 3.9 is equivalent to conjunction.
Solution
According to Table 3.9, “p because q” means (p  q)  (q S p) and con-
junction means p  q (Table 3.1).
Example   5
Language analysis
The officer said to the detective, “If John was at the scene of the crime, 
then he knows that Jean could not have done it.” “No, Colombo,” answered the detective,
“that is not correct. John was at the scene of the crime and Jean did it.” Was the detec-
tive’s statement a correct negation of Colombo’s statement?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. We are asking for the negation of a given statement, which we
then wish to compare with the proposed negation.
Devise a Plan. Translate the given statement into symbolic form, find the negation, sim-
plify, and then translate back into English.
Carry Out the Plan. Let p: John was at the scene of the crime; q: Jean committed the crime.
Then p S q is a symbolic statement of the given statement, “If John was at the scene of
the crime, then he knows that Jean could not have done it.” We now form the negation and
then simplify:
(p S q) 3 p  (q)
Negation of a conditional
3 p  q
Law of double negation
Translate back into English: John was at the scene of the crime and Jean committed the
crime.
Look Back. The detective’s negation was correct.
Pólya’s 
Method
Miscellaneous Operators
Occasionally, we encounter other operators, and it is necessary to formulate precise defi-
nitions of these additional operators. As Table 3.9 shows, they are all defined in terms of
our previous operators.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.3
Operators and Laws of Logic
105
Problem Set 3.3
Level 1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the difference between the
conditional and the biconditional. 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the procedure for finding the
negation of compound statements. 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss when you use the 
symbols 4 and 3. 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss when you use the symbols
S and 1. 
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Make up five good English statements,
each using one of the additional operators shown in Table 3.9. 
Use the parking signs in this photograph to answer the questions
in Problems 6–7. Assume it is not Sunday.
6. a. How long can you legally park if you arrive at midnight?
b. How long can you legally park if you arrive at 2:00 P.M.? 
7. a. How long can you legally park if you arrive at 5:00 P.M.? 
b. How long can you legally park if you arrive at 4:00 P.M.?
Level 2
Use truth tables in Problems 8–15 to determine whether the given
compound statement is a tautology.
8. (p  q)  (p S q)
9. (p  q)  (q S p)
10. (p S q) S p
11. (q S p) S q
12. (p  q) 4 (p  q)
13. (p S q) 4 (p  q)
14. (p  q) 4 (q  p)
15. (p  q) 4 (p  q)
Verify the indicated definition in Problems 16–19 from Table 3.9
using a truth table.
16. either p or q
17. neither p nor q
18. p unless q
19. no p is q
Translate the statements in Problems 20–29 into symbols. 
For each simple statement, indicate the meanings of the symbols
you use. 
20. Neither smoking nor drinking is good for your health.
21. I will not buy a new house unless all provisions of the sale are
clearly understood.
22. To obtain the loan, I must have an income of $85,000 
per year.
23. I am obligated to pay the rent because I signed the contract.
24. I cannot go with you because I have a previous engagement.
25. No man is an island.
26. Either I will invest my money in stocks or I will put it in a 
savings account.
27. Be nice to people on your way up ’cause you’ll meet ’em on
your way down. (Jimmy Durante)
28. No person who has once heartily and wholly laughed can be
altogether irreclaimably bad. (Thomas Carlyle)
29. If by the mere force of numbers a majority should deprive 
a minority of any clearly written constitutional right, it 
might, in a moral point of view, justify revolution. (Abraham
Lincoln)
From Table 3.9
From Table 3.1
p
q
(p  q)  (q S p)
p  q
(p  q)  (q S p) 4 (p  q)
T
T
T
T
T 
T
F
F
F
T 
F
T
F
F
T 
F
F
F
F
T
The last column is all Ts, so we can write (p  q)  (q S p) 3 p  q.
T
T
© Austin MacRae
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

106
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Problem Solving 3   
56. To qualify for a loan of $200,000 an applicant must have a
gross income of $72,000 if single, or $100,000 combined
income if married. It is also necessary to have assets of at least
$50,000. Write these statements symbolically, and decide
whether Liz, who is single and has assets of $125,000, satisfies
the conditions for obtaining a loan. She has an income of
$58,000.
57. An airline advertisement states, “OBTAIN 40% OFF 
REGULAR FARE.”
Read the fine print: “You must purchase your tickets 
between January 5 and February 15 and fly round trip 
between February 20 and May 3. You must also depart 
on a Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday, and return on 
a Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday. You must also stay 
over a Saturday night.” Write out these conditions
symbolically.
58. The contract states, “No alterations, redecorating, tacks, or
nails may be made in the building, unless written permission is
obtained.” Write this statement symbolically.
59. The contract states, “The tenant shall not let or sublet 
the whole or any portion of the premises to anyone for any
purpose whatsoever, unless written permission from the 
landlord is obtained.” Write this statement 
symbolically.
60. Translate into symbolic form: Either Alfie is not afraid to go, or
Bogie and Clyde will have lied.
Use the tautology (p S q) 3 (p  q) to write each statement in
Problems 30–35 in an equivalent form. 
30. If I go, then I paid $100.
31. If the cherries have turned red, then they are ready to be
picked.
32. We will not visit New York or we will visit the Statue of
Liberty.
33. Hannah will not watch Jon Stewart or she will watch the NBC
late-night orchestra.
34. The sun is shining or I will not go to the park. 
35. The money is available or I will not take my vacation.
Level 3
36. Show that the definition for neither p nor q could also be
p  q. 
37. Prove the law of double negation by using a truth table. 
38. Prove the law of contraposition by using a truth table. 
39. Prove De Morgan’s law: 
(p  q) 3 p  q
40. In the text we used laws of logic to prove that 
(p S q) 3 (p  q)
Use a truth table to prove this result. 
41. Prove (p S q) 3 (p  q). 
Write the negation of each compound statement in 
Problems 42–55. 
42. p S q
43. p S q
44. p S q
45. p S q
46. Cole went to Macy’s or Sears.
47. Jane went to the basketball game or to the soccer game. 
48. Theron is not here and he is not at home. 
49. Missy is not on time and she missed the boat. 
50. If I can’t go with you, then I’ll go with Bill. 
51. If you’re out of Schlitz, you’re out of beer. 
52. If x  2  5, then x  3.
53. If x  5  4, then x  1.
54. If x  5, then x2  25.
55. 2x  3y  8 if x  1 and y  2.
© 2009, Priceline.com
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.4
The Nature of Proof
107
3.4  The Nature of Proof
One of the greatest strengths of mathematics is its concern with the logical proof of its
propositions. Any logical system must start with some undefined terms, definitions, and
postulates or axioms. We have seen several examples of each of these. From here, other
assertions can be made. These assertions are called theorems, and they must be proved
using the rules of logic. In this section, we are concerned not so much with “proving
mathematics” as with investigating the nature of proof in mathematics since the idea of
proof does occupy a great portion of a mathematician’s time.
"I think you should be
more explicit here in step two."
Cartoon by Sidney Harris - American Scientist
Magazine. 1977. Reprinted by permission of 
ScienceCartoonsPlus.com. 
In Chapter 1 we discussed inductive reasoning. Experimentation, guessing, and looking
for patterns are all part of inductive reasoning. After a conjecture or generalization has been
made, it needs to be proved using the rules of logic. After the conjecture is proved, it is called
a theorem. Often several years will pass from the conjectural stage to the final proved form.
Certain definitions must be made, and certain axioms or postulates must be accepted. Per-
haps the proof of the conjecture will require the results of some previous theorems.
A syllogism is a form of reasoning in which two statements or premises are made
and a logical conclusion is drawn from them. In this book, we will consider three types
of syllogisms: direct reasoning, indirect reasoning, and transitive reasoning.
Direct Reasoning
The simplest type of syllogism is direct reasoning. This type of argument consists of two
premises, or hypotheses, and a conclusion. For example,
p S q
If you receive an A on the final, then you will pass the course.
p
You receive an A on the final.
_______
‹  q
Therefore, you pass the course.
The three dot symbol ‹ is used to symbolize the word therefore, which is used to sepa-
rate the conclusion from the premises. We can use a truth table to prove direct reasoning.
We begin by noting that the argument form can be rewritten as
[(p S q)  p] S q
p
q
p S q
(p S q)  p
[(p S q)  p] S q
T
T
T
T
T 
T
F
F
F
T 
F
T
T
F
T 
F
F
T
F
T 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Since the argument is always true, we can write [(p S q)  p] 1 q, which proves the
reasoning form called direct reasoning. It is also called modus ponens, law of detach-
ment, or assuming the antecedent.
108
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Example
1
Formulate a conclusion
Use direct reasoning to formulate a conclusion for each of the given arguments.
a. If you play chess, then you are intelligent.
You play chess.
b. If 
, then 
.
.
c. If you are a logical person, then you will understand this example.
You are a logical person.
Solution
a. You are intelligent.
b.
.
c. You understand this example.
x 5 1
x 1 2 5 3
x 5 1
x 1 2 5 3
Charles Dodgson 
(1832–1898)
Example 5 and Problems 49–52
and 57–60 are patterned after this
English mathematician’s famous
logic problems. Better known by
his pseudonym Lewis Carroll, he
was the author of Alice in Wonder-
land and Through the Looking
Glass, as well as numerous math-
ematics textbooks. Queen Victoria
was said to have been so taken by
his children’s books that she
requested copies of every book he
had written. Imagine her surprise
when she received a pile of
mathematics books! Dodgson
stammered, and he felt most at
ease with children, which
accounts for his interest in
children’s books. The fascinating
thing about his children’s books is
that they can also be appreciated
from a mathematical standpoint.
For example, Through the Looking
Glass is based on a game of
chess, and, in Alice in
Wonderland, Alice’s size and pro-
portions form a closed set of 
projective transformations.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Historical
Indirect Reasoning
The following syllogism illustrates indirect reasoning.
p S q
If you receive an A on the final, then you will pass the course.
q
You did not pass the course.
_______
‹ p
Therefore, you did not receive an A on the final.
We can prove this is valid by using a truth table (see Problem 34) or by using direct rea-
soning as follows: 
[(q S p)  q] 1 p
Direct reasoning
[(p S q)  q] 1 p
Law of contraposition
This type of reasoning is also called modus tollens or denying the consequent. 
Major premise:
p S q
Minor premise:
q
______
Conclusion:
‹p
Indirect Reasoning
This is another of the important
rules of reasoning.
Major premise:
p S q
Minor premise:
p
______
Conclusion:
‹ q 
Direct Reasoning
This is one of the important rules of
reasoning.  
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.4
The Nature of Proof
109
Example
2
Use indirect reasoning
Formulate a conclusion for each statement by using indirect reasoning.
a. If the cat takes the rat, then the rat will take the cheese.
The rat does not take the cheese.
b. If x is an even number, then 3x is an even number.
3x is not an even number.
c. If you received an A on the test, then I am Napoleon.
I am not Napoleon.
Solution
a. The cat does not take the rat.
b. x is not an even number.
c. You did not receive an A on the test.
Transitive Reasoning
Sometimes we must consider some extended arguments. Transitivity allows us to
reason through several premises to some conclusion. The argument form is given in
the box.
We can prove transitivity by using a truth table. Notice that for three statements we need
a truth table with eight possibilities.
p
q
r
p S q
q S r
p S r
(p S q)  (q S r)
[(p S q)  (q S r)] S (p S r)
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T 
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T 
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
T 
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T 
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T 
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T 
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T 
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
c
All Ts
Since transitivity is always true, we may write 
[(p S q)  (q S r)] 1 (p S r)
Major premise:
p S q
Minor premise:
q S r
________
Conclusion:
‹ p S r
Transitive Reasoning
This is the last of the three important
rules of reasoning.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

110
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Example
3
Formulate a conclusion
Formulate a conclusion for each argument.
a. If you attend class, then you will pass the course.
If you pass the course, then you will graduate.
b. If you graduate, then you will get a good job.
If you get a good job, then you will meet the right people.
If you meet the right people, then you will become well known.
c. If 
, then 
.
If 
, then 
.
If 
, then 
.
Solution
a. If you attend class, then you will graduate.
b. The transitive law can be extended to several premises:
If you graduate, then you will become well known.
Notice that we can apply the transitive law to both parts a and b: If you attend class,
then you will become well known.
c. If 
, then 
.
x 5 2
x 1 2x 1 3 5 9
x 5 2
3x 5 6
3x 5 6
3x 1 3 5 9
3x 1 3 5 9
x 1 2x 1 3 5 9
Example
4
Given premises, form a valid conclusion
Form a valid conclusion using all these statements. We number the premises for easy
reference.
1. If I receive a check for $500, then we will go on vacation.
2. If the car breaks down, then we will not go on vacation.
3. The car breaks down.
Solution
Begin by changing the argument into symbolic form.
1. c S v
where
c: I receive a $500 check. 
v: We will go on vacation. 
2. b S v
b: The car breaks down. 
3. b
Next, simplify the argument. For this example, we rearrange the premises. Notice the
numbers to help you keep track of the premises. 
2.
b S v
Given
1. v S c
Contrapositive of the first premise
__________
‹ b S c
Transitive
3.
b
Given
__________
‹ c
Direct reasoning
Finally, we translate the conclusion back into words: I did not receive a check for $500.
Logical Proof
The point of studying these various argument forms is to acquire the ability to apply them
to longer and more involved arguments.
Pólya’s 
Method
Example
5
Conclusion from a puzzle
Form a valid conclusion using all the statements.*
1. All unripe fruit is unwholesome.
2. All these apples are wholesome.
3. No fruit grown in the shade is ripe.
*From Lewis Carroll, Symbolic Logic and The Game of Logic (New York: Dover Publications, 1958).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.4
The Nature of Proof
111
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. The forms in this argument are not exactly like those we
are used to seeing. We recall that the statement all p is q can be translated as if p
then q.
Devise a Plan. The procedure we will use is to (step 1) translate into symbols, (step 2)
simplify using logical arguments, and finally (step 3), translate the symbolic form back
into English.
Carry Out the Plan.
Step 1
1. r S (w)
where 
r: This fruit is ripe. 
2. a S w
w: This fruit is wholesome. 
3. s S (r)
a: This fruit is an apple. 
s: This fruit is grown in the shade. 
Note: The sentence “No p is q” is translated as p S (q). 
Step 2
Let (1), w S r, replace (1) by the law of contraposition. 
Let (3), r S s, replace (3) by the law of contraposition. 
Rearranging the premises, we have: 
2.
a S w
1.
w S r
________
‹ a S r
Transitive
3. r S (s) 
________
a S (s)
Transitive
Step 3 
Conclusion: All these apples were not grown in the shade. 
If we assume that s represents grown in the sun, then the conclusion can be stated
more simply: All these apples were grown in the sun. 
Look Back. Does this conclusion seem reasonable?
Fallacies
Sometimes invalid arguments are given. The remainder of this section is devoted to some
of the more common logical fallacies.
What is this?
(circular reasoning)
Example
6
Invalid argument
Show that the following argument is not valid.
If a person reads the Times, then she is well informed.
This person is well informed.
Therefore, this person reads the Times.
Solution
This argument has the following form:
p S q
q______
‹ p
Fallacy of the Converse 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

112
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
By considering the associated truth table, we can test the validity of our argument. 
p
q
p S q
(p S q)  q
[(p S q)  q] S p
T
T
T
T
T 
T
F
F
F
T 
F
T
T
T
F 
F
F
T
F
T 
We see that the result is not always true; thus the argument is invalid.
Example
7
Test validity
Test the validity of the following argument.
If a person goes to college, he will make a lot of money. 
You do not go to college. 
Therefore, you will not make a lot of money.
Solution
This argument has the following form:
We recognize this reasoning as the fallacy of the inverse (the fallacy of denying the
antecedent).
p S q
p
______
‹ q
If p S q were replaced by q S p, the argument in the preceding example would
become valid. That is, the argument would be valid if the direct statement and the con-
verse had the same truth values, which in general they do not. For this reason the argu-
ment is sometimes called the fallacy of the converse or the fallacy of assuming the
consequent.
We can often show that a given argument is invalid by finding a counterexample.
In the preceding example we found a counterexample by looking at the truth table. The
entry in the third row is false, so the argument can be shown to be false in the case in
which p is false and q is true. In terms of this example, a person could never see the
Times (p false) and still be well informed (q true), which shows the argument form is
invalid.
Fallacy of the Inverse
Consider the following argument:
If a person reads the Times, then he is well informed.
This person does not read the Times.
Therefore, this person is not well informed.
As we have seen in Example 6, a person who never sees the Times might also be well in-
formed. This line of reasoning is called the fallacy of the inverse (sometimes also called
the fallacy of denying the antecedent). A truth table for
[(p S q)  (p)] S (q)
shows that the fallacy of the inverse is not valid. (The truth table is left as a problem.)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.4
The Nature of Proof
113
False Chain Pattern
In certain areas of this country, it is thought that thunderstorms cause milk to sour. This
belief is an example of the fallacy we will call the false chain pattern. It can be shown
as follows:
Hot, humid weather favors thunderstorms.
Hot, humid weather favors bacterial growth, which causes milk to sour. 
Therefore, thunderstorms cause milk to sour.
The false chain pattern is illustrated by
and can be proved invalid by construction of an appropriate truth table.
The three types of common fallacies that we have discussed can be summarized as
follows:
Assuming the Consequent
Denying the Antecedent
Fallacy of 
Fallacy of
False Chain
the Converse
the Inverse
Pattern
p S q
p S q
p S q
q
p
p S r
_______
_______
_______
‹ p
‹ q
‹ q S r
Study these fallacies, and notice how they differ from direct reasoning, indirect reason-
ing, and transitivity.
p S q
p S r
________
‹ q S r
Problem Set 3.4
Level  1
1. Explain what we mean by direct reasoning.
2. Explain what we mean by indirect reasoning.
3. Explain what we mean by transitive reasoning. 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by logical fallacies? 
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a syllogism? 
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
There are similarities between
Pólya’s problem-solving method and the steps a detective will
go through in solving a case. Rewrite each of these detective
problem-solving steps using the language of Pólya’s problem-
solving method. (See Problems 55–56 below for examples of
detective-type problems.) 
Understand the case. 
What are you looking for? 
Investigate the case.
Have you solved a similar case? 
What are the facts? 
Analyze the facts/data.
What information is important? 
What information is not important? 
What pieces of information do not seem to fit together
logically? 
Which data are inconsistent with the given information? 
Reexamine the facts.
Do the facts support the solution? 
Can we obtain a conviction? 
Determine whether each argument in Problems 7–10 is valid or
invalid. Give reasons for your answer. 
7. a. p S q
q
______
‹ p
8. a. p  q
p
______
‹ q
9. a. p S q
p
______
‹ q
10. a. p S  q
q______
‹ p
b. p S q
q______
‹ p
b. p  q
q
______
‹ p
b. p S q
p______
‹ q
b. p S q
p
______
‹ q
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Determine whether each argument in Problems 11–33 is valid or
invalid. If valid, name the type of reasoning, and if invalid, deter-
mine the error in reasoning. 
11. If I inherit $1,000, I will buy you a cookie. 
I inherit $1,000. 
Therefore, I will buy you a cookie.
12. If a2 is even, then a must be even. 
a is odd. 
Therefore, a2 is odd.
Note: Assume that if a number is odd, then it is not even. 
13. All snarks are fribbles. 
All fribbles are ugly. 
Therefore, all snarks are ugly.
14. All cats are animals. 
This is not an animal. 
Therefore, this is not a cat.
15. If I don’t get a raise in pay, I will quit.
I don’t get a raise in pay. 
Therefore, I quit.
16. If Fermat’s Last Theorem is ever proved, 
then my life is complete.
Fermat’s Last Theorem was proved in 1994. 
Therefore, my life is complete.
17. If Congress appropriates the money, the project can be 
completed.
Congress appropriates the money. 
Therefore, the project can be completed.
18. If Alice drinks from the bottle marked “poison,” 
she will become sick.
Alice does not drink from a bottle that is marked “poison.” 
Therefore, she does not become sick.
19. Blue-chip stocks are safe investments.
Stocks that pay a high rate of interest are safe investments. 
Therefore, blue-chip stocks pay a high rate of interest. 
20. If Al understands logic, then he enjoys this sort of problem.
Al does not understand logic.
Therefore, Al does not enjoy this sort of problem. 
21. If Al understands a problem, it is easy.
This problem is not easy. 
Therefore, Al does not understand this problem.
22. If Mary does not have a little lamb, then she has a big bear.
Mary does not have a big bear.
Therefore, Mary has a little lamb.
23. If 2x  4  0, then x  2.
x  2 
Therefore, 2x  4  0.
24. If Todd eats Krinkles cereal, then he has “extra energy.”
Todd has “extra energy.”
Therefore, Todd eats Krinkles cereal.
25. If Ron uses Slippery oil, then his car is in good running 
condition. 
Ron’s car is in good running condition. 
Therefore, Ron uses Slippery oil.
114
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
26. If you get a fill-up of gas, you will get a free car wash.
You get a fill-up of gas. 
Therefore, you will get a free car wash.
27. If the San Francisco 49ers lose, then the Dallas Cowboys win.
If the Dallas Cowboys win, then they will go to the Super Bowl. 
Therefore, if the San Francisco 49ers lose, then the Dallas 
Cowboys will go to the Super Bowl.
28. If Missy uses Smiles toothpaste, then she has fewer cavities.
Therefore, if Missy has fewer cavities, then she uses Smiles 
toothpaste.
29. All mathematicians are eccentrics.
All eccentrics are rich. 
Therefore, all mathematicians are rich.
30. (Let x be an integer and y a nonzero integer for this 
argument.) 
If Q is a rational number, then Q  , where is a reduced 
fraction. 
Q  , where is a reduced fraction. 
Therefore, Q is not a rational number.
31. If you like beer, you’ll like Bud. 
You don’t like Bud. 
Therefore, you don’t like beer.
32. No students are enthusiastic.
You are enthusiastic. 
Therefore, you are not a student.
33. If the crime occurred after 4:00 A.M., then Smith could not 
have done it.
If the crime occurred at or before 4:00 A.M., then Jones could 
not have done it. 
The crime involved two persons, if Jones did not commit the
crime. 
Therefore, if Smith committed the crime, it involved two 
persons.
Level 2
34. Prove [(p S q)  q] S p by constructing a truth table.
What is the name we give to this type of reasoning? 
35. Show that [(p S q)  (p S r)] S (q S r) is an invalid
argument by constructing a truth table. What is the name of this
fallacy?
36. Prove that [(p S q)  p] S q is an invalid argument.
What is the name of this fallacy?
In Problems 37–54, form a valid conclusion, using all the premises
given for each argument. Give reasons. 
37. If you learn mathematics, then you are intelligent. 
If you are intelligent, then you understand human nature. 
38. If I am idle, then I become lazy. 
I am idle.
39. If we go to the concert, then we are enlightened. 
We are not enlightened.
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40. If you climb the highest mountain, then you feel great. 
If you feel great, then you are happy. 
41. a  0 or b  0 
a  0
42. If a  b  0, then a  0 or b  0. 
a  b  0
43. If we interfere with the publication of false information, we are
guilty of suppressing the freedom of others. 
We are not guilty of suppressing the freedom of others.
44. If a nail is lost, then a shoe is lost. 
If a shoe is lost, then a horse is lost. 
If a horse is lost, then a rider is lost. 
If a rider is lost, then a battle is lost. 
If a battle is lost, then a kingdom is lost.
Section 3.4
The Nature of Proof
115
50. All hummingbirds are richly colored. 
No large birds live on honey. 
Birds that do not live on honey are dull in color. 
51. No ducks waltz.
No officers ever decline to waltz. 
All my poultry are ducks.
52. Everyone who is sane can do logic. 
No lunatics are fit to serve on a jury. 
None of your sons can do logic.
53. If the government awards the contract to Airfirst Aircraft 
Company, then Senator Firstair stands to earn a great deal 
of money.
If Airsecond Aircraft Company does not suffer financial 
setbacks, then Senator Firstair does not stand to earn a 
great deal of money. 
The government awards the contract to Airfirst Aircraft 
Company.
54. If you go to college, then you get a good job.
If you get a good job, then you make a lot of money. 
If you do not obey the law, then you do not make a lot of money. 
You go to college.
Problem Solving 3   
55. THE CASE OF THE DEAD PROFESSOR*
The detective,
Columbo, had just arrived at the scene of the crime and found that
the professor had been at the lab working for hours. He seemed to
have electrocuted himself and ended up blowing the fuses for the
whole building. Later in the night, the janitor came to clean up the
lab and found the professor’s body. Columbo suspected the janitor,
but when he was questioned, he vehemently denied killing the pro-
fessor. He said, “I came to work late. When I got off the elevator, I
found the professor dead with his head on the lab table. I wish I
could tell you more, but that is all I know.” 
Then Columbo said, “I think you can tell us more at headquar-
ters.” Downtown under grueling interrogation, the janitor
confessed. What made Columbo suspect the janitor?
56. THE CASE OF THE TUMBLED TOWER†
Dwayne got 
up at 6:00 A.M. and was watching the sunrise from his 
bedroom window. After the sun came up, he started working
on his toothpick tower in his room. The tower was very fragile.
While he was working on his tower, his little brother came into the
room bugging him. Dwayne’s brother wanted to be more like
Dwayne and he wanted to build something out of toothpicks, too.
He was very jealous of Dwayne.    
In the afternoon, Dwayne went out to buy candy at the candy
store and he left his little brother home (even though he was
supposed to be babysitting). On his way out of the house, he heard
on the radio that there was going to be a slight westerly wind com-
ing. He then left the house, forgetting that he had left his bedroom
window open. When he returned and saw that he had left the win-
dow open, he thought that the wind had blown the tower over. But
then he remembered something and said that his little brother must
have knocked over the tower. What did he remember?
Reprinted with special permission. © King Features Syndicate.
45. If I eat that piece of pie, I will get fat. 
I will not get fat.
46. If 2 divides a positive integer N and if N is greater than 2, 
then N is not a prime number.
N is a prime number.
47. If we win first prize, we will go to Europe. 
If we are ingenious, we will win first prize. 
We are ingenious.
48. If I am tired, then I cannot finish my homework. 
If I understand the homework, then I can finish my homework. 
Level 3
HISTORICAL QUEST
Problems 49–52 are problems 
written by Charles Dodgson, better known as Lewis Carroll. 
You might wish to read the Historical Note and Example 5 in 
this section.
49. Babies are illogical.
Nobody is despised who can manage a crocodile.
Illogical persons are despised.
*My thanks to Don Gernes of Ponderosa High School for this idea.
†Problems 55 and 56 were adapted from “Solving the Mystery,” by Frances R. Curicio
and J. Lewis McNeece, .The Mathematics Teacher, November 1993, pp. 682–685.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

116
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
3.5 Problem Solving Using Logic
In the previous chapter we introduced the distinction between inductive and deductive
reasoning. In mathematics, we often build a deductive system using the principles of logic
we have developed. Let us begin with a simple example.
Example
1 Undefined terms, defined terms, axioms, and theorems
You are probably familiar with the game of Monopoly®. Just as in mathematics, a game
often has some undefined terms or materials used in the game. In addition, there are def-
initions used in the game (just as in mathematics), and the game usually has rules,
which correspond to mathematical axioms or postulates. Finally, the game has out-
comes, just as in mathematics there are theorems that result from the given definitions
and rules.* Classify each of the following components from the game of Monopoly as
an undefined term, defined term, axiom, or theorem.
a. Park Place
b. If you land on an unowned property, then you may buy it from the bank.
c. bank
d. Community Chest
e. jail
Solution
a. Park Place is a property location in the game, so we would called this a defined term.
b. This is a rule of the game, so we call this an axiom.
c. The bank is a defined term.
d. Community Chest is a definition in the game.
e. In the game of Monopoly, the rules talk of “landing in jail” or “getting out of jail”
but the term itself is undefined.
*My thanks to Don Gernes of Ponderosa High School for this idea.
HISTORICAL QUEST
Form a valid conclusion in Problems
57–60 using all of the given statements. These problems were
written by Charles Dodgson, better known as Lewis Carroll. You
might wish to read the Historical Note and Example 5 in this
section.
57. Nobody who really appreciates Beethoven fails to keep silent
while the Moonlight Sonata is being played. Guinea pigs
are hopelessly ignorant of music. No one who is hopelessly
ignorant of music ever keeps silent while the Moonlight Sonata
is being played.
58. No kitten that loves fish is unteachable. No kitten with a tail
will play with a gorilla. Kittens with whiskers always love fish.
No teachable kitten has green eyes. Kittens have tails unless
they have whiskers.
59. When I work a logic problem without grumbling, you may be
sure it is one that I can understand. These problems are not
arranged in regular order, like the problems I am used to. No
easy problem ever makes my head ache. I can’t understand
problems that are not arranged in regular order, like those I am
used to. I never grumble at a problem unless it gives me a
headache.
60. Every idea of mine that cannot be expressed as a syllogism is 
really ridiculous. None of my ideas about rock stars is worth
writing down. No idea of mine that fails to come true can be
expressed as a syllogism. I never have any really ridiculous idea
that I do not at once refer to my lawyer. All my dreams are about
rock stars. I never refer any idea of mine to my lawyer unless it
is worth writing down.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.5
Problem Solving Using Logic
117
Example
2
Two-pan problem
You are given nine steel balls of the same size and color. One of the nine
balls is slightly heavier in weight; the others all weigh the same. Using a two-pan balance,
what is the minimum number of weighings necessary to find the ball of different weight?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Do you understand the terminology? Are you familiar with
a two-pan balance?
Devise a Plan. One of the techniques for Pólya’s method is to guess and test. That is the
method we will use here. We will find a solution by trial and error (that is, guess), and
then test it. Next we will see whether we can find a solution with fewer weighings. We
will accomplish this by first solving some simpler problems.
Carry Out the Plan. Suppose we had two steel balls. Then one weighing would suffice.
What about three steel balls? One weighing would still suffice. How? Put one ball on
each pan. If it doesn’t balance, then you have found the heavier one. If it balances, then
the one not weighed is the heavier one. Does this give you an idea for the nine balls?
Let’s try two weighings.
1. Divide the 9 steel balls into 3 groups of 3. First weighing: Balance 3 balls against
3 balls.
a. The weighing either balances or doesn’t balance (law of excluded middle).
b. If it balances, then the heavier one is in the group not weighed. If it doesn’t bal-
ance, then take the group with the heavier ball.
2. Divide the 3 steel balls from the heavier group. Second weighing: Balance 1 ball
against 1 ball.
a. The weighing either balances or doesn’t balance. (Why?)
b. If it doesn’t balance, then the heavier ball is the one that tips the scale. If it does
balance, then the heavier ball is the one not weighed.
Look Back. Two weighings is the solution.
Pólya’s 
Method
www. istockphoto .com
In Chapter 1, we laid the foundation for problem solving. The key to building
problem-solving skills is to encounter problem solving in a variety of contexts. We will
now apply another method of proof to solving some logic puzzles that have been around
for a long time but that nevertheless continue to challenge the lay reader. Example 2 gives
an analysis of Problem 57 of Problem Set 1.2.
Example
3
The letter game
Consider the “letter game” patterned after an article by Don Gernes from Ponderosa
High School.* We have three undefined terms, the letters M, I, and U, and one definition,
“x means any string of I’s and U’s.” Finally, there are four postulates for this letter game.
Postulates
1. If a string of letters ends in I, you may add a U at the end. This is the addition rule.
2. If you have Mx, then you may add x to get Mxx, by what we call the doubling rule.
3. If three I’s occur—that is, III—then you may replace that string by U. We call this
the substitution rule.
4. If UU occurs, you drop it. This is the deletion rule.
Given: MI,
Prove: MUIU
*“The Rules of the Game,” from the Sharing Teaching Ideas section of The Mathematics Teacher, May 1999, pp. 424–426.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Solution
We begin with the given and justify each step.
MI
Given
MII
Doubling rule
MIII
Doubling rule
MIIII
Doubling rule
MIIIIU
Addition rule
MUIU
Substitution rule
We can shorten this sequence of steps (without reasons) by
MISMIISMIIISMIIIISMIIIIUSMUIU
Example
4 Liar problem
On the South Side, a member of the mob had just knocked off a store.
Since the boss had told them all to lay low, he was a bit mad. He decided to have a talk
with the boys.
Pólya’s 
Method
From the boys’ comments, can you help the boss figure out who committed the crime?
Assume that the Boss is telling the truth.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem.
Let a: Alfie did it.
b: Bogie did it.
c: Clyde did it.
d: Dirty Dave did it.
f: Fingers did it.
Translate the sentences into symbolic form:
Alfie said:
b  c
Bogie said:
( f  b)
Clyde said:
[(b  c)]  [(f  b)]
Dirty Dave said: [(b  c)  ( f  b)]  [(b  c)  ( f  b)]
Fingers said:
{[(b  c)  ( f  b)]  [(b  c)  ( f  b)]}
Assume that a is true, and check all these statements. Next, assume that b is true, and
check all the statements. Do the same for c, d, and f. Since we assume the boss is telling
the truth, we look for those cases (if any) in which three are truthful and two are lying. 
Devise a Plan. We can summarize our analysis by using a matrix (a rectangular array)
with vacant cells for all possible pairings of the elements in each set.
Both you
guys are
lying.
No, one
is lying; the
other is telling
the truth.
No, Dirty
Dave, that’s
not true!
Three of you guys
are always truthful.
Now, who knocked
off the store?
ALFIE
BOGIE
CLYDE
DIRTY DAVE
FINGERS
BOSS
It was
Bogie or
Clyde.
Neither
Fingers
nor I did it
The remainder of this
section requires some
additional effort. Some
people like and enjoy
logic puzzles, and others
avoid them. If you spend
the time necessary to un-
derstand the rest of the
examples in this section,
your logical abilities in
everyday life should be
enhanced. Sit back, re-
lax, and enjoy!
Kenneth C. Zirkel/iStockphoto.com
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.5
Problem Solving Using Logic
119
Let us assume that the a at the left means that we are making the assumption that Alfie did
it. Then we place a 1 or a 0 in each position to indicate the truth or falsity, respectively, of
each witness’s statement with the assumption that person a (as listed at the left) is guilty.
Carry Out the Plan.
Witness Statements
Conclusion
a
b
c
d
f 
Alfie did it.
a
0
1
0
1
0 
Bogie did it.
b
1
0
0
1
0 
Clyde did it.
c
1
1
0
0
1 
Dave did it.
d
0
1
0
1
0 
Fingers did it.
f
0
0
1
0
1 
Next we assume that Bogie did it, and we fill in the second row of the matrix. We
continue until the matrix is complete, as shown. Now if we take the boss’s statement as
the major premise, we see that in only one case are there three truthful mobsters and two
liars. Thus we can say that Clyde knocked off the store.
Look Back. Assume that Clyde knocked off the store, and check each mobster’s com-
ments to see that in this case there are three truthful mobsters and two liars.
a
b
c
d
f
a
b
c
d
f
Example
5
Prisoner problem
During an ancient war three prisoners were brought into a room. In the
room was a large box containing three white hats and two black hats. Each man was
blindfolded, and one of the hats was placed on his head.
The men were lined up, one behind the other, facing the wall. The blindfold of the
man farthest from the wall (man C) was removed, and he was permitted to look at the
hats of the two men in front of him. If he knew (not guessed) the color of the hat on his
head, he would be freed. However, he was unable to tell. The blindfold was then taken
from the head of the next man (man B), who could see only the hat of the one man in
front of him. This man had the same chance for freedom, but he, too, was unable to tell
the color of his hat. The remaining man (man A) then told the guards the color of the hat
he was wearing and was released. What color hat was he wearing, and how did he know?
Solution We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. The situation looks like this:
Devise a Plan. We consider what the last man in line could see, and then decide which
of these possibilities fit the conditions of what the middle man in the line saw.
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Example
6
Reporter’s error problem
Emor D. Nilap, a news reporter who was a little backward, was sent to
cover a billiards tournament. Since he wanted to do a good job, he rounded up some 
human-interest facts to make his story a little more interesting. He gathered the following
information:
1. The men competing were Pat, Milt, Dick, Joe, and Karl.
2. Milt had once beaten the winner at tennis.
3. Pat and Karl frequently played cards together.
4. Joe’s finish ahead of Karl was totally unexpected.
5. The man who finished fourth left the tournament after his match and did not see the
last two games.
6. The winner had not met the man who came in fifth prior to the day of the 
tournament.
7. The winner and the runner-up had never met until Joe introduced them just before
the final game.
When Emor returned to his office, he found that he had forgotten the order in which the
men had finished, but he was able to figure it out from the information provided. Can
you figure it out?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. We need to find the order in which the men finished the
tournament.
Devise a Plan. The procedure we will use is to form a matrix of all possibilities and then
use the rules of logic to eliminate the parts that are impossible; what remains is the
solution.
Carry Out the Plan. From (1) we are able to make the following matrix of the possible
solutions:
The steps are listed with the “work” shown after the last step.
a. We are given seven premises. We begin by the process of elimination; that is, we
cross out those positions that it would be impossible for the men to occupy. The or-
der in which we work the problem is not unique.
b. From (7), Joe is not the winner or the runner-up. Thus we cross out 1 and 2 under
Joe’s name and label those places b, as shown below.
c. By (5), Joe did not finish fourth; cross out and label c.
d. Joe finished ahead of Karl, by (4); therefore Karl was not first, second, or third. By
the same premise, Joe could not have been last. (Why?)
Pólya’s 
Method
Pat
Milt
Dick
Joe
Karl
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
Carry Out the Plan.
1. What did man C see? There are four possibilities:
I
II
III
IV
A
white
white
black
black
B
white
black
white
black
If he had seen possibility IV, he would have known that he had on a white hat.
(Why?) He did not know, so it must be possibility I, II, or III.
2. What did man B see? If he had seen a black hat, then he would have known that his
hat was white. (Why?) This rules out possibility III.
3. Since both of the remaining possibilities, I and II, have a white hat on the front man,
man A knew he had a white hat.
Look Back. Reread the question to see whether all the conditions of the problem are
satisfied.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.5
Problem Solving Using Logic
121
e. Therefore Joe finished third, which means that Pat, Milt, and Dick are not in third
place.
f. By (2), Milt was not the winner.
g. By (7), Milt was not the runner-up.
h. By (6), Milt was not fifth.
i. Therefore Milt finished fourth, which means that Pat, Dick, and Karl are not in fourth
place.
j. Therefore Karl finished fifth, which means that the others did not finish fifth.
k. By (6) and the fact that Karl finished last, along with (3), we see that Pat could not
have finished first.
l. Therefore Pat is second, which means that Dick was not second.
m.Therefore Dick finished first, and the problem is finished.
Example
7 Turkey problem
A man I know once owned a number of turkeys. One day, one of his gobblers flew over
the man’s fence and laid an egg on a neighbor’s property. To whom did the egg belong—
to the man who owned the gobbler, to the gobbler, or to the neighbor?
Solution
To understand the question, you must understand the terminology. Since a
turkey gobbler is a male turkey, it could not lay an egg. You must be careful to use com-
mon sense along with the rules of logic when answering puzzle problems.
Level  1
For each of the situations in Problems 1–8, classify each item as an
undefined term, a defined term, a axiom, or a theorem.
1. The game of Monopoly®
a. playing board
b. If you pass go, then collect $200.
c. passing “GO”
d. “chance” card
e. race car playing piece
2. The game of Monopoly®
a. dice
b. luxury tax
c. doubles
Problem Set 3.5
d. If you roll three doubles in a row, then you go directly
to jail.
e. jail
3. The game of Sorry®
a. pawn
b. You take turns drawing cards from a special deck and 
moving your pawn around the board.
c. home
d. Pawns may move forward or backward.
e. backward
4. The game of Clue®
a. playing board
b. Professor Plum
c. detective notebook
Pat
Milt
Dick
Joe
Karl
1k
1f
1m
1b
1d
2
2g
2
2b
2d
3e
3e
3e
3e
3d
4i
4i
4i
4c
4i
5j
5h
5j
5d
5j
Look Back. We have found that Dick finished first, Pat second, Joe third, Milt fourth,
and Karl last. Reread each of the statements to make sure this solution does not cause
any inconsistencies.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

122
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
*Ibid. SHEET 2.
d. You may not enter or land on a square that’s already 
occupied by another suspect.
e. weapon
5. The game of Clue®
a. The pack of cards consists of three groups: Suspects,
Rooms, and Weapons.
b. Roll the die and move your token the number of squares
you rolled.
c. a die
d. a door
e. Miss Scarlet always plays first.
6. The game of baseball
a. base
b. ball
c. home run
d. If the player accumulates three strikes, then the player is
called out.
e. If an opposing player catches a foul ball, then the batter is
called out.
7. The game of soccer
a. players
b. If a player is fouled, then that player’s team gets a free kick.
c. free kick
d. goal
e. The referee objectively applies the rules of the game to
each play.
8. The game of basketball
a. If a player travels, then the other team gets possession of
the ball.
b. ball
c. traveling
d. basket
e. free throw
Level 2
Use the definitions and postulates given in Example 3 to prove the
theorems in Problems 9–14. Give both statements and reasons.*
9. Given: MIII;
Prove: M
10. Given: MI;
Prove: MUI
11. Given: MI;
Prove: MIUIU
12. Given: MI;
Prove: MIIUIIU
13. Given: MIIIUUIIIII;
Prove: MIIU
14. Given: MIIIUII;
Prove: MIIUIIU
Here is another variation of the letter game.
Undefined terms: A, E, and I.
Definition: x means any string of E’s and I’s.
Postulates:
1. If a string of letters begins with A, then you may add x to get Ax.
2. If a string of letters ends with A, then you may add an E to get EA.
3. EA  AE
4. If a string 3 I’s occurs, that is III, then you may substitute E 
in its place.
5. If AA or EE occur, you can drop it.
Use these rules to prove the theorems in Problems 15–20. Give
both statements and reasons.
15. Given: EA;
Prove: A
16. Given: AIII;
Prove: EA
17. Given: AI;
Prove: A
18. Given IAEA;
Prove: I
19. Given AE;
Prove: A
20. Given: AA;
Prove: E
In a certain kingdom there were knights and knaves. The knights
always tell the truth and the knaves always lie. Everyone in the
kingdom is either a knight or a knave. Use this information to
answer the questions in Problems 21–24.
21. There are two people, and the first one says, “Either I am a
knave or the other person is a knight.” In which category does
each belong?
22. There are two people, Ed and Ted. Ed says, “Ted and I are
different.” Ted claims, “Only a knave would say that Ed is a
knave.” In which category does each belong?
23. Three people—call them Al, Bob, and Cary—were standing
together at a bus stop. A stranger asked Al, “Are you a knight
or a knave?” Al answered, but the stranger could not make out
what he said. The stranger then asked Bob, “What did Al say?”
Bob replied, “Al said that he is a knave.” At this point, Cary
said, “Don’t believe Bob; he is lying!” What are Bob and
Cary?
24. Three people, Al, Bob, and Cary, are standing together at the
mall. Al says, “All of us are knaves,” and Bob says, “Exactly one
of us is a knight.” What are all three?
25. BEAR PROBLEM
A fox, hunting for a morsel of food,
spotted a huge bear about 100 yards due east of him. Before
the hunter could become the hunted, the crafty fox ran due
north for 100 yards but then realized the bear had not
moved. Thus he stopped and remained hidden. At this point
the bear was due south of the fox. What was the color of the
bear?
26. PARENT PROBLEM
Two doctors—an old doctor and a
young doctor—were discussing an interesting case. The
young doctor is the son of the older doctor, but the older
doctor is not the father of the younger doctor. How can you 
explain this?
27. SOCK PROBLEM
I have a habit of getting up before the sun
rises. My socks are all mixed up in the drawer, which contains 10
black and 20 blue socks. I reach into the drawer and grab some
socks in the dark. How many socks do I need to take from the
drawer to be sure that I have a matched pair?
28. TEACHER CONVENTION
A group of 50 teachers and school ad-
ministrators attended a convention. If any two persons are picked
at random, at least one of the two would be a teacher. From this
information, is it possible to determine what percentage of the
people at the convention were teachers?
29. FLOWER GARDEN
I visited a beautiful flower garden yester-
day and counted exactly 50 flowers. Each flower was either red
or yellow, and the flowers were not all the same color. My
friend made the following observation: No matter which two
flowers you might have picked, at least one was bound to be
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.5
Problem Solving Using Logic
123
red. From this can you determine how many were red and how
many were yellow?
30. SISTERS’ GARDEN
Three sisters visited a garden of red,
white, blue, and yellow flowers. One sister observed that if any
four flowers were picked, one of them would be red. Another
observed that if any four were picked, at least one of them
would be blue. The third sister noted that if any four were
picked, at least one would be yellow. Does this necessarily
mean that if any four were picked, one would be white?
Level 3
Consider a silly game called Bluffhead in which each of three
players takes a card from a shuffled deck and holds it, face out, to
his or her forehead, as shown in the figure.*
Undefined term: forehead
Defined terms:
deck of cards
ace, the highest card
Postulates:
1. The players’ names are Alice, Ben, and Cole, who always speak
in that order, and then it goes back to Alice again.
2. Each player makes one of the following statements:
“I win.” (I have a higher card than everyone else.)
“I lose.” (Someone has a higher card than I have.)
“I tie.” (I and at least one other player tie with the highest card.)
“I don’t win.” (I either tie as a winner or lose.)
“I don’t lose.” (I either win or tie as a winner.) 
“I don’t know.”
3. The players play with perfect logic and reveal information
through acceptable statements.
4. Each player says the strongest thing he or she can—that is, the
player chooses the statement that is true and highest on the list.
In Problems 31–36, state what you can infer about the cards from
the given statements.
31. Alice: “I don’t know.”
Ben: “I lose.”
Cole: “I lose.”
32. Alice: “I don’t know.”
Ben: “I don’t win.”
Cole: “I win.”
33. Alice: “I don’t know.”
Ben: “I don’t win.”
Cole: “I tie as a winner.”
Alice
Ben
Cole
34. Alice: “I don’t know.”
Ben: “I don’t win.”
Cole: “I don’t win.”
35. Alice: “I don’t know.”
Ben: “I don’t know.”
Cole: “I don’t know.”
Alice: “I lose.”
What will Ben and Cole say next?
36. Alice: “I don’t know.”
Ben: “I don’t know.”
Cole: “I don’t know.”
Alice: “I don’t know.”
Ben: “I don’t know.”
Cole: “I don’t know.”
Alice: “I don’t know.”
Ben: “I don’t know.”
Cole: “I win.”
In Problems 37–54, fill in each blank with a digit so that every
statement is true.* That is, after you have replaced each problem
number with the correct answer for that problem number, then the
statements will be true.
Problem Solving 3   
55. THE HAT GAME
Harry, Larry, and Moe are sitting in a circle
so that they see each other. The game is played by a judge plac-
ing either a black or a white hat on each person’s head so that
each person can see the others’ hats, but not the hat on his or her
own head. Now when the judge says “GO,” all players who see a
black hat must raise their hands. The first player to deduce (not
guess) the color of his own hat wins the game. Now, the judge
put a black hat on each player’s head, and then says, “GO.” All
players raised their hands and after a few moments Moe said he
knew his hat was black. How did he deduce this?
In this rectangle (including the smaller rectangles), the
number of occurrences of the digit 1 is ___, of 2 is ___,
and of 7 is ___.
37
38
39
In this rectangle (including the smaller rectangles), the
number of occurrences of the digit 1 is ___, of 2 is ___,
and of 6 is ___.
40
41
42
In this rectangle (including the smaller rectangles), 
the number of occurrences of the digit 3 is ___, of 
4 is ___, of 5 is ___, and of 6 is ___.
43
44
45
46
In this rectangle (including the smaller 
rectangle), the number of occurrences of the 
digit 1 is ___, of 2 is ___, of 3 is ___, and of 
5 is ___.
47
48
49
50
In this rectangle, the number of 
occurrences of the digit 1 is ___, 
of 2 is ___, of 3 is ___, and of 
4 is ___.
51
52
53
54
*From “Bluffhead” by Dennis E. Shasha, Scientific American, April 2004, p. 108.
*By Guney Mentes in Games, August 1996, p. 43.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

56. BROKEN WINDOW PROBLEM
Three children were playing
baseball and their names were Alice, Ben, and Cole. One of
them hit a home run and broke your expensive plate glass
window, and you went out to question the children. Each child
made two statements.
Alice: “Cole didn’t do it. Ben did it.”
Ben: “I didn’t do it. Cole did it.”
Cole: “I didn’t do it. Alice did it.”
Now if you know that one of the three always tells the truth,
one always lies, and the other tells the truth half the time, can
you point to the guilty party?
57. THE MARBLE PLAYERS
Four boys were playing marbles;
their names were Gary, Harry, Iggy, and Jack. One of the boys
had 9 marbles, another had 15, and each of the other two had
12. Their ages were 3, 10, 17, and 18, but not respectively.
Gary shot before Harry and Jack. Jack was older than the boy
with 15 marbles. Harry had fewer than 15 marbles. Jack shot
before Harry. Iggy shot after Harry. If Iggy was 10 years old,
he did not have 15 marbles. Gary and Jack together had an even
number of marbles. The youngest boy was not the one with 
15 marbles. If Harry had 12 marbles, he wasn’t the youngest.
The 10-year-old shot after the 17-year-old. In what order did
they shoot, and how old was each boy?
58. WHODUNIT?
Daniel Kilraine was killed on a lonely road,
two miles from Pontiac, at 3:30 A.M. on March 3, 1997. Otto,
Curly, Slim, Mickey, and The Kid were arrested a week later
in Detroit and questioned. Each of the five made four
statements, three of which were true and one of which was
false. One of these men killed Kilraine. Whodunit? Their
statements were:*
Otto: “I was in Chicago when Kilraine was murdered. I never 
killed anyone. The Kid is the guilty man. Mickey and I 
are pals.”
124
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Curly: “I did not kill Kilraine. I never owned a revolver in 
my life. The Kid knows me. I was in Detroit the night of 
March 3rd.”
Slim: “Curly lied when he said he never owned a revolver. 
The murder was committed on March 3rd. One of us is 
guilty. Otto was in Chicago at the time.”
Mickey: “I did not kill Kilraine. The Kid has never been in 
Pontiac. I never saw Otto before. Curly was in Detroit 
with me on the night of March 3rd.”
The Kid: “I did not kill Kilraine. I have never been in 
Pontiac. I never saw Curly before. Otto lied when he said 
I am guilty.”
59. COIN PROBLEM
Suppose you are given 12 coins, one of
which is counterfeit and weighs a little more or less than the real
coins. Using a two-pan balance scale, what is the minimum
number of weighings necessary to find the counterfeit coin? (If
you are interested in a general solution to this type of problem,
see T. H. O’Beirne’s book, Puzzles and Paradoxes, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, New York, 1965, Chapters 2 and 3.)
60. MIXED BAG PROBLEM
Suppose I have three bags, one with
two peaches, another with two plums, and a third mixed bag
with one peach and one plum. Now I give the bags (in mixed-
up order) to Alice, Betty, and Connie. I tell the three to look
into their bags and that I want each to make a false statement
about the contents of her bag. Here is what they say:
Alice: I have two peaches.
Betty: I have two plums.
Connie: I have one peach and one plum.
Now here is the game. I want you to develop a strategy of ask-
ing one of the three to reach into her bag, pull out one fruit,
and show it to you. The fruit is then returned to the bag and
you ask another to do the same thing. Continue until you can
deduce which bag is the mixed bag. What is the minimum 
possible number of necessary moves? Explain.
*Reprinted with permission of The Macmillan Company from Introduction to Logic
(2nd ed.), by Irving Copi. Copyright © 1961 by The Macmillan Company.
3.6  Logic Circuits
One of the applications of symbolic logic that is easiest to understand is that of an electri-
cal circuit (see Figure 3.5).
Consider the following symbols that we use for the parts of a circuit.
Basic Circuits
There are two types of circuits for connecting two switches together; the first is called
a series circuit, and the other is called a parallel circuit.
on
off
Light
Battery
(or other power source)
Switch
off
on
off
p
on
off
p
on
on
off
Battery
Switch
p
FIGURE 3.5 Schematic diagram
showing how a light might be
connected to a switch
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.6
Logic Circuits
125
Series
on
off
q
on
off
p
Parallel
on
off
q
off
on
p
Example
1
Circuit design
How can symbolic logic be used to describe circuits?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. When two switches are connected in series, current will flow
only when both switches are closed. When they are connected in parallel, current will
flow if either switch is closed.
Devise a Plan. Let switch p be considered as a logical proposition that is either true or
false. If p is true, then the switch will be considered closed (current flows), and if p is
false, then the switch will be considered open (current does not flow).
Carry Out the Plan. A series circuit of two switches p and q can be specified as a logical
statement p  q. A parallel circuit can be specified as a logical statement p  q.
Look Back. Each circuit has four possible states, as shown in Figure 3.6. Note that some
circuits show the light on, and others show the light off.
Pólya’s 
Method
Series:
on
off
q
on
off
p
Parallel:
on/on
off
on
p
q
on
off
on
off
q
on
off
p
off
on
p
q
on
off
on
off
q
on
off
p
off
on
p
q
on
off
on
off
q
on
off
p
off
on
p
q
on
off
on/off
off/on
off/off
FIGURE 3.6 Series and parallel circuits showing four possible states for each
The three fundamental operators are conjunction, disjunction, and negation. In Exam-
ple 1 we saw that a series circuit can be represented as a conjunction, and a parallel circuit
as a disjunction. The circuit for negation is relatively easy, as is shown in Figure 3.7. Note
that the light is on when the switch is off, and the light is off when the switch is on.
on
off
p
FIGURE 3.7 Negation circuit
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Logical Gates
It is often necessary to combine circuits. We symbolically represent these as gates.
The series circuit is called an AND-gate, the parallel circuit is called an OR-gate, and
the negation circuit is called a NOT-gate. The notation for each of these is shown in 
Figure 3.8.
The main concept when dealing with circuits is that the light is ON if the compound state-
ment is true, and the light is OFF if the compound statement is false. Study the following
table until you are certain you understand why the light is on or why it is off.
p
q
p  q
p  q
p
T; on
T; on
T; light on
T; light on
F; light off
T; on
F; off
F; light off
T; light on
F; light off
F; off
T; on
F; light off
T; light on
T; light on
F; off
F; off
F; light off
F; light off
T; light on
Notice (from Figure 3.8) that the NOT-gate has a single input (proposition p) and a single
output (proposition p). That is, current will flow out of the NOT-gate in those cases in
which the light is on for the negation circuit. Similarly, the AND-gate and OR-gate have
two switches, p and q. These are symbolized as two inputs, p and q. The single output
stands for the light.
We can construct logic circuits to simulate logical truth tables. For example, suppose
we wish to find the truth values for (p  q). We should design the following circuit
(remember that parentheses indicate the operation to be performed first):
p
q
p ~ q
,sp ~ qd
1
,
FIGURE 3.8 Circuits and gates
Parallel
 Disjunction
AND-gate
Series
 Conjunction
Negation
p
q
p ` q
on
off
q
on
off
p
off
on
p
q
on
off
on
off
p
OR-gate
NOT-gate
p
,p
,
p
q
p ~ q
1
126
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Example
2
Compare circuit design and gate diagram
Design a circuit for p  (q). Show both the circuit and the simplified gate diagram. 
Solution
For the circuit we begin with a truth table:
p
q
p
q
p  q
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.6
Logic Circuits
127
The light must be on only when both switches are off (see boldface in table), as shown
in Figure 3.9a.:
on
off
p
q
off
on
,p
,q
,p ` ,q
p
q
,
,
a. Designing a circuit
We can simulate this circuit by drawing the gate diagram, as shown in Figure 3.9b.
Example
3
Design a circuit to test truth values
Design a circuit that will find the truth values for (p  q)  q.
Solution
We use gates to symbolize (p  q)  q:
Next we must have some way of determining when the output values of (p  q)  q
in Example 3 are true and when they are false. We can do this by again connecting
a light to the circuit. When (p  q)  q is true, the light should be on; when it is false,
the light should be off. We represent this connection as follows:
p
q
p ~ q
q
s p ~ qd ` q
1
p
q
p ~ q
q
sp ~ qd ` q
1
b. Circuit diagram
FIGURE 3.9 Designing a circuit for a given truth table
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

128
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain when the light on a circuit is
on and when it is off.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
When will the light be on for 
a series circuit?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
When will the light be on for 
a parallel circuit?
What do each of the circuit symbols in Problems 4–9 mean?
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Write a symbolic statement for each circuit shown in 
Problems 10–15.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
Build a truth table for each of the gate circuits in 
Problems 16–19. 
16.
17.
p
q
~
p
q
~
on
off
p
on
off
q
on
off
p
on
off
q
on
off
q
off
on
p
on
off
p
on
off
q
p
on
off
p
on
off
,
1
off
p
on
18.
19.
Level 2
Using both switches and simplified gates, design a circuit
that would find the truth values for the statements in 
Problems 20–25 (answers are not unique). 
20. p  q
21. p  q
22. p  q
23. p  q
24. (p  q)
25. (p  q) 
First build a truth table and then, using switches, design a circuit
that would find the truth values for the statements in 
Problems 26–31 (answers are not unique). 
26. p S q
27. q S p
28. p S q
29. q S p
30. (p S q)
31. (q S p) 
Using AND-gates, OR-gates, and NOT-gates, design circuits that
would find the truth values for the statements in Problems 32–37. 
32. p  q
33. (p  q)  r
34. (p  q)  (p  r)
35. (p  q) 
36. [(p  q)  r]
37. (p  q)  (p  q) 
First build a truth table and then design a circuit using
switches that would find the truth values for the statements in
Problems 38–45 (answers are not unique). 
38. (p  q)  r
39. (p  q)  r
40. (p  q)  r
41. p  (q  r) 
42. p  (q  r)
43. (p  q)  r
44. p  (q  r)
45. p  (q  r)
Level 3
46. Suppose you wish to design a machine that dispenses 10¢ gum
balls. The machine will not give change, but will accept only
nickels and dimes.
a. Write a compound logical statement that represents the 
condition for dispensing a gum ball.
b. Construct a truth table for the statement.
c. Draw a circuit diagram.
47. Suppose you wish to design a notification system for three air-
plane rest rooms. A light should go on at the attendant’s post
when at least one of the rooms is in use.
a. Write a compound logic statement that represents the 
condition for notifying the attendant.
b. Construct a truth table for the statement.
c. Draw a circuit diagram.
~
~
p
q
1
~
~
p
q
1
Problem Set 3.6
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.7
Chapter Summary
129
48. Suppose you wish to design a security system that requires
that three people in different locations turn the keys 
simultaneously.
a. Write a compound logic statement that represents the condi-
tion for activating the security system.
b. Construct a truth table for the statement.
c. Draw a circuit diagram.
49. Suppose you wish to design a thermostat that will heat a
room. The system will activate the furnace under either of
two conditions:
I. The system is set on automatic mode and all the doors are
closed.
II. The system is set on manual mode and an authorization
code has been entered.
Write a compound logic statement that represents the condition
for heating the room.
50. Write a truth table for the thermostat described in Problem 49.
51. Draw a circuit diagram representing the thermostat described
in Problem 49.
52. The conditional p S q was defined to be equivalent to 
(p  q). Use gates to represent this conditional. 
53. The cost of the circuit is often a factor in work with switching
circuits. The circuit you constructed in Problem 52, by using
the definition of the conditional, required three gates. Construct
a truth table for p S q and p  q. What do you notice about
the truth values of the result? Design circuits for p S q by 
using only one OR-gate and one NOT-gate.
Using the results of Problems 52 and 53, design circuits for the
conditional statements given in Problems 54–56.
54. p S q
55. p S q
56. q S p
Problem Solving 3   
57. a. Suppose an engineer designs the following circuit: 
{[(p  q)  (p)]  (p)}
What will the circuit look like? 
b. If each gate costs 2¢ and a company is going to manufacture
1 million items using this circuit, how much will the 
circuits cost?
58. Use truth tables to find the following.
a. {[(p  q)  p]  (p)}
b. p  q
c. What do you notice about the final column of each of these
truth tables?
d. Draw a simpler circuit that will output the same values as
those in Problem 57. 
e. If the company in Problem 57b is going to manufacture 1 mil-
lion items using this simpler circuit, how much will the circuits
cost? How much will the company save by using this simpler
circuit rather than the more complicated one?
59. Alfie, Bogie, and Clyde are the members of a Senate committee.
Design a circuit that will output yea or nay depending on the
way the majority of the committee members voted.
60. Suppose that the Senate committee of Problem 59 has five
members. Design a circuit that will output the result of the
majority of the committee’s vote.
3.7
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Truth table of fundamental operators [3.1, 3.2]
Law of double negation [3.2]
Law of contraposition [3.2]
De Morgan’s laws [3.3]
Negation of a conditional [3.3]
Direct reasoning [3.4]
Indirect reasoning [3.4]
Transitive reasoning [3.4]
Relationship between logic and circuits [3.6]
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online,
you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of
problems that were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by
working the problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test help in studying for a mathe-
matics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
Students should be able
to construct cogent 
arguments in support of
their claims.
NCTM STANDARDS
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
Chapter
3
Review Questions
15. Translate into symbols and identify the type of argument. 
If there are a finite number of primes, then there is some 
natural number, greater than 1, that is not divisible by any
prime. 
Every natural number greater than 1 is divisible by 
a prime number. 
Therefore, there are infinitely many primes.
16. a. Using switches, design a circuit that would find the truth
values for p  q.
b. Using AND-gates, OR-gates, or NOT-gates, 
design a circuit that would find the truth values for 
[(p  q)  p].
In Problems 17–19, form a valid conclusion using all the prem-
ises given in each problem. 
17. If I attend to my duties, I am rewarded. 
If I am lazy, I am not rewarded. 
I am lazy.
18. All organic food is healthy. 
All artificial sweeteners are unhealthy. 
No prune is nonorganic.
19. All squares are rectangles. 
All rectangles are quadrilaterals. 
All quadrilaterals are polygons.
20. TABLE PUZZLE
The mathematics department of a very fa-
mous two-year college consists of four people: Josie, who is
department chairperson, Maureen, Terry, and Warren. For de-
partment meetings they always sit in the same seats around a
square table. Their hobbies are (in alphabetical order) baking,
gardening, hiking, and surfing. Josie, whose hobby is garden-
ing, sits on Terry’s left. Maureen sits at the hiker’s right. War-
ren, who faces Terry, is not the baker. Make a drawing
showing who sits where, and state the hobby of each person. 
1. a. What is a logical statement?
b. What is a tautology? 
c. What is the law of contraposition?
2. Complete the following truth table.
p
q
p
p  q
p  q
p S q
p 4 q
Construct truth tables for the statements in Problems 3–6.
3. (p  q)
4. [(p  q)  p] S q
5. [(p  q)  r] S p
6. (p  q) 4 (p  q) 
7. State and prove the principle of direct reasoning.
8. Give an example of indirect reasoning.
9. Give an example of a common fallacy of logic, and show
why it is a fallacy.
10. Is the following valid?
p S q
q
______
‹ p
Can you support your answer?
11. Write the negation of each of the following statements.
a. All birds have feathers.
b. Some apples are rotten.
c. No car has two wheels.
d. Not all smart people attend college. 
e. If you go on Tuesday, then you cannot 
win the lottery.
12. Which of the following statements are true?
a. If 111  1  1,000, then I’m a monkey’s uncle.
b. If 6  2  10 and 7  2  9, then 5  2  7.
c. If 6  2  10 or 5  2  7, then 7  2  9.
d. If 5  2  7 and 7  2  9, then 6  2  10.
e. If the moon is made of green cheese, then 
5  7  57.
13. Let p: P is a prime number; q: P  2 is a prime number.
Translate the following statements into verbal form.
a. p S q
b. (p  q)  [(p  q)]
14. Consider this statement: “All computers are incapable of self-
direction.” 
a. Translate this statement into symbolic form.
b. Write the contrapositive of the statement.
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on one of these books:
Overcoming Math Anxiety, Sheila Tobias (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Co., 1978).
Mathematical Puzzles for Beginners & Enthusiasts,
Geoffrey Mott-Smith (New York: Dover, 1954).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.7
Chapter Summary
131
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G6.
Write a symbolic statement for each of the following verbal statements. (1) Either
Donna does not like Elmer because Elmer is bald, or Donna likes Frank and George
because they are handsome twins. (2) Either neither you nor I am honest, or Hank is
a liar because Iggy did not have the money.
G7.
Consider the following question: “Of all possible collections of states that yield 270
or more electoral votes—enough to win a presidential election—which collection has
the smallest geographical area?” Hint: Let O be the set consisting of the optimal col-
lection of states. Your group should choose a state and prove mathematically that the
state is not in O or prove that the state is in O.
References This problem is found in the article “Proof by Contradiction and the Elec-
toral College,” by Charles Redmond, Michael P. Federici, and Donald M. Platte in
The Mathematics Teacher, November 1998. The U.S. Electoral College Calculator
http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/electoral_college/calculator.html
National Archives and Records Administration Federal Register
http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/electoral_college.html
G8.
Five cabbies have been called to pick up five fares at the Hilton Towers. On arrival,
they find that their passengers are slightly intoxicated. Each man has a different first
and last name, a different profession, and a different destination; in addition, each
man’s wife has a different first name. Unable to determine who’s who and who’s 
going where, the cabbies want to know: Who is the accountant? What is Winston’s
last name? Who is going to Elm Street? Use only the following facts to answer
these questions:
1. Sam is married to Donna.
2. Barbara’s husband gets into the third cab.
3. Ulysses is a banker.
4. The last cab goes to Camp St.
5. Alice lives on Denver Street.
6. The teacher gets into the fourth cab.
7. Tom gets into the second cab.
8. Eve is married to the stock broker.
9. Mr. Brown lives on Denver St.
10. Mr. Camp gets into the cab in front of Connie’s husband.
11. Mr. Adams gets into the first cab.
12. Mr. Duncan lives on Bourbon St.
13. The lawyer lives on Anchor St.
14. Mr. Duncan gets into the cab in front of Mr. Evans.
15. The lawyer is three cabs in front of Victor.
16. Mr. Camp is in the cab in front of the teacher.
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G9.
This problem is similar to the previous taxicab problem, only instead of five taxi
drivers we consider nine persons who play positions on a baseball team. You will
need to get the details from this books’s website (www.mathnature.com) for a
description of this problem.
G10. Consider the apparatus shown in Figure 3.10.
132
CHAPTER 3
The Nature of Logic
AND
OR
REWARD
AND
OR
AND
OR
AND
OR
AND
AND
AND
Note that there are 12 chutes (numbered 1 to 12), and a ball dropped into a chute will
slide down the tube until it reaches an AND-gate or an OR-gate. If two balls reach an
AND-GATE, then one ball will pass through, but if only one reaches an AND-gate, it
will not pass through. If one or two balls reach an OR-gate, then one ball will pass
through. The object is to obtain a reward by having a ball reach the location called
REWARD. What is the fewest number of balls that can be released in order to gain
the reward?
FIGURE 3.10 Reward Game
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.7
Chapter Summary
133
Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas in this chapter. You can find references
to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 3.1 Deck of Cards Puzzle from Games magazine.
See www.mathnature.com, Section 3.1, for a statement of this puzzle.
PROJECT 3.2 Do some research to explain the differences between the words necessary
and sufficient.
PROJECT 3.3 Sometimes statements p and q are described as contradictory, contrary, or
inconsistent. Consult a logic text, and then define these terms using truth tables.
PROJECT 3.4 Between now and the end of the course, look for logical arguments in news-
papers, periodicals, and books. Translate these arguments into symbolic form. Turn in
as many of them as you find. Be sure to indicate where you found each argument.
PROJECT 3.5 Suppose a prisoner must make a choice between two doors. One door leads
to freedom and the other door is booby-trapped so that it leads to death. The doors
are labeled as follows:
Door 1:
This door leads to freedom and the other door leads to death.
Door 2:
One of these doors leads to freedom and the other of these doors leads
to death.
If exactly one of the signs is true, which door should the prisoner choose? Give rea-
sons for your answer.
PROJECT 3.6 Convention Problem
A mathematician attended a convention of fifty
male and female scientists. The mathematician observed that if any two of them were
picked at random, at least one of the two would be male. From this information, is it
possible to deduce what percentage of the attendees were women?
PROJECT 3.7 A man is about to be electrocuted but is given a chance to save his life. In
the execution chamber are two chairs, labeled 1 and 2, and a jailer. One chair is elec-
trified; the other is not. The prisoner must sit on one of the chairs, but before doing
so, he may ask the jailer one question, to which the jailer must answer “yes” or “no.”
The jailer is a consistent liar or else a consistent truth teller, but the prisoner does not
know which. Knowing that the jailer either deliberately lies or faithfully tells the
truth, what question should the prisoner ask?
PROJECT 3.8 Build a simple device that will add single-digit numbers.
www.mathnature.com 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
4.1 Early Numeration 
Systems
135
Egyptian numeration system, Roman
numeration system, subtraction princi-
ple, multiplication principle, Babylonian
numeration system, other historical
systems
4.2 Hindu-Arabic Numeration
System
144
Decimal system—grouping by tens,
expanded notation
4.3 Different Numeration
Systems
148
Number of symbols, change from base
b to base 10, change from base 10 to
base b
4.4 Binary Numeration
System
154
Base two, ASCII code, binary arithmetic
4.5 History of Calculating 
Devices
159
First calculating tool, early calculating
devices, mechanical calculators, 
hand-held calculators, first computers,
present-day computers, computer hard-
ware, computer software, uses of com-
puters, misuses of computers
4.6 Chapter Summary
170
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports group
research projects, individual research
projects
THE NATURE OF 
NUMERATION SYSTEMS
4
Outline
What in the World?
“It’s just not fair!” exclaimed José. “Half my class
has computers at home. I just went to the student
store and the cheapest computer and printer I can
find is over $500. Forget that!”
“You’re right, I gave up on getting my own com-
puter,” said Sheri. “But I use the library computer all
the time. Using Google™, I can look up almost any-
thing! Last week, I was able to access some
information at the Stanford library.”
“Do you think that library computer will help me
with my paper? I need to invent my own numeration
system,” said José. “How am I supposed to do
what took centuries for others to do? As I’ve said
before, it’s just not fair!”
Overview
It is nearly impossible to graduate from college today and
not have some computer skills. We are all affected by com-
puters, and even though we do not need to understand all
about what makes them operate any more than we need to
know about an internal combustion engine to drive a car, it
is worthwhile to learn just a little about how they do what
they do. We study numeration systems in this chapter so that
we can better understand our own numeration system, as
well as gain some insight into the internal workings of a
computer. In addition to looking at computers today, we
take a peek back into the history of computers.
Some knowledge about computers and how they work
may help you to understand how better to deal with comput-
ers in your day-to-day life.
© Dennis MacDonald/Photo Edit 
     Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.1
Early Numeration Systems
135
4.1  Early Numeration Systems
To err is human, but to really foul things up requires a computer.
ANONYMOUS
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
“Do you know your numbers?” is a question you might hear one child asking another. At
an early age, we learn our numbers as we learn to count, but if we are asked to define
what we mean by number, we are generally at a loss. There are many different kinds of
numbers, and one type of number is usually defined in terms of more primitive types of
numbers. The word number is taken as one of our primitive (or undefined) words, but the
following definition will help us distinguish between a number and the symbol that we
use to represent a number.
2
5
7
8
3
8
11
7
15
?
The invention of a precise and “workable” numeration system is one of the greatest
inventions of humanity. It is certainly equal to the invention of the alphabet, which en-
abled humans to carry the knowledge of one generation to the next. It is simple for us to
use the symbol 17 to represent this many objects:
However, this is not the first and probably will not be the last numeration system to
be developed; it took centuries to arrive at this stage of symbolic representation. Here are
some of the ways that 17 has been written:
Tally:
Egyptian:
Roman:
XVII
Mayan:
Linguistic:
seventeen, seibzehn, dix-sept
The concept represented by each of these symbols is the same, but the symbols differ.
The concept or idea of “seventeenness” is called a number; the symbol used to represent
the concept is called a numeral.
Three of the earliest civilizations known to use numerals were the Egyptian, Baby-
lonian, and Roman. We shall examine these systems for two reasons. First, it will help us
to more fully understand our own numeration (decimal) system; second, it will help us to
see how the ideas of these other systems have been incorporated into our system.
A number is used to answer the question “How many?” and usually refers to
numbers used to count objects:
This set of numbers is called the set of counting numbers.
A numeral is a symbol used to represent a number, and a numeration
system consists of a set of basic symbols and some rules for making other sym-
bols from them, the purpose being the identification of all numbers.
51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, . . . 6
Number/Numeral
There is a story
of a woman who
decided she
wanted to write
to a prisoner in a
nearby state
penitentiary.
However, she was
puzzled over how
to address him,
since she knew
him only by a
string of numer-
als. She solved
her dilemma by
beginning her 
letter: "Dear
5944930, may 
I call you 594?"
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Egyptian Numeration System
Perhaps the earliest type of written numeration system developed was a simple group-
ing system. The Egyptians used such a system by the time of the first dynasty, around
2850 B.C. The symbols of the Egyptian system were part of their hieroglyphics and are
shown in Table 4.1.
136
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
TABLE 4.1
Egyptian Hieroglyphic Numerals
Usual Numeral (decimal)
Egyptian Numeral
Descriptive Name
1
Stroke
10
Heel bone
100
Scroll
1,000
Lotus flower
10,000
Pointing finger
100,000
Polliwog 
1,000,000
Astonished man
Any number is expressed by using these symbols additively; each symbol is repeated
the required number of times, but with no more than nine repetitions. This additivity is
called the addition principle.
Example
1 Translate hieroglyphics
Write 
using decimal numerals.
Solution
The position of the individual symbols is not important. For example,
5
5
5 12,345
5 10, 000 1 2 3 1,000 1 3 3 100 1 4 3 10 1 5 3 1
Historical
There are two important sources
for our information about the
Egyptian numeration system. The
first is the Moscow papyrus,
which was written in about 
1850 B.C. and contains 25 mathe-
matical problems. The second is
the Rhind papyrus (1650 B.C.). The
chronology of this papyrus is in-
teresting. Around 1575 B.C. the
scribe Ahmose copied (and most
likely edited) material from an
older manuscript. In 1858, A.
Henry Rhind acquired the papyrus
in Luxor (he found it in a room of
a small building near the Rames-
seum). After this, the manuscript
became known as the Rhind
papyrus. It contains 85 problems
and was a type of mathematical
handbook for the Egyptians. From
these two sources, we conclude
that most of the problems were of
a practical nature (although some
were of a theoretical nature).
NOTE
Karl Smith library
© The New Yorker Collection 1952 Alan Dunn from
Cartoonbank.com. All rights reserved.   
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Egyptian arithmetic, multiplication and division were performed by succes-
sions of additions that did not require the memorization of a multiplication table 
and could easily be done on an abacus-type device (see links on this topic at www.
mathnature.com).
The Egyptians also used unit fractions (that is, fractions of the form 1/n, for some
counting number n). These were indicated by placing an oval over the numeral for the de-
nominator. Thus,
The fractions and were exceptions:
Fractions that were not unit fractions (with the exception of just mentioned) were
represented as sums of unit fractions. For example,
Repetitions were not allowed, so would not be written as 
Why so difficult?
We don’t know, but the Rhind papyrus (see Figure 4.1) includes a table for all such de-
compositions for odd denominators from 5 to 101.
1
7 1 1
7.
2
7
2
7 could be expressed as 1
4  1
28
2
3
or
5
or
5
1
2
2
3
2
3
1
2
5 1
3
5
5
1
4
1
10
5 1
33
Section 4.1
Early Numeration Systems
137
The Egyptians had a simple repetitive-type numeration system. Addition and
subtraction were performed by repeating the symbols and regrouping.
Example
2 Egyptian arithmetic
Use Egyptian arithmetic to find
a. 245  457
b. 142  67
Solution
a.
b.
Regroup:
2
2
Regroup:
Regroup again:
1
Historical
The Rhind papyrus used a
symbolism for addition and sub-
traction. Addition was indicated by
a pair of legs walking to the left,
and subtraction by a pair of legs
walking to the right.
NOTE
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Roman Numeration System
The Roman numeration system was used in Europe until the 18th century, and is still used
today in outlining, in numbering certain pages in books, and for certain copyright dates. The
Roman numerals were selected letters from the Roman alphabet, as shown in Table 4.2.
138
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
FIGURE 4.1 Rhind papyrus. The top portion is part of the actual papyrus and
the bottom portion is a translation. Look for the Egyptian symbols; can you see
the polliwog and the astonished man?
TABLE 4.2
Roman Numerals
Decimal Numeral
1
5
10
50
100
500
1,000
Roman Numeral
I
V
X
L
C
D
M
The Roman numeration system is repetitive, like the Egyptian system, but has two
additional properties, called the subtraction principle and the multiplication principle.
Subtraction Principle
One property of the Roman numeration system is based on the subtraction principle.
Reading from the left, we add the value of each numeral unless its value is smaller than
the value of the numeral to its right, in which case we subtract it from that number. Only
the numbers 
can be subtracted, and only from the next two higher num-
bers. For example,
are the successive counting numbers. Instead of IIII we write IV, which (using the sub-
traction principle) means 
The I can be subtracted from V or X, and the X can
be subtracted from L or C; thus
The C can be subtracted only from D or M. For example,
DC means 
but
CD means 500 2 100 5 400
500 1 100 5 600
XL means 50 2 10 5 40
5 2 1 5 4.
I, II, III, IIII or IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, VIIII or IX, X, XI, c
1, 10, 100, c ,
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Multiplication Principle
A bar is placed over a Roman numeral or a group of numerals to mean 1,000 times the
value of the Roman numerals themselves. When one symbol (such as a bar) is used to
multiply the value of an associated symbol, it is called the multiplication principle.
For example,
means 
and
means 
The bar is not used if there is an existing symbol. For example, M and not is used for
1,000. 
I
40 3 1,000 5 40,000
XL
5 3 1,000 5 5,000
V
Section 4.1
Early Numeration Systems
139
Example
4 Write Roman numerals
Write each decimal numeral as a Roman numeral.
a. 49
b. 379
c. 345,123
d. 2,003
Solution
a. 49  (50  10)  (10  1)  XLIX 
b. 379  100  100  100  50  20  (10  1)  CCCLXXIX 
c. 345,123  345  1,000  123
 [100  100  100  (50  10)  5]  1,000  (100  20  3)

d. 2,003  2,000  3
 MMIII
CCCXLVCXXIII
Example
3 Translate Roman numerals
Write each Roman numeral as a decimal numeral.
a. CCLXIII
b. MXXIV
c. MCMXCIX
d.
CLIX
Solution
a.
b. MXXIV  1,000  10  10  (5  1)  1,024 
c. MCMXCIX  1,000  1,000  100  100  10  10  1  1,999
2
1
2
1
2
1
CCLXIII 1 100 1 100 1 50 1 10 1 1 1 1 1 1 5 263
CD
d.
CLIX  500  100  1,000  100  50  10  1  400,159
2
1
2
1
CD
Fields Medal
The Fields Medal is often referred to as the “Nobel Prize of Mathematics.” The existence of
the award is related to the fact that Alfred Nobel chose not to include mathematics in his areas
of recognition. There is no documentary evidence to explain this exclusion, but the general
gossip attributes it to a personal conflict between Nobel and Mittag-Leffler. John Charles
Fields (1863–1932) was disturbed by the lack of such a mathematical award. so he worked
toward the establishment of these awards from 1922 until his death in 1932. It was Fields’ last
will and testament that provided the necessary funds for the establishment of the award, which
was finalized on January 4, 1934. The first Fields Medals were awarded in 1936 to L. V.
Ahlfors (Harvard) and Jesse Douglas (MIT). Because of World War II the next award was not
until 1950; it has been awarded every 4 years at the International Congress of Mathematics.
My thanks to Henry S. Tropp, Humboldt State University, for this information. 
Professor Tropp was my first mathematics professor and was 
instrumental in my interest in mathematics. I thank him not only for his 
research on the Fields Medal, but also for his influence in my life. 
Stefan Zachow/The International Mathematics Union  
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Babylonian Numeration System
The Babylonian numeration system differed from the Egyptian in several respects.
Whereas the Egyptian system was a simple grouping system, the Babylonians employed
a much more useful positional system. Since they lacked papyrus, they used mostly clay
as a writing medium, and thus the Babylonian cuneiform was much less pictorial than the
Egyptian system. They employed only two wedge-shaped characters, which date from
2000 B.C. and are shown in Table 4.3.
140
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
Example
5 Translate Babylonian numerals
Write each of the Babylonian numerals in decimal form.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a.
 3  60  59  239
b.
 5  60  11  311
c.
 23  60  16  1,396
2
1
2
1
2
1
TABLE 4.3
Babylonian Cuneiform Numerals
Decimal Numeral
Babylonian Numeral
1
2
9
10
59
Notice from the table that, for numbers 1 through 59, the system is repetitive. However,
unlike in the Egyptian system, the position of the symbols is important. The 
symbol
must appear to the left of any 
s to represent numbers smaller than 60. For numbers larger
than 60, the symbols 
and 
are written to the left of 
(as in a positional system), and
now take on a new value that is 60 times larger than the original value. That is,
means 1  60  35
Study the following example.
2
1
Historical
Cuneiform tablet
More than 50,000 clay tablets 
are available to us, and the work
of interpreting them is continuing.
Most of our knowledge of the
tablets is less than 130 years
old and has been provided by
Professors Otto Neugebauer 
and F. Thureau-Dangin.
NOTE
© Erich Lessing/Photo Edit
The Babylonian numeration system is called a sexagesimal system and uses the princi-
ple of position. However, the system is not fully positional, because only numbers larger than
60 use the position principle; numbers within each basic 60-group are written by a simple
grouping system. A true positional sexagesimal system would require 60 different symbols.
c
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Babylonians carried their positional system a step further. If any numerals were
to the left of the second 60-group, they had the value of 
or 
Thus,
602.
60 3 60
Section 4.1
Early Numeration Systems
141
Example
6 Complex Babylonian numerals
Change each Babylonian numeral to decimal form.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a.
b.
c. Note the ambiguity; this might be 54 or it might be 120 3 602 1 34 5 1,234
12 3 6022 1 123 3 602 1 16 5 7,200 1 1,380 1 16 5 8,596
13 3 602 1 20 2 1 5 199
 5 9,924
 5 7,200 1 2,700 1 24
 5 12 3 6022 1 145 3 602 1 24
The Babylonians also made use of a subtractive symbol,
. That is, 38 could be written 
or
Example
7
Babylonian arithmetic
Write 4,571 as a Babylonian numeral.
Solution
1  602  3,600
16  60 
960
11  1 
11
_____
4,571
Thus, 
is the Babylonian numeral.
Although this positional numeration system was in many ways superior to the Egypt-
ian system, it suffered from the lack of a zero or placeholder symbol. For example, how
is the number 60 represented? Does 
mean 2 or 61? In Example 6c the value of the
number had to be found from the context. (Scholars tell us that such ambiguity can be
resolved only by a careful study of the context.) However, in later Babylon, around
300 B.C., records show that there is a zero symbol, an idea that was later used by the Hindus.
Arithmetic with the Babylonian numerals is quite simple, since there are only two
symbols. A study of the Babylonian arithmetic will be left for the reader (see Problem 6).
A numeration system consists of a set of basic symbols. Because the set of counting
numbers is infinite and the set of symbols in any numeration system is finite, some
rules for using the set of symbols are necessary. Different historical systems use one
or more of these properties:
Properties of Numeration Systems
(continued)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Other Historical Systems
One of the richest areas in the history of mathematics is the study of historical numeration
systems. In this book, we discuss the Egyptian numeration system because it illustrates a
simple grouping system, the Babylonian numeration system because it illustrates a posi-
tional numeration system, and the Roman system because it is still in limited use today.
Other numeration systems of interest from a historical point of view are the Mayan,
Greek, and Chinese numeration systems. These are summarized in Table 4.4.
142
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
A simple grouping system invents a symbol to represent the number of objects in
a predetermined group of objects. For example, the symbol
3 is used to represent
V is used to represent
or
is used to represent
A positional system reuses a symbol to represent different numbers of objects by
changing the position in its symbolic (numerical) representation. For example,
in 35 the “3” is used to represent
whereas in 53 the “3” is used to represent
The addition principle means that the various values of individual symbols 
(numerals) are added, as in 
meaning 
10  10  10  1  1  1  1
The subtraction principle means that certain values are subtracted, as in IX
meaning 10  1  9. 
The multiplication principle means that certain symbolic values are multiplied,
as in 
meaning 1,000  5. 
A repetitive system reuses the same number over and over in an additive manner,
as in XXX meaning 10  10  10.
V

TABLE 4.4
Historical Numeration Systems
Numeration System
Classification
Selected Numerals
Decimal system
positional (10s)
1
2
5
10
50
100
500
1,000
Egyptian system
grouping
Roman system
positional
Babylonian (Sumerian)
positional (60s)
Greek
grouping
Mayan
positional 
(vertical)
Chinese
positional 
(vertical)
I
II
V
X
L
C
D
M
r
b
e
i
n
f
a
a9
Historical
The Aztec nation used chocolate
not only as a food, but also as a
counting unit. Rather than counting
by tens, they used a system based
on 20. For quantities up to 28, the
system was repetitive and used
dots; the next unit was a flag that
was repeated for numbers up to
400; next, a fir tree was repeated
for numbers up to 800. The largest
symbol used by the Aztecs was a
sack that represented 8,000
because each sack of cocoa 
contains about 8,000 beans.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.1
Early Numeration Systems
143
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the difference between num-
ber and numeral. Give examples of each.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the similarities and
differences between a simple grouping system and a positional
system. Give examples of each.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do you regard as the shortcom-
ings and contributions of the Egyptian numeration system?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do you regard as the shortcom-
ings and contributions of the Roman numeration system?
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do you regard as the shortcom-
ings and contributions of the Babylonian numeration system?
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss addition and subtraction for
Babylonian numerals. Show examples.
7. Tell which of the named properties apply to the Egyptian,
Roman, and Babylonian numeration systems.
a. grouping system
b. positional system
c. repetitive system
d. additive system
e. subtractive system
f. multiplicative system
Write each numeral in Problems 8–21 as a decimal numeral. 
By decimal numeral, we mean the system we use in everyday 
arithmetic.
8. a.
b.
9. a.
b.
10. a.
b.
11. a.
b.
12. a.
b.
13. a.
b.
14. a. XLVIII
b. DCCIX
15. a. MCMXCIX
b. MMI
16. a.
b.
17. a.
MMDC
b.
DCCXII
18. a.
b.
19. a.
b.
20. a.
b.
21. a.
b.
22. Kathy had a dream in which she was selling roses in an inter-
national market. She started out with 143 roses. Then her first
customer, an Egyptian, bought 
of them. Soon afterward,
IX
V
CD
DL
a Babylonian asked to buy 
roses; later XIV
roses were bought by (you guessed it) a Roman. How many
roses did she have left to sell at the end of her dream?
23. In a strange mix-up, several people (no two of whom spoke the
same language) needed to pool their resources to survive the
scorching desert heat. Eric had 45 bottles of water; Dimetrius had
bottles; Sparticus had 
bottles.
How many bottles of water did they have all together?
The Rhind papyrus contains many problems. Two are symbolized
on the following simulated papyri. The one in Problem 25 is an
18th-century Mother Goose rhyme. Answer the question posed in
each problem.
24.
Problem Set 4.1
In each of 7 houses are 
   7 cats.
Each cat kills 7 mice.
Each mouse would have 
   eaten 7 spelt (wheat).
Each ear of spelt would 
  have produced 7 kehat 
   of grain.
Query: How much grain 
   is saved by the 7 
   houses' cats?
As I was going to St. Ives
I met a man with seven 
   wives.
Every wife had seven 
   sacks,
Every sack had seven 
   cats.
Every cat had seven kits.
Kits, cats, sacks, and 
   wives,
How many were there 
   going to St. Ives?
25.
Level  2
Write each of the numerals in Problems 26–31 in the Egyptian 
numeration system.
Write each of the numerals in Problems 32–37 in the Roman
numeration system.
32. 47
33. 75
34. 258
35. 521
36. 852
37. 2,007
Write each of the numerals in Problems 38–43 in the Babylonian
numeration system.
38. 47
39. 75
40. 258
41. 521
26. 47
27. 75
28. 258
29. 521
30. 852
31. 2,007
42. 852
43. 2,007
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

57. a. What is the largest number that uses each of the seven
Roman numerals exactly once?
b. What is the smallest number that uses each of the seven
Roman numerals exactly once?
58. HISTORICAL QUEST
The Fields Medal (discussed in
this section) has a Roman numeral misprint. The date is writ-
ten in Roman numerals: MCNXXXIII. Translate this number
into decimal numerals. Hint: There is no typo in this
problem. . . . any conclusion? Write a history of the Fields
Medal.
59. HISTORICAL QUEST
The Yale tablet from the Babylon-
ian collection, written between 1900 B.C. and 1600 B.C.,
contains the following algebra problem:
The length of a rectangle exceeds the width by 7, 
and the area is 60. What are the dimensions of the 
rectangle?
Answer the question in the Babylonian numeration system. 
60. HISTORICAL QUEST
Answer the following question from
the Yale tablet (see Problem 59):
The length of a rectangle exceeds the width by 10 
and the area is 600. What are the dimensions of the
rectangle?
Give your answer using Babylonian notation.
Perform the indicated operations in Problems 44–49.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
What is the largest number that begins with the Roman numeral
symbol in Problems 50–55?
50. I
2
2
1
2
2
1
144
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
51. V
52. X
53. L
54. C
55. M
Problem Solving 3
56. In Example 3c, we wrote 1,999 as MCMXCIX, which accord-
ing to the National Institute of Standards and Technology, is
the preferred representation. Which of the following does not
also represent 1,999?
A. MCMXCXI 
B. MCMXCVIIII 
C. MDCCCCLXXXXVIIII
4.2  Hindu-Arabic Numeration System
The numeration system in common use today (the one we have been calling the decimal
system) has ten symbols—namely, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. The selection of ten dig-
its was no doubt a result of our having ten fingers (digits).
The symbols originated in India in about 300 B.C. However, because the early speci-
mens do not contain a zero or use a positional system, this numeration system offered no
advantage over other systems then in use in India.
The date of the invention of the zero symbol is not known. The symbol did not origi-
nate in India but probably came from the late Babylonian period via the Greek world.
By the year A.D. 750 the zero symbol and the idea of a positional system had been
brought to Baghdad and translated into Arabic. We are not certain how these numerals
were introduced into Europe, but it is likely that they came via Spain in the 8th century.
Gerbert, who later became Pope Sylvester II in 999, studied in Spain and was the first
European scholar known to have taught these numerals. Because of their origins, these
numerals are called the Hindu-Arabic numerals. Since ten basic symbols are used, the
Hindu-Arabic numeration system is also called the decimal numeration system, from the
Latin word decem, meaning “ten.”
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.2
Hindu-Arabic Numeration System
145
Historical
This picture depicts a contest 
between one person computing
with a form of abacus and another
computing with Hindu-Arabic 
numerals.
The symbols that we use in the
Hindu-Arabic numeration system
have changed considerably over
the centuries.
NOTE
Hindu 300 BC
Arabic 10th century
Arabic 15th century
European 15th century
20th century typewriter
20th century bank check
1   2   3   4   5      6  7  8  9  0
We have recently seen the digits in
bar codes, which can easily be
read by computer.
Although we now know that the decimal system is very efficient, its introduction met
with considerable controversy. Two opposing factions, the “algorists” and the “abacists,”
arose. Those favoring the Hindu-Arabic system were called algorists, since the symbols
were introduced into Europe in a book called (in Latin) Liber Algorismi de Numero Indo-
rum, by the Arab mathematician al-Khowârizmî. The word algorismi is the origin of our
word algorithm. The abacists favored the status quo—using Roman numerals and doing
arithmetic on an abacus. The battle between the abacists and the algorists lasted for
400 years. The Roman Catholic Church exerted great influence in commerce, science,
and theology. The church criticized those using the “heathen” Hindu-Arabic numerals
and consequently kept the world using Roman numerals until 1500. Roman numerals
were easy to write and learn, and addition and subtraction with them were easier than
with the “new” Hindu-Arabic numerals. It seems incredible that our decimal system has
been in general use only since about the year 1500.
Decimal System—Grouping by Tens
Let’s examine the Hindu-Arabic or decimal numeration system a little more closely:
1. It uses ten symbols, called digits. 
2. Larger numbers are expressed in terms of powers of 10. 
3. It is positional. 
Consider how we count objects:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
?
At this point we could invent another symbol as the Egyptians did (you might sug-
gest 0, but remember that 0 represents no objects), or we could reuse the digit symbols by
repeating them or by altering their positions. We agree to use 10 to mean 1 group of
We call this group a ten. The symbol 0 was invented as a placeholder to show that the 1
here is in a different position from the 1 representing . We continue to count:
We continue in the same fashion until we have 9 groups and 9 extra. What’s next? It is 10
groups or a group of groups: 
We call this group of groups a 10  10 or 102 or a hundred. We again use position and re-
peat the symbol 1 with yet a different meaning: 100. 
. . .
. . .
11
This is 1 group and 1 extra. 
12
This is 1 group and 2 extra.
20
This is 2 groups.
21
This is 2 groups and 1 extra.
Science & Society Picture Library/Getty Images   
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

146
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
Example
1 Find the meaning of a number
What does 134 mean?
Solution
134 means that we have 1 group of 100, 3 groups of 10, and 4 extra. In symbols,
We denote this more simply by writing:
These represent the number in each group.
T
T
1  102  3  10
 4
2
1
2
1
Example
2 Write in expanded form
Write 52,613 in expanded form.
Solution
52,613  50,000  2,000  600  10  3
 5  104  2  103  6  102  1  10  3
Expanded Notation
The representation, or the meaning, of the number 134 in Example 1 is called expanded
notation.
Example
3 Write in decimal form
Write 
in decimal form.
Solution
You can use the order of operations and multiply out the digits, but you
should be able to go directly to decimal form if you remember what place value means:
49 00600 37  490,060,037
cc c c
14243
Notice that there were no powers of 106, 105, 103, or 102.
4 3 108 1 9 3 107 1 6 3 104 1 3 3 10 1 7
A period, called a decimal point in the decimal system, is used to separate the fractional
parts from the whole parts. The positions to the right of the decimal point are fractions:
To complete the pattern, we also sometimes write 10  101 and 1  100. 
1
10
 5  1021, 
 1
100
 5  1022, 
 
1
1,000
 5  1023
c
c
These are the names of the groups.
This leads us to the meaning one hundred, three tens, four ones.
5
e
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.2
Hindu-Arabic Numeration System
147
Example
4 Expanded form with a decimal
Write 479.352 using expanded notation.
Solution
479.352  400  70  9  0.3  0.05  0.002
 400  70  9 


 4  102  7  101  9  100  3  101  5  102  2  103
2
1,000
5
100
3
10
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the difference between
“number” and “numeral.”
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is expanded notation?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is an abacus, and what does it
have to do with expanded notation?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Illustrate the meaning of 123 by
showing the appropriate groupings.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Illustrate the meaning of 145 by
showing the appropriate groupings.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Illustrate the meaning of 1,134 by
showing the appropriate groupings.
7. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Define 
for b any nonzero number
and n any counting number.
8. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Define 
for b any nonzero num-
ber and n any counting number.
Give the meaning of the numeral 5 in each of the numbers in 
Problems 9–14.
9. 805
10. 508
11. 0.00765
12.
13. 0.00567
14. 58,000,000
Write the numbers in Problems 15–31 in decimal notation.
15. a. 105
b. 103
16. a. 106
b. 104
17. a. 104
b. 103
18. a. 102
b. 106
19. a. 5  103
b. 5  102
20. a. 8  104
b. 7  103
5 3 104
b2n
bn
21. a. 6  102
b. 9  105
22. a. 5  106
b. 2  109
23. 1  104  0  103  2  102  3  101  4  100
24. 6  101  5  100  0  101  8  102
 9  103
25. 5  105  2  104  1  103  6  102
 5  101  8  100
26. 6  107  4  103  1  100
27. 7  106  3  102
28. 6  109  2  103
29. 5  105  4  102  5  101  7  100
 3  101  4  102
30. 3  103  2  101  8  100  5  101
 4  102  2  104
31. 2  104  6  102  4  101  7  103
 6  104  9  105
Write each of the numbers in Problems 32–43 in 
expanded notation.
32. a. 741
b. 728,407
33. a. 0.096421
b. 27.572
34. a. 47.00215
b. 521
35. a. 6,245
b. 2,305,681
36. a. 428.31
b. 5,245.5
37. 0.00000527
38. 100,000.001
39. 893.0001
40. 8.00005
41. 678,000.01
42. 143,912.1743
43. 57,285.9361
Problem Set 4.2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

148
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
48.
49.
Sketch an abacus to show the numbers given in 
Problems 50–57.
50. 132
51. 849
52. 3,214
53. 9,387
54. 1,998
55. 2,001
56. 3,000,400
57. 8,007,009
Problem Solving 3
58. Can you find a pattern?
0, 1, 2, 10, 11, 12, 20, 21, 22, 100, . . .
59. Can you find a pattern? 
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 20, 21, . . .
60. Notice the following pattern for multiplication by 11:
14  11  1_4
51  11  5_1
First, copy the first and last digits of the number to be
multiplied by 11. Leave a space between these digits. Then,
insert the sum of the original two digits between those
original digits: 
14  11  154
51  11  561
c
c
1  4  5
5  1  6
Use expanded notation to show why this pattern 
“works.”
Level  2
HISTORICAL QUEST
One of the oldest devices used for 
calculation is the abacus, as shown in Figure 4.2. Each rod names
one of the positions we use in counting. Each bead on the bottom of
the central bar represents one unit in that column and each bead on
the top represents 5 units in that column. The number illustrated in
Figure 4.2 is 1,734. What number is illustrated by the drawings in
Problems 44–49?
FIGURE 4.2 Abacus
Go to www.mathnature.com for a
couple of helpful links on using an
abacus.
44.
45.
46.
47.
4.3  Different Numeration Systems
In the previous section, we discussed the Hindu-Arabic numeration system and grouping
by tens. However, we could group by twos, fives, twelves, or any other counting number.
In this section, we summarize numeration systems with bases other than ten. This not
only will help you understand our own numeration system, but will give you insight into
the numeration systems used with computers, namely, base 2 (binary), base 8 (octal),
and base 16 (hexadecimal).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Number of Symbols
The number of symbols used in a particular base depends on the method of grouping for
that base. For example, in base ten the grouping is by tens, and in base five the grouping
is by fives. Suppose we wish to count 
in various bases. Let’s look for
patterns in Table 4.5. Note the use of the subscript following the numeral to keep track of
the base in which we are working.
TABLE 4.5
Grouping in Various Bases
Base
Symbols
Method of Grouping
Notation
two
0, 1
1011two
three
0, 1, 2
102three
four
0, 1, 2, 3
23four
five
0, 1, 2, 3, 4
21five
six
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
15six
seven
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
14seven
eight
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
13eight
nine
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
12nine
ten
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
11ten
Do you see any patterns? Suppose we wish to continue this pattern. Can we group
by elevens or twelves? We can, provided new symbols are “invented.” For base eleven (or
higher bases), we use the symbol T to represent 
. For base twelve 
(or higher bases), we use E to stand for 
. For bases larger than twelve,
other symbols can be invented.
For example, 2Ttwelve means that there are two groupings of twelve and T (ten) extra:
We continue with the pattern from Table 4.5 by continuing beyond base ten in 
Table 4.6.
Section 4.3
Different Numeration Systems
149
Do you see more patterns? Can you determine the number of symbols in the base b
system? Remember that b stands for some counting number greater than 1. Base two has
two symbols, base three has three symbols, and so on.
TABLE 4.6
Grouping in Various Bases
Base
Symbols
Method of Grouping
Notation
eleven
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, T
10eleven
twelve
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, T, E
Etwelve
thirteen
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, T, E, U
Ethirteen
fourteen
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, T, E, U, V
Efourteen
Historical
Karok from the Yukis nation
A study of the Native Americans
of California uncovered the use
of a wide variety of number bases.
Several of these bases are
discussed by Barnabus Hughes in
an article entitled “California
Indian Arithmetic” in The Bulletin
of the California Mathematics
Council (Winter 1971/1972).
According to Professor Hughes,
the Yukis, who lived north of
Willits, used both the quaternary
(base four) and the octonary
(base eight) systems. Instead of
counting on their fingers, these
Native Americans enumerated the
spaces between the fingers.
The sketch above shows a
Karok woman because the Yukis
were nearly eliminated at the be-
ginning of the 20th century and
consequently there are no known
photographs of the Yukis. The
Native Americans in the western
corner of California use the
decimal system, while those in
the rest of the state use the
quinary (base five) system for
small numbers, but switch to a
vigesimal (base twenty) system
for large numbers.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The next example shows how we can interpret this grouping process in terms of
a simple division.
150
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
Example
1 Write in base 10
Change each number to base ten.
a. 1011.01two
b. 1011.01four
c. 1011.01five
Solution
a.
b.
c.
Change from Base 10 to Base b
To see how to change from base ten to any other valid base, let’s again look for a pattern:
To change from base ten to base two, group by twos.
To change from base ten to base three, group by threes.
To change from base ten to base four, group by fours.
To change from base ten to base five, group by fives.
The groupings from this pattern are summarized in Table 4.7.
 5 131.04
 5 125 1 0 1 5 1 1 1 0 1 0.04
 1011.01five 5 1 3 53 1 0 3 52 1 1 3 51 1 1 3 50 1 0 3 521 1 1 3 522
 5 69.0625
 5 64 1 0 1 4 1 1 1 0 1 0.065
 1011.01four 5 1 3 43 1 0 3 42 1 1 3 41 1 1 3 40 1 0 3 421 1 1 3 422
 5 11.25
 5 8 1 0 1 2 1 1 1 0 1 0.25
 1011.01two 5 1 3 23 1 0 3 22 1 1 3 21 1 1 3 20 1 0 3 221 1 1 3 222
TABLE 4.7
Place-Value Chart
Base
Place Value
2
25 5 32
24 5 16
23 5 8
22 5 4
21 5 2
20 5 1
3
35 5 243
34 5 81
33 5 27
32 5 9
31 5 3
30 5 1
4
45 5 1,024
44 5 256
43 5 64
42 5 16
41 5 4
40 5 1
5
55 5 3,125
54 5 625
53 5 125
52 5 25
51 5 5
50 5 1
8
85 5 32,768
84 5 4,096
83 5 512
82 5 64
81 5 8
80 5 1
10
105 5 100,000
104 5 10,000
103 5 1,000
102 5 100
101 5 10
100 5 1
12
125 5 248,832
124 5 20,736
123 5 1,728
122 5 144
121 5 12
120 5 1
Change from Base b to Base 10
To change from base b to base ten, we write the numerals in expanded notation. The
resulting number is in base ten.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.3
Different Numeration Systems
151
Example
2 Write in base two
Convert 42 to base two.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Using Table 4.7, we see that the largest power of two smaller
than 42 is 
so we begin with 
:
We could now write out 42 in expanded notation.
Devise a Plan. Instead of carrying out the steps by using Table 4.7, we will begin with
42 and carry out repeated division, saving each remainder as we go.
Carry Out the Plan. We are changing to base 2, so we do repeated division by 2:
21
r. 0 d Save remainder.
2
Next we need to divide 21 by 2, but instead of rewriting our work we work our way up: 
10
r. 1 d Save all remainders.
2
r. 0 d Save remainder.
2
Continue by doing repeated division. 
Stop when you get a zero here.
T
0
r. 1
Answer is found by reading down.
2
r. 0
2
r. 1
2
r. 0
2
r. 1
2
r. 0 T
2
Thus, 42  101010two.
Look Back. You can check by using expanded notation: 
101010two  1  25  1  23  1  2  32  8  2  42
42
21
10
  5
   2
   1
42
21
42
 0 5 0 3 20
 2 5 1 3 21 1 0
 2 5 0 3 22 1 2
 10 5 1 3 23 1 2
 10 5 0 3 24 1 10
 42 5 1 3 25 1 10
25 5 32
25
Pólya’s 
Method
Historical
When photographs are sent back
from space, they are sent using
a binary numeration system. The
images are not usually recorded
on photographic film, but instead
the image is broken up into tiny
dots, called pixels. If you have
a digital camera, you know the
number of pixels per photograph
is related to the quality of the
picture. For example, a photo-
graph might be divided into 5,000
pixels horizontally and 1,000 pix-
els vertically, for a 5 megapixel
photograph. Each pixel is then as-
signed a number representing its
brightness—0 for pure white and
256 for pure black. These
numbers are sent back as eight-
digit binary numbers, which a
computer translates into a photo-
graph. The photo shown here is
the scarred face of Triton,
Neptune’s largest moon. The
image was sent by Voyager 2 on
November 23, 1997.
5,000,0002
15,000 3 1,000 5
NOTE
Photograph courtesy of NASA
Example
3 Write in base b
Write 42 in
a. base three
b. base four
Solution
a. Begin with 33  27 (from Table 4.7):
42  1  33  15
or
0
r. 1 
15  1  32  6
3
r. 1 
6  2  31  0
3
r. 2 
0  0  30
3
r. 0 
3
Thus, 42  1120three. 
42
14
  4
   1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

152
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
Example
4 Minimize cost
Suppose you need to purchase 1,000 name tags and can buy them by the
gross (144), the dozen (12), or individually. The name tags cost $0.50 each, $4.80 per
dozen, and $56.40 per gross. How should you order to minimize the cost?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. If you purchase 1,000 tags individually, the cost is
. This is not the least cost possible, because of the bulk dis-
counts. We must find the maximum number of gross, the number of dozens, and then
purchase the remainder individually.
Devise a Plan. We will proceed by repeated division by 12, which we recognize as
equivalent to changing the number to base twelve.
Carry Out the Plan. Change 1,000 to base 12:
0
r. 6
12
r. 11, or E in base twelve 
12
r. 4
12
Thus, 
so you must purchase 6 gross, 11 dozen, and 4 individual tags. 
Look Back. The cost is 
. As you
can see, this is considerably less expensive than purchasing the individual name tags.
6 3 $56.40 1 11 3 $4.80 1 4 3 $0.50 5 $393.20
1,000 5 6E4twelve
1,000
     83
       6
$0.50 3 1,000 5 $500
Pólya’s 
Method
b. Begin with 42  16 (from Table 4.7): 
42  2  42  10
or
0
r. 2
10  2  41  2
4
r. 2
2  2  40
4
r. 2
4
Thus, 42  222four.
How would you change from base ten to base seven? To base eight? To base b? We
see from the above pattern that we group by b’s or perform repeated division by b.
q42
10
   2
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the process of changing
from base eight to base ten.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the process of changing
from base sixteen to base ten.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the process of changing
from base ten to base eight.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the process of changing
from base ten to base sixteen.
5. Count the number of people in the indicated base.
a. base ten
b. base five
c. base three
d. base eight
e. base two
f. base nine
Problem Set 4.3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.3
Different Numeration Systems
153
6. Count the number of people in the indicated base.
a. base ten
b. base five
c. base thirteen
d. base eight
e. base two
f. base twelve
In Problems 7–16, write the numbers in expanded notation.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
Change the numbers in Problems 17–30 to base ten.
17. 527eight
18. 527twelve
19. 25TEteelve
20. 1101.11two
21. 431five
22. 65eight
23. 1011.101two
24. 11101000110two
25. 573twelve
26. 4312eight
27. 2110three
28. 4312five
29. 537.1eight
30. 3721eight
31. a. Change 724 to base five.
b. Change 628 to base four.
32. a. Change 256 to base two.
b. Change 427 to base twelve.
33. a. Change 412 to base five.
b. Change 615 to base eight.
34. a. Change 5,133 to base twelve.
b. Change 615 to base two.
35. a. Change 512 to base two.
b. Change 795 to base three.
36. a. Change 52 to base three.
b. Change 4,731 to base twelve.
37. a. Change 602 to base eight.
b. Change 76 to base four.
Level  2
Use number bases to answer the questions in Problems 38–51.
38. Change 158 hours to days and hours.
39. Change 52 days to weeks and days.
2033.1four
3.40231five
234000five
323000.2four
1021.221three
64200051eight
5411.102six
110111.1001two
5387.9twelve
643eight
40. Change 39 ounces to pounds and ounces.
41. Change 55 inches to feet and inches.
42. Change $4.59 to quarters, nickels, and pennies.
43. Change 500 to gross, dozens, and units.
44. Suppose you have two quarters, four nickels, and two 
pennies. Use base five to write a numeral to indicate your
financial status.
45. Using only quarters, nickels, and pennies, what is the
minimum number of coins needed to make $0.84?
46. Change $8.34 to the smallest number of coins consisting of
quarters, nickels, and pennies.
47. A bookstore ordered 9 gross, 5 dozen, and 4 pencils. Write this
number in base twelve and in base ten.
48. Change 54 months to years and months.
49. Change 44 days to weeks and days.
50. Change 49 hours to days and hours.
51. Change 29 hours to days and hours.
52. Add 5 years, 7 months to 6 years, 8 months.
53. Add 3 years, 10 months to 2 years, 5 months.
54. Add 10 ft, 7 in. to 7 ft, 10 in.
55. Add 6 ft, 8 in. to 9 ft, 5 in.
56. Add 2 gross, 3 dozen, 4 units to 5 gross, 9 dozen, 10 units.
57. Add 1 gross, 9 dozen, 7 units to 2 gross, 8 dozen, 8 units.
58. If you keep one investment for 1 year, 7 months, 11 days, and
then roll it over into another investment for 1 year, 6 months,
26 days, how long was the total investment (if you assume that
all months are 30 days long)?
59. If you keep one investment for 3 years, 4 months, 21 days, and
then roll it over into another investment for 1 year, 6 months,
15 days, how long was the total investment (if you assume that
all months are 30 days long)?
Problem Solving  3
60. HISTORICAL QUEST
The duodecimal numeration system
refers to the base twelve system, which uses the symbols
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, T, E. Historically, a numeration
system based on 12 is not new. There were 12 tribes in Israel
and 12 Apostles of Christ. In Babylon, 12 was used as a base
for the numeration system before it was replaced by 60. In the
18th and 19th centuries, Charles XII of Sweden and Georg
Buffon (1707–1788) advocated the adoption of the base twelve
system. Even today there is a Duodecimal Society of America
that advocates the adoption of this system. According to the
Society’s literature, no one “who thought long enough—three
to 17 minutes—to grasp the central idea of the duodecimal
system ever failed to concede its superiority.” Study the
duodecimal system from 3 to 17 minutes, and comment on
whether you agree with the Society’s statement.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As we see in Example 1, to change a number from binary to decimal we write it in
expanded notation and then carry out the arithmetic. To change a number from decimal to
binary, it is necessary to find how many units (1 if odd, 0 if even), how many twos, how
many fours, and so on are contained in that given number. This can be accomplished by
repeated division by 2, as shown in the following example.
154
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
4.4  Binary Numeration System
One of the biggest surprises of our time has been the impact of the personal computer on
everyone’s life. We have just completed a section on different numeration systems, and it
is this study that enables us to understand how computers work (see Section 4.5). In this
section, we focus on one of those systems—namely, the one that uses only two symbols
(binary numerals), called the binary numeration system.
Base Two
For a computer to be of use in calculating, the human mind had to invent a way of repre-
senting numbers and other symbols in terms of electronic devices. In fact, it is the simplest
of electronic devices, the switch, that is at the heart of communication between machines
and human beings. A switch can be only “on” or “off,” as illustrated in Figure 4.3.
We can see that it would be easy to represent the numbers “one” and “zero” by
“on” and “off,” but that won’t get us very far. Binary numerals represent the numbers
1, 2, 3, . . . using only the symbols 1 and 0, as shown in Table 4.8. Can you see the
pattern?
Recall that expanded notation provides the link between the binary numeration and
decimal numeration systems, and that for a binary numeration system the grouping is
by twos.
FIGURE 4.3 Two-state device. Light bulbs serve as a good example
of two-state devices. The 1 is symbolized by “on,” and the 0 is
symbolized by “off.”
TABLE 4.8
Binary Numerals
Decimal
Binary
0
4
0 
1
4
1 
2
4
10 
3
4
11 
4
4
100 
5
4
101 
o
o
8
4
1000 
9
4
1001 
o
o
15
4
1111 
16
4
10000 
o
o
31
4
11111 
32
4
100000 
o
o
Example
1 Base 2 to base 10
What does 1110two mean? Change it to base 10.
Solution
fours column
units column
T
1
1
1
0
twos column
eights column
We see this means: 1  8  1  4  1  2  0  8  4  2  14
¡
¡
T
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.4
Binary Numeration System
155
Example
2 Base 10 to base 2
Change 47 to a binary numeral.
Solution
0
r. 1
There is one thirty-two.
2
r. 0
There are zero sixteens.
2
r. 1
There is one eight.
2
r. 1
There is one four.
2
r. 1
There is one two.
2
r. 1
There is one unit.
2
d Start here
If you read down the remainders, you obtain the binary numeral 101111.
Check: 101111two means 
1  32  0  16  1  8  1  4  1  2  1  1  47
ASCII Code
In a computer, each switch, called a bit (from binary digit), represents a 1 or 0, depend-
ing on whether it is on or off. A group of eight of these switches is lined up to form a
byte, which can represent any number from 0 to 11111111two
255ten.
Of course, when we use computers we need to represent more than numerals. There
must be a representation for every letter and symbol that we wish to use. For example, we
will need to represent statements such as
The code that has been most commonly used is the American Standard Code for Infor-
mation Interchange, developed in 1964 and called ASCII (pronounced “ask-key”) code.
A partial list of this code is shown in Table 4.9.
x 5 3.45 2 y
5
q47
23
11
  5
  2
  1
TABLE 4.9
Partial Listing of ASCII Code. The entire ASCII code has 127 symbols
ASCII Code
Symbol
ASCII Code
Symbol
ASCII Code
Symbol
ASCII Code
Symbol
32
Space
53
5
67
C
95
-
33
!
54
6
68
D
96
`
34
“
55
7
69
E
97
a
35
#
56
8
70
F
98
b
o
o
57
9
o
o
o
o
48
0
58
:
90
Z
119
w
49
1
59
;
91
[
120
x
50
2
o
o
92
\
121
y
51
3
65
A
93
]
122
z
52
4
66
B
94
^
o
o
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

From this table you can find that the word cat would be represented by the
ASCII code
99 97 116
In the machine, this would be represented by binary numerals, each one in a different
byte. Thus, cat is represented as shown:
Symbol
ASCII Code
Binary
Byte
c
99
01100011
off on on off off off on on
a
97
01100001
off on on off off off off on
t
116
01110100
off on on on off on off off
Each of these bytes is stored at some location in the computer called its address. Each
address (billions of them) stores one byte of information. To store the information 3 cats
would require six addresses:
Address
Information 
1000
d Code for 3
1001
d Code for space
1010
d Code for c
1011
d Code for a
1100
d Code for t
1101
d Code for s
During the process of solving a problem, the storage unit will contain not only the
set of instructions that specify the sequence of operations required to complete the prob-
lem, but also the input data. Notice that an address number has nothing to do with the
contents of that address. The early computers stored these individual bits with switches,
vacuum tubes, or cathode ray tubes, but computers today use much more sophisticated
means for storing bits of information. These advances in storing information have en-
abled computers to use codes that use many more than eight bits. For example, a location
might look like the following: 
Address 00101
Binary Arithmetic
The binary numeration system has only two symbols, 0 and 1, which makes counting in
the system simple. Arithmetic is particularly easy in the binary system, since the only
arithmetic “facts” one needs are the following:
Addition
Multiplication

0
1

0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
10
1
0
1
You simply must remember when adding 
in binary that you put down 0 and
“carry” the 1, as shown in the following example.
1 1 1
00011111000110110110000000001101
01110011
01110100
01100001
01100011
00100000
00110011
156
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
Historical
You are no doubt aware of the
special numerals at the bottom
of your bank checks:
These are called MICR (Magnetic
Ink Character Recognition)
numerals and are printed in
magnetic ink so they can be read
mechanically. Although they may
look futuristic, modern-day
computers do not use MICR,
which was designed in the late
1950s, but instead use an
alphabet called OCR (Optical
Character Recognition):
Another optical scanner is used
at your supermarket to read bar
codes. All packages (not only
those at the supermarket) have 
or will have a bar code.
Cartoon by Bob Schochet. Reprinted 
by permission.
NOTE
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.4
Binary Numeration System
157
Example
3 Binary arithmetic
Carry out the following operations:
a. 11two  101two
b. 11two  101two
Solution
a.
11two
b.
11two
101two
101two
__________
__________
1000two
11two
00two
11two
___________
1111two
Note 1  1  10, carry 1;
1  1  10, carry 1 again;
1  1  10 for the last time.
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe Figure 4.3 on page 154.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe a procedure for converting
a decimal number into binary representation.
What decimal number is represented by the light bulbs shown in
Problems 3–6?
3.
4.
5.
6.
Write each number given in Problems 7–18 as a decimal numeral.
7. 1101two
8. 1001two
9. 1011two
10. 1111two
11. 11101two
12. 10111two
13. 11011two
14. 11111two
15. 1100011two
16. 1110111two
17. 10111000two
18. 11111111two
Write each number given in Problems 19–30 as a binary numeral. 
19. 13
20. 15
21. 35
22. 46
23. 51
24. 63
25. 64
26. 256
27. 128
28. 615
29. 795
30. 803
Level  2
Write the ASCII codes for the capital letters in Problems 31–34.
31. DO
32. PRINT
33. END
34. SAVE
Write the words for the ASCII codes given in Problems 35–38.
35. 72 65 86 69
36. 70 85 78
37. 83 84 85 68 89
38. 72 65 82 68
Perform the indicated operations in Problems 39–46.
39.
11two
40.
1011two
 10two
 111two
_______
________
41.
110two
42.
1101two
 111two
 1100two
________
_________
43.
101two
44.
11011two
 11two
 10110two
________
__________
45.
111two
46.
10110two
 101two
 1001two
________
__________
Level  3
47. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
There is a slogan among computer
operators: GIGO (garbage in, garbage out). This phrase
reflects the fact that a computer will do exactly what it is told
to do. Consider the following humorous story.
A very large computer system has been created for the
military. It was built and staffed by the best computer
people in the country. “The system is now ready to answer
questions,” said the spokesperson for the project. A four-
star general bit off the end of a cigar, looked whimsically at
his comrades, and said, “Ask the machine if there will be
war or peace.” The machine replied: YES. “Yes what?”
bellowed the general. The operator typed in this question,
and the machine answered: YES, SIR!
In terms of what you know about logic, why did the computer
correctly answer the first question YES?
Problem Set 4.4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
The octal numeration system refers to
the base eight system, which uses the symbols 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 
6, 7. Describe a process for converting octal numbers to decimal
and decimal to octal.
Computer programmers often use octal numerals (see 
Problem 48) instead of binary numerals because it is easy 
to convert from binary to octal directly. Table 4.10 shows this 
conversion.
158
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
Convert the numbers in Problems 53–58 to the octal system.
53. a. 101two
b. 100two
54. a. 011two
b. 001two
55. 000 000 111 111 101 000two
56. 100 000 000 101 110 111two
57. 111 111 011 101 010 001two
58. 100 101 011 001 010 111two
Problem Solving  3
59. Age Finder
Table 4.11 will enable you to determine anyone’s age. Just hand
Table 4.11 to a person and ask that person to tell you in which
column or columns their age appears. Using this information only,
how can you determine the person’s age?
TABLE 4.10
Octal Binary Equivalence
Octal
Binary
0
000
1
001
2
010
3 
011
4
100
5
101
6
110
7
111
A binary number 1101110111 is separated into three-digit 
groupings by starting at the right end of the number and 
supplying leading zeros at the left if necessary: 001 101 110 111.
The binary groups are then replaced by their octal 
equivalents:
001two  1eight
101two  5eight
110two  6eight
111two  7eight
and the binary number is converted to its octal equivalent: 1567.
Conversely, an octal number can be expanded to a binary number
using the same table of equivalents: 
5307eight  101 011 000 111two
Use this information for Problems 49–58.
Convert the numbers in Problems 49–52 to the binary system.
49. a. 5eight
b. 6eight
50. a. 14eight
b. 56eight
51. a. 167eight
b. 624eight
52. a. 5700eight
b. 04320eight
TABLE 4.11
Age Chart
FARMER’S MANUAL
1
2
4
8
16
32
3
3
5
9
17
33
5
6
6
10
18
34
7
7
7
11
19
35
9
10
12
12
20
36
11
11
14
14
21
37
13
14
14
14
22
38
17
18
20
24
24
40
19
19
21
25
25
41
21
22
22
26
26
42
23
23
23
27
27
43
27
27
29
29
29
45
29
30
30
30
30
46
31
31
31
31
31
47
33
34
36
40
48
48
35
35
37
41
49
49
37
38
38
42
50
50
39
39
39
43
51
51
41
42
44
44
52
52
43
43
45
45
53
53
45
46
46
46
54
54
47
47
47
47
55
55
49
50
52
56
56
56
51
51
53
57
57
57
53
54
54
58
58
58
55
55
55
59
59
59
57
58
60
60
60
60
59
59
61
61
61
61
63
63
63
63
63
63
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.5
History of Calculating Devices
159
1
5
9
13
ON
YES
Card 1
3
7
11
15
17
21
25
29
19
23
27
31
2
6
10
14
ON
YES
Card 2
3
7
11
15
18
22
26
30
19
23
27
31
4
6
12
14
ON
YES
Card 3
5
7
13
15
20
22
28
30
21
23
29
31
16
18
20
22
ON
YES
Card 5
17
19
21
23
24
26
28
30
25
27
29
31
16
18
20
22
Back of Card 5
17
19
21
23
24
26
28
30
25
27
29
31
2
4
6
1
3
5
7
8
10
12
14
9
11
13
15
“YES” is on back of
this corner
8
10
12
14
ON
YES
Card 4
9
11
13
15
24
26
28
30
25
27
29
31
4.5  History of Calculating Devices
Few people foresaw that computers would jump the boundaries of scientific and
engineering communities and create a revolution in our way of life in the last half of the
20th century. No one expected to see a computer sitting on a desk, much less on desks in
every type of business, large and small, and even in our homes. Today no one is ready to
face the world without some knowledge of computers. What has created this change in
our lives is not only the advances in technology that have made computers small and af-
fordable, but the tremendous imagination shown in developing ways to use them. In this
section we will consider the historical achievements leading to the easy availability of
calculators and computers.
First Calculating Tool
The first “device” for arithmetic computations is finger counting. It has the advantages of
low cost and instant availability. You are familiar with addition and subtraction on your
fingers, but here is a method for multiplication by 9. Place both hands as shown at the left.
To multiply 
simply bend the fourth finger from the left as shown here.
3
6
9 3 3,
“It says, ‘don’t fold, spindle,
or mutilate.’”
Reprinted by permission of Datamation Magazine.
© by Technical Publishing Company, a division of
Dunn-Donnelley Publishing Corporation, 1969.
All rights reserved.
60. Magic Number Cards
You will need to use a pair of
scissors for this problem. Construct the five cards shown here.
Cut out those parts of the cards that are white. Ask
someone to select a number between 1 and 31. Hold the
cards face up on top of one another, and ask the person if
his or her number is on the card. If the answer is yes, place
the card on the table face up with the word yes at the upper
left corner. If the answer is no, place the card face up with
the word no at the upper left corner. Repeat this procedure
with each card, placing the cards on top of one another on
the table. After you have gone through the five cards, turn
the entire stack over. The chosen number will be seen. Ex-
plain why this trick works.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The answer is read as 27, the bent finger serving to distinguish between the first and second
digits in the answer. (See the Historical Note about “the finger man” in the margin.)
What about 
Separate the third and fourth fingers from the left (as shown at
the left), since 36 has 3 tens. Next, bend the sixth finger from the left, since 36 has 6 units.
Now the answer can be read directly from the fingers:
The answer is 324.
Aristophanes devised a complicated finger-calculating system in about 500 B.C., but
it was very difficult to learn. Figure 4.4 shows an illustration from a manual published
about two thousand years later, in 1520.
Early Calculating Devices
Numbers can be represented by stones, slip knots, or beads on a string. These devices
evolved into the abacus, as shown in Figure 4.5 (see also Problems 44–49 of 
Section 4.2).
Abaci (plural of abacus) were used thousands of years ago, and are still used today.
In the hands of an expert, they even rival some calculators for speed in performing certain
calculations. An abacus consists of rods that contain sliding beads, four or five in the
lower section, and two in the upper that equal one in the lower section of the next higher
denomination. The abacus is useful today for teaching mathematics to youngsters. One
can actually see the “carry” in addition and the “borrowing” in subtraction.
FIGURE 4.4 Finger calculation was important in the Middle Ages.
3
2
4
9 3 36?
160
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
Historical
In the movie Stand and Deliver
(Warner Brothers, 1988), the
teacher Jaime Escalante (played
by actor Edward James Olmos)
confronts a gang member, Chuco:
Escalante: “Oh. You know the
times tables?”
Chuco:
“I know the ones . . .
twos . . . three.
[On “three” Chuco flips
the bird to Escalante.]
Escalante: “Finger man. I heard
about you. Are you The
Finger Man? I’m the
Finger Man, too. Do
you know what I can
do? I know how to
multiply by nine! Nine
times three. What you
got? Twenty-seven. Six
times nine. One, two,
three, four, five, six,
seven eight. What you
got? Seventy two.”*
NOTE
Warner Bros./Everett Collection
* Stand and Deliver, Warner Brothers, 
1988, p. 9.
FIGURE 4.5 Abacus: The
number shown is 31.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

NOTE
In the early 1600s, John Napier invented a device similar to a multiplication table
with movable parts, as shown in Figure 4.6. These rods are known as Napier’s rods or
Napier’s bones.
Section 4.5
History of Calculating Devices
161
Science & Society Picture Library/Getty Images
FIGURE 4.6 Napier’s rods (1617)
a. Pascal’s calculator (1642)
b. Babbage’s calculating machine 
Glenn Mitsui/Photodisc/Getty Images
IBM Corporate Archives
The next advance in mechanical calculators came from Germany in about 1672,
when the great mathematician Gottfried Leibniz studied Pascal’s calculators, improved
them, and drew up plans for a mechanical calculator. In 1695 a machine was finally built,
but this calculator also proved to be unreliable.
In the 19th century, an eccentric Englishman, Charles Babbage, developed plans for
a grandiose calculating machine, called a “difference engine,” with thousands of gears,
ratchets, and counters (see Figure 4.8b).
FIGURE 4.7 Slide rule
FIGURE 4.8 Early mechanical calculators
Historical
Jhone Neper 
(1550–1617)
Jhone Neper (or John Napier,
using the modern spelling)
invented not only these rods, but
also logarithms, which led to the
development of the slide rule.
Napier considered himself a
theologian and not a mathematician.
In 1593, he published a commen-
tary on the Book of Revelation and
argued that the pope in Rome was
the anti-Christ. He also predicted
that the world would end by the
end of the17th century. Napier
believed his reputation would rest
solely on this work, but instead we
remember him because of what
he considered to be a minor
mathematical diversion in his life.
Karl Smith library
NOTE
A device used for many years was a slide rule (see Figure 4.7), which was also
invented by Napier. The answers given by a slide rule are only visual approximations and
do not have the precision that is often required.
Mechanical Calculators
The 17th century saw the beginnings of calculating machines. When Blaise Pascal
(1623–1662) was 19, he began to develop a machine to add long columns of figures
(see Figure 4.8a). He built several versions, and since all proved to be unreliable, he con-
sidered this project a failure; but the machine introduced basic principles that are used in
modern calculators.
Glenn Mitsui/
Photodisc/Getty Images
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Four years later, in 1826, even though Babbage had still not built his difference
engine, he began an even more elaborate project—the building of what he called an “ana-
lytic engine.” This machine was capable of an accuracy to 20 decimal places, but it, too,
could not be built because the technical knowledge to build it was not far enough
advanced. Much later, International Business Machines (IBM) built both the difference
and analytic engines based on Babbage’s design, but using modern technology, and they
work perfectly.
Hand-Held Calculators
In the past few years pocket calculators have been one of the fastest-growing items in the
United States. There are probably two reasons for this increase in popularity. Most peo-
ple (including mathematicians!) don’t like to do arithmetic, and a good calculator is very
inexpensive. It is assumed that you have access to a calculator to use with this book, and
the basics of their use were introduced in Chapter 1.
First Computers
The devices discussed thus far in this section would all be classified as calculators. With
some of the new programmable calculators, the distinction between a calculator and a
computer is less well defined than it was in the past. Stimulated by the need to make bal-
listics calculations and to break secret codes during World War II, researchers made great
advances in calculating machines. During the late 1930s and early 1940s, John Vincent
Atanasoff, a physics professor at Iowa State University, and his graduate student Clifford
E. Berry built an electronic digital computer, but could not get it to work properly. The first
working electronic computers were invented by J. Presper Eckert and John W. Mauchly at
the University of Pennsylvania. All computers now in use derive from the original work
they did between 1942 and 1946. They built the first fully electronic digital computer,
called ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator), as shown in Figure 4.9.
162
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
Historical
Charles Babbage
(1792–1871)
Babbage continued for 40 years
trying to build his “engines.” He
was constantly seeking financial
help to subsidize his projects.
However, his eccentricities often
got him into trouble. For example,
he hated organ-grinders and other
street musicians, and for this rea-
son people ridiculed him. He was
a no-nonsense man and would not
tolerate inaccuracy. Had he been
willing to compromise his ideas of
perfection with the technical skill
available, he might have
developed a workable machine.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
FIGURE 4.9 ENIAC computer (1946)
The ENIAC filled 
feet of floor space, weighed 30 tons, had 18,000
vacuum tubes, cost $487,000 to build, and used enough electricity to operate three 150-
kilowatt radio stations. Vacuum tubes generated a lot of heat, and the room where com-
puters were installed had to be kept at a carefully monitored temperature and humidity
level; still, the tubes had a substantial failure rate, and in order to “program” the com-
puter, many switches and wires had to be adjusted.
There is some controversy over who actually invented the first computer. In the early
1970s there was a lengthy court case over a patent dispute between Sperry Rand (who had
30 feet 3 50
Jerry Cooke/Historical Premium/Corbis
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

acquired the ENIAC patent) and Honeywell Corporation, who represented those who
originally worked on the ENIAC project. The judge in that case ruled that “between 1937
and 1942, Atanasoff . . . developed and built an automatic electronic digital computer for
solving large systems of linear equations . . . . Eckert and Mauchly did not themselves
invent the automatic electronic digital computer, but instead derived that subject matter
from one Dr. John Vincent Atanasoff.” On the other hand, others believe that a court of
law is not the place for deciding questions about the history of science and give Eckert
and Mauchly the honor of inventing the first computer. In 1980, the Association for
Computing Machinery honored them as founders of the computer industry.
The UNIVAC I, built in 1951 by the builders of the ENIAC, became the first com-
mercially available computer. Unlike the ENIAC, it could handle alphabetic data as well
as numeric data. The invention of the transistor in 1947 and solid-state devices in the
1950s provided the technology for smaller, faster, more reliable machines.
Present-Day Computers
In 1958, Seymour Cray developed the first supercomputer, sometimes called the Cray
computer, which could handle at least 10 million instructions per second. It is used in major
scientific research and military defense installations. The newest version of this computer,
the X-1, operates a million times faster than the first supercomputer. It is difficult to keep
track of the world’s fastest computer, so if you want up-to-date information, you should
check the Top500 Supercomputer Sites (www.top500.org/lists). One of the fastest, “The
Roadrunner,” is an IBM supercomputer at Los Alamos National Laboratory (Figure 4.10).
In June 2008 it was declared the world’s fastest computer. It is the first computer to break
the pentaflop barrier. One pentaflop is one quadrillion operations per second.
Section 4.5
History of Calculating Devices
163
Keep in mind some of the deception 
that goes on in the name of 
technology.  People sometimes think 
that "if a calculator or a computer did 
it, then it must be correct."  This is 
false, and the fact that a "machine" is 
involved has no effect on the validity 
of the results.  Have you ever been 
told that "The computer requires...," 
or "There is nothing we can do; it is 
done by computer," or "The 
computer won't permit it."  What they 
really mean is they don't want to 
instruct the programmer to do it.
FIGURE 4.10 “Roadrunner” supercomputer
Courtesy of Los Alamos National Laboratory
Throughout the 1960s and early 1970s, computers continued to become faster and
more powerful; they became a part of the business world. The “user” often never saw the
machines. A “job” would be submitted to be “batch processed” by someone trained to run
the computer. The notion of “time sharing” developed, so that the computer could handle
more than one job, apparently simultaneously, by switching quickly from one job to
another. Using a computer at this time was often frustrating; an incomplete job would be
returned because of an error and the user would have to resubmit the job. It often took
days to complete the project.
The large computers, known as mainframes, were followed by the minicomputers,
which took up less than 3 cubic feet of space and no longer required a controlled atmos-
phere. These were still used by many people at the same time, though often directly
through the use of terminals.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

164
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
BITNET BEGINS
NSFNET BEGINS
CREN
WWW
Growth curve for number of hosts
1996
Instant  Messaging (IM) created
1995
WWW and Search engines awarded Tecnologies of the year 
2001
First live music distributed and radio goes silent over royalty dispute; blogging begins
2002
Electricity over IP 
1995
NSFNET returns to research function; AOL services begin
1994
Shopping begins on the Internet; first piece of spam
1993
United Nations comes online; WWW proliferates
1993
Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Egypt, Fiji, Ghana, Guam, Indonesia, Kazakstan, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Peru, Romania, Russian Federation, Turkey,
Ukraine, UAE, Virgin Islands connect
1992
(World Wide Web) is released by CERN: Tim Berners-Lee, developer
1992
World Bank comes online; Internet Hunt started by Rick Gates
1992
Cameroon, Cyprus, Ecuador, Estonia, Kuwait, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Thailand, Venezuela connect.
1991
Argentina, Austria, Brazil, Chile, Greece, India, Ireland, South Korea, Spain, Switzerland connect.
1990
World comes online (world.std.com)
1989
Compuserve started through Ohio State; MCI mail started
1989
Australia, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Puerto Rico, and United Kingdom connect.
1988
(Corporation for Research & Education Networking) formed with merger of CSNET & BITNET
1988
CERFnet founded by Susan Estrada; Internet Relay Chat developed by Jarkko Oikarinen
1988
FidoNet gets connected to the Net, enabling the exchange of e-mail and news
1988
Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden connect.
1985
created by National Science Foundation, establishes 5 supercomputing centers
1982
Internet protocol established; FIRST DEFINITION OF AN INTERNET
1980
1974
Vint Cert and Bob Kahn, A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication
1973
Bob 
1983
AOL begins as dedicated online service for Commodore computers
Kahn starts internetting research program
1972
Ray Tomlinson of BBN invents e-mail program
1971
15 nodes: UCLA, SRI, UCSB, U of Utah, BBN, MIT, RAND, SDC, Harvard, Lincoln Lab, Stanford, UIU (C), CWRU,
CMU, NASA
1969
First node at UCLA; UCLA/Stanford/UCSB/U of Utah
1967
Lawrence G. Roberts, first design paper on ARPANET
1965
1st network linkage: MIT to SDC
1964
Paul 
1961
Leonard Kelinrock, MIT: 
Baran from RAND: On Distributed Communication Networks
CSNET BEGINS
1969
ARPA BEGINS
Number of Hosts:
30 million 
120 million 
1 billion 
2 billion 
4 billion 
H I S T O R Y  A N D  G R O W T H  O F  T H E  I N T E R N E T
 
2004
CERNET2 connects 75 universities in China
2003
GLORIAD is first network to cross the Russian-China border.
2009
Internet runs out of IP addresses. Changed to Internet IPv6 p/oTexals.
Information in Large Communication Nets
FIGURE 4.11 The growth and history of the Internet
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.5
History of Calculating Devices
165
The term personal computer was first used by Steward Brand in The Whole Earth
Catalog (1968), which, oddly enough, was before any such computers existed. In 1976,
Steven Jobs and Stephen Wozniak designed and built the Apple II, the first personal
computer to be commercially successful. This computer proved extremely popular.
Small businesses could afford to purchase these machines that, with a printer attached,
took up only about twice the space of a typewriter. Technology “buffs” could purchase
their own computers. This computer was designed so that innovations that would im-
prove or enlarge the scope of performance of the machine could be added with rela-
tively little difficulty. Owners could open up their machines and install new devices.
One such device, the mouse, was introduced to the world by Douglas Engelbart in
1968. This increased contact between the user and the machine produced an atmos-
phere of tremendous creativity and innovation. In many cases, individual owners
brought their own machines to work to introduce their superiors to the potential useful-
ness of the personal computer.
In the fast-moving technology of the computer world, the invention of language to
describe it changes as fast as teenage slang. Today there are battery-powered laptops,
weighing about 2 pounds, that are more powerful than the huge ENIAC. Today, laptop,
iPods, and smart phones are changing the nature of computers every year. The next
trend linked together several personal computers so that they could share software and
different users can easily access the same documents. Such arrangements are called
LANs, or local area networks. The most widely known networks are the Internet,
which was first described by Paul Baran of the RAND Corp. in 1962, and the World
Wide Web (www), developed by Tim Berners-Lee based on Baran’s ideas and released
in 1992. The growth of the Internet and the World Wide Web could not have been pre-
dicted. Figure 4.11 shows some of the significant events in the growth of the Internet
from 1962 to the present. In 1962 there were 4 hosts, and in 1992 there were 727,000.
By 2010 there were almost 2 billion.
Computer Hardware
The machine, or computer itself, is referred to as hardware. A personal computer might
sell for under $500, but many extras, called peripherals, can increase the price by several
thousand dollars. In this section we will familiarize you with the various components of a
typical personal computer system that you might find in a home, classroom, or office. We
will also discuss the link between the electronic signals of the computer and the human
mind that enables us to harness the power and speed of the computer. The basic parts of a
computer are shown in Figure 4.12.
Keyboard
Modem, DSL, 
cable, etc.
Computer, mouse,
CPU, hard drive
Printer
Monitor
CD, DVD,
or Zip drive
FIGURE 4.12 Input and output with a computer
We will focus our attention in this section on the terminology you will need to know
to purchase a computer. The central unit of a computer contains a small microchip, called
the central processing unit, where all processing takes place, and the computer memory,
where the information is stored while the computer is completing a given task. The
microchip and the unit that contains this chip are collectively referred to as the CPU
(Central Processing Unit). Almost daily new and more popular chips are announced.
Historical
Steven Jobs 
(1955– )
Steven Jobs cofounded Apple
Computer, Inc. and codesigned
the Apple II computer. He also led
the development of the Macintosh
computer and is credited with
helping to define key technology
trends in the personal computer
industry. In October 1985 he
(along with five others) founded
NeXT, Inc. to develop innovative,
personal, and affordable computer
solutions for the 1990s. In 1997
he returned to Apple Computers.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Although you do not need to understand electronic circuitry, a simple conceptual
model of the inside of a computer can be very useful. The memory of a computer can be
thought of as rows and rows of little storage boxes, each one with an address—yes, an
address, just like your address. These boxes are of two types: ROM (read-only memory)
and RAM (random-access memory). ROM is very special: You can never change what is
in it and it is not erased when the computer is turned off. It is programmed by the manu-
facturer to contain routines for certain processes that the computer must always use. The
CPU can fetch information from it, but cannot send new results back. It is well protected
because it is at the heart of the machine’s capabilities. On the other hand, programs and
data are stored in RAM while the computer is completing a task. If the power to the com-
puter is interrupted for any time, however brief, everything in RAM is lost forever.
Your computer will also have memory. When referring to memory, we used to talk in
terms of a thousand bytes, called a kilobyte (KB or K), or in terms of a thousand kilo-
bytes, called a megabyte (MB or MEG). However, today, we refer to gigabytes (GB; one
gigabyte is about one billion bytes) or terabytes (TB; one trillion bytes). Your computer
will come with 512 MEG or 1 GB (or even more) of RAM.
You will also need a device that reads and stores data, called a hard drive, which is
used as additional memory to store the programs you purchase. Hard drives in sizes of
40, 80, 160, or more gigabytes are commonly installed in microcomputers.
To use a computer, you will need input and output devices. A keyboard and a
mouse are the most commonly used input devices. The most common output devices are
a monitor and a printer. One of the monitor’s main functions is to enable you to keep
track of what is going on in the computer. The letters or pictures seen on a monitor are
displayed by little dots called pixels, just as they are on a television. As the number of
dots is increased, we say that the resolution of the monitor increases. The better the reso-
lution, the easier on your eyes.
Computer Software
Communication with computers has become more sophisticated, and when a computer is
purchased it often comes with several programs that allow the user to communicate with
the computer. A computer program is a set of step-by-step directions that instruct a
computer how to carry out a certain task. Programs that allow the user to carry out partic-
ular tasks on a computer are referred to as software.
The business world has welcomed the advances made possible by the use of personal
computers and powerful programs, known as software packages, that enable the com-
puter to do many diverse tasks. The most widely used computer applications are word
processing, database management, gaming, and spreadsheets.
There are several sources for obtaining software. You can buy it in a store or you can
download shareware, which is try-before-you-buy software. Some software is available on
the Internet free of charge (freeware or public domain software). The most widely used
software is from Microsoft, which owns Windows®, Word®, Internet Explorer®, and
Excel®. Bill Gates (1956- ) is the cofounder of Microsoft and is known as the world’s
wealthiest person. In 1975, Ed Roberts built the first personal computer (the Altair 8800)
in Albuquerque, New Mexico; it was featured on the cover of Popular Electronics, and was
named because the word Altair was used in an episode of Star Trek. Bill Gates and his
partner, Paul Allen, were students at Harvard at the time, and traveled to New Mexico to
look at this new machine. The story about the beginning of the huge Microsoft empire is
told by Stephen Segaller in Nerds 2.0.1: “He [Bill Gates] kept postponing and postponing
actually writing the code [for the Altair]. He said, ‘I know how to write it, I have a design
in my head, I’ll get it done, don’t worry about it, Paul.’ Four days before he was due to go
back to Harvard he checked into a hotel and he was incommunicado for three days. Bill
came back three or four days later with this huge sheet of paper. He’d written 4K of code
in three days, and typed the whole thing in, got it working, and went back to school, just
barely. It was really one of the most amazing displays of programming I’ve ever seen.”
166
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
Historical
Stephen Hawking
(1942– )
Stephen Hawking, a physicist
known the world over for his
study of the origins of the
universe, has had a degenerative
disease for many years. It has left
him unable to speak, although his
mind remains as brilliant as ever.
He communicates with his
colleagues and family and even
gives speeches using a computer
with a voice synthesizer. There has
recently been a movie featuring
his life and his accomplishments,
and in 1992 he even appeared in
an episode of Star Trek: The Next
Generation. He is one of the great
thinkers of our time.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Uses of Computers
Today, computers are used for a variety of purposes (see Figure 4.13).
Section 4.5
History of Calculating Devices
167
FIGURE 4.13 Common computer uses
My thanks to John Martin of Santa Rosa
Junior College for this quotation.
From A Computer Glossary © 1968 International Business
Machines Corporation.
Data processing involves large collections of data on which relatively few
calculations need to be made. For example, a credit card company could use the system to
keep track of the balances of its customers’ accounts. Information retrieval involves
locating and displaying material from a description of its content. For example, a 
police department may want information about a suspect, or a realtor may want listings
that meet the criteria of a client. Pattern recognition is the identification and classifica-
tion of shapes, forms, or relationships. For example, a chess-playing program will exam-
ine the chessboard carefully to determine a good next move. The computer carries out
these tasks by accepting information, performing mathematical and logical operations with
the information, and then supplying the results of the operations as new information.
Finally, a computer can be used for simulation of a real situation. For example, a prototype
of a new airplane can be tested under various circumstances to determine its limitations.
By using a modem, installed internally or attached as a peripheral, and a program
called a communications package, a computer can transfer information to and from
other computers directly, via satellite, a fiber optic line, or even over a phone line. If you
send software or data from your computer to another, this is called uploading; if you get
software or data from another computer, this is called downloading. Networks have been
designed specifically to enable people to send messages to each other via computer. Such
networks, known as electronic mail or e-mail, have become commonplace. Individuals or
user groups set up networks to share information about a common interest. The more
common ones are Facebook and Twitter, but many people use bulletin boards or chat
rooms to communicate with others online (connected to a computer network).
Misuses of Computers
Most companies and bulletin boards require a password or special procedures to be able
to go online with their computers. A major problem for certain computer installations has
been to make sure that it is impossible for the wrong person to get into their computer.
There have been many instances where people have “broken into” computers just as a
safecracker breaks into a safe. They have been clever enough to discover how to access
the system. A few of these people have been caught and prosecuted. A security break of
this nature can be very serious. By transferring funds in a bank computer, someone can
steal money. By breaking into a military installation, a spy could steal secrets or commit
sabotage. By breaking into a university’s computers, one could change grades or records.
Computer abuse includes illegal use (as described above, but also includes illegal copy-
ing of programs, called pirating) and abuse caused by ignorance. Ignorance of computers
leads to the assumption that the output data are always correct or that the use of a
I have a spelling checker.
It came with my PC. 
It clearly marks four my
revue Mistakes 
I cannot sea. 
I've run this poem threw it.
I'm sure your pleased
two no
Its letter perfect in
its weigh,
My checker tolled me sew.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

computer is beyond one’s comprehension. Breaking into computers, called hacking, has
become a subculture in what is known as the computer underground.
With the tremendous advances in computer technology, financial investors and ana-
lysts can simulate various possible outcomes and select strategies that best suit their goals.
Designers and engineers use computer-aided design, known as CAD. Using computer
graphics, sculptors can model their work on a computer that will rotate the image so that
the proposed work can be viewed from all sides. Computers have been used to help people
with disabilities learn certain skills. Computers can be used to “talk” for those without
speech. For those without sight, there are artificial vision systems that translate a visual
image to a tactile “image” that can be “seen” on their back. A person who has never seen a
candle burn can learn the shape and dynamic quality of a flame.
Along with the advances in computer technology came new courses, and even new
departments, in colleges and universities. New specialties developed involving the
design, use, and impact of computers on our society. The feats of the computer captured
the imagination of some who thought that a computer could be designed to be as intelli-
gent as a human mind, and the field known as artificial intelligence was born. Many
researchers worked on natural language translation with very high hopes initially, but
the progress has been slow. Progress continues in “expert systems,” programs that involve
the sophisticated strategy of pushing the computer ever closer to humanlike capabilities.
The quest has produced powerful uses for computers.
What does the future hold? Earlier editions of this book attempted to make
predictions of the future, and in every case those predictions became outdated during the
life of the edition. Instead of making a prediction, we invite you to visit a computer store.
168
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
Historical
Famous last words. . .
“I think there is a world market for
maybe five computers.” 
Thomas Watson, chairman of IBM, 1943.
“Computers in the future may
weigh no more than 1.5 tons.” 
Popular Mechanics, 1949.
“I have traveled the length and
breadth of this country and talked
with the best people, and I can as-
sure you that data processing is a
fad that won’t last out the year.” 
A Prentice Hall editor, 1957.
“There is no reason anyone
would want a computer in their
home.“
Ken Olson, president, chairman, and founder of
Digital Equipment Corp., 1977
NOTE
Level 1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe some of the computing
devices that were used before the invention of the electronic
computer.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Distinguish between hardware and
software.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does the CPU in a computer do?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What are input and output devices?
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the difference between ROM
and RAM?
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give at least one example of each of
the indicated computer functions: data processing, information
retrieval, pattern recognition, and simulation.
7. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What are five common uses for a
computer at home? Describe the purpose of each.
8. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What are five common uses for a
computer in the office? Describe the purpose of each.
9. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
It has been said that “computers in-
fluence our lives increasingly every year, and the trend will
continue.” Do you see this as a benefit or a detriment to
humanity? Explain your reasons.
10. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
A heated controversy rages about the
possibility of a computer actually thinking. Do you believe that
is possible? Do you think a computer can eventually be taught
to be truly creative?
Use finger multiplication to do the calculations shown in
Problems 11–14.
11. a. 3  9
b. 7  9
c. 6  9
12. a. 5  9
b. 8  9
c. 9  9
13. a. 27  9
b. 48  9
c. 56  9
14. a. 35  9
b. 47  9
c. 68  9
15. Arrange the development of the following computers in
chronological order of their first appearance.
Altair, Cray, ENIAC, Apple, and UNIVAC
HISTORICAL QUEST
Many names were mentioned in this
section. Give a brief description for each person named in
Problems 16–33, telling each person contributed to the
development of computers.
16. Paul Allen
17. Aristophanes
18. John Atanasoff
19. Charles Babbage
20. Paul Baran 
21. Clifford Berry 
22. Steward Brand 
23. Seymour Cray
24. J. Presper Eckert
25. Douglas Engelbart 
26. Bill Gates
27. Steven Jobs
28. Tim Berners-Lee
29. Gottfried Leibniz
30. John Mauchly
31. John Napier
32. Blaise Pascal
33. Stephen Wozniak
Problem Set 4.5
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Level 2
Problems 34–45 list a specific task. Decide whether a computer
should be used, and, if so, is it because of the computer’s speed,
complicated computations, repetition, or some other reason?
34. Guiding a missile to its target
35. Controlling the docking of a spacecraft
36. Tabulating averages for a teacher’s classes
37. Identifying the marital status indicated on tax returns reporting
income more than $100,000
38. Sorting the mail according to zip code
39. Assembling automobiles on an assembly line
40. Turning on and off the lights in a public office building
41. Typing and printing a term paper
42. Teaching a person to solve quadratic equations
43. Teaching a person to play the piano
44. Teaching a person how to repair a flat tire
45. Compiling a weather report and forecast
Problems 46–50 are multiple-choice questions designed to get you
to begin thinking about computer use and abuse.
46. As part of a patient monitoring system in a local hospital, the
computer (a) constantly monitors the patient’s pulse and
respiration rates; (b) sounds an alarm if the rates fall outside a
preset range; and (c) notifies the nearest nursing station if either
or both of its systems fail to function properly. The computer’s
capabilities are suited to these tasks because the tasks call for:
A. Speed
B. Repetition
C. Program modification
D. Simulation
E. Data processing
47. Computers are capable of organizing large amounts of data.
Which of the following situations would call for a computer
having that capability?
A Printing the names and addresses of all employees
B. Turning lights on and off at specified times
C. Running a statistical analysis of family incomes as taken
from the 2010 census
D. Monitoring the temperature and humidity in a large office
building
E. All of the above
48. Karlin Publishing purchased a program for its computer that
would enable it to streamline the printing process and decrease
the time it takes to print each page. The program was too fast
for Karlin’s printer, so the company hired Shannon Foley to
eliminate the problem. The human function required by Shan-
non for this job was:
A. Performing calculations
B. Modifying the hardware
C. Interpreting output
D. Modifying the software
E. None of the above
49. Melissa knew that if she flunked mathematics she would be in-
eligible to play in her team’s last five basketball games. When
Section 4.5
History of Calculating Devices
169
she found out that one of her classmates had been able to
change someone else’s grade on the school computer, she had
this same person change her math grade from F to C. This
example of computer abuse was:
A. Invasion of privacy
B. Stealing funds
C. Pirating software
D. Falsifying information
E. Stealing information
50. One example of computer abuse is categorized as assuming
that computers are largely incomprehensible. Which of the
following situations would indicate this abuse?
A. A secretary refuses promotion because he will have to inter-
act with the company’s computer.
B. A clerk inputs the wrong information into the computer to
defraud the company.
C. A student changes the grade of a classmate.
D. A hacker (computer hobbyist) copies a copyrighted
program for three of her friends.
E. A credit card customer wants to receive his bill on the
25th of the month instead of on the 10th, but when he calls
to have it changed he is told that there is nothing that can
be done since that is the way the computer was
programmed.
Level  3
51. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
There is a great deal of concern
today about invasion of privacy by computer. With more and
more information about all of us being kept in computerized
databases, there is the increasing possibility that a computer
may be used to invade our privacy. Discuss this issue.
52. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Have you ever been told that some-
thing cannot be changed because “that is the way the computer
does it”? Discuss this issue.
53. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Have you ever been told that
something is right because the computer did it? For example,
suppose I have my computer print, THE VALUE OF 
IS
3.141592. Is this statement necessarily correct? What confidence
do you place in computer results? What confidence do you think
any of us should place in computer results? Discuss.
54. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Definitions for “thinking” are given.
According to each of the given definitions, answer the
question, “Can computers think?”
a. To remember
b. To subject to the process of logical thought
c. To form a mental picture of
d. To perceive or recognize
e. To have feeling or consideration for
f. To create or devise
g. To have the ability to learn
55. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do you mean by “thinking”
and “reasoning”? Try to formulate these ideas as clearly as
possible, and then discuss the following question: “Can com-
puters think or reason?”
56. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
In his book Future Shock, Alvin
Toffler divided humanity’s time on earth into 800 lifetimes.
The 800th lifetime, in which we now live, has produced more
p
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

knowledge than the previous 799 combined, and this has been
made possible by computers. How have computers made this
possible? What impact has this had on our lives? Do people
actually know more today because they have ready access to
vast amounts of knowledge?
57. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
In his article “Toward an Intelligence
Beyond Man’s” (Time, February 20, 1978), Robert Jastrow
claimed that by the 1990s computer intelligence would match
that of the human brain. He quoted Dartmouth President Emer-
itus John Kemeny as saying we would “see the ultimate
relation between man and computer as a symbiotic union of
two living species, each completely dependent on the other for
survival.” He called the computer a new form of life. Now,
with the advantage of a historical perspective, do you think his
predictions came to pass? Now that we have completed the
decade of the 1990s, and twenty years of perspecitve, do you
agree or disagree with the hypothesis that a computer could be
a “new form of life”?
Problem Solving  3
58. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
One of the things that can go wrong
when we use a computer is due to machine error. Such errors
can be caused by an electrical surge or a power failure. Talk to
some users of computers and gather some anecdotal informa-
tion about computer problems due to machine errors.
59. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
It is possible that a computer can
make a mistake due to a programming error. There are three
types of programming errors: syntax errors, run-time errors,
and logic errors. Do some research and write a paragraph
about each of these types of programming error.
60. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
One category of possible computer
errors includes data errors or input errors. What is meant by
this type of error?
170
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
4.6
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Properties of numeration systems [4.1]
Decimal numeration system [4.2]
Converting between numeration systems [4.3]
Use a binary numeration system to store “data” in a computer [4.4]
The history of calculating devices [4.5]
Distinguish between computer hardware and software [4.5]
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes in this chapter. If
you look online, you will find a list of important terms introduced, as well as the types
of problems that were introduced in this chapter. You will maximize your understanding
of this chapter by working the problems in this section only after you have studied the
material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test help in studying
for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
The availability of 
low-cost calculators,
computers, and related
new technology has
already dramatically
changed the nature of
business, industry,
government, sciences,
and social sciences.
NCTM STANDARDS
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter
4
Review Questions
Section 4.6
Chapter Summary
171
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean when we say that
a numeration system is positional? Give examples.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Is addition easier in a positional sys-
tem or in a grouping system? Discuss and show examples.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What are some of the characteristics
of the Hindu-Arabic numeration system?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Briefly discuss some of the events
leading up to the invention of the computer.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss some computer abuses.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Briefly describe each of the given
computer terms.
a. hardware
b. software
c. word processing
d. network 
e. e-mail
f. RAM
g. computer bulletin board
h. hard drive
Write the numbers given in Problems 7–10 in expanded notation.
7. one billion
8. 436.20001
9.
10.
11. Write 4  106  2  104  5  100  6  101
 2  102 in decimal notation.
1001110two
523eight
Write the numbers in Problems 12–15 in base ten.
12.
13.
14.
15.
Write the numbers in Problems 16–19 in base two.
16. 12
17. 52
18. 2007
19. one million
20. a. Write 1,331 in base twelve.
b. Write 100 in base five.
821twelve
122three
1111011two
11101two
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on one of these books:
How Computers Work, Ron White (Emeryville, CA: 
Ziff-Davis Press, 1993).
Nerds 2.0.1, Stephen Segaller (New York: TV 
Books, 1998).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172
CHAPTER 4
The Nature of Numeration Systems
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G11. Invent an original numeration system.
G12. Organize a debate. One side represents the algorists and the other side the abacists.
The year is 1400. Debate the merits of the Roman numeration system and the Hindu-
Arabic numeration system.
REFERENCE: Barbara E. Reynolds, “The Algorists vs The Abacists: An Ancient
Controversy on the Use of Calculators,” The College Mathematics Journal, Vol. 24,
No. 3, May 1993, pp. 218–223. Includes additional references.
G13. Organize a debate. The issue: “Resolved: Computers can think.”
G14. In a now famous paper, Alan Turing asked, “What would we ask a computer to do
before we would say that it could think?” In the 1950s Turing devised a test for
“thinking” that is now known as the Turing test. Dr. Hugh Loebner, a New York phi-
lanthropist, has offered $100,000 for the first machine that fools a judge into thinking
it is a person. In 1991, the Computer Museum in Boston held a contest in which 10
judges at the museum held conversations on terminals with eight respondents around
the world, including six computers and two humans. The conversations of about
15 minutes each were limited to particular subjects, such as wine, fishing, clothing,
and Shakespeare, but in a true Turing test, the questions could involve any topic.
Work as a group to decide the questions you would ask. Do you think a computer
will ever be able to pass the test?
REFERENCES: Betsy Carpenter, “Will Machines Ever Think?” U.S. News & World Re-
port, October 17, 1988, pp. 64–65.
Stanley Wellborn, “Machines That Think,” U.S. News & World Report, December 5,
1983, pp. 59–62.
G15. Construct an exhibit on ancient computing methods. Some suggestions for your
exhibit are charts of sample computations by ancient methods, pebbles, tally sticks,
tally marks in sand, Roman number computations, abaci, Napier‘s bones, and old
computing devices. You should consider answering the following questions as part of
your exhibit: How do you multiply with Roman numerals? What is the scratch
system? What is the lattice method of computation? What changes in our methods of
long multiplication and long division have taken place over the years? How did the
old computing machines work? Who invented the slide rule?
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.6
Chapter Summary
173
Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas in this chapter. You can find references
to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 4.1 Write a paper discussing the Egyptian method of multiplication.
PROJECT 4.2 What are some of the significant events in the development of
mathematics? Who are some of the famous people who have contributed to
mathematical knowledge?
PROJECT 4.3 The people from the Long Lost Land had only the following four symbols:
Write out the first 20 numbers. Find
a.
b.
(Use your imagination to invent a system to answer these questions.)
PROJECT 4.4 Is it possible to have a numeration system with a base that is negative?
PROJECT 4.5 “I became operational at the HAL Plant in Urbana, Ill., on January 12,
1997,” the computer HAL declares in Arthur C. Clarke’s 1968 novel, 2001: A Space
Odyssey. Now that time has passed and many advances have been made in computer
technology since 1968, write a paper showing the similarities and differences
between HAL and the computers of today.
PROJECT 4.6 Software bugs (for example, the Y2KMillennium Bug) can have devastat-
ing effects. Write a paper on some famous software bugs and some of the problems
that they have caused.
PROJECT 4.7 Build a working model of Napier’s rods.
PROJECT 4.8 Write a paper and prepare a classroom demonstration on the use of an aba-
cus. Build your own device as a project.
PROJECT 4.9 Write a paper on the invention of the first electronic computer.
PROJECT 4.10 In Chapter 1, we introduced Pascal’s triangle. The reproduction here is 
from a 14th century Chinese manuscript, and in this form is sometimes called 
Yang Hui’s triangle. Even though we have not discussed these ancient Chinese
numerals, see if you can reconstruct the basics of their numeration system.
(Use your imagination.)
w 3 w
u 1 w
u, ^, w, s
www.mathnature.com 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
5.1 Natural Numbers
175
Closure property, commutative and
associative properties, distributive
property, definition of subtraction
5.2 Prime Numbers
183
Divisibility, prime factorization, greatest
common factor (g.c.f.), least common
multiple (l.c.m.), in pursuit of primes,
infinitude of primes
5.3 Integers
197
Addition of integers, multiplication of
integers, subtraction of integers, division
of integers
5.4 Rational Numbers
205
Fundamental property, operations with
rationals
5.5 Irrational Numbers
211
Pythagorean theorem, square roots,
operations with square roots
5.6 Groups, Fields, and Real
Numbers
220
Definition of real numbers, decimal
representation, real number line,
properties of real numbers
5.7 Discrete Mathematics
231
Clock arithmetic, modulo five arithmetic,
group properties for a modulo system
5.8 Cryptography
240
Simple codes, modular codes,
unbreakable codes
5.9 Chapter Summary
245
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
THE NATURE OF NUMBERS
5
Outline
What in the World?
“I’m never going to have children!” exclaimed Shelly.
“Sometimes my little brother drives me nuts!”
“I know what you mean,” added Mary. “Just
yesterday, my brother asked me to explain what 5
means. The best I could do was to show him my fist.”
“Stop! That’s beginning to sound too much like
my math class—just yesterday, Ms. Jones asked us
whether 
is rational or irrational, and we need to
justify our answer,” Shelly said with a bit of anger.
“I don’t have the faintest; the only radical I know is
my brother. I don’t know why we should know
about weird numbers like 
.”
"2
"2
Overview
Before we can do mathematical work, we need to have some
building blocks for our journey. Those building blocks are
sets of numbers. We assume that you know about some of
these sets of numbers, but to form a common basis for the
rest of the textbook, we will discuss some sets of numbers
and their properties in this chapter.
The first set of numbers we encounter as children is the
set of counting numbers. As we build more and more com-
plex sets of numbers in this chapter, we move from the
counting numbers to the integers (which include the count-
ing numbers, zero, and their opposites), to the fractions,
which we characterize as numbers whose decimal represen-
tations terminate or repeat. Even though this is a very useful
set of numbers, there are certain applications (finding the
length of a diagonal of a square, for example) that require
numbers that cannot be written as terminating or repeating
decimals. This set is called the set of irrational numbers.
Jeff Maloney/Getty Images
     Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.1
Natural Numbers
175
5.1  Natural Numbers
In most sciences one generation tears down what another has
built, and what one has established another undoes. In mathematics
alone each generation builds a new story to the old structure.
HERMAN HANKEL
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
3
12
27
48 ?
The most basic set of numbers used by any society is the set of numbers used for counting:
  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, . . .
This set of numbers is called the set of counting numbers or natural numbers. Let’s
assume that you understand what the numbers in this set represent, and you understand
the operation of addition, . That is, we assume, without definition, knowledge of the
operation of addition of natural numbers.
There are a few self-evident properties of addition for this set of natural numbers.
They are called “self-evident” because they almost seem too obvious to be stated explic-
itly. For example, if you jump into the air, you expect to come back down. That assump-
tion is well founded in experience and is also based on an assumption that jumping has
certain undeniable properties. But astronauts have found that some very basic assump-
tions are valid on earth and false in space. Recognizing these assumptions (properties,
axioms, laws, or postulates) is important.
Closure Property
When we add or multiply any two natural numbers, we know that we obtain a natural number.
This “knowing” is an assumption based on experiences (inductive reasoning), but we have
actually experienced only a small number of cases for all the possible sums and products of
numbers. The scientist—and the mathematician in particular—is very skeptical about mak-
ing assumptions too quickly. The assumption that the sum or product of two natural numbers
is a natural number is given the name closure and is referred to as the closure property. The
property is phrased in terms of sets and operations. Think of a set as a “box”; there is a label
on the box—say, addition. If all additions of numbers in the box have answers that are
already in the box, then we say the set is closed for addition. If there is at least one answer
that is not contained in the box, then the set is said to be not closed for that operation.
6
5
99
88
44
33
66
77
11
22
55
out of
order
Historical
The word add comes from the
Latin word adhere, which means
“to put to.” Johannes Widman
(1462–1498) first used “” and
“” signs in 1489 when he stated,
“What is , that is minus, what 
is , that is more.” The symbol
“” is believed to be a derivation
of the Latin et (“and ”).*
NOTE
*Behende und hupsche Rechnung auf allen Kauffmanschaff, 1489, which became widely popular and was reprinted in 1508,
1519, and 1526.
A closed box
A box that is not closed
Slavoljub Pantelic/iStockphoto.com  
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

176
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Let  be the set of natural (or counting) numbers. Let a and b be any natural
numbers. Then
a  b is a natural number 
We say  is closed for addition.
Closure for  in 
Example
1 Test closure for addition
Is the set A  {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10} closed for addition?
Solution
The set A is not closed for addition because
5  7  12
and
12  A
Note: The fact that 
is in the set does not change the fact that A is not closed
for addition.
You need find only one counterexample to show that a property does not hold.
Commutative and Associative Properties
Another self-evident property of the natural numbers concerns the order in which they are
added. It is called the commutative property for addition and states that the order in
which two numbers are added makes no difference; that is (if we read from left to right),
for any two natural numbers a and b. The commutative property allows us to rearrange
numbers; it is called a property of order. Together with another property, called the asso-
ciative property, it is used in calculation and simplification.
The associative property for addition allows us to group numbers for addition.
Suppose you wish to add three numbers—say, 2, 3, and 8:
To add these numbers you must first add two of them and then add this sum to the third.
The associative property tells us that, no matter which two numbers are added first, the
final result is the same. If parentheses are used to indicate the numbers to be added first,
then this property can be symbolized by
The parentheses indicate the numbers to be added first. This associative property for
addition holds for any three or more natural numbers.
Add the column of numbers in the margin. How long does it take? Five seconds is
long enough if you use the associative and commutative properties for addition:
However, it takes much longer if you don’t rearrange (commute) and regroup (associate)
the numbers:
 5 45
 5 44 1 1
 5 142 1 22 1 1
 5 139 1 32 1 12 1 12
 5 135 1 42 1 13 1 2 1 12
 5 130 1 52 1 14 1 3 1 2 1 12
 5 124 1 62 1 15 1 4 1 3 1 2 1 12
19 1 82 1 17 1 6 1 5 1 4 1 3 1 2 1 12 5 117 1 72 1 16 1 5 1 4 1 3 1 2 1 12
19 1 12 1 18 1 22 1 17 1 32 1 16 1 42 1 5 5 10 1 10 1 10 1 10 1 5 5 45
12 1 32 1 8 5 2 1 13 1 82
2 1 3 1 8
a 1 b 5 b 1 a
5 1 3 5 8
The word commute can mean to
travel back and forth from home to
work; this back-and-forth idea can
help you remember that the commu-
tative property applies if you read
from left to right or from right to left.
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
_____
The word 
associate can
mean “connect”,
“join”, or “unite”;
with this
property you
associate two 
of the added
numbers.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The properties of associativity and commutativity are not restricted to the operation
of addition. For example, these properties also hold for  and multiplication, as we will
now discuss.
Multiplication is defined as repeated addition.
Section 5.1
Natural Numbers
177
For a  0, multiplication is defined as follows: 
a  b means b  b  b  . . .  b
1444442444443
a addends
If a  0, then 0  b  0.
Multiplication
Historical
The word multiply comes from the
Latin word multiplicare, which
means “having many folds.”
William Oughtred (1574–1660)
introduced the symbol
for
multiplication in 1631, and Thomas
Harriot (1560–1621) introduced
the dot in the same year. In 1698
Leibniz wrote to Bernoulli, saying,
“I do not like the times sign
as
a symbol for multiplication, as it is
easily confounded with x,
.
Often I simply relate two
quantities by an interposed dot.”
Today, multiplication is denoted
by a cross (usually in arithmetic)
as in 3
a; a dot, as in 
parentheses, as in 
or
juxtaposition, as in 3a.
31a2;
3 # a;
3
c
3
3
NOTE
We now consider the property of closure for multiplication.
Let  be the set of natural (or counting) numbers. Let a and b be any natural
numbers. Then 
ab is a natural number.
We say  is closed for multiplication.
Closure for  in 
For any natural numbers a, b, and c:
Commutative properties
Associative properties
Addition: a  b  b  a
Addition: 1a  b2  c  a  1b  c2
Multiplication: ab  ba
Multiplication: 1ab2c  a1bc2
Commutative and Associative Properties
Example
2 Test closure for multiplication
Is the set 
closed for multiplication?
Solution
The set B is closed for the operation of multiplication, because all possible
products are in B:
1 3 1 5 1
1 3 0 5 0
0 3 1 5 0
0 3 0 5 0
B 5 50, 16
We can now consider commutativity and associativity for multiplication in the set 
of natural numbers:
Commutativity:
Associativity:
The question mark above the equal sign signifies that we should not assume the con-
clusion (namely, that the expressions on both sides are equal) until we check the arithmetic.
Even though we can check these properties for particular natural numbers, it is impossible
to check them for all natural numbers, so we accept the following properties as axioms.
12 3 32 3 4 0 2 3 13 3 42
2 3 3 0 3 3 2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To distinguish between the commutative and associative properties, remember the
following:
1. When the commutative property is used, the order in which the elements appear from
left to right is changed, but the grouping is not changed.
2. When the associative property is used, the elements are grouped differently, but the
order in which they appear is not changed.
3. If both the order and the grouping have been changed, then both the commutative and
associative properties have been used.
We are not confined to  when discussing the associative and commutative properties (or
any of the properties, for that matter). Nor are we restricted to addition and multiplication
for our operations. Indeed, it is often fun to form your own “group” of numbers and see
whether the properties hold for your group under your designated operation.
Distributive Property
Are there properties in  that involve both operations? Consider an example.
178
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Example
3 Distributive property discovery
Suppose you are selling tickets for a raffle, and the tickets cost $2 each. You sell 3 tick-
ets on Monday and 4 tickets on Tuesday. How much money did you collect?
Solution I
You sold a total of 
tickets, which cost $2 each, so you collected
dollars. That is,
Solution II
You collected 
dollars on Monday and 
dollars on
Tuesday for a total of 
dollars. That is,
Since these solutions are equal, we see
Do you suppose this would be true if the tickets cost a dollars and you sold b tickets
on Monday and c tickets on Tuesday? Then the equation would be
or simply
This example illustrates the distributive property for multiplication over addition.
a1b 1 c2 5 ab 1 ac
a 3 1b 1 c2 5 1a 3 b2 1 1a 3 c2
2 3 13 1 42 5 12 3 32 1 12 3 42
12 3 32 1 12 3 42 5 14
6 1 8 5 14
2 3 4 5 8
2 3 3 5 6
2 3 13 1 42 5 14
2 3 7 5 14
3 1 4 5 7
© Mark Antman/The Image Works
a1b 1 c2 5 ab 1 ac
Distributive Property
If there is one property to
remember, it is this one!
In the set  of natural numbers, is addition distributive over multiplication? We wish
to check
3 1 14 3 52 0 13 1 42 3 13 1 52
There still remain
three studies
suitable for free
man. Arithmetic
is one of them.
Plato
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Checking:
and
Thus, addition is not distributive over multiplication in the set of natural numbers.
The distributive property can also help to simplify arithmetic. Suppose you wish
to multiply 9 by 71. You can use the distributive property to do the following mental
multiplication:
This allows you to do the problem quickly and simply in your head.
Definition of Subtraction
Since these properties hold for the operations of addition and multiplication, we might
reasonably ask whether they hold for other operations. Subtraction is defined as the
opposite of addition.
9 3 71 5 9 3 170 1 12 5 19 3 702 1 19 3 12 5 630 1 9 5 639
13 1 42 3 13 1 52 5 7 3 8 5 56
3 1 14 3 52 5 3 1 20 5 23
Section 5.1
Natural Numbers
179
The operation of subtraction is defined in terms of 
addition: 
means
a 5 b 1 x
a 2 b 5 x
Subtraction
To test the commutative property for subtraction, we check a particular example:
Now, 
but 
doesn’t even exist in the set of natural numbers. Therefore, 
the commutative property does not hold for subtraction in .
Furthermore, to provide the result of the operation of subtraction for 
, we must
find a number that when added to 3 gives the result 2. But there is no such natural number.
Thus, the set of natural numbers is closed for addition and multiplication, but is not
closed for subtraction. In Section 5.3, we will add elements to the set of natural numbers
to create the set of integers, which will be closed for subtraction as well as for addition
and multiplication.
To make sure you understand the properties discussed in this section, this problem
set focuses on the properties of closure, commutativity, associativity, and distributivity
rather than on the set of natural numbers and the operations of addition, multiplication,
and subtraction. Since you are so familiar with the set of natural numbers and with these
operations, you could probably answer questions about them without much reflection on
the concepts involved. Therefore, in the problem set we work with some operations other
than addition, multiplication, and subtraction. When we refer to a table, rows are hori-
zontal and columns are vertical.
2 2 3
2 2 3
3 2 2 5 1,
3 2 2 0 2 2 3
Author’s
From the definition of subtrac-
tion, 2  3   means 
2    3, so we need to find
a number that, when added to
3, gives the result 2. 
NOTE
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Level  1
IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain each of the words or concepts in
Problems 1–9. 
1. Natural number
2. Multiplication 
3. Subtraction
4. Closure for addition 
5. Commutativity
6. Associativity 
7. Distributivity
8. Closure for multiplication
9. Contrast commutativity and associativity. 
Use the definition of multiplication to show what each expression
in Problems 10–15 means. 
10. a. 2  3
b. 3  2
11. a. 3  4
b. 4  3
12. a. 5  2
b. 2  5
13. a. 2  184
b. 184  2
14. a. 3  145
b. 145  3
15. a. xy
b. yx
In Problems 16–26, classify each as an example of the
commutative property, the associative property, or both. 
16. 3  5  5  3
17. 2  3  5  2  5  3
18. 2  13  52  12  32  5
19. 6  12  32  16  22  3
20. 6  12  32  16  32  2
21. 6  12  32  6  13  22
22. 6  12  32  12  32  6
23. 14  5216  92  14  5219  62
24. 14  5216  92  16  9214  52
25. 13  52  12  42  13  52  14  22
26. 13  52  12  42  13  42  15  22
27. “Isn’t this one just too sweet, dear?” asked the wife as she tried
on a beautiful diamond ring. “No,” the husband replied. “It’s just
too dear, sweet.” Does this story remind you of the associative or
the commutative property?
28. Is the operation of putting on your shoes and socks
commutative?
29. In the English language, the meanings of certain phrases can
be very different depending on the association of the words.
For example, 
(MAN EATING) TIGER
is not the same as 
MAN (EATING TIGER)
Decide whether each of the following groups of words is
associative.
a. HIGH SCHOOL STUDENT
b. SLOW CURVE SIGN
c. BARE FACTS PERSON
d. RED FIRE ENGINE
e. TRAVELING SALESMAN JOKE
f.
BROWN SMOKING JACKET
30. Think of three nonassociative word triples as shown in
Problem 29.
Level  2
31. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Why do you think addition of natural
numbers was left undefined? Try to write a definition. Look in
one or more dictionaries. What problems do you find with these
definitions?
32. Consider the set A  {1, 4, 7, 9} with an operation z defined
by the table.
z
1
4
7
9 
1
9
7
1
4 
4
7
9
4
1 
7
1
4
7
9 
9
4
1
9
7 
a z b means find the entry in row a and column b; for
example,
7 z 9  9 
(the entry in row 7 and column 9). Find each of the following.
a. 7 z 4
b. 9 z 1
c. 1 z 7
d. 9 z 9
e. 4 z 7
f. 1 z 9
g. 7 z 1
h. 7 z 7
33. Consider the set 
F  1, 1, i, i
with an operation  defined by the table. 

1
1
i
i
1
1
1
i
i
1
1
1
i
i
i
i
i
1
1
i
i
i
1
1
a  b means find the entry in row a and column b; for
example, 1  1i2  i 1the entry in row 1 and 
column i2. Find each of the following. 
a. 1  i
b. i  i
c. i  i
d. i  1
e. 1  i
f. i  i
6
5
Problem Set 5.1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34. Consider the set A and the operation z from Problem 32.
Is the set A closed for the operation of z? Give reasons for
your answer.
35. Consider the set F and the operation of  from Problem 33. Is
the set F closed for the operation of  ? Give reasons for your
answer.
36. Consider the set A and the operation z from Problem 32. Does
the set A satisfy the given property for the operation of z?
Give reasons for your answer. 
a. Associative
b. Commutative
37. Consider the set F and the operation of  from Problem 33.
Does the set F satisfy the given property for the operation 
of ? Give reasons. 
a. Associative
b. Commutative
38. Let a be the process of putting on a shirt; let b be the 
process of putting on a pair of socks; and let c be the process 
of putting on a pair of shoes. Let  be the operation of
“followed by.” 
a. Is  commutative for {a, b, c}?
b. Is  associative for {a, b, c}?
Section 5.1
Natural Numbers
181
41. Consider the operation • defined by the following table.
•















a. Find  • .
b. Find  • .
c. Does  •    • ?
Is the set commutative for •?
d. Does ( • ) •    • ( • )?
42. Let T mean “select the smaller number” and S mean “select
the second of the two.” Is S distributive over T in the set of
natural numbers, ?
43. Let T mean “select the smaller number” and S mean “select
the second of the two.” Is T distributive over S in the set of
natural numbers, ?
44. Do the following problems mentally using the distributive property. 
a. 6  82
b. 8  41
c. 7  49
45. Do the following problems mentally using the distributive
property. 
a. 5  99
b. 4  88
c. 8  52
46. Is the set {0, 1} commutative for the operation of
multiplication? Give reasons.
47. Is the set {0, 1} associative for the operation of multiplication?
Give reasons.
48. Is the set {1, 0, 1} commutative for the operation of
multiplication? Give reasons.
49. Is the set of even natural numbers closed for the operation of
addition? Give reasons.
50. Is the set of even natural numbers closed for the operation of
multiplication? Give reasons.
51. Is the set of odd natural numbers closed for the operation of
multiplication? Give reasons.
52. Is the set of odd natural numbers closed for the operation of
addition? Give reasons.
Level  3
53. Let S  {1, 2, 3, . . . , 9, 10}. Define an operation  as 
a  b  0  a  1  b
Is S closed for the operation of ?
54. Let S  {1, 2, 3, . . . , 99, 100}. Define an operation  as 
a  b  2a  b
Check the commutative and associative properties. 
Fancy/Veer/Corbis/Jupiterimages  
39. Consider the set  of natural numbers and an operation 	
which means “select the first of the two.” That is, 
4 	 3  4;
3 	 4  3;
5 	 7  5;
6 	 6  6 
Is the set  closed for the operation of 	? Give reasons.
40. Consider the set  of natural numbers and an operation 	
defined in Problem 39. 
a. Is 	 associative for ? Give reasons.
b. Is 	 commutative for ? Give reasons.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

55. Let S  {1, 2, 3, . . . , 999, 1000}. Define an operation
as 
a
b  21a  b2
Check the commutative and associative properties. 
Problem Solving 3   
56. Consider a soldier facing in a given direction (say north). Let
us denote 
“left face” by O, 
“right face” by r, 
“about face” by a, and 
“stand fast” by f. 
(The element f means “don’t move from your present
position.” It does not mean “return to your original position.”)
Then we define 
H  O, r, a, f
and an operation  meaning “followed by.” Thus, O  O  a
means “left face” followed by “left face” and is the same as the
single command “about face.” Complete the following table. 

O
r
a
f 
/
a
r
a
f
57. Is the set H from Problem 56 closed for the operation of ?
6
5
182
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
58. Does the set H and operation  from Problem 56 satisfy the
following properties? Give reasons. 
a. Associative
b. Commutative
59. Mensa is an association for people with high IQs. An
advertisement for the organization offers the following
challenge: “Take this instant test to see if you’re a genius.” 
The advertisement also states, “This problem stumps 45% 
of the Mensa members who try it. And they all have IQs in 
the top 2% nationwide. See if you can pass this test. If you 
can do it, you might have what it takes to join us. To find out, .
. . write to American Mensa, 2626 East 14th St., Brooklyn, 
NY 11235.” 
60. The Vanishing Leprechaun Puzzle
The puzzle shown
in Figure 5.1 consists of three pieces and was originally
published by W. A. Elliott Company, 212 Adelaide St. W.,
Toronto, Canada M5H 1W7. 
If we place the pieces together as shown at the top, we see
15 leprechauns. However, if we commute pieces A and B as
shown at the bottom, we count 14 leprechauns! 
Clearly, from Figure 5.1 we see 
AB  BA
Can you explain where the vanishing leprechaun went?
Put the appropriate plus or minus signs 
between the numbers, in the correct places, 
so that the sum total will equal 1.
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  =  1
A
B
B
A
© Adapted from The Vanishing Leprechaun © 1968 by the W. A. Elliott Company, Toronto. All rights reserved
under the Universal Copyright Convention.
FIGURE 5.1 Leprechaun Puzzle: How many leprechauns?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.2
Prime Numbers
183
5.2  Prime Numbers
A set of numbers that is important, not only in algebra but in all of mathematics, is the set
of prime numbers. To understand prime numbers, you must first understand the idea of
divisibility, along with some new terminology and notation.
Divisibility
The natural number 10 is divisible by 2, since there is a natural number 5 so that
it is not divisible by 3, since there is no natural number k such that 10  3 k.
This leads us to the following definition of divisibility.
#
10 5 2 # 5;
If m and d are natural numbers, and if there is a
natural number k so that 
we say that d is a
divisor of m, d is a factor of m, d divides m, and m is
a multiple of d. We denote this relationship by d|m.
m 5 d # k,
Divisibility
That is, 5 30 is read “5 divides 30” and means that there exists some natural number k—
namely, 6—such that 30 5 5 # k.
k
Do not confuse this
notation with the notation
sometimes used for
fractions: “5/30” means 
5 divided by 30, which is a
fraction; “5|30” means “5
divides 30,” which is
a statement.
Example
1 Test divisibility
Tell whether each of the following is true or false, and give the meaning of each.
a. 7 63
b. 8 104
c. 14 2
d. 6 15
Solution
a. 7 63 is read “7 divides 63” and is true since we can find a natural number k—namely,
9—such that 
b. 8 104 is true, since 
c. 14 2 is false because we can find no natural number k so that 
We write 
14 2 to say that 14 does not divide 2.
d. 6 15 is false, because we can find no natural number k so that 15 5 6 # k.
k
 ƒ 
2 5 14 # k.
k
104 5 8 # 13.
k
63 5 7 # k.
k
k
k
k
k
Every natural (counting) number greater than 1 has at least two distinct divisors, itself
and 1.
Number of Divisors   
This property is basic
to understanding what
follows.
It is easy to see that 1 divides every natural number m, since 
Also, by the
commutative property of multiplication, 
thus every natural number m divides
itself. We have proved the following theorem.
m 5 m # 1;
m 5 1 # m.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Example
2 Divisibility rule
If 
Solution
Since 
, there must exist a natural number K so that 
Also, since 
there must exist a natural number k so that 
Now, since a and b
are natural numbers, we see 
so that 
, or in other words, K
k is a natu-
ral number. By substitution, 
so that 
Since
K
k is a natural number, we see that 
Consider the number 341,592. Is this number divisible by 2? By 3? By 4? By 5? You
may know some ways of answering these questions without actually doing the division.
x k b.
2
b 5 xK 2 xk 5 x1K 2 k2.
xK 5 xk 1 b
2
K . k
a 1 b . a
xk 5 a.
x k a,
xK 5 a 1 b.
x k 1a 1 b2
x k 1a 1 b2 and x k a, then x k b.
Example
3 Divisibility rule for 2
Find a rule for the divisibility of any number M by 2.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. You might already know the rule for divisibility by 2. It says
that if the last digit of the number is even, then the number is divisible by 2. That is, if
the number M ends in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8, it is divisible by 2. This example asks us to show
why this rule “works.”
Devise a Plan. We will begin with a simpler example, say 341,592. We write the num-
ber in expanded notation.
The question to answer is “When will this number be divisible by 2?” Associate all the
digits except the last one:
341,592  3  105  4  104  1  103  5  102  9  101  2
14
444444444444244444444444444443
This is divisible by 2.
The associated part is always divisible by 2, since 
.
Carry Out the Plan. For the number M we see that since 
, the
divisibility of M by 2 depends solely on whether 2 divides the last digit.
Look Back. We see that 2 341,592 since 2  2. Also 2  838 since 2  8, and 2 839 since 2 9.
Similar rules apply for divisibility by 4 or 8. You might even expect to try the same
type of rule for divisibility by 3, but this situation is not quite so easy, as shown by the
following example.
2 k 10, 2 k 102, c, 2 k 10n
2 k 10, 2 k 102, 2 k 103, 2 k 104, and 2 k 105
341,592 5 3 3 105 1 4 3 104 1 1 3 103 1 5 3 102 1 9 3 101 1 2
Pólya’s 
Method
Example
4 Divisibility rule for 3
Find a rule for divisibility by 3.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Try a simple example. We see that 
since we can find a 
3 k 84
Pólya’s 
Method
natural number—namely, 28—so that 
We also note that 34, so the same
type of rule that worked for divisibility by 2 will not work for divisibility by 3.
Devise a Plan. We will once again look at the expanded notation. Consider a simpler
problem—say, the divisibility of 341,592 by 3:
341,592 5 3 3 105 1 4 3 104 1 1 3 103 1 5 3 102 1 9 3 101 1 2
84 5 3 # k.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The plan is to make each product divisible by 3. We do this by adding and subtracting 1
from each term containing 10b, where b is a natural number. 
Carry Out the Plan. 
341,592  3  105  1  1  4  104  1  1  1  103  1  1
 5  102  1  1  9  101  1  1  2 
We now use the distributive and associative properties to rewrite this expression: 
341,592  3  105  1  3  4  104  1  4  1  103  1  1
 5  102  1  5  9  101  1  9  2
 3 105  1  4 104  1  1 103  1  5 102  1  9 101  1
This is divisible by 3.
 3  4  1  5  9  2
1444
4444244444443
This is the sum of the digits.
Notice what we have done:
101  1  9
102  1  99
103  1  999
104  1  9,999
105  1  99,999
These are all divisible by 3, and hence we see that
if 
Checking, we see that 
(sum of digits), so 
. Furthermore, since
for any natural number n, we see that the divisibility of a number N by 3
depends on whether 3 divides the sum of the digits.
Look Back. If the sum of the digits of a number N is divisible by 3, then N is divisible by 3. 
Some of the more common rules of divisibility are shown in Table 5.1.
3 k 110n 2 12
3 k 341,592
3 k 24
3 k 13 1 4 1 1 1 5 1 9 1 22, then 3 k 341,592
4
3
42
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
3
4
2
1
3
4
2
1
3
4
2
1
3
4
2
1
3
4
2
1
3
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
Section 5.2
Prime Numbers
185
TABLE 5.1
Rules of Divisibility for a Natural Number N
N is divisible by
Test
1
all N
2
if the last digit is divisible by 2.
3
if the sum of the digits is divisible by 3.
4
if the number formed by the last two digits is divisible by 4.
5
if the last digit is 0 or 5.
6
if the number is divisible by 2 and by 3.
8
if the number formed by the last three digits is divisible by 8.
9
if the sum of the digits is divisible by 9.
10
if the last digit is 0.
12
if the number is divisible by 3 and by 4.
1444444444444444444244444444444444444443
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Finding Primes
Since every natural number greater than 1 has at least two divisors, can any number have
more than two?
Checking:
2 has exactly two divisors:
1, 2 
3 has exactly two divisors:
1, 3 
4 has more than two divisors:
1, 2, and 4
Thus, some numbers (such as 2 and 3) have exactly two divisors, and some (such as 4 and 6)
have more than two divisors. Do any natural numbers have fewer than two divisors?
We now state a definition that classifies each natural number according to the num-
ber of divisors it has.
186
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
A prime number is a natural number that has exactly
two divisors. A natural number that has more than two
divisors is called a composite number.
Prime Number
We see that 2 is prime, 3 is prime, 4 is composite (since it is divisible by three natu-
ral numbers), 5 is prime, 6 is composite (since it is divisible by 1, 2, 3, and 6). Note that
every natural number greater than 1 is either prime or composite. The number 1 is neither
prime nor composite.
One method for finding primes smaller than some given number was first used by a
Greek mathematician, Eratosthenes, more than 2,000 years ago. The technique is known
as the sieve of Eratosthenes. Suppose we wish to find the primes less than 100. We pre-
pare a table of natural numbers 1–100 using the following procedure.
Step 1
Write down a list of numbers from 1 to 100 (see Table 5.2 page 187).
Step 2
Cross out 1, since it is not classified as a prime number.
Step 3
Draw a circle around 2, the smallest prime number. Then cross out every
following multiple of 2, since each is divisible by 2 and thus is not prime.
Step 4
Draw a circle around 3, the next prime number. Then cross out 
each succeeding multiple of 3. Some of these numbers, such as 
6 and 12, will already have been crossed out because they are also 
multiples of 2.
Step 5
Circle the next open prime, 5, and cross out all subsequent 
multiples of 5.
Step 6
The next prime number is 7; circle 7 and cross out multiples of 7.
Step 7
Since 7 is the largest prime less than 
 10, we now know that all the
remaining numbers are prime. 
"100
Sieve of Eratosthenes
Historical
In 1978, Hugh C. Williams of the
University of Manitoba discovered
a prime number:
11,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111,111,111, 111,111,111,111,
111,111,111,111,111,111,111,
111
He called this number 
for
short. Do some research and see
what prime numbers have been
newly discovered prime numbers.
R317
NOTE
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The process is a simple one, since you do not have to cross out the multiples of 3 (for
example) by checking for divisibility by 3 but can simply cross out every third number.
Thus, anyone who can count can find primes by this method. Also, notice that in finding
the primes under 100, we had crossed out all the composite numbers by the time we
crossed out the multiples of 7. That is, to find all primes less than 100: (1) Find the largest
prime smaller than or equal to 
(7 in this case); (2) cross out multiples of
primes up to and including 7; and (3) all the remaining numbers in the chart are primes.
This result generalizes. If you wish to find all primes smaller than n:
1. Find the largest prime less than or equal to 
.
2. Cross out the multiples of primes less than or equal to 
.
3. All the remaining numbers in the chart are primes.
Phrasing this another way, if n is composite, then one of its factors must be less than
or equal to 
That is, if 
then it can’t be true that both a and b are greater than 
otherwise 
is a contradiction . Thus, one of
the factors must be less than or equal to 
Prime Factorization
Prime numbers are fundamental to many mathematical processes. In particular, we use
prime numbers in working with rational numbers later in this chapter. You will need to
understand prime factorization, greatest common factor, and least common multiple.
The operation of factoring is the reverse of the operation of multiplying. For exam-
ple, multiplying 3 by 6 yields 
and this answer is unique (only one answer is
possible). In the reverse process, called factoring, you are given the number 18 and asked
for numbers that can be multiplied together to give 18. This process is not unique; we list
several different factorizations of 18:
18 5 1 # 18 5 18 # 1 5 2 # 9 5 9 # 2 5 1 # 1 # 2 # 9 5 3 # 6 5 2 # 3 # 3 5 c
3 # 6 5 18,
"n.
2
ab . "n "n 5 n 5 ab, so ab . ab
1
"n.
n 5 ab,
"n.
"n
"n
"100 5 10
Section 5.2
Prime Numbers
187
TABLE 5.2
Age Chart
Finding Primes Using the Sieve of Eratosthenes
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
Historical
Eratosthenes was a highly talented
and versatile person: athlete,
astronomer, geographer, historian,
poet, and mathematician. In
addition to his sieve for prime
numbers, he invented a mechani-
cal “mean finder” for duplicating
the cube, and he made some re-
markably accurate measurements
of the size of the earth. Unfortu-
nately, most of his mathematical
contributions are lost. It is said
that he committed suicide by
starving himself to death upon
discovering that he had
ophthalmia.
NOTE
5
7
23
19
31
29
17
11
13
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

There are, in fact, infinitely many possibilities. We make some agreements, so the process
gives a unique answer:
1. We will not consider the order in which the factors are listed as important. That is,
and 
are considered the same factorization.
2. We will not consider 1 as a factor when writing out any factorizations. That is, prime
numbers do not have factorizations.
3. Recall that we are working in the set of natural numbers; thus, 
and
are not considered factorizations of 18.
With these agreements, we have greatly reduced the possibilities:
These are the only three possible factorizations. Notice that the last factorization contains
only prime factors; thus it is called the prime factorization of 18.
It should be clear that, if a number is composite, it can be factored as the product
of two natural numbers greater than 1. Each of these two numbers will be prime or com-
posite. If both are prime, then we have a prime factorization. If one or more is composite,
we repeat the process, and continue until we have written the original number as a prod-
uct of primes. It is also true that this representation is unique. This is one of the most im-
portant results in arithmetic, and it carries the impressive title fundamental theorem of
arithmetic.
18 5 2 # 9 5 3 # 6 5 2 # 32
18 5 1222 1292
18 5 36 # 1
2
9 # 2
2 # 9
188
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
As you might guess from
the name, this result is
important for the following
material.
Every natural number greater than 1 is either a prime or a product of primes, 
and its prime factorization is unique (except for the order in which the factors
appear).
Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic
Historical
A statement equivalent to the
fundamental theorem of arithmetic
is found in Book IX of Euclid’s
Elements. This work is not only
the earliest known major Greek
mathematical book, but it is also
the most influential textbook of all
time. It was composed around
300 B.C. and first printed in 1482.
Except for the Bible, no other book
has been through so many print-
ings. Euclid, the first professor of
mathematics at the Museum of
Alexandria, was the author of at
least ten other books.
NOTE
Example
5 Find prime factorizations
Find the prime factorizations: 
a. 385
b. 1,400
Solution
a. One of the easiest ways to find the prime factors of a number is to try division by each
of the prime numbers in order: 2, 3, 5, 7, . . . . The rules of divisibility in Table 5.1
may help. For this example, we need to check primes up to 
 19. If none of
the primes up to 19 is a factor of 385, then 385 is prime. We see by inspection that
385 is not divisible by 2 or 3. It is divisible by 5, so 
385  5  77
Since 77 is composite 177  7  112, we write 
385  5  7  11
We are now finished since all the factors are prime numbers. 
Many people prefer to find the prime factorization using a factor tree.
385
5 • 77
5 • 7 • 11
2385
Finding prime factoriza-
tions is a process that
is used in a multitude
of mathematical
applications.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b. Using a factor tree, we may begin with any factors of 1,400: 
We write the prime factorization using exponents: 
1,400  23  52  7
The answers to Example 5 lead us to what is called canonical form. The canoni-
cal representation of a number is the representation of that number as a product of con-
secutive primes using exponential notation with the factors arranged in order of
increasing magnitude. For example, the canonical forms of the numbers in Example 5 are
385  20  30  51  71  111 and 1,400  23  30  52  71. Remember that any nonzero
base to the zero power is 1.
1,400
10 • 140
2 • 5 • 10 • 14
2 • 5 • 2 • 5 • 2 • 7
Section 5.2
Prime Numbers
189
Example
6 Find canonical representation
Find the canonical representation of 3,465.
Solution
We use a factor tree. 
The prime factorization in canonical form is 20  32  51  71  111.
Greatest Common Factor
Suppose we look at the set of factors common to a given set of numbers:
Factors of 18:
{1, 2, 3,
6, 9, 18} 
D D D
D
Common factors: {1, 2, 3, 6}
Factors of 12:
{1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 12} 
The greatest common factor is the largest number in the set of common factors.
3,465
5 • 693
5 • 3 • 231
5 • 3 • 3 • 77
5 • 3 • 3 • 7 • 11
The greatest common factor (g.c.f.) of a set of numbers
is the largest number that divides (evenly) into each of
the numbers in the given set.
Greatest Common Factor
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The procedure for finding the greatest common factor involves the canonical form of
the given numbers. For example, suppose we want to find the greatest common factor of
24 and 30. We first find all factors, then the intersection (common factors), and finally the
greatest one in that set:
Factors of 24:
{1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 24}
Factors of 30:
{1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 15, 30}
Common facors:
{1, 2, 3, 6}
g.c.f.  6
This process can be rather tedious, so we outline a more refined procedure:
190
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Step 1
Write the factorizations in canonical form.
Step 2
Select the representative of each factor with the SMALLEST exponent.
Step 3
Multiply the representatives to find the greatest common factor (g.c.f.).
Procedure for Finding the g.c.f
We illustrate this procedure for the numbers 24 and 30. First, find the canonical represen-
tation of each:
24  23  3
 23  31  50
30  2  3  5  21  31  51
Select one representative from each of the columns in the factorizations. The representa-
tive we select when finding the g.c.f. is the one with the smallest exponent. The g.c.f. is
the product of these representatives. 
g.c.f.  21  31  50  6
The procedure for finding the g.c.f. is summarized in Figure 5.2.
FIGURE 5.2 Flowchart for finding
the greatest common factor (g.c.f.)
START
WRITE THE
FACTORIZATIONS
IN CANONICAL
FORM
STOP
SELECT THE
REPRESENTATIVE
OF EACH FACTOR
WITH THE
SMALLEST
EXPONENT
MULTIPLY THE
REPRESENTATIVES
FOR THE G.C.F.
Example
7 Find the greatest common factor
Find the greatest common factor of the given sets of numbers.
a. 300, 144
b. 15, 28
c. 3150, 588, 280
Solution
a. 300  22  31  52
144  24  32  50
g.c.f.  22  31  50
 4  3  1
 12
b. 15  20  31  51  70
28  22  30  50  71
g.c.f.  20  30  50  70
 1  1  1  1
 1
c. 3,150  21  32  52  71
588  22  31  50  72
280  23  30  51  71
g.c.f.  21  30  50  71
 2  1  1  7
 14
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If the greatest common factor of two numbers is 1, we say that the numbers are rela-
tively prime. Notice that 15 and 28 are relatively prime, but they themselves are not
prime. It is possible for relatively prime numbers to be composite numbers.
Least Common Multiple
The greatest common factor is the largest number in the intersection of the factors of a set
of given numbers. On the other hand, the least common multiple is the smallest number
in the intersection of the multiples of a set of given numbers.
Section 5.2
Prime Numbers
191
The least common multiple (l.c.m.) of a set of
numbers is the smallest number that each of the
numbers in the set divides into evenly.
Least Common Multiple
For example, suppose we want to find the least common multiple of 24 and 30.
Multiples of 24:
{24, 48, 72, 96, 120, . . .} 
Multiples of 30:
{30, 60, 90, 120, . . .} 
Common factors:
{120, 240, . . .} 
l.c.m.  120 
An algorithm for finding the least common multiple is very much like the one for finding
the g.c.f.
Step 1
Write the factorizations in canonical form.
Step 2
Select the representative of each factor with the LARGEST exponent.
Step 3
Multiply the representatives to find the least common multiple (l.c.m.).
Procedure for Finding the l.c.m.
The process, as before, begins by finding the canonical representations of the num-
bers involved. For example, to obtain the l.c.m. of the numbers 24 and 30, write each in
canonical form:
24  23  31  50
30  21  31  51
For the l.c.m., we choose the representative of each factor with the largest exponent. The
l.c.m. is the product of these representatives.
l.c.m.  23  31  51  120
The procedure for finding the least common multiple is shown in Figure 5.3.
FIGURE 5.3 Procedure for finding
the least common multiple (l.c.m.)
START
WRITE THE
FACTORIZATIONS
IN CANONICAL
FORM
STOP
SELECT THE
REPRESENTATIVE
OF EACH FACTOR
WITH THE
LARGEST
EXPONENT
MULTIPLY THE
REPRESENTATIVES
FOR THE L.C.M.
Example
8 Find the least common multiple
Find the least common multiple of 300, 144, and 108.
Solution
 5 16 # 27 # 25 5 10,800
 l.c.m. 5 24 # 33 # 52
 108 5 22 # 33 # 50
 144 5 24 # 32 # 50
 300 5 22 # 31 # 52
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

192
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Historical
The mathematician Pierre de
Fermat (see Historical Note on
page 329) was not able to show
that 4,294,967,297 was not a
prime. Leonhard Euler (see
Historical Note on page 762) later
discovered it is divisible by 641.
In the 1800s there was a young
American named Colburn who had
a great capacity to do things in his
head. He was shown this number
and asked if it was a prime. He
said, “No, because 641 divides it.”
When asked how he knew that, he
replied, “Oh, I just felt it.” He was
unable to explain his great gift—
he just had it.
NOTE
Courtesy of Donald B. Gillies, University of Illinois
In Pursuit of Primes
The method of Eratosthenes gives a finite list of primes, but it is not very satisfactory to
use if we wish to determine whether a given number n is a prime. For centuries, mathe-
maticians have tried to find a formula that would yield every prime. Let’s try to find a for-
mula that results in giving only primes. A possible candidate is
n2  n  41
If we try this formula for n  1, we obtain 12  1  41  41. 
For n  2:
22  2  41  43, a prime 
For n  3:
32  3  41  47, a prime 
So far, so good; that is, we are obtaining only primes. Continuing, we keep finding only
primes for n up to 40:
For n  40:
402  40  41  1,601, a prime 
Inductively, we might conclude that the formula yields only primes, but the next value
provides a counterexample: 
For n  41:
412  41  41  412  1,681, not a prime! 
A more serious attempt to find a prime number formula was made by Pierre de Fer-
mat, who tried the formula 
For n  1:
 1  5, a prime 
For n  2:
 1  24  1  17, a prime 
For n  3:
 1  28  1  257, a prime 
For n  4:
 1  216  1  65,537, a prime 
For n  5:
 1  232  1  4,294,967,297
Is 4,294,967,297 a prime?
The answer is not easy. See the Historical Note in the margin. It turns out this number is not
prime! It is divisible by 641. Whether this formula generates any other primes is unknown.
In 1644, the French priest and number theorist Marin Mersenne (1588–1648) stated
without proof that the number
is composite. In the 19th century, mathematicians finally proved Mersenne correct when
they discovered that this number was divisible by both 503 and 54,217. Mersenne did dis-
cover, however, that
is a prime number.
In 1970, a young Russian named Yuri Matyasevich discovered several explicit poly-
nomials 1such as 
2 of this sort that generate only prime numbers, but all of
those he discovered are too complicated to reproduce here. The largest known prime
number at that time was
which was discovered at the University of Illinois through the use of number theory and
computers. The mathematicians were so proud of this discovery that the following post-
mark was used on the university’s postage meter:
211,213 2 1
n2 2 n 1 41
2257 2 1
2251 2 1
225
224
223
222
221
22n  1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Some other large prime numbers and the dates of their discovery are shown in Table 5.3.
The Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search, or GIMPS, is a computing project that uses
volunteers’ computers to hunt for primes. The last source shown in Table 5.3 claimed a
$100,000 prize from the Electronic Frontier Foundation for being the first to find a prime
number that has more than ten million digits.
Section 5.2
Prime Numbers
193
TABLE 5.3
Some Large Prime
Prime Number
Date of 
Discovery
Source
2257 2 1
1644
Marin Mersenne
211,213 2 1
1970
University of Illinois
219,937 2 1
1971
Bryant Tuckerman
221,701 2 1
1978
Laura Nickel and Curt Knoll
286,243 2 1
1983
David Slowinski
2216,091 2 1
1985
Amdal Benchmark Center
2858,433 2 1
1994
David Slowinski and Paul Gage
21,398,269 2 1
1996
Joel Armengaud
23,021,377 2 1
1998
Clarkson and Kurowski
26,972,593 2 1
1999
Hajratwala and Kurowski
213,466,917 2 1
2001
Cameron and Kurowski
230,402,457 2 1
2005
Cohen and Boone, GIMPS
232,582,657 2 1
2007
Cooper and Boone,GIMPS
237,156,667 2 1
2008
Hans-Michael, George Woltman, et. al., GIMPS
243,112,609 2 1
2008
Edison Smith, George Woltman, et. al., GIMPS
http://www.mersenne.org/
prime.htm or find this link
at: www.mathnature.com
If you are interested in finding out more about the search for large primes, you might
wish to check out GIMPS. GIMPS is a worldwide project coordinated by George Woltman,
who wrote a program for the PC to find primes. The hunt for record prime numbers used
to be the exclusive domain of supercomputers, but today by using thousands of individual
machines, it is possible to collectively surpass even the most powerful computers.
Infinitude of Primes
Table 5.3 shows some very large primes. Is there a largest prime? If there is no largest
prime, then there must be infinitely many primes.
Historical
David Hilbert 
(1862–1943)
In 1900, David Hilbert delivered an
address before the International
Congress of Mathematicians in
Paris. Instead of solving a
problem, Hilbert presented a list 
of 23 problems. The mathematical
world went to work on these
problems and, even today, is still
working on some of them. In the
process of solving these
problems, entire new frontiers of
mathematics were opened.
Hilbert’s 10th problem was solved
in 1970 by Yuri Matyasevich, who
built upon the work of Martin
Davis, Hilary Putnam, and Julia
Robinson. A consequence of
Hilbert’s 10th problem is the fact
that there must exist a polynomial
with integer coefficients that will
produce only prime numbers.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Example
9 No largest prime 
Show that there is no largest prime.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example. 
Understand the Problem. Is there a prime larger than the largest known prime shown in
Table 5.3? If we find one, then we are finished. If we can’t find one, is there a way we
can still show it is not the largest prime? 
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

194
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Historical
The only standing ovation ever given at a meeting of the American Mathematical Association was given to a mathematician named Cole
in 1903. It was commonly believed that 
was a prime. Cole first multiplied out 
and then subtracted 1. Moving to another
board, he wrote
761,838,257,287
 193,707,721
_____________
He multiplied it out and came up with the same result as on the first blackboard. He had factored a number thought to be a prime! Here
is what it looks like (using a computer): 
267  1  147573952589676412927
761838257287  193707721  147573952589676412927
267
267 2 1
NOTE
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a prime number? 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe a process for finding a
prime factorization. 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the canonical representation
of a number? 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does g.c.f. mean, and what is
the procedure for finding the g.c.f. of a set of numbers? 
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does l.c.m. mean, and what is
the procedure for finding the l.c.m. of a set of 
numbers? 
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Compare and contrast finding the
g.c.f. and l.c.m. of a set of numbers. 
Which of the numbers in Problems 7–10 are prime? 
7. a. 59
b. 57
c. 1
d. 1,997
8. a. 63
b. 73
c. 79
d. 1,999
9. a. 43
b. 97
c. 171
d. 2,007
10. a. 91
b. 87
c. 111
d. 2,008
Problem Set 5.2
Devise a Plan. We will consider a simpler problem. Suppose we believe that 19 is the
largest prime. The task is to show that there exists a prime larger than 19. There are two
ways to proceed. We could simply find a larger prime—say, 23. But what if we can’t
find a larger one? Without actually finding the largest prime, we will proceed by show-
ing that 19 can’t be the largest prime. Consider the number 
M  2  3  5  7  11  13  17  19  1
This number is larger than 19. Is it a prime? 
Carry Out the Plan. According to our assumption, M must be composite, since it is
larger than 19. But if it is composite, it has a prime divisor. Check all the primes: 
2 does not divide M since 2 2  3  5  7  11  13  17  19 , and thus 2 does not
divide 1 more than this number. 
3 does not divide M for the same reason. 
Repeat for every known prime. 
Thus, if M is not divisible by any known prime, then either it must be prime or there is a
prime divisor larger than 19. In either case, we have found a prime larger than 19. 
Look Back. If anyone claims to be in possession of the largest prime, we need only
carry out an argument like the above to find a larger prime. Thus, we are saying that
there are infinitely many primes, since it is impossible to have a largest prime.
2
1
2
1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.2
Prime Numbers
195
Are the statements in Problems 11–14 true or false? 
11. a. 648
b. 748
c. 848
d. 948
12. a. 639
b. 530
c. 16576
d. 37,823
13. a. 155
b. 583,410
c. 2628,174
d. 10148,729,320
14. a. 154,814
b. 17255
c. 97,823,572
d. 10148,729,320
15. Find all prime numbers less than or equal to 300.
16. Determine the largest prime you need to consider to be sure
that you have excluded, in the sieve of Eratosthenes, all primes
less than or equal to: 
a. 200
b. 500
c. 1,000
d. 1,000,000
Write the prime factorization for each of the numbers in 
Problems 17–20. If the number is prime, so state. 
17. a. 24
b. 30
c. 300
d. 144
18. a. 108
b. 740
c. 699
d. 123
19. a. 120
b. 90
c. 75
d. 975
20. a. 490
b. 4,752
c. 143
d. 51
Find the canonical representation for each of the numbers in
Problems 21–36. 
21. 83
22. 97
23. 127
24. 113
25. 377
26. 151
27. 105
28. 187
29. 67
30. 229
31. 315
32. 111
33. 567
34. 568
35. 2,869
36. 793
Find the g.c.f. and l.c.m. of the sets of numbers in 
Problems 37–44.
37. {60, 72}
38. {95, 1425}
39. {12, 54, 171}
40. {11, 13, 23}
41. {9, 12, 14}
42. {3, 6, 15, 54}
43. {75, 90, 120}
44. {85, 100, 240}
Level  2
45. Bill and Sue both work at night. Bill has every sixth night off
and Sue has every eighth night off. If they are both off tonight,
how many nights will it be before they are both off again at the
same time?
46. Two movie theaters, UAI and UAII, start their movies at 7:00 P.M.
The movie at UAI takes 75 minutes and the movie at UAII
takes 90 minutes. If the shows run continuously, when will
they again start at the same time?
47. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
We used a sieve of Eratosthenes in
Table 5.2 by arranging the first 100 numbers into 10 rows and
10 columns. Repeat the sieve process for the first 100 numbers
by arranging the numbers in the following patterns.
a. By 6:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
. . .
b. By 7:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
. . .
c. By 21:
1
2
3
4
5
6
. . .
As you are using these sieves, look for patterns. Describe some
of the patterns you notice. Do you think that any of these sieves
are better than the one shown in Table 5.2? Why or why not? 
48. Use the sieve in Problem 47a to make a conjecture about
primes and multiples of 6. 
49. Lucky Numbers
Set up a sieve similar to the one illustrated
here: 
Follow these directions: 
Step 1
Start counting with 1 each time. 
Step 2
Cross out every second number (shown as ). 
Step 3
The next uncrossed number is 3, so cross out every
3rd number that remains (shown as ). 
Step 4
The next uncrossed number is 7, so cross out every
7th number that remains (shown as —). 
Continue in the same fashion. The numbers that are not
crossed out are called lucky numbers. What are the lucky num-
bers less than 100? 
Level  3
50. Pairs of consecutive odd numbers that are primes are called
prime twins. For example, 3 and 5, 11 and 13, and 41 and 43
are prime twins. Can you find any others?
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

51. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Three consecutive odd numbers that
are primes are called prime triplets. It is easy to show that 
3, 5, and 7 are the only prime triplets. Can you explain why
this is true? 
52. HISTORICAL QUEST
In 1742 the mathematician Christ-
ian Goldbach observed that every even number (except 2)
seemed representable as the sum of two primes. Goldbach
could not prove this result, known today as Goldbach’s conjec-
ture, so he wrote to his friend, the world-famous mathematician
Leonhard Euler (see historical note on page 762). Euler was
unable to prove or disprove this conjecture, and it remains
unsolved to this day. Write the following numbers as the sum
of two primes (the first three are worked for you): 
4  2  2
6  3  3
8  5  3
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
40 
80 
100 
196
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Problem Solving 3   
55. In the text, we showed that 19 is not the largest prime by
considering 
M  2  3  5  7  11  13  17  19  1
Now, M is either prime or composite. If it is prime, then since
it is larger than 19, we have a prime larger than 19. If it is com-
posite, it has a prime divisor larger than 19. In either case, we
find a prime larger than 19. Show that this number M does not
always generate primes. That is, 
2  1  3, a prime 
2  3  1  7, a prime 
2  3  5  1  31, a prime 
Find an example in which the product of consecutive primes
plus 1 does not yield a prime. 
56. What is the smallest natural number that is divisible by the first
20 counting numbers?
To date, this conjecture has not been proved, but the Russian
mathematician L. Schnirelmann (1905–1938) proved that
every positive integer can be represented as the sum of not
more than 300,000 primes. That may seem like a long way 
off from Goldbach’s conjecture, but at least 300,000 is a finite
number! Later, another mathematician, I. M. Vinogradoff,
proved that there exists a number N such that all numbers
larger than N can be written as the sum of, at most, four primes. 
53. Let S  {1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 15, 30}, and define an operation 
meaning least common multiple. For example, 
5
10  10,
5
6  30,
10
30  30 
a. Is S closed for the operation of 
?
b. Is S associative for 
?
c. Is S commutative for 
?
54. Use an argument similar to the one in the text to show that 23
is not the largest prime.
 M 
 M 
 M 
 M 
 M 
 M 
 M 
57. Some primes are 1 more than a square. For example, 
5  22  1. Can you find any other primes p so that 
p  n2  1?
58. Some primes are 1 less than a square. For example, 
3  22  1. Can you find any other primes p so that 
p  n2  1?
59. HISTORICAL QUEST
The Pythagoreans studied numbers
to find certain mystical properties in them. Certain numbers
they studied were called perfect numbers. A perfect number is
a natural number that is equal to the sum of all its divisors that
are less than the number itself. A divisor that is less than the
number itself is called a proper divisor. The proper divisors of
6 are {1, 2, 3} and 
1  2  3  6
so 6 is a perfect number. It is not hard to show that 6 is the
smallest perfect number. On the other hand, 24 is not perfect,
since its proper divisors are {1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12}, which have
the sum 
1  2  3  4  6  8  12  36
The Pythagoreans discovered the first four perfect numbers.
Fourteen centuries later the fifth perfect number was
discovered. The 43rd perfect number is 
2N1 2N  1
where N is the largest prime listed in Table 5.3. It is known
that all even perfect numbers are of the form shown for the
43rd perfect number. Show that if N  5, the resulting number
is perfect.
60. HISTORICAL QUEST
The Pythagoreans studied numbers
that they called amicable or friendly. A pair of numbers is
friendly if each number is the sum of the proper divisors of
the other (a proper divisor includes the number 1, but not the
number itself). The Pythagoreans discovered that 220 and
284 are friendly. The proper divisors of 220 are {1, 2, 4, 5,
10, 11, 20, 22, 44, 55, 110}, and 
1  2  4  5  10  11  20  22  44  55  110  284
2
1
Also, the proper divisors of 284 are {1, 2, 4, 71, 142}, and 
1  2  4  71  142  220
The next pair of friendly numbers was found by Pierre de
Fermat (1601–1665): 17,296 and 18,416. In 1638 the French
mathematician René Descartes (1596–1650) found a third pair,
and the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler (1707–1783)
found more than 60 pairs. In 1866, a 16-year-old Italian
schoolboy, Nicolo Pagonini, found another relatively small
pair of friendly numbers that had been overlooked by the great
mathematicians. He found the pair of numbers 1,184 and
1,210. Show that 1,184 and 1,210 are friendly.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.3
Integers
197
5.3  Integers
Historically, an agricultural-type society would need only natural numbers, but what
about a subtraction such as
Certainly society would have a need for a number representing 
, so a new number,
called zero, was invented, so that 
(remember the definition of subtraction). If
this new number is annexed to the set of natural numbers, a set called the set of whole
numbers is formed:
  50, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . .6
This one annexation to the existing numbers satisfied society’s needs for several thousand
years.
However, as society evolved, the need for bookkeeping advanced, and eventually the
need to answer this: Can we annex new numbers to the set  so that it is possible to carry
out all subtractions? The numbers that need to be annexed are the opposites of the natu-
ral numbers. The opposite of 3, which is denoted by 
, is the number that when added
to 3 gives 0. If we add these opposites to the set  we have the following set:
  5. . . , 3, 2, 1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .6
This set is known as the set of integers. It is customary to refer to certain subsets of  as
follows: 
1. Positive integers:
51, 2, 3, 4, . . .6
2. Zero:
506
3. Negative integers:
51, 2, 3, . . .6
Now with this new enlarged set of numbers, are we able to carry out all possible ad-
ditions, subtractions, and multiplications? Before we answer this question, let’s review
the process by which we operate within the set of integers. It is assumed that you have
had an algebra course, so the following summary is intended only as a review.
You might recall that the process for describing the operations with integers requires
the notion of absolute value, which represents the distance of a number from the origin
when plotted on a number line. We give an algebraic definition.
23
5 5 5 1 0
5 2 5
5 2 5 5 ?
B.C. cartoon reprinted by permission of Johnny Hart and Creators Syndicate.
The absolute value of x, denoted by 
, is defined as
0 x 0 5 e
x,
if x $ 0
2x,
if x , 0
0 x 0
Absolute Value
This definition may be diffi-
cult for you to understand;
stop for a few moments to
make sure you understand
what it says.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Addition of Integers
If one (or both) of the integers is 0, then we use the identity property to write
, for all x. We could introduce the addition of nonzero integers in
terms of number lines, and we note that if the numbers we’re adding have the same sign,
the result is the same as the sum of the absolute values, except for a plus or a minus sign
(since their directions on a number line are the same). If we’re adding numbers with dif-
ferent signs, their directions are opposite, so the net result is the difference of the absolute
values with a sign to indicate final position. This is summarized by the following proce-
dure for adding integers.
x 1 0 5 0 1 x 5 x
198
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
To add integers x and y, look at the signs of x and y. 
Step 1
Check to see if at least one of the integers is 0; if so, then
x  0  0  x  x. 
Step 2
Check to see if the signs are the same. If so, then 
POSITIVE  POSITIVE
 POSITIVE
NEGATIVE  NEGATIVE  NEGATIVE
1442443
Sign part
Step 3
Check to see if the signs are different. If so, then 
POSITIVE  NEGATIVE  Sign of the larger
Subtract smaller absolute
NEGATIVE  POSITIVE  absolute value
value from larger one
14444244443
1444444442444444443
Sign part
Whole-number part
Notice that all integers consist of two parts: a sign part and a whole-number part.
Addition of Integers
14243
Whole-number part
e
e
You may feel you already
know how to add
integers, but this is one
of the fundamental
ideas of mathematics
STOP
START
ADD
ABSOLUTE
VALUES
ARE
SIGNS THE
SAME
?
STOP
Yes
AFFIX
COMMON
SIGN
RESULT
IS ZERO
STOP
ARE
NUMBERS
OPPOSITES
?
Yes
No
SUBTRACT
SMALLER
ABSOLUTE VALUE
FROM LARGER
ABSOLUTE VALUE
No
AFFIX SIGN
OF NUMBER
WITH LARGER
ABSOLUTE VALUE
Addition of nonzero integers 
Example
2
Add integers
Add the integers:
a. 41  13
b. 41  1132
c. 41  1132
d. 41  13 
Solution
a. POSITIVE  POSITIVE:
41  13  54
Add absolute values.
b. NEGATIVE  NEGATIVE:
41  1132  54
Add absolute values. 
c. POSITIVE  NEGATIVE:
41  1132  28
Subtract absolute values. 
d. NEGATIVE  POSITIVE:
41  13  28
Subtract absolute values.
Example
1
Find absolute value
Find the absolute value of each number:
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a. ƒ5ƒ  5, since 5  0 
b. ƒ5ƒ  5, since 5  0 and 
 5 
1252
021232 0
0250
050
c.
 ƒ3ƒ  3, since 3  0
021232 0
0x0 1 0y0
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.3
Integers
199
When using a calculator, you must distinguish between a negative sign, as in 5,
and a subtraction sign, as in 8  5. For entering negative numbers into a calcula-
tor, you’ll find a key marked
or
or
These keys change the sign of a number. For example, 5  (6) is entered as
or
ENTER
6
()

5


6

5
()
CHS

COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
Example
3
Calculator addition
Indicate the sequence of keys to enter 
into a calculator.
Solution
or
c
c
Change sign key
Change sign key
ENTER
5
()

8
()


5


8
1282 1 1252
Notice that a calculator has separate keys for subtraction 
and opposite 
or 
. The latter keys change the sign of a number to the opposite of its present sign.
For example, 
would be entered as 
or
Because the calculator assumes that all numbers entered are positive, a negative number
is obtained by taking the opposite of a positive.
Multiplication of Integers
For whole numbers, multiplication is defined as repeated addition, since we say that 5  4
means 
4  4  4  4  4
14444244443
5 addends
However, we cannot do this for the integers, since (5)  4 or 
4  4  4      4
1444442444443
5 addends does not make sense.
Even though you may remember how to multiply integers, we consider four patterns.
POSITIVE  POSITIVE We know how to multiply positive numbers since these are natural
numbers. The product of two positive numbers is a positive number.
POSITIVE  NEGATIVE Consider, for example, 3  142. We look at the pattern:
3  4  12 
3  3  9 
3  2  6 
3  1  3 
3  0  0 
What comes next? Answer this question before reading further.
ENTER
2
()

5


2

5
5 2 1222
()


      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3  112  3
3  122  6
3  132  9
3  142  12
Do you know how to continue? Try building a few more such patterns using different
numbers. What did you discover about the product of a positive number and a nega-
tive number? The product of a positive number and a negative number is a negative
number.
NEGATIVE  POSITIVE Since we now know how to multiply a positive by a negative, and
if we assume the commutative property holds, the result here must be the same for a neg-
ative times a positive. The product of a negative number and a positive number is a nega-
tive number. 
NEGATIVE  NEGATIVE Consider the example 3  142. Let’s build another pattern. 
3  4  12 
3  3  9 
3  2  6
3  1  3
3  0  0 
What comes next? Answer this question before reading further. 
3  112  3 
3  122  6 
3  132  9 
3  142  12
Thus, as the pattern indicates: The product of two negative numbers is a positive number.
We summarize our discussion in the following box. 
200
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
To multiply integers x and y, look at the signs of x and y.
Step 1
Check to see if at least one of the integers is 0; if so, then 
.
Step 2
POSITIVE  POSITIVE
 POSITIVE
POSITIVE  NEGATIVE  NEGATIVE
NEGATIVE  POSITIVE  NEGATIVE
NEGATIVE  NEGATIVE  POSITIVE
14243
Sign part
0 x 0  3  0 y 0
x # 0 5 0 # x 5 0
Multiplication of Integers
d
Take a few moments
with this idea and make
sure you know how to
multiply integers. Can
you explain this idea to
someone else?
START
IS
ONE OF
THE NUMBERS
ZERO?
STOP
Yes
PRODUCT
IS ZERO
AFFIX
POSITIVE
SIGN
STOP
ARE
SIGNS OF
NUMBERS THE
SAME
?
Yes
No
AFFIX
NEGATIVE
SIGN
STOP
No
MULTIPLY
ABSOLUTE
VALUE
Multiplication of integers
Example
4
Multiply integers
Multiply the given integers.
a. 1412 1132
b. 1412 1132
c. 1412 1132
d. 1412 1132
Solution
a. POSITIVE  POSITIVE:
14121132  533
Positive
b. NEGATIVE  NEGATIVE:
14121132  533
Positive
c. POSITIVE  NEGATIVE:
14121132  533
Negative
d. NEGATIVE  POSITIVE:
14121132  533
Negative
14243
Whole-number part
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.3
Integers
201
To subtract, add the opposite (of the number being subtracted). In symbols,
x 2 y 5 x 1 12y2
Subtraction of Integers
This is saying that we do
not subtract integers,
but rather we change
subtraction problems to
addition by adding the
opposite.
Example
5
Subtract integers
Subtract the given integers.
a. 41  13
b. 41  1132
c. 41  13
d. 41  1132
Solution
a. POSITIVE  POSITIVE:
41  13  41  1132  28
c
c
123
Subtraction
Addition c
Opposite
144424443
Complete the addition.
b. POSITIVE  NEGATIVE:
41  1132  41  13  54 
c. NEGATIVE  POSITIVE:
41  13  41  1132  54 
d. NEGATIVE  NEGATIVE:
41  1132  41  13  28
Division of Integers
Let’s take an overview of what has been done in this chapter. We began with the natural
numbers, which are closed for addition and multiplication. Next, we defined subtraction
and created a situation where it was impossible to subtract some numbers from others.
After looking at the prime numbers and factorization, we then “created” another set
(called the integers) that includes not only the natural numbers, but also zero and the
opposite of each of its members.
Since the subtraction of integers is defined in terms of addition, we can easily show
that the integers are closed for subtraction. You are asked to do this in Problem 57. We
now will define division and then ask, “Is the set of integers closed for division?”
Subtraction of Integers
What about subtracting negative numbers? Negative already indicates “going back.” Does
subtraction of a negative indicate “going ahead?” Consider the following pattern:
4  4  0 
4  3  1 
4  2  2 
4  1  3 
4  0  4 
Stop and look for patterns:
4  112  5 
4  122  6 
4  132  7
Guided by these results, we make the following procedure for subtraction of integers.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

202
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
To divide integers x and y, look at the signs of x and y.
Step 1
for all numbers x
is not permitted.
Step 2
If 
,
POSITIVE 
 POSITIVE
 POSITIVE
POSITIVE 
 NEGATIVE  NEGATIVE
NEGATIVE 
 POSITIVE  NEGATIVE
NEGATIVE 
 NEGATIVE  POSITIVE
14243
Sign part
y 2 0
x 4 0
0 4 x 5 0
Division of Integers
d
14243
Whole-number part
x
y
NEVER DIVIDE BY 0.
Example
6
Divide integers
Divide the given integers.
a. 12 
 6
b. 18 
 2
c. 10 
 (2)
d. 65 
 (13) 
Solution
a. POSITIVE 
 POSITIVE:
 2
Positive
b. NEGATIVE 
 POSITIVE:
 9 Negative
c. POSITIVE 
 NEGATIVE:
 5
Negative
d. NEGATIVE 
 NEGATIVE:
 5
Positive
265
213
10
22
218
2
12
6
If a and b are integers, where 
, then division 
is
written as and is defined in terms of multiplication.
means
a 5 bz
a
b 5 z
a
b
a 4 b
b 2 0
Division
Since division is defined in terms of multiplication, the rules for dividing integers are
identical to those for multiplication. We summarize the procedure for 
, but first we
must make sure 
, because division by zero is not defined.
y 2 0
x 4 y
This completes our defini-
tions of the fundamental
operations. Can you
define multiplication,
subtraction, and 
division?
Division is defined as the opposite operation of multiplication.
Notice that for , we require 
. Why do we not allow division by zero? We con-
sider two possibilities.
1. Division of a nonzero number by zero:
or
What does this mean? Is there such a number x so that this makes sense? We see that
any number x would have to be such that 
. But 
for all x, and since
, we see that such a situation is impossible. That is, 
does not exist.
a 4 0
a 2 0
0 # x 5 0
a 5 0 # x
a
0 5 x
a 4 0
b 2 0
a
b
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2. Division of zero by zero:
or
What does this mean? Is there such a number x? We see that any x makes this true,
since 
for all x. But this leads to certain absurdities, for example:
If
, then this checks since 
; also
if
, then this checks since 
.
But since both 2 and 5 are equal to the same number, we would conclude that 
. This
is absurd, so we say that division of zero by zero is excluded (or that it is indeterminate).
Is the set of integers closed for division? Certainly we can find many examples in which
an integer divided by an integer is an integer. Does this mean that the set of integers is closed?
What about 
or 
? These numbers do not exist in the set of integers; thus, the set
is not closed for division. Now, as long as society has no need for such division problems,
the question of inventing new numbers will not arise. However, as the need to divide one into
two or more parts arises, some new numbers will have to be invented so that the set will be
closed for division. We’ll do this in the next section. The problem with inventing such new
numbers is that it must be done in such a way that the properties of the existing numbers are
left unchanged. That is, closure for addition, subtraction, and multiplication must be retained.
4 4 5
1 4 2
2 5 5
0 # 5 5 0
0
0 5 5
0 # 2 5 0
0
0 5 2
0 # x 5 0
0
0 5 x
0 4 0
Section 5.3
Integers
203
Abraham Lincoln used a biblical 
reference (Mark 3:25) to initiate his 
campaign in 1858.  He said, "A 
house divided against itself cannot 
stand."  I offer a corollary to 
Lincoln's statement: "A house 
divided by itself is one (provided, of 
course, that the house is not zero)."
Historical
Srinivasa Ramanujan (1887–1920)
Ramanujan, who lived only 33 years, was a mathematical prodigy of great originality. He was largely
self-taught, but was “discovered” in 1913 by the eminent British mathematician G. H. Hardy. Hardy
brought Ramanujan to Cambridge, and in 1918 Ramanujan became the first Indian to become a 
Fellow of the Royal Society. An often-told story about Hardy and Ramanujan is that when Hardy 
visited Ramanujan in the hospital, he came in a taxi bearing the number 1729. He asked Ramanujan if
there was anything interesting about this number. Without hesitation, Ramanujan said there was: It is
the smallest positive integer that can be represented in two different ways as a sum of two cubes:
1,729 5 13 1 123 5 93 1 103
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain how to add integers. 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain how to subtract integers. 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain how to multiply integers. 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain how to divide integers. 
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the difference between 
0  5 and 5  0.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Why is division by 0 not defined? 
Evaluate each absolute value expression in Problems 7–8. 
7. a. ƒ30ƒ
b. ƒ30ƒ
c. ƒ30ƒ
d. ƒ30ƒ  ƒ30ƒ
8. a. ƒ18ƒ
b. ƒ 18ƒ
c. ƒ1182ƒ
d. ƒ18ƒ  ƒ18ƒ
Simplify the expressions in Problems 9–37. 
9. a. 5  3
b. 5  3
10. a. 4  172
b. 2  142
11. a. 7  3
b. 9  5
12. a. 10  4
b. 8  1102
13. a. 15  8
b. ƒ14  2ƒ
14. a. ƒ8  1102ƒ
b. 38  1142
15. a. 10  7
b. 7  10
16. a. 6  142
b. 0  1152
17. a. 3162
b. 514)
18. a.
b.
19. a. 14152
b. 14(52
20. a. 518  122
b. [518)]  12
26
23
24
22
Problem Set 5.3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

21. a.
b.
22. a.
b. (6)
23. a.
b. (1)3
24. a. 1124
b.
25. a. 7182
b. 51152
26. a. 5162
b.
27. a. 22
b. 1222
28. a. 13)2
b. 32
29. a. 4  8
b. 31  1162
30. a. 14  21
b. 9  16  1112
31. a. 162  1122
b. 12  [142  132]
32. a. 46  1462
b. ƒ7  132ƒ
33. a. ƒ5  1102ƒ
b. ƒ5  152ƒ
34. a. 7  1182
b. 62  11122
35. a. ƒ8ƒ  18)
b. 9  14  52
36. a. 123  142
b. 7  16  42
37. a. 6  162
b. 18  5
Level 2
Simplify the expressions in Problems 38–50.
38. a. 8  7  16
b. 14  1102  8  11
39. a. 6  182  5
b. 2(3)  112(62
40. a. 5172  192
b. 2(3)  182
41. a. 6  122
b. 5  132
42. a. 15  162
b. 4  ƒ6  8ƒ
43. a.
 5  172
b.
 4  182
44. a. 3  [162  4]
b. 5  119)  ƒ15ƒ
45. a. ƒ3ƒ  [122]
b. 15  172
46. a. [54  192]  3
b. 54  [192  3]
47. a. [48  162]  122
b. 48  [162  122]
48. a. 15  132  ƒ4  11ƒ
b. 12  172  10  14
49. a. 5122  132142  6172
b. 8132  6142  2182
50. a. 1221321421521621721821921102
b. 1  122  3  142  5  162  7  182  9  1102
215
25
232
28
242
3
10 A28
22B
2528
24
14
22
12
24
263
29
212
4
204
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Level 3
51. Perform the indicated operations. Let k be a natural number. 
a. 16
b. 167
c. 12007
d. 12k
e. 12k1
f. 12k1
52. Perform the indicated operations. Let k be a natural number. 
a. 22
b. 23
c. 24
d. 25
e. Is 22k1 positive or negative?
53. Perform the indicated operations. Let k be a natural number. 
a. 1126
b. 11267
c. 1122007
d. 1122k
e. 1122k1
f. 1122k1
54. Perform the indicated operations. Let k be a natural number.
a. 1222
b. 1223
c. 1224
d. 1225
e. Is 1222k1 positive or negative?
55. a. State the commutative property.
b. Is  commutative for addition? Give reasons.
c. Is  commutative for subtraction? Give reasons.
d. Is  commutative for multiplication? Give reasons.
e. Is  commutative for division? Give reasons.
56. a. State the associative property.
b. Is  associative for addition? Give reasons.
c. Is  associative for subtraction? Give reasons.
d. Is  associative for multiplication? Give reasons.
e. Is  associative for division? Give reasons.
57. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Show that the set  is closed for
subtraction. 
Problem Solving 3   
58. Find a finite subset of  that is closed for multiplication. 
59. Multiply 1,234,567  9,999,999 
a. using a calculator 
b. using patterns
60. Four Fours
B.C. apparently has a mental block against
fours, as we can see from the cartoon. 
See if you can handle fours by writing the numbers from
1 to 10 using four 4s, operation symbols, or possibly grouping
symbols for each. Here are the first three completed for you: 
4 1 4 1 4
4
5 3
4
4 1 4
4 5 2
4
4 1 4 2 4 5 1
B.C. cartoon reprinted by permission of Johnny
Hart and Creators Syndicate. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.4
Rational Numbers
205
5.4  Rational Numbers
Historically, the need for a closed set for division came before the need for closure for
subtraction. We need to find some number k so that
As we saw in Section 4.1, the ancient Egyptians limited their fractions by requiring the
numerators to be 1. The Romans avoided fractions by the use of subunits; feet were
divided into inches and pounds into ounces, and a twelfth part of the Roman unit was
called an uncia.
However, people soon felt the practical need to obtain greater accuracy in measure-
ment and the theoretical need to close the number system with respect to the operation of
division. In the set  of integers, some divisions are possible:
,
, 
However, certain others are not:
,
, 
Just as we extended the set of natural numbers by creating the concept of opposites,
we can extend the set of integers. That is, the number 
is defined to be that number
obtained when 5 is divided by 12. This new set, consisting of the integers as well as the
quotients of integers, is called the set of rational numbers.
5
12
5
12, c
216
5
1
2
216
28 , c
24
2
10
22
1 4 2 5 k
Historical
The symbol “
” was adopted by
John Wallis (1616–1703) and was
used in Great Britain and in the
United States [but not on the
European continent, where the
colon (:) was used]. In 1923, the
National Committee on Mathe-
matical Requirements stated:
“Since neither 
 nor : as signs of
division play any part in business
life, it seems proper to consider
only the needs of algebra, and to
make more use of the fractional
form and (where the meaning is
clear) of the symbol ‘ / ’ and to
drop the symbol 
 in writing
algebraic expressions.”
—From Report of the National Committee
on Mathematical Requirements under the
auspices of the Mathematical Association 
of America, Inc. (1923), p. 81.
NOTE
Historical
The Arabic word for fraction is 
al-kasr and is derived from the
Latin word fractus meaning “to
break.” The English word fraction
was first used by Chaucer in 1321
and the fraction bar was used in
1556 by Tartaglia, who said, “We
write the numerator above a little
bar and the denominator below it.”
NOTE
The set of rational numbers, denoted by , is the set of
all numbers of the form
where a and b are integers, and 
.
b 2 0
a
b
Rational Number
Notice that a rational number has fractional form. In arithmetic you learned that if a num-
ber is written in the form it means 
and that a is called the numerator and b the
denominator. Also, if a and b are both positive, is called
a proper fraction if 
;
an improper fraction if 
; and
a whole number if b divides evenly into a.
It is assumed that you know how to perform the basic operations with fractions, but we
will spend the next few pages reviewing those operations.
Fundamental Property
If the greatest common factor of the numerator and denominator of a given fraction is 1,
then we say the fraction is in lowest terms or reduced. If the greatest common factor is
not 1, then divide both the numerator and denominator by this greatest common factor
using the fundamental property of fractions.
a . b
a , b
a
b
a 4 b
a
b
PEOPLE
HAVE
3 OUT OF 2
WITH
TROUBLE
FRACTIONS
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

That is, given some fraction that you wish to simplify:
1. Find the g.c.f. of the numerator and denominator (this is x in the fundamental property).
2. Use the fundamental property to simplify the fraction.
206
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
If is any rational number and x is any nonzero integer, then
a  x
b  x 5 x  a
x  b 5 a
b
a
b
Fundamental Property of Fractions
The fundamental property
works only for products
and NOT for sums.
Example
1
Reduce fractions
Reduce the given fractions: a.
b.
Solution
a. First, find the greatest common factor: 24  23  31  50
30  21  31  51
g.c.f.  21  31  50  6
Next, use the fundamental property to simplify the fraction. Thus, 
c
g.c.f.
b.
300  22  31  52
144  24  32  50
g.c.f.  22  31  50  12
Note that 
is reduced because the g.c.f. of the numerator and denominator is 1. Notice
that a reduced fraction may be an improper fraction.
25
12
300
144 5
12  52
12  22  3 5
52
22  3 5 25
12
24
30 5 6  22
6  5 5 22
5 5 4
5
300
144
24
30
If and are rational numbers, then 
ADDITION
SUBTRACTION
MULTIPLICATION
DIVISION
a
b 4 c
d 5 ad
bc 1c 2 02
a
b 	 c
d  ac
bd
a
b  c
d  ad
bd  bc
bd  ad  bc
bd
a
b  c
d  ad
bd  bc
bd  ad  bc
bd
c
d
a
b
Operations with Rational Numbers
In this book, we agree to
leave all fractional
answers in reduced form. 
Operations with Rationals
Now that we have defined rational numbers, we need to review how to add, subtract, multi-
ply, and divide them. The procedure for each of these operations is given in algebraic form.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Pólya’s 
Method
Section 5.4
Rational Numbers
207
Example
2
Multiply rationals
Multiply the given rational numbers.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Solution
a.
 
 
c
This step is often done in your head
b.
c. When multiplying a whole number and a fraction, write the whole number as a fraction,
and then multiply: 
d. When multiplying mixed numbers, write the mixed numbers as improper fractions,
and then multiply: 
e. For most complicated fractions, the best procedure is to reduce before multiplying
rather than after, as illustrated here. 
3
4 3 2
3 5 1 3 1
2 3 1 5 1
2
31
2 3 23
5
 5 7
2 3 13
5 5 91
10
25 3 22
3 5 25
1 3 22
3 5 10
3
2
3 3 24
7 5 28
21
2
15
1 3 2
3 3 5
1
3 3 2
5
3
4 3 2
3
31
2 3 23
5
25 3 22
3
2
3 3 24
7
1
3 3 2
5
You will note that both addition and subtraction require that we first obtain common
denominators. That process requires a multiplication of fractions, so we begin with an
example reviewing multiplication of rational numbers.
1
1
2
1
Example
3
Division of rational numbers
Justify the rule for division of rational numbers.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Given 
where 
. Note that we don’t say 
and
, because the definition of rational number excludes these possibilities, but does
not exclude 
, so this is the condition that must be stated. The example asks us to
show where the rule for division as stated in the previous box comes from. Let
We are looking for the value of 
. To understand what we are doing here, look at
a more familiar problem:
means
	
What do we put into the box to get the answer? Do it in two steps. First multiply by to
obtain 1, and then multiply by to obtain the result that makes the equation true:
Thus, 
. This seems to suggest that we “invert” the fraction we are dividing 
by, and then multiply.
2
3 4 4
5 5 5
4 3 2
3
4
5 3  5
4 3 2
3
  5 2
3
2
3
5
4
4
5
 2
3
4
5
2
3
 
  4
5 
a
b 4 c
d 5
c 5 0
d 2 0
b 2 0
c 2 0
a
b 4 c
d
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Devise a Plan. We will use the definition of division, and then the fundamental property
of fractions to multiply the numerator and denominator by the same number.
Carry Out the Plan.
Write the division using fractional notation.
Multiply numerator and denominator by ; fundamental property
of fractions
Multiplication of the “big” fractions
Reduce the fraction 
.
Look Back. The result here, 
, checks with the entry in the box.
a
b 
 c
d  ad
bc
  ad
bc
cd
dc
 
  ad
bc
 1
 
 ad
bc
  cd
dc  
d
c
 
 a
b 
 c
d 	
 d
c 
 d
c
a
b 
 c
d 
 a
b 
 c
d
208
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Example
4
Divide rational numbers
Divide the given rational numbers.
a.
b.
Solution
a.
b. 4
3 4 8
9 5 4
3 3 9
8 5 1 3 3
1 3 2 5 3
2
23
4 4 24
7 5 23
4 3 7
24 5 221
216 5 21
16
4
3 4 8
9
23
4 4 24
7
1
3
1
2
Example
5
Simplify rational expressions
Simplify the given expressions.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
a. The denominators are 24 and 30, so we find the l.c.m. of these numbers.
24  23  31  50
30  21  31  51
l.c.m.  23  31  51  120
_________________________
53
120
1 7
30 5 7
30  4
4 5 28
120
5
24 5 5
24  5
5 5 25
120
21
15 2  27
50
7
18 2 25
24
19
300 1  55
144 1  25
108
5
24 1  7
30
This example is
intentionally long. Stick
with it because it was
designed to illustrate
many of the procedures
of this section.
We are simply multiplying each fraction
by the identity 1, since and are both
equal to 1.
The answer is in reduced form, since 
53 and 120 are relatively prime.
4
4
5
5
To carry out addition or subtraction of fractions, you must find the least common
denominator. The least common denominator is the same as the least common multiple.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b. If the numbers are complicated, it is easier to work in factored form. In Section 5.2
we found the l.c.m. of 300, 144, and 108 to be 24  33  52. Thus,
____________________________________
Adding:
Now 7,309 is not divisible by 2, 3, or 5; thus, 7,309 and 24  33  52 are relatively
prime, and the solution is complete: 
c.
18  21  32
24  23  31
l.c.m.  23  32  72
_____________________
d.
15  31  51
24  21  52
l.c.m.  21  31  52  150
________________________
The set  is closed for the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
nonzero division. As an example, we will show that the rationals are closed for addition.
We need to show that, given any two elements of , their sum is also an element of .
Suppose 
and
are any two rational numbers. By definition of addition, 
x
y 1 w
z 5 xz 1 wy
yz
w
z
x
y
91
150
227
50 5 1227
50
 3
3 5 281
150
21
15 5      21
15   10
10 5 210
150
43
72
225
24 5 1 5
24  3
3 5 15
72
7
18 5       7
18  4
4 5 28
72
7,309
24  33  52or7,309
10,800

684
24  33  52   
4,125
24  33  52 
2,500
24  33  52 
7,309
24  33  52
19  22  32
24  33  52  3  53  11
24  33  52 
22  54
24  33  52
1 25
108 5
52
22  33  22   52
22  52 5
22  54
24  33  52
 55
144 5 5  11
24  32  3  52
3  52 5 3  53  11
24  33  52
 19
300 5
19
22  3  52  22  32
22  32 5  19  22  32
24  33  52
Section 5.4
Rational Numbers
209
This is the step during which we
multiply each fraction by 1.
Notice with subtraction it is usually
easier to add the opposite.
Historical
Amalie (Emmy) Noether
(1882–1935)
Noether has been described as the
greatest female mathematician.
She chose a career in mathemat-
ics during a time when it was very
unusual for a woman to seek a
higher education. In fact, when
she attended the University of
Erlangen, the Academic Senate
declared that female students
would “overthrow all academic
order” and a historian of the day
wrote that talk of “surrendering
our university to the invasion of
women 
is a shameful display
of moral weakness.” Emmy
Noether is famous for her work in
algebra, which laid a cornerstone
for Einstein’s work in general
relativity. But in addition to her
theoretical work, she was a
teacher and a caring person.
c
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We now need to show that 
is a rational number. Since x and w are integers and y and z
are nonzero integers, we know from closure of the integers for multiplication that xz and wy
are also integers. Since the set of integers is closed for addition, we know that xz  wy is
also an integer. This means that, since yz is a nonzero integer, 
is a rational number. Thus, the rational numbers are closed for addition.
xz  wy
yz
xz  wy
yz
210
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does it mean for a fraction to
be reduced? Describe a process for reducing a fraction. 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the process for multiplying
fractions. 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the process for dividing
fractions. 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the process for adding
fractions. 
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Use algebra to show where the
formula for subtracting fractions comes from. 
Completely reduce the fractions in Problems 6–17. 
6. a.
b.
7. a.
b.
8. a.
b.
9. a.
b.
10. a.
b.
11. a.
b.
12. a.
b.
13. a.
b.
14. a.
b.
15. a.
b.
16. a.
b.
17. a.
b.
Perform the indicated operations in Problems 18–37. (Recall that
negative exponents are sometimes used to denote fractions. For
example, 
) 
18. a.
b.
19. a.
b. 21  31
20. a. 3  31
b. 2  21
21. a.
b.
22. a.
b.
23. a.
b.
24. a.
b.
25. a. 31  51
b. 21  51
26. a.
b. 21  31  51
27. a.
b. 21
8 3
2
25
2
3 3 5
7
1
2 1 1
3 1 1
5
6 3 5
9
2
3 3 9
22
9 4 6
7
5
3 4 7
12
6
7 4 23
7
23
5 2 26
9
4
7 2 25
9
7
9 2 2
3
212
35  2 8
15
25
7  1  4
3
2
3 1  7
9
721.
1
7
47,957
54,808
2,431
3,003
5,670
12,150
240
672
75
500
78
455
2,500
10,000
150
1,000
140
420
50
400
70
105
18
30
16
24
42
14
72
15
92
20
38
19
14
7
6
12
4
12
3
12
2
10
6
9
3
9
28. a.
b.
29. a. 7  71
b. 14  141
30. a. 8  81
b. 12  121
31. a. 6  61
b. 5  51
32. a.
b.
33. a.
b.
34. a.
b.
35. a.
b.

36. a.
b.

37. a. 5  1522
b. 3  1322
Level 2
38. a.
b.
39. a.
b.
40. a.
b.
41. a.
b.
42. a. 3  31  32
b. 51  52  5
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
Level 3
49. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Show that the set  of rationals is
closed for subtraction. 
50. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Show that the set  of rationals is
closed for nonzero division. 
51. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Is the set  of integers closed for addi-
tion, subtraction, multiplication, and nonzero division? Explain. 
15
484 2
5
234 1 27
200
143
210 1 15
124 1
11
1,085
14
90 1 7
60 2 11
50
7
60 2 19
90 1 21
51
11
108 2
7
144 1 23
300
11
144 1 17
300 1
7
108
23
4 a119
200 1 81
200b
23
4   119
200 1 23
4   81
200
223
5 1  41
8 2 7 1
10
22
15 1  3
5 1 7
12
6 1 221
1
2 1 1
3
221 1 322
221 1 321
1
3 2 21
4
7
8 2 3
16
1
2 1 22
3
5
6 2 23
5
213
16
27
24
2
3 2 7
12
1
27
1
28
28
9 2 4
27
4
5A17
95 1 78
95B
4
5A17
95B 1 4
5A78
95B
2
23  22
15
A3
7  3
5B 4 1
2
25
18  9
25
1
10  22
5
105
211 4 215
33
4
9 4 2
3
Problem Set 5.4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.5
Irrational Numbers
211
52. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Is , the set of rationals, associative
for addition? Explain.
53. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Is , the set of rationals,
commutative for addition? Explain. 
54. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Is , the set of rationals, associative
and/or commutative for multiplication? Explain. 
Problem Solving 3   
A unit fraction (a fraction with a numerator of 1) is sometimes
called an Egyptian fraction. In Section 4.1, we said that the
Egyptians expressed their fractions as a sum of distinct (different)
unit fractions. How might the Egyptians have written the fractions
in Problems 55–58?
55.
56.
57.
58.
7
17
67
120
47
60
3
4
59. HISTORICAL QUEST
Recall that the Egyptians used only
unit fractions to represent numbers. Is the answer given on the
papyrus correct? 
60. The sum and difference of the same two squares may be
primes, as in this example: 
9  4  5
and
9  4  13 
Can the sum and difference of the same two primes be
squares? Can you find more than one example?
1
194
A quantity and its two-thirds and its half and its
one-seventh together make 33. Find the quantity.
Answer: 14  +
+
+
+
+
+
+
1
4
1
56
1
97
1
388
1
679
1
776
5.5  Irrational Numbers
We have been considering numbers as they relate to practical problems. However, num-
bers can be appreciated for their beauty and interrelationships. The Pythagoreans were a
Hellenic group of astronomers, musicians, mathematicians, and philosophers who be-
lieved that all things are essentially numeric. To our knowledge, they were among the first
to investigate numbers for their own sake.
Pythagorean Theorem
Much of the Pythagoreans’ lifestyle was embodied in their beliefs about numbers. They
considered the number 1 the essence of reason; the number 2 was identified with opinion;
and 4 was associated with justice because it is the first number that is the product of equals
(the first perfect squared number, other than 1). Of the numbers greater than 1, odd num-
bers were masculine and even numbers were feminine; thus, 5 represented marriage, since
it was the union of the first masculine and feminine numbers 2  3  5 .
The Pythagoreans were also interested in special types of numbers that had mystical
meanings: perfect numbers, friendly numbers, deficient numbers, abundant numbers,
prime numbers, triangular numbers, square numbers, and pentagonal numbers. Other than
the prime numbers we have already considered, the perfect square numbers are probably
the most interesting. They are called perfect squares because they can be arranged into
squares (see Figure 5.4). They are found by squaring the natural numbers.
2
1
1
4
9
16
25
FIGURE 5.4 Square numbers 1, 4, 9, 16, and 25. 
Other square numbers (not pictured) are 36, 49, 64, 81, 100, 121, 144, 169, c
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
The Pythagoreans discovered the famous property of square numbers that today
bears Pythagoras’ name. They found that if they constructed any right triangle and then
constructed squares on each of the legs of the triangle, the area of the larger square was
equal to the sum of the areas of the smaller squares (see Figure 5.5).
FIGURE 5.5 Relationships of sides of right triangles
5
12
13
8
17
15
3
4
5
Today we state the Pythagorean theorem algebraically by saying that, if a and b are
the lengths of the legs (or sides) of a right triangle and c is the length of the hypotenuse
(the longest side), then the square of the length of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of
the squares of the lengths of the other two sides.
For a right triangle ABC, with sides of length a, b, and hypotenuse c,
Also, if 
for a triangle with sides a, b, and c, then 
ABC is a right triangle.
^
a2 1 b2 5 c2
A
C
B
b
c
a
Pythagorean Theorem
The following result, called the Pythagorean theorem,
is one of the most famous (and important) results in
all of mathematics.
B.C. cartoon reprinted by permission of
Johnny Hart and Creators Syndicate.
Historical
Pythagoras of Samos 
(569 B.C.–475 B.C.)
Very little is known about
Pythagoras, but he is an extremely
important person in the history 
of mathematics. He founded a
school (see the Prologue) in the
6th century B.C. and his followers
were called Pythagoreans. They
had their own philosophy, religion,
and way of life. This secret society
investigated music, astronomy,
geometry, and number properties.
Because of their strict secrecy,
much of what we know about the
Pythagoreans is legend, and it is
difficult to tell just what work can
be attributed to Pythagoras him-
self. We also know that it was
considered impious for a member
of the Pythagorean Society to
claim any discovery for himself.
Instead, each new idea was attrib-
uted to their founder, Pythagoras.
Every evening each member of the
Pythagorean Society had to reflect
on three questions:
1. What good have I done today?
2. What have I falled at today?
3. What have I not done today
that I should have done?
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.5
Irrational Numbers
213
Square Roots
The Pythagoreans were overjoyed with this discovery, but it led to a revolutionary idea in
mathematics—one that caused the Pythagoreans many problems.
Legend tells us that one day while the Pythagoreans were at sea, one of their group
came up with the following argument. Suppose each leg of a right triangle is 1, then
a2  b2  c2
12  12  c2
2  c2
If we denote the number whose square is 2 by 
, we have 
 c. The symbol
is read “square root of two.” This means that 
is that number such that, if multi-
plied by itself, is exactly equal to 2; that is,

 2
22
22
22
22
22
22
Historical
The Egyptians and the Chinese
knew of the Pythagorean theorem
before the Pythagoreans (but they
didn’t call it the Pythagorean theo-
rem, of course). An early example
is shown above. It is attributed to
Chou Pei, who was probably a con-
temporary of Pythagoras. Below we
have shown a copy from a Muslem
manuscript, written in 1258, which
shows the Pythagorean theorem.
NOTE
Illustrations courtesy of the British Library, London.
Example
1
Use the definition of square root
Use the definition of square root to find the indicated products.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
Solution
a. 3
b. 4
c. 5
d. 15
e. 16
f. 144
g. 200
2200  2200
2144  2144
216  216
215  215
25  25
24  24
23  23
What is 
? The defini-
tion says that it is the
number with the property 
that 
 3. 
2323
23
Some square roots are rational. For example,
and we also know
, so it seems that 
. But wait! We also know 
, so isn’t
it just as reasonable to say 
? Mathematicians have agreed that the square root 
symbol may be used only to denote positive numbers, so that 
and NOT 
.
What about square roots of numbers that are not perfect squares? Is 
, for exam-
ple, a rational number? Remember, if 
, where 
is some fraction so that
a
b # a
b 5 2
a/b
"2 5 a/b
22
22
"4 5 2
"4 5 22
122 3 1222 5 4
"4 5 2
2 3 2 5 4
"4 3 "4 5 4
The square root of a nonnegative number n is a number
so that its square is equal to n. In symbols, the positive
square root of n, denoted by 
, is defined as that
number for which
"n "n 5 n
"n
Square Root
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

214
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Historical
The word root is radix in Latin, and
it was represented by r. This led to
r, then to 
, and finally to 
.
Students often say work with radi-
cals is difficult. However, in the
16th century, there were four sym-
bols for indicating roots: the letters
R and O (both lowercase and capi-
tal), 
, and the rational exponent.
To complicate matters, these sym-
bols were used not only for roots,
but also for unknown quantities as
well. Also, the radical signs for
cube and fourth roots had quite
different shapes, and by the close
of the 16th century there were 25
or more symbols for radicals.
"
"    
"
NOTE
then it is rational. The Pythagoreans were among the first to investigate this question.
Now remember that, for the Pythagoreans, mathematics and religion were one; they as-
serted that all natural phenomena could be expressed by whole numbers or ratios 
of whole numbers. Thus, they believed that 
must be some whole number or fraction
(ratio of two whole numbers). Suppose we try to find such a rational number:
We are “getting closer” to 2, but we are still not quite there, so we really get down to busi-
ness and use a calculator:
Display:
1.414213562
If you square this number, do you obtain 2? Notice that the last digit of this multiplica-
tion will be 4; what should it be if it were the square root of 2? Even if we use a computer
to find the following possibility for 
, we see that its square is still not 2:
1.4142135623730950488016887242096980785696718753769480731766797379907324784
Can you give a brief argument showing why that can’t be 
? Project 5.9 asks for a
proof that 
is not rational. Such a number is called an irrational number. The set of
irrational numbers is the set of numbers whose decimal representations do not termi-
nate, nor do they repeat.
It can be shown that not only 
is irrational, but also 
, 
, 
, 
, 
,
; in fact, the square root of any whole number that is not a perfect square is irra-
tional. Also the cube root of any whole number that is not a perfect cube, and so on, is
an irrational number. The number , which is the ratio of the circumference of any
circle to its diameter, is also not rational. The number 
cannot be written in exact
decimal form (which is why we use the symbol “ ”), but if you press the 
key on
your calculator, you will see the approximation 3.141592654. In everyday work, you
will use irrational numbers when finding the circumference and area of a circle.
Another commonly used irrational number is the number e, which is defined in
Chapter 11, and is related to natural growth or decay. Like , the number e cannot be
written in exact decimal form, but if you press 
keys on your calculator, you will see
the approximation 2.718281828. 
1
ex
p
p
p
p
p
210
28
27
26
25
23
22
22
22
22
2
7
5 3 7
5 5 49
25 5 1.96 or, try again: 707
500 3 707
500 5 499,849
250,000 5 1.999396
"2
One of the most famous irrational 
numbers is π.  You are, of course, 
familiar with this number used to 
find the area or circumference of 
a circle.  Technically, it is defined 
as the ratio of the circumference 
of a circle to its diameter.  You 
may remember its decimal 
approximation of 3.1416; as an 
irrational number, it cannot be 
written as a terminating or 
repeating decimal.  This number 
was recently featured in Leslie 
Nielsen's spoof Spy Hard, where 
Nicollette Sheridan plays Russian 
Agent 3.14.
Example
2
Exponentials by calculator
Approximate e2 and e3 using your calculator.
Solution
This example is a check to make sure you know how to use your calculator.
Check the outputs of your calculator with those shown here. Look for the 
key on
your calculator. Some calculators require input of the value of x first, whereas others re-
quire input of the exponent after the ex key is pressed.
e2  7.389056099
e3  0.0497870684
ex
We also use irrational numbers when applying the Pythagorean theorem. Since the
Pythagorean theorem asserts a2  b2  c2, then
Also, if you wish to find the length of one of the legs of a right triangle, say a, when you
know both b and c, you can use the formula 
a  2c2  b2
c  2a2  b2
2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.5
Irrational Numbers
215
Example
3
Find the reach of a ladder
If a 13-ft ladder is placed against a building so that the base of the ladder is 5 ft away
from the building, how high up does the ladder reach?
Solution:
Consider Figure 5.6. Let h be the height of the ladder on the building.
Since h is one of the legs of a right triangle, use the formula 
Substitute.
c
unknown
 12
Thus, the ladder reaches 12 ft up the side of the
building. 
 2144
  2169  25
h  2132  52
a  2c2  b2
13-ft
ladder
5 ft
© Myrleen F. Cate/PhotoEdit
FIGURE 5.6 Ladder problem
The Pythagorean theorem is of value only when dealing with a right triangle. Car-
penters often use this property when they want to construct a right angle. That is, if
, then an angle of the triangle must be a right angle.
a2 1 b2 5 c2
Example
4
Squaring the corner of a room
A carpenter wants to make sure that the corner of a room is square (is a right angle). If
she measures out sides (legs) of 3 ft and 4 ft, how long should she make the diagonal
(hypotenuse) in order to make sure the corner is square?
Solution
The triangle (corner of the room) is shown in Figure 5.7.
The hypotenuse is the unknown, so use the formula
Thus, 
If she makes the diagonal 5 ft long, then by the Pythagorean theorem, the angle is a right
angle, which forces the corner of the room to be square.
Your answers to Examples 3 and 4 are rational. But suppose the result were irra-
tional. You can either leave your result in radical form or estimate your result, as shown
in Example 5.
c  232  42  29  16  225  5
c  2a2  b2
FIGURE 5.7 Building a right angle
4 ft
c
3 ft
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

216
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Example
5
Length of guy wire
Suppose that you need to attach three guy wires to support a large tree, as shown in 
Figure 5.8. If one guy wire is attached 10 ft away from the center of tree and it is
attached 6 ft up on the tree, what is the exact length of one wire? How much wire would
you need to purchase for three guy wires?
Solution
The length of the guy wire is the length of the hypotenuse of a right
triangle:
The exact length of the guy wire is 
; it is irrational, since 136 is not a perfect 
square. We use a calculator to find 
: Display:
34.985711
You need to pur-
chase 35 ft.
3"136
"136
5 "136
5 "102 1 62
c  2a2  b2
www2.ville.montreal.qc.ca/haubans.htm
Existing,
undisturbed soil
Amended soil
Guy wire
45˚
30˚
Strap
FIGURE 5.8 Guy wires
Operations with Square Roots
There are times when a square root is irrational and yet we do not want a rational approx-
imation. We begin by defining when a square root is simplified.
Let a and b be positive numbers. Then:
1.
 0
2.
 a
3.

4.
 !a
!b
Å
a
b
2a2b
2ab
2a2
20
Laws of Square Roots
In order to make sure that a square root is simplified, we will need to know certain
laws of square roots.
You will not be able to
deal properly with radicals
if you do not understand
the material in this box.
Example
6
Simplify a square root
Simplify 
.
Solution
Step 1
Factor the radicand: 

Step 2
Write the radicand as a product of as many factors with exponents of 2 as possible; 
if there is a remaining factor, it will have an exponent of 1: 

.
Step 3
Use Law 3 for square roots: 

.
Step 4
Use Law 2 for square roots: 
 2
.
22
222  221
222  221
222  21
"22  21
"23
223
28
"8
A square root is simplified if:
• The radicand (the number under the radical sign) has no factor with an exponent
larger than 1 when it is written in factored form.
• The radicand is not written as a fraction or by using negative exponents.
• There are no square root symbols used in the denominators of fractions.
Simplified Square Root
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.5
Irrational Numbers
217
Notice that the simplified form in Example 6 still contains a radical, so 
is an 
irrational number. We call 
the exact simplified representation for 
, and the cal-
culator representation 2.828427125 is an approximation. The whole process of simplify-
ing radicals depends on factoring the radicand and separating out the square factors and
is usually condensed, as shown by the following example.
"8
2"2
"8
Example
7
Simplify radical expressions
Simplify the radical expressions and assume that the variables are positive. If the ex-
pression is simplified, so state.
a.
b. 3
c.
d. 2x2  y2
"1x 1 y2 2
22,100
2441
e.
f.
g.
h.
4
"20
20.1
7"2
"6  
"2
5
i.
j.
k. 3 
l. 3  25
3
25
"22 2 4112 1252
Å
5x2
27y
m.
n. 21222 1 "1222 2 2 4122 1212
2122
6  325
3
There are many parts to
this example, and you
should review them care-
fully because they lay the
groundwork for future
sections in this book.
Solution
a. If you do not see any factors that are square numbers, 
you can use a factor tree: 

 3  7  21 
b. 3
 3
 3 10
 30
c.
 x  y
d.
is simplified; remember that we are looking for square factors, not square
terms. 
e.


f. This example came from a Peanuts cartoon, and the solution shown in the cartoon is
correct. 
!10
5
!5
!5
#
!2
!5
Å
2
5
2x2   y2
"1x 1  y2 2
221
2
23  7
1
2102  3  7
22,100
232  72
2441
441
3
147
3
3
49
3
3
7
7
g.




This is also written as 
or 0.1
. 
h.



i.





j.

 2
k. 3 
is simplified. 
"5
"6
"24
"22 2 4112 1252
x!15y
9y
x!5  3y
313y2
!3y
!3y
x!5
3!3y
Å
5x2
32  3y
Å
5x2
27y
2!5
5
!5
!5
4
2!5
4
!20
"10
1
10"10
!10
10
!10
!10
!1
!10
Å
1
10
"0.1
Peanuts: © 2010 Peanuts Worldwide
LLC., dist by UFS, Inc.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

218
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
l.
is simplified. 
m.

 2 
n.
5 1 1 "3
2
5 211 1 "32
4
5 2 1 2"3
4
5 2 1 "12
4
21222 1 "1222 2 2 4122 1212
2122
5 2 1 "4 1 4122
4
"5       
312 1 !52
3
6 1 3!5
3
3 1 !5
3
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the Pythagorean theorem? 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the two meanings of the
square root symbol—as an operation and as a number. 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the exact and decimal
approximations for an irrational number. 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does it mean for a square root
to be simplified? 
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
A computer approximation for 
is
1.41421356237309504880168872420969807856967187537694
Give a brief argument showing why that can’t be 
. 
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do you think is meant by a
triangular number? 
7. Write the following limerick in symbols, and then tell whether
it is true or false:*
Use the definition of square root to find the indicated products in
Problems 8–11. Assume the variables are positive. 
8. a.
b.
c.
d.
9. a.
b.
c.
d. 2169  2169
2807  2807
236  236
230  230
214  214
29  29
27  27
26  26
A dozen, a gross, and a score
Plus three times the square root of four
Divided by seven
Plus five times eleven
Is nine squared and not a bit more.
22
22
10. a.
b.
c.
d.
11. a.
b.
c.
d.
Classify each number in Problems 12–17 as rational or irrational.
If it is rational, write it without a square root symbol. If it is
irrational, approximate it with a rational number correct to the
nearest thousandth. 
12. a.
b.
c. e
d.
13. a.
b.
c.
d. e
14. a.
b.
c.
d.
15. a.
b.
c. e
d.
16. a.
b.
c.
d. e
17. a.
b.
c.
d.
Simplify the expressions in Problems 18–37. Assume that the 
variables are positive. 
18. a.
b.
c.
d.
19. a.
b.
c.
d.
20. a.
b.
c.
d.
21. a.
b.
c.
d.
22. a.
b.
c.
d. 20.05
20.75
20.4
20.1
23
7
23
5
21
3
21
2
3296
5248
2290
3275
"4,410
"2,240
"2,800
"1,000
296
2125
2144
216
"p
2
2p
21,936
21,024
p
p
6
21,000
2500
pe
p
2400
2169
p
2
2e
250
236
2
p2
230
210
p
225
29
52w  82w
22b  22b
2xy  2xy
2a  2a
20.25  20.25
22.4  22.4
22.5  22.5
2400  2400
Problem Set 5.5
*From Omni, March 1995, “Games” department, p. 104.
Do not cancel terms:
 2  3
is NOT correct.
"5
6 1 3!5
3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.5
Irrational Numbers
219
45. An empty lot is 400 ft by 300 ft. How many feet would
you save by walking diagonally across the lot instead of walk-
ing the length and width?
46. A diagonal brace is to be placed in the wall of a room. The
height of the wall is 8 ft and the wall is 20 ft long. What is the
exact length of the brace? What is the length of the brace to the
nearest foot?
47. A balloon rises at a rate of 4 ft per second when the wind is
blowing horizontally at a rate of 3 ft per second. After three
seconds, how far away from the starting point, in a direct line,
is the balloon?
Level 3
48. Consider a square inch as shown in Figure 5.9.
FIGURE 5.9 Find the length of steps 
a. Find the total length of the segments making up the stairs in
each part of Figure 5.9.
b. Find the length of the diagonal of each square.
c. It seems that if we continue the progression started with the
three parts of Figure 5.9, at some point the stairs will
become indistinguishable from the diagonal. This seems to
say that your answers for parts a and b should be the same
(if there are enough stairs). Discuss.
49. Find an irrational number between 1 and 3.
50. Find an irrational number between 0.53 and 0.54.
51. Find an irrational number between 
and .
52. Without using a radical symbol, write an irrational number
using only 2s and 3s. 
53. Suppose three squares of uniform thickness are made of gold
plate and you are offered either the large square or the two
smaller ones. Which choices would you make for each of the
squares having sides whose lengths are given below?
a. 1 in. and 1 in. or 2 in.
b. 3 in. and 4 in. or 5 in.
c. 4 in. and 5 in. or 7 in.
d. 5 in. and 7 in. or 9 in.
e. 10 in. and 11 in. or 15 in.
1
10
1
11
1 in.
1 in.
c. Eight stairs
1 in.
1 in.
a. Two stairs
1 in.
1 in.
b. Four stairs
20 ft
8 ft
Studs
Diagonal brace
23. a.
b.
c.
d.
24. a.
b.
25. a.
b.
26. a.
b.
27. a.
b.
28. a.
b.
29. a.
b.
30. a.
b.
31. a.
b.
32. a.
b.
33. a.
b.
34.
35.
36.
37.
Level 2
38. How far from the base of a building must a 26-ft ladder be
placed so that it reaches 10 ft up the wall?
39. How high up on a wall does a 26-ft ladder reach if the bottom of
the ladder is placed 10 ft from the base of the building?
40. If a carpenter wants to make sure that the corner of a room is
square and measures out 5 ft and 12 ft along the walls, how
long should he make the diagonal?
41. If a carpenter wants to be sure that the corner of a building is
square and measures out 6 ft and 8 ft along the sides, how long
should she make the diagonal?
42. An antenna is to be erected and held by guy wires. If the guy
wires are 15 ft from the base of the antenna and the antenna is
10 ft high, what is the exact length of each guy wire? 
What is the length of each guy wire to the nearest foot?
If three guy wires are to be attached, how many feet of wire
should be purchased if it can’t be bought by a fraction of a foot?
43. What is the exact length of the hypotenuse if the legs of a right
triangle are 2 in. each?
44. What is the exact length of the hypotenuse if the legs of a right
triangle are 3 ft each?
212122 1 "12122 2 2 4112 1212
2112
210 2 "102 2 4132 162
2132
21222 2 "1222 2 2 4162 1232
2162
27 1 "72 2 4122 132
2122
Å
5y
16x
Å
4x 2
25y
27
"y
3
"x
9 1 3"x
23
3 2 9"x
3
6 2 2"5
4
12 2 3"2
6
8 2 4"3
4
6 1 2"5
2
"22 2 4112 1212
"62 2 4132 1222
"122 2 4132 1122
"102 2 4152 1252
"72 2 4152 122
"52 2 4132 122
"1x 1 22 2
2x2  4
2a2  b2
"1a 1 b2 2
5
!10
2
!5
21
!3
1
!2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

220
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Problem Solving 3   
54. The Pythagorean theorem tells us that the sum of the 
squares of the lengths of the legs of a right triangle is 
equal to the square of the length of the hypotenuse. Verify 
that the theorem is true by tracing the squares and fitting them
onto the pattern of the upper two squares shown in 
Figure 5.10. 
Next, cut the squares along the lines and rearrange the 
pieces so that the pieces all fit into the large square in 
Figure 5.10.
FIGURE 5.10 Pythagorean theorem squares 
 2
 3
 4
5
1
55. Repeat Problem 54 for the following squares.
56. A man wanted to board a plane with a 5-ft-long steel rod, but
airline regulations say that the maximum length of any object
or parcel checked on board is 4 ft. Without bending or cutting
the rod, or altering it in any way, how did the man check it
through without violating the rule?
57. HISTORICAL QUEST
The Historical Note on page 222
introduces the great mathematician Karl Gauss. Gauss kept a
scientific diary containing 146 entries, some of which were
independently discovered and published by others. On July 10,
1796, he wrote
What do you think this meant? Illustrate with some numerical
examples.
58. What mathematical property is illustrated in Figure 5.11?
FIGURE 5.11 Can you discover this mathematical property?
59. How are the square numbers embedded in Pascal’s triangle?
60. How are the triangular numbers embedded in Pascal’s triangle?
EUREKA!
NUM =            +         +
 6
 7
10
11
8
9
5.6  Groups, Fields, and Real Numbers
You are familiar with the rational numbers (fractions, for example) and the irrational
numbers 
or square roots of certain numbers, for example , and now we wish to con-
sider the most general set of numbers to be used in elementary mathematics. This set con-
sists of the annexation of the irrational numbers to the set of rational numbers and is
called the set of real numbers.
Definition of Real Numbers
2
p
1
The set of real numbers
is the most common set
used in elementary math.
The set of real numbers, denoted by , is defined as the union of the set of
rationals and the set of irrationals.
Real Numbers
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.6
Groups, Fields, and Real Numbers
221
Example
1
Convert fractional form to decimal form
Find the decimal representation of each of the given rational numbers.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
Solution
a.
This is a terminating decimal.
b.
This is a terminating decimal. 
c.
This is a terminating decimal.
d.
. . .
Display: .6666666667
This is a repeating decimal.
3

2
2
3 5 0.666
10

58
58
10 5 5.8
8

5
5
8 5 0.625
4

1
1
4 5 0.25
1
7
5
11
1
6
2
3
58
10
5
8
1
4
Notice that calculators always represent decimals as terminat-
ing decimals, so you need to interpret the calculator display as
a repeating decimal. If you look at the long division, you can
see that the division never terminates:
Decimal Representation
Let’s consider the decimal representation of a real number. If a number is rational, then
its decimal representation is either terminating or repeating.
e.
. . .
This is a repeating decimal.
f.
. . .
This is a repeating decimal.
g.
Display: .1428571429
It may happen that you do not recognize a pattern by looking at the calculator display.
For most of our work, an approximation of the result will suffice. Can you use long
division to show that the decimal representation must terminate (have a 0 remainder) or
must repeat? For it repeats after six digits.
1
7
7

1
1
7 < 0.143
11

5
5
11 5 0.4545
6

1
1
6 5 0.166
Historical
History of the Decimal Point
Write the decimal 24.375:
Author
Time
Notation
Unknown
Simon 
1585
24 3(1) 7(2) 5(3)
Stevin
François 
1600
24|375
Viète
Johannes 
1616
24(375
Kepler
John 
1616
24:3 7 5
Napier
Henry 
1624
24375
Biggs
William 
1631
24|375
Oughtred
Chilam
1653
24:375
Balam
(1)(2)(3)
Jacques
1691
243 7 5
Ozanam
24 375
1,000
NOTE
.666. . .
1.8
____
20
18
____
2 . . .
32.000 . .  .
When a decimal repeats, we sometimes use an overbar to indicate the numerals that
repeat. For Example 1,
One digit repeats:
Two digits repeat:
Six digits repeat:
Real numbers that are irrational have decimal representations that are nonterminating
and nonrepeating: 
 1.414213 . . .
p  3.141592 . . .
e  2.71828 . . .
In each of these examples, the numbers exhibit no repeating pattern and are irrational.
Other decimals that do not terminate or repeat are also irrational: 
0.12345678910111213 . . .
0.10110111011110111110 . . .
We now have some different ways to classify real numbers: 
1. Positive, negative, or zero 
2. A rational number or an irrational number
a. If the decimal representation terminates, it is rational.
b. If the decimal representation repeats, it is rational.
c. If it has a nonterminating and nonrepeating decimal, it is irrational.
"2
1
7 5 0.142857
5
11 5 0.45
2
3 5 0.6, 1
6 5 0.16
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

222
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Historical
Karl Gauss 
(1777–1855)
Along with Archimedes and Isaac
Newton, Gauss is considered one of
the three greatest mathematicians 
of all time. When he was 3 years 
old, he corrected an error in his 
father’s payroll calculations. By the
time he was 21 he had contributed
more to mathematics than most do
in a lifetime.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Example
2 Convert terminating form to fractional form
Change the terminating decimals to fractional form.
a. 0.123
b. 56.28
c. 0.3479 
Solution
Write each in expanded notation.
a. 0.123  1  101  2  102  3  103
b.
The steps shown in part a can often be done mentally. 
c.
Make sure the fraction is reduced.
It is assumed that you can carry out the basic operations with real numbers written in
decimal form. You are asked to carry out the basic operations of addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division of decimal fractions.
Real Number Line
If we consider a line and associate the numbers 0 and 1 with two points situated so that
the 1 is to the right of 0, we call the distance between these points a unit distance.
Next, if we mark off equal distances to the right and associate the successive points
with the natural numbers, and mark equal distances to the left and associate those
points successively with the opposites of the natural numbers, we have drawn a num-
ber line, as shown in Figure 5.12.
0.3479 5 3,479
10,000
56.28 5 5,628
100 5 1,407
25
5 1
10 1
2
100 1
3
1,000 5 123
1,000
We have illustrated the procedure for changing from a fraction to a decimal: Divide
the numerator by the denominator. To reverse the procedure and to change from a
terminating decimal representation of a rational number to a fractional representation, 
use expanded notation. Recall that 
, 102 
, 103 
, . . . ,
10n 
. Thus 0.5 means 5  101  5 
. 
1
10 5 5
10 5 1
2
1
10n
1
1,000
1
100
1021 5 1
10
0
1
 2
21
22
Zero
Negative numbers
Positive numbers
FIGURE 5.12 A number line
If we now associate points on the number line with rational numbers, it appears that
the number line is just about “filled up” by the rationals. The reason for this feeling of
“fullness” is that the rationals form what is termed a dense set. That is, between every
two rationals we can find another rational (see Figure 5.13).
0
1
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
2
1
4
1
8
1
16
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
…
FIGURE 5.13 A number line with rationals
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.6
Groups, Fields, and Real Numbers
223
If we plot all the points of this dense set called the rationals, are there still any
“holes”? In other words, is there any room left for any of the irrationals? We have shown
that 
is irrational. We can show that there is a place on the number line representing
this length by using the Pythagorean theorem, as shown in Figure 5.14.
"2
0
1
1.5
.5
1
1
2.5
2
FIGURE 5.14 Finding an irrational “hole” on a
dense number line with rationals plotted
FIGURE 5.15 Real number line showing some rationals and some irrationals
We could show that other irrationals have their places on the number line (see Pro-
ject G16 of the Group Research at the end of the chapter as well as Figure 5.14). These
points (corresponding to both the rational and irrational numbers), when plotted on a line,
form what is known as the real number line, as shown in Figure 5.15.
R
Rationals
Irrationals
0
0.12345678910...
0.15
0.1555...
1
4
0.05
1
5
50
0.01
0.05
.02
0
.04
.08
0.1
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.24
0.26
Historical
The Most Famous Irrational Number,
It is not at all obvious that 
is an irrational number. In the Bible (I Kings 7:23), 
is given as 3. In 1892, The New York Times printed an 
article showing 
as 3.2. In 1897, House Bill No. 246 of the Indiana State Legislature defined 
as 4; this definition was “offered as a 
contribution to education to be used only by the State of Indiana free of cost. . . .” Actually, the bill’s author had 3.2 in mind but worded 
the bill so that it came out to be 4. The bill was never passed. In a book written in 1934, 
was proposed to equal 
. (The symbol itself
was first published in 1706, but was not used widely until Euler adopted it in 1737.) By 1873 William Shanks had calculated 
to 700 
decimal places. It took him 15 years to do so; however, computer techniques have shown that his last 100 or so places are incorrect.
p
313
81
p
p
p
p
p
p
NOTE
A mnemonic for remembering π:
"Yes, I have a number."
Notice that the number of letters in 
the words gives an approximation 
for π (the comma is the decimal 
point).
June 11, 1989–Two researchers, 
David Chudnovsky and his brother 
Gregory, both of Columbia 
University, have cut themselves a 
record slice of pi: 480 billion 
decimal places.  This exceeded the 
previous calculation by more than 
200 places.  This newly calculated 
number would stretch for 600 
miles if printed, a Columbia 
University official stated.
   Why would someone want 480 
billion decimal places of π?  It is 
not the actual calculation that is 
important, but rather the 
algorithm, which also has self-
check features to check for 
mistakes.
Cartoon courtesy of Patrick J. Boyle.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The relationships among the various sets of numbers we have been discussing are
shown in Figure 5.16.
224
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
R Real numbers
Q Rational numbers
Q ' Irrational numbers
Opposites of fractions
Fractions
Z Integers
Zero
N Natural numbers
Opposites of N
FIGURE 5.16 Classifications within the set of real numbers, 
Identity and Inverse Properties
At the beginning of this chapter, we stated some properties of natural numbers that apply
to sets of real numbers as well. We repeat them here for easy reference. Let a, b, and c be
real numbers; we denote this by a, b, c  . Then, 
Addition
Multiplication
Closure:
1a  b2  
ab  
Associative:
1a  b2  c  a  1b  c2
1ab)c  a1bc2
Commutative:
a  b  b  a
ab  ba
Distributive for multiplication over addition:
a1b  c2  ab  ac
There are two additional properties that are important in the set of real numbers: the iden-
tity and inverse properties.
Spend some time
studying these
relationships.
In Section 4.2, we mentioned that the development of the concept of zero and a sym-
bol for it did not take place at the same time as the development of the natural numbers.
The Greeks were using the letter “oh” for zero as early as A.D. 150, but the predominant
system in Europe was the Roman numeration system, which did not include zero. It was
not until the 15th century, when the Hindu-Arabic numeration system finally replaced the
Roman system, that the zero symbol came into common usage.
The number 0 (zero) has a special property for addition that allows it to be added to
any real number without changing the value of that number. This property is called the
identity property for addition of real numbers.
There exists in  a number 0, called zero, so that
0  a  a  0  a
for any a  . The number zero is called the identity for addition or the additive
identity.
Identity for Addition
Remember that when you are studying algebra, you are studying ideas and not just
rules about specific numbers. A mathematician would attempt to isolate the concept of an
identity. First, does an identity property apply for other operations?
Multiplication
Subtraction
Division
 a  a 
 a
 a  a 
 a
 a  a 
 a
c
c
c
c
c
c
Same number
Same number
Same number
Is there a real number that will satisfy any of the blanks for multiplication, subtrac-
tion, or division?
Historical
The Egyptians did not have a
zero symbol, but their numer-
ation system did not require such
a symbol. On the other hand, the
Babylonians, with their positional
system, had a need for a zero
symbol but did not really use one
until around A.D. 150. The Mayan
Indians’ numeration system was
one of the first to use a zero sym-
bol, not only as a placeholder but
as a number zero. The exact time
of its use is not known, but the
symbol was noted by the early
16th century Spanish expeditions
into Yucatan. Evidently, the
Mayans were using the zero long
before Columbus arrived in
America.
NOTE
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.6
Groups, Fields, and Real Numbers
225
The second property involves another special, important number in , namely the
number 1 (one). This number has the property that it can multiply any real number with-
out changing the value of that number. This property is called the identity property for
multiplication of real numbers.
There exists in  a number 1, called one, so that 
1  a  a  1  a
for any a  .  The number one is called the identity for multiplication or the 
multiplicative identity.
Identity for Multiplication
Notice that there is no real number that satisfies the identity property for subtraction
or division. There may be identities for other operations or for sets other than the set of
real numbers.
In the Section 5.3 we also spoke of opposites when we were adding and subtracting
integers. Recall the property of opposites:
When opposites are added, the result is zero, the identity for addition. This idea,
which can be generalized, is called the inverse property for addition.
5 1 1252 5 0 2128 1 128 5 0 a 1 12a2 5 0
For each a  , there is a unique number 1a2  , called the opposite (or additive
inverse) of a, so that
a 1 12a2 5 2a 1 a 5 0
Inverse Property for Addition
Recall that the product of a number and its reciprocal is 1, the identity for multiplica-
tion. The reciprocal of a number, then, is the multiplicative inverse of the number, as we
will now show.
Inverse for multiplication
Inverse for multiplication
T
T
5 

 5  1
128 

 11282  1
5 

 5  1
128 

 11282  1 
c
c
Since  , is an inverse
Since 
 , 
is an inverse
of 5 for multiplication. 
of 128 for multiplication. 
1
2128
1
2128
1
5
1
5
1
2128
1
2128
1
5
1
5
To show this inverse property for multiplication in a general way, we seek to find a
replacement for the box for each and every real number a: 
a 
 
 a  1
Does the inverse property for multiplication hold for every real number a? No,
because if a  0, then 
0 
 
 0  1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
For each number a  , a  0, there exists a number a1  , called the reciprocal
(or multiplicative inverse) of a, so that  
a  a1  a1  a 1
Inverse Property for Multiplication
Example
3
Inverse property for multiplication
Given the set 
. Does this set A have an element that satisfies the inverse
property for multiplication?
Solution
Before we can talk about the inverse property, we need to find the identity
for the operation, in this case, multiplication. Without an identity for multiplication, we
cannot have an inverse for multiplication. The operation of multiplication has the iden-
tity 1. Check to see that each element of A has an inverse:
Member of set
Operation
Inverse
Identity
T
T
T
1

1
 1
0

?
 1
No such number for “?”; does not
matter because it is 0.
1

1
 1
Since every nonzero element in the set has an inverse, we say the inverse property for
multiplication is satisfied.
A 5 521, 0, 16
does not have a replacement for the box in . However, the inverse property for multipli-
cation holds for all nonzero replacements of a, and we adopt this condition as part of the
inverse property for multiplication of real numbers.
Algebraic Structure
We have now introduced several properties that we can apply to a given set with a given
operation. If every element of a set satisfies the closure, associative, identity, and inverse
properties for a particular operation, then we call that set a group. We use the symbol  to
stand for any operation. This operation might be , x, or any other given operation.
The idea of using a
variable to represent
an operation will take
some extra effort to
understand.
The idea of a group is an
important unifying idea
in more advanced 
mathematics.
A commutative group is 
called Abelian to honor the
mathematician Niels Abel (see
Historical Note on page 255).
Let  be any set, let  be any operation, and let a, b, and c be any elements of . We
say that  is a group for the operation of  if the following properties are satisfied:
1. Closure:
a  b  
2. Associative:
a  b
 c  a  b  c
3. Identity:
There exists a number I   so that 
x  I  I  x  x for every x  
4. Inverse:
For each x  , there exists a corresponding x1   so that
x  x1  x1  x  I, where I is the identity element in .
Furthermore,  is called a commutative group (or Abelian group) if the following
property is satisfied:
5. Commutative:
a  b  b  a 
2
1
2
1
2
1
Group
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.6
Groups, Fields, and Real Numbers
227
This is a lengthy exam-
ple, but if you stick with
it, you will have a better
understanding of the
ideas of this section.
Example
4
Natural numbers is a group
Is the set  of natural numbers a group for multiplication?
Solution
We have already studied the properties of , so we can form hasty conclusions:
1. Closure:
The product of any two natural numbers is a natural number. 
2. Associative:
Yes 
3. Identity:
Yes, namely, 1 
4. Inverse:
No, since there is no number 
in  so that 3 

 3  1
All we need to do to show that a property doesn’t hold is to come up with one coun-
terexample. We might also note that an inverse exists, namely , but  .
Therefore,  does not form a group for multiplication.
1
3
1
3
Example
5
Test group properties
Let us partition the set of natural numbers into two sets, E (even) and 
O (odd). Consider the operations of addition 
and multiplication 
in the set 
{E, O}. Does the set form a group for either or both of these operations?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. In this example, we are considering a set consisting of two
elements E and O (never mind that each of these elements is also a set). How could we
possibly define addition? 
means that we take any even number and add to it any
odd number, and then ask whether the result is even, odd, or something else; in this case
we conclude that the answer must be an odd number, so we write 
. Consider
the operations of addition and multiplication:
Addition
Multiplication
even  even  even
even  even  even 
even  odd  odd
even  odd  even 
odd  even  odd
odd  even  even 
odd  odd  even
odd  odd  odd 
E 1 O 5 O
E 1 O
2
1
2
1
Pólya’s 
Method
These operations can be summarized in table format: 

E
O

E
O
E
E
O
E
E
E
O
O
E
O
E
O
Devise a Plan. We will check the properties for each of these operations one at a time.
If and when we find a counterexample for one of the group properties, we will have the
conclusion that it is not a group for that operation.
Carry Out the Plan.
Property
Addition
Multiplication 
1. Closure
Yes
Yes 
Every entry in the tables is either an E or O, both of which are in the
set. 
2. Associative
Yes
Yes 
We prove this by checking all possibilities (there are several).
We show a few here.
E  E  E  E  E  E
E  E  E  E  E  E
E  E  O  E  E  O 
E  E  O  E  E  O
E  O  E  E  O  E 
E  O  E  E  O  E
(
(
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

228
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Property
Addition
Multiplication 
3. Identity
Yes, it is E.
Yes, it is O.
4. Inverse
Yes
No 
Inverse of E is E E  E  E .
E does not have an inverse 
Inverse of O is O O  O  E .
because E  ?  O has no
value for “?”. 
Conclusion:
The set E, O is a group for , but not for . 
5. Commutative
Yes
Yes 
The tables are symmetric with respect to the principal diagonal.
That is, E  O  O  E and E  O  O  E. 
Look Back. The set 
is a commutative group for addition.
5E, O6
6
5
2
1
2
1
The field properties
summarize the main
properties used with
the set of real numbers.
We call this the
structure of the real
numbers.
The set of real numbers is a field, but there are other fields.  In our definition of a
field we used  and the operations of addition and multiplication for the sake of
understanding, but for the mathematician, a field is defined as a set with any two
operations satisfying the 11 stated properties. 
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the distinguishing character-
istic between the rational and irrational numbers? 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
A segment of length 
is shown in
Figure 5.14. Describe a process you might use to draw a seg-
ment of length 
. 
23
22
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the identity property. 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the inverse property. 
5. What is a group?
6. What is a field?
Problem Set 5.6
Example 5 showed that a given set was a commutative group for one operation but
not for another. If a set is a commutative group for two operations and also satisfies the
distributive property, it is called a field. We define a field in terms of the set  and the
operations of  and x .
Field
A field is a set , with two operations  and  satisfying the following properties
for any elements a, b, c  :
Property
Addition
Multiplication
Closure
1. 1a  b2  
2. ab  
Associative
3. 1a  b2  c  a  1b  c2
4. 1a  b2  c  a  1b  c2
Identity
5. There exists 0   so
6. There exists 1   so that 
that 0  a  a  0  a
1  a  a  1  a
for every element a in .
for every element a in .
Inverse
7. For each a  , there is a
8. For each a  , a  0, 
unique number 1a2  
there is a unique 
so that
number   so that. 
a  1a2  1a2  a  0
a  

 a  1 
Commutative
9. a  b  b  a
10. ab  ba
Distributive
11. a  1b  c2  a  b  a  c
1
a
1
a
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.6
Groups, Fields, and Real Numbers
229
7. Tell whether each number is an element of  (a natural num-
ber),  (an integer),  (a rational number),  (an irrational
number), or  (a real number). You may need to list more than
one set for each answer. 
a. 7
b. 4.93
c. 0.656656665 . . .
d.
e. 3.14159
f.
g. 0.00
h.
i. 0
8. Tell whether each number is an element of  (a natural num-
ber),  (an integer),  (a rational number),  (an irrational
number), or  (a real number). Since these sets are not all dis-
joint, you may need to list more than one set for each answer. 
a. 19
b. 6.48
c. 1.868686868 . . .
d.
e. 
f. 0.00
g.
h.
i.
Express each of the numbers in Problems 9–12 as a decimal. 
9. a.
b.
c.
d.
10. a.
b.
c.
d.
11. a.
b.
c.
d.
12. a.
b.
c.
d.
Change the terminating decimals in Problems 13–20 to 
fractional form. 
13. a. 0.5
b. 0.8
14. a. 0.25
b. 0.75
15. a. 0.45
b. 0.234
16. a. 0.111
b. 0.52
17. a. 98.7
b. 0.63
18. a. 0.24
b. 16.45
19. a. 15.3
b. 6.95
20. a. 0.64
b. 6.98
Carry out the operations with decimal forms in Problems 21–25.
21. a. 6.28  3.101
b. 6.824  1.32
c. 1.36  0.541
d. 6.31  12.62
22. a. 4.2  0.921
b. 8.23  0.005
c. 6.03  4.6
d. 5.002  9.009
23. a. 0.44  0.298
b. 10.5 6.23
c. 3.72  0.3
d.
5.95  7.00
24. a. 13.06  0.02
b. 8  4.002
c. 0.5 6.2  3.4
d. 0.25 5.03  4.0052
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
214
5  
217
6
22
3
24
5
12
11
15
3
2 2
13
2
3
21
6
3
25
2
7
5
6
27
15
3
5
7
10
3
2
1
7
21,000
216
12
28
29
27
17
43
22
30. 15  3a  1a24  15  0
31.


Figure 5.17 shows the cover of a leading mathematics journal. It
depicts the symbols for the twelve animals in the Chinese zodiac.
(2010, for example, is the year of the tiger and 2011 is the year of
the rabbit.) Use this cover illustration to answer the questions in
Problems 32–35.
1
x2
1
x
2
x2  x  1
x2  1
x2  x  1
x2  1
© 2000 National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
32. Find 
33. If x is any element in the Chinese zodiac, then x
x
?
34. Is the set of Chinese zodiac elements with the operation of 
commutative?
35. Is there an identity element?
5
5
Level  2
Check whether each of the sets and operations in Problems 36–44
forms a group.
36.  for 
37.  for 
38.  for 
39.  for 
40.  for 
41.  for 
42.  for 
43.  for 
44.  for 
45. a. Given the set 1, 2, 3, 4 and the operation , construct a
multiplication table showing all possible answers for the
numbers in the set. 
b. Given the set 1, 2, 3, 4 and the operation * defined by
6
5
6
5
25. a. 5.2  2.3  4.5
b. 5.2  2.3  4.5
c. 8.2  2.8  23
d. 8.2  2.8  23
Identify each of the properties illustrated in Problems 26–31.
26. a. 5  7  7  5
b.
27. a.
b.
28. a.
b.
29. a. mustard  catsup  catsup  mustard
b.
red  blue  yellow  red  blue  yellow2
1
2
1
a 1 110 1 b2 5 110 1 b2 1 a
a 1 110 1 b2 5 1a 1 102 1 b
314 1 82 5 3142 1 3182
5 # 1 5 1 # 5 
5 # 1
5 5 1 
a * b  2a, construct a table for * showing all possible
answers for numbers in the set. 
c. Verify as many of the field properties as possible for the
operations of  and *. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

230
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
symmetries. Define an operation  which means “followed
by.” Consider, for example, A  B: Start with the basic 
position, apply A, followed by B (without returning to basic
position) to obtain the result shown: 
Thus, we say A  B  C, meaning “A followed by B is the
same as applying the single element C.” 
a. Complete a table for the operation  and the set A, B, C,
D, E, F, G, H .
b. Is the set closed for ?
c. Is the set associative for ?
d. Is the set commutative for ?
e. Does the set have an identity for ?
f. Does the inverse property hold for the set and the operation ?
g. Is the set of symmetries of a square with the operation  a
group?
6
5
1
4
2
3
Apply B to result
1
4
2
3
Apply C
1
4
2
3
1
4
2
3
3
2
4
1
Apply A 
4
3
1
2
Basic position
=
Level  3
Find a rational number and an irrational number between each of
the given pairs of numbers in Problems 46–50.
46. 1 and 10
47. 2 and 3
48. 3 and 4
49. 4.5 and 4.6
50. 8.00 and 8.01
51. List the rationals between 0 and 1 by roster.
Let  be an arbitrary operation in Problems 52–59. Describe the
operation  for each problem. 
52. 5  3  8; 7  2  9; 9  1  10; 8  2  10; . . .
53. 5  3  15; 7  2  14; 9  1  9; 8  2  16; . . .
54. 5  3  2; 7  2  5; 9  1  8; 8  2  6; . . .
55. 1  9  11; 2  7  10; 9  0  10; 9  8  18; . . .
56. 8  0  1; 5  4  21; 1  0  1; 5  6  31; . . .
57. 4  6  20; 8  2  20; 7  9  32; 6  8  28; . . .
58. 4  7  1; 4  5  3; 7  3  11; 12  9  15; . . .
59. 4  7  17; 5  6  26; 6  4  37; 2  8  5; . . .
Problem Solving  3
60. Symmetries of a Square
Cut out a small square and label it
as shown in Figure 5.18.
FIGURE 5.18 Square construction
Be sure that 1 is in front of 1, 2 is in front of 2, 3 is in front of 3,
and 4 is in front of 4. We will study certain symmetries of this
square—that is, the results that are obtained when a square is
moved around according to certain rules that we will establish. 
Hold the square with the front facing you and the 1 in the
top right-hand corner as shown.  This is called the basic
position. 
Now rotate the square 90 clockwise so that 1 moves into the
position formerly held by 2 and so that 4 and 3 end up on top.
We use the letter A to denote this rotation of the square. That is,
A indicates a clockwise rotation of the square through 90.
Other symmetries can be obtained similarly according to Table
5.4. You should be able to tell how each of the results in the
table was found.  Do this before continuing with the problem. 
We now have a set of elements: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H .
We must define an operation that combines a pair of these
6
5
Basic position
4
3
1
2
Apply A
4
3
1
2
4
3
1
2
3
2
4
1
Result
4
3
1
2
1'
2'
4'
3'
Back
Front
TABLE 5.4
Symmetries of a Square
Element
Description
Result
A
clockwise rotation
90°
B
clockwise rotation
180°
C
clockwise rotation
270°
D
clockwise rotation
360°
E
Flip about a horizontal
line through the middle
of the square
F
Flip about a vertical
line through the middle
of the square
G
Flip along a line drawn
from upper left to 
lower right
H
Flip along a line drawn
from lower left to 
upper right
3
2
4
1
4
3
1
2
3'
4'
2'
1'
1'
2'
4'
3'
4'
1'
3'
2'
2'
3'
1'
4'
1
4
2
3
2
1
3
4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.7
Discrete Mathematics
231
5.7  Discrete Mathematics
Discrete mathematics is that part of mathematics that deals with sets of ob-
jects that can be counted or processes that consist of a sequence of individual
steps. That is, a discrete set is one that is finite (the cardinality of the set is a
natural number). Computers have enhanced the importance of discrete mathe-
matics because many natural phenomena are idealized in terms of discrete (or
countable) steps or numbers of objects. For example, television sets today are
termed digital TVs, which means that the screen is divided into a large number
of cells, and each cell is associated with a number designating its color, bright-
ness, and other characteristics of that picture in that cell. CDs and digital music
utilize the same ideas from discrete mathematics. Figure 5.19 shows a famous
image that has been digitized by computer and used on a cover of a Finite
Mathematics textbook.
When you hear the word algebra, you probably think of the algebra you encoun-
tered in high school. The dictionary says that algebra is a generalization of arithmetic.
Most people speak of algebra in the singular, but to a mathematician algebra refers to
a structure, a set of symbols that operate according to certain agreed-upon properties,
as we saw in the last section. A mathematical dictionary reveals that we can speak
of an algebra with a unit element, a simple algebra, an algebra of subsets, a commuta-
tive algebra, or an algebra over a field. In the next chapter we consider the algebra
studied in high school, but in this section we will look at a different, discrete algebra
that focuses on the definition of operations and on the properties we have studied in
this chapter.
Clock Arithmetic
We now consider a mathematical system based on a 12-hour clock (see Figure 5.20).
We’ll need to define some operations for this set of numbers, and we’ll use the way
we tell time as a guide to our definitions. For example, if you have an appointment at
4:00 P.M. and you are two hours late, you arrive at 6:00 P.M. On the other hand, if your
appointment is at 11:00 A.M. and you’re two hours late, you arrive at 1:00 P.M. That is, on
a 12-hour clock,
and
Using the clock as a guide, we define an operation called “clock addition,” which is dif-
ferent from ordinary addition because it consists of a finite set, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12 , and is closed for addition, as you can see by looking at Table 5.5.
6
5
11 1 2 5 1
4 1 2 5 6
FIGURE 5.19 A digitized image of the Mona Lisa
Courtesy of Karl J. Smith. Image on the cover courtesy of Professor Leon D. Harmon,
Case Western Reserve University , Cleveland, Ohio. 
12
1
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
3
FIGURE 5.20 A 12-hour clock
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

232
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
TABLE 5.5
Addition on a 12-Hour Clock
Example
1
Find clock sums
Use a 12-hour clock to find the following sums.
a. 7  5
b. 9  5
c. 4  11
d. 12  3 
Solution
Look at Table 5.5. Find the first number in the column at the left and then
move across that row until you find the second number in the row at the top. The answer
is at the intersection of the indicated row and column.
a. 7  5  12
b. 9  5  2
c. 4  11  3
d. 12  3  3
Example
2
Clock operations
Carry out the given operations on a 12-hour clock by using the definitions for the
elementary operations.
a. 4  9
b. 4  9
c. 4  7
d.
Solution
a. 4  9  x means 4  9  x. That is, what number when added to 9 produces 4?
From Table 5.5, we see x  7. 
4
9
Subtraction, multiplication, and division may be defined as they are in ordinary 
arithmetic.
Note that these
definitions of the basic 
operations are 
consistent with the
usual definitions.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Subtraction:
a  b  x means a  b  x
Multiplication:
a  b  ab means b  b  . . .  b
144424443
a addends
Zero multiplication:
If a  0, then a  b  0  b  0 
Division:
a  b 
 x means a  bx provided b has an inverse for
multiplication. 
a
b
Elementary Operations
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We see from Example 2 that it might be worthwhile to construct a multiplication
table. However, since the addition and multiplication tables for a 12-hour clock are
rather large, we shorten our arithmetic system by considering a clock with fewer than
12 hours.
Modulo Five Arithmetic
Consider a mathematical system based on a 5-hour clock, numbered 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4, as
shown in Figure 5.21. Clock addition on this 5-hour clock is the same as on an ordinary
clock, except that the only numbers in this set are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 .6
5
Section 5.7
Discrete Mathematics
233
TABLE 5.6
Addition and 
Multiplication tables
1
3
4
2
0
FIGURE 5.21 A five-hour clock

0
1
2
3
4
0
0
1
2
3
4
1
1
2
3
4
0
2
2
3
4
0
1
3
3
4
0
1
2
4
4
0
1
2
3

0
1
2
3
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
2
3
4
2
0
2
4
1
3
3
0
3
1
4
2
4
0
4
3
2
1
b. 4  9 means 9  9  9  9  12 (from Table 5.5). 
c. 4  7  t means 4  7t. That is, what number can be multiplied by 7 to obtain the
result 4? We can proceed by trial and error:
7  1  7;
7  2  2;
7  3  9;
7  4  4;. . .
We see t  4. 
d.
means 4  9  s or 4  9s. We need to find the number that, when multiplied by
9, produces 4. Once again, proceed by checking each possibility:  
9  1  9;
9  2  6;
9  3  3;
9  4  12;
9  5  9;
9  6  6;
9  7  3;
9  8  12;
9  9  9;
9  10  6;
9  11  3;
9  12  12
Even though this process is tedious, it is complete because we are dealing with 
a finite set, and since we have checked all possibilities we see there is no such num-
ber. We say does not exist.
4
9
4
9
We define the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division just as
we did for a 12-hour clock. Since subtraction and division are defined in terms of addi-
tion and multiplication, respectively, we need only the two operation tables that are
shown in Table 5.6.
Instead of speaking about “arithmetic on the 5-hour clock” mathematicians usually
speak of “modulo 5 arithmetic.” The set 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 , together with the operations
defined in Table 5.6, is called a modulo 5 or mod 5 system. Suppose it is 4 o’clock on a
5-hour clock. What time will the clock show 9 hours later? We could write 
and
thus 4  9  2  1. Since we do not wish to confuse this with ordinary arithmetic in
which 
4  9  2  1
2 1 1 5 3
4 1 9 5 3
6
5
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Another way to determine whether two numbers are congruent mod m is to divide
each by m and check the remainders. If the remainders are the same, then the numbers are
congruent mod m. For example, 
gives a remainder 3, and 
gives a remain-
der of 3, so 3  53, (mod 5). 
53 4 5
3 4 5
234
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Example
3
Checking congruence
Decide whether each statement is true or false.
a. 3  8, (mod 5)
b. 3  53, (mod 5)
c. 3  19, (mod 5) 
Solution
a. 3  8, (mod 5) because 8  3  5, and 5 is a multiple of 5. 
b. 3  53, (mod 5) because 53  3  50, and 50 is a multiple of 5. 
c. 3  19, (mod 5) because 19  3  16, and 16 is not a multiple of 5.
Example
4
Solve modular equations
Solve each equation for x. In other words, find a replacement for x that makes each
equation true.
a. 4  9  x, (mod 5)
b. 15  92  x, (mod 5)
c. 2  4  x, (mod 5) 
d. 2  4  x, (mod 5)
e. 7  5  x, (mod 7)
f. 3  5  x, (mod 12) 
Solution
a. 4  9  13  3, (mod 5) 
b. 15  92  107  2, (mod 5) 
c. 2  4  6  1, (mod 5) 
d. 2  4  7  4, (mod 5) 
Since 2  7, (mod 5), we can replace 2 by 7.
 3, (mod 5)
e. 7  5  35  0, (mod 7) 
f. 3  5  15  5, (mod 12) 
Since 3  15, (mod 12)
 10, (mod 12)
Notice that every whole number is congruent modulo 5 to exactly one element in the
set I  {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}, which contains all possible remainders when dividing by 5. Since
the number of elements in I is rather small, we can easily solve equations by trying
the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4. In modulo 7 try numbers in the set {0, 1, 2, . . . , 6} and in
modulo 10 try numbers in the set {0, 1, 2, . . . , 9}. Consider the following example. 
we use the following notation: 
4  9  2  1, (mod 5)
which is read “4  9 is congruent to 2  1, mod 5.” We define congruence as follows. 
The real numbers a and b are congruent modulo m, written a  b, (mod m), if a
and b differ by a multiple of m.
Congruence Mod m
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.7
Discrete Mathematics
235
Example
5
Modular arithmetic application
The manager of a TV station hired a college student, U. R. Stuck, as an election-eve
runner. The request for reimbursement turned in is shown in the margin. The station
manager refused to pay the bill, since the mileage was not honestly recorded. How
REQUEST FOR REIMBURSEMENT
FOR MILEAGE
NAME              U.R. Stuck
ADDRESS        1234 Fifth St.  
S.S. NO.              555-83-4495
ENDING MILEAGE            14,    .8
BEGINNING MILEAGE      14,     3
NO. OF TRIPS          8
did he know? Note: The answer has nothing to do with the illegible digits in the
mileage report, and you should also assume that the mileage is rounded to the near-
est mile.
Solution
Let x  the number of miles in one round trip. For the reimbursement
request, we see there are 8 trips, so the total mileage must be 8x. Since the last digits are
legible, we see the difference is 5, (mod 10). Thus,  
8x  5, (mod 10)
We solve this by checking each possible value:
x  0:
8(0)  0, (mod 10)
x  1:
8(1)  8, (mod 10)
x  2:
8(2)  16  6, (mod 10)
x  3:
8(3)  24  4, (mod 10)
x  4:
8(4)  32  2, (mod 10)
x  5:
8(5)  40  0, (mod 10)
x  6:
8(6)  48  8, (mod 10)
x  7:
8(7)  56  6, (mod 10)
x  8:
8(8)  64  4, (mod 10)
x  9:
8(9)  72  2, (mod 10)
These are the only possible values for x in modulo 10, and none gives a mileage
reading for 5, (mod 10) in the units digit. Therefore, Stuck did not report the mileage
honestly.
Example
6
Modular arithmetic application
Suppose you are planning to buy paper to cover some shelves. You need 
to cover 1 shelf 100 inches long, and in order to minimize the amount of waste you need
to cover at least 30 11-inch shelves, but not more than 50 11-inch shelves. The paper
can be purchased in multiples of 36 inches. How much paper should you buy to mini-
mize the waste? 
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Suppose I need to cover 30 shelves; then I will need 30 
11  100 inches of paper. Since 30  11  100  430 inches and the paper comes in
36-inch lengths, I can find 430  36 
. This means the minimum purchase is 
12  36  432 inches of paper. On the other hand, if I need to cover 50 shelves, then I
will need 50  11  100  650 inches; 650  36 
. This requires 19 units of
length 36 inches: 36  19  684 inches.
Devise a Plan. We know the minimum purchase and we also know the maximum
purchase. We need to find a solution that specifies a general solution (for any num-
ber of shelves between 30 and 50). Since the paper comes in multiples of 36 inches,
we must buy 36x inches of paper, where x represents the number of multiples we buy.
Suppose we need to cover k shelves at 11 inches and an extra shelf at 100 inches for
a total of 11k  100 inches. We will write this as a congruence modulo 11 and then
solve for x. 
18.05
11.94
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Carry Out the Plan. The amount of shelf paper required is 11k  100, which means
36x  11k  100
36x  100, (mod 11)
3x  1, (mod 11)
Note: 36  3, (mod 11) and 100  1, (mod 11)
Since we are working in modulo 11, and if we assume no waste, we can check all
possibilities (since the set of possibilities is finite—namely, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and
10; all these congruences are modulo 11): 
x  0: 3(0)  0  1
x  1:
3(1)  3  1
x  2: 3(2)  6  1
x  3: 3(3)  9  1
x  4:
3(4)  12  1
x  5: 3(5)  15  1
x  6: 3(6)  18  1
x  7: 
3(7)  21  1
x  8: 3(8)  24  1
x  9: 3(9)  27  1
x  10: 3(10)  30  1
The solution is x  4, (mod 11). 
Look Back. We know that the minimum is 12 multiples of the 36-inch paper, and the
maximum is 19 multiples. To minimize the waste we see that x  4, (mod 11) must be
x  4, 15, 26, . . . . This means that to minimize the waste we should buy 15 multiples
of the 36-inch paper: 
36(15)  540
inches of paper. This amount allows us to cover the 100-inch board and 40 11-inch boards.
236
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Group Properties for a Modulo System
It appears that some modulo systems “behave” like ordinary algebra and others do not.
The distinction is found by determining which systems form a field. We assume that mod-
ular arithmetic follows the usual order of operations. 
Let’s first explore the group properties for the set I  {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} and the opera-
tion of addition, modulo 5. 
Closure for :
The set I of elements modulo 5 is closed with respect to
addition. That is, for any pair of elements, there is a unique
element that represents their sum, and that is also a member 
of the original set. 
Associative for :
Addition of elements modulo 5 satisfies the associative
property. That is,  
1a  b2  c  a  1b  c2
for all elements a, b, and c  I. As a specific example, we eval-
uate 2  3  4 in two ways: 
12  32  4  9  4, 1mod 52
2  13  42  9  4, 1mod 52
Identity for :
The set I of elements modulo 5 includes an identity element
for addition. That is, the set contains an element 0 such that
the sum of any given element and zero is the given element.
In modulo 5,
0  0  0, 1  0  1, 2  0  2, 3  0  3, 4  0  4
Inverse for :
Each element in arithmetic modulo 5 has an inverse with respect
to addition. That is, for each element a  I, there exists a unique
element a  I such that a  a  a  a  0. The element a
is said to be the inverse of a. Specifically (in mod 5):  
There was a young fellow 
   named Ben
Who could only count 
   modulo 10
He said when I go
Past my last little toe
I shall have to start 
   over again.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Elements in the set
Identity
The inverse of 0 is 0:
0  0  0
The inverse of 1 is 4:
1  4  0
The inverse of 2 is 3:
2  3  0
The inverse of 3 is 2:
3  2  0
The inverse of 4 is 1:
4  1  0
Inverses
Since the closure, associative, identity, and inverse properties are satisfied for addition
modulo 5, we conclude that it is a group. 
c
T
T
Section 5.7
Discrete Mathematics
237
Example
7
Testing group properties, modulo 6
Is the set {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} a group for multiplication modulo 6?
Solution
This set has an identity element 1 for multiplication. However, the inverse
property is not satisfied (in mod 6):  
Elements in the set
Identity
T
T
Example
8
Testing field properties, modulo 5
Is the set I  {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} a field for  and
modulo 5?
Solution
We have shown (just prior to Example 7) that four of the 11 field properties
are satisfied.
Commutative for :
Addition in arithmetic modulo 5 satisfies the commutative
property. That is,  
a  b  b  a
where a and b are any elements in I. Specifically, we see
that the entries in Table 5.6 on page 233 are symmetric with
respect to the principal diagonal. 
We can now say that I is a commutative group for addition. We continue by verifying
other properties for multiplication.
Closure for :
The set I is closed for multiplication, as we can see from
Table 5.6. 
Associative for :
This property is satisfied, and the details are left for you to
verify. 
3
The inverse of 1 is 1:
1  1 
 1
The inverse of 2 does not exist:
2  ? 
 1
2  1  2, 2  2  4,
2  3  0, 2  4  2, 2  5  4
None of the possible products gives the answer 1.
However, the best way to proceed is always to check the closure property first. Note that
2  3  6  0 (mod 6), which is not in the set, so the set is not closed. 
The set is not a group for multiplication modulo 6.
c
Inverses
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

238
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Identity for :
The identity element for multiplication is 1, since (in mod 5):  
0  1  0, 1  1  1, 2  1  2, 3  1  3, 4  1  4
Inverse for :
The inverse for multiplication can be checked by finding the
inverse of each element (mod 5). 
Elements in the set Identity
There is no inverse of 0:
0  ?  1
The inverse of 1 is 1:
1  1  1
The inverse of 2 is 3:
2  3  1
The inverse of 3 is 2:
3  2  1
The inverse of 4 is 4:
4  4  1
Inverses
Since 0 does not have an inverse, we say the inverse
property for multiplication is not satisfied, so I is not a
group. We note, however, that for a field we are check-
ing to see whether all nonzero elements have inverses. 
Commutative for :
The set is commutative for multiplication, as we can
see by looking at Table 5.6. 
Distributive for  over :
We need to check a b  c  ab  ac. 
Check some particular examples:   
2 3  4  2 7  14  4, (mod 5) 
2 3  2 4  6  8  14  4, (mod 5)  
Thus, 2 3  4  2 3  2 4 . Also, 
4 1  22  4 1  4 2 and 
3 2  4  3 2  3 4
These examples seem to imply that the distributive
property holds. 
The set I is a field for the operations of addition and multiplication, modulo 5.
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
c
T
T
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by clock
arithmetic? 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
How can the operations of addition
and multiplication be defined for a 24-hour clock? 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the meaning of the definition
of congruence modulo m. 
4. Define precisely the concept of congruence modulo m. 
Perform the indicated operations in Problems 5–10 using
arithmetic for a 12-hour clock. 
5. a. 9  6
b. 5  7
c. 5  3
d. 2  7
Problem Set 5.7
6. a. 7  10
b. 7  9
c. 6  7
d. 1  5
7. a. 5  7
b. 4  8
c. 2  6
b. 9  3
8. a. 4  8
b. 2  3
c. 1  12
b. 10  6
9. a. 3  5  7
b. 7  3  2
10. a. 5  2  11
b. 5  8  5  4
Which of the statements in Problems 11–16 are true? 
11. a. 5  8  1, (mod 6)
b. 4  5  1, (mod 7)
12. a. 5  53, (mod 8)
b. 102  1, (mod 2)
13. a. 47  2, (mod 5)
b. 108  12, (mod 8)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14. a. 5,670  270, (mod 365) 
b. 2,001  39, (mod 73)
15. a. 2,007  0, (mod 2,007)
b. 246  150, (mod 6)
16. a. 126  1, (mod 7)
b. 144  12, (mod 144)
Perform the indicated operations in Problems 17–22. 
17. a. 9  6, (mod 5)
b. 7  11, (mod 12)
c. 4  3, (mod 5)
d. 1  2, (mod 5)
18. a. 5  2, (mod 4)
b. 2  4, (mod 5)
a. 6  6, (mod 8)
b. 5  7, (mod 9)
19. a. 4  3, (mod 5)
b. 6  12, (mod 8)
20. a. 2  3, (mod 7)
b. 121  47, (mod 121)
21. a. 7  41, (mod 5)
b. 4  5, (mod 11)
22. a. 62  4, (mod 2)
b. 7  12, (mod 13)
Solve each equation for x in Problems 23–31. Assume that k is any
natural number. 
23. a. x  3  0, (mod 7)
b. 4x  1, (mod 5)
24. a. x  5  2, (mod 9)
b. 4x  1, (mod 6)
25. a. x  2  3, (mod 6)
b. 3x  2, (mod 7)
26. a. 5x  2, (mod 7)
b. 7x  1  3, (mod 11)
27. a. x2  1, (mod 4)
b. x  4  5, (mod 9)
28. a. x2  1, (mod 5)
b. 4  6  x, (mod 13)
29. a. 4k  x, (mod 4)
b. 4k  2  x, (mod 4)
30. 2x2  1  3, (mod 7)
31. 5x3  3x2  70  0, (mod 2)
Section 5.7
Discrete Mathematics
239
35. Suppose you make six round trips to visit a sick aunt and wish to
record your mileage to the nearest mile. You forget the original
odometer reading, but you do remember that the units digit has
increased by 8 miles. What are the possible distances between
your house and your aunt’s house?
36. Suppose you are planning to purchase some rope. You
need between 15 and 20 pieces that are 7 inches long and one
piece that is 80 inches long. The rope can be purchased in
multiples of 12 inches. How much rope should you buy to
minimize waste?
37. If you know that your aunt in Problem 35 lives somewhere be-
tween 10 and 15 miles from your house, how far exactly is her
house, given the information in Problem 41?
38. Is the set {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5} a group for addition modulo 6?
39. Is the set {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} a group for addition modulo 7?
40. Is the set {0, 1, 2, 3} a field for addition and multiplication
modulo 4?
Problems 41–46 involve the set {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10} and
addition and multiplication modulo 11. 
41. Make a table for addition and multiplication.
42. Is the set a group for addition?
43. Is the set a group for multiplication?
44. Is the set a commutative group for addition?
45. Is the set a commutative group for multiplication?
46. Is the set a field for the operations of addition and
multiplication?
When constructing addition and multiplication tables for various
modular systems, you have probably noticed some patterns. For
example, if you consider multiplication mod 19, we find (mod 19):
9  1  9, 9  2  18, 9  3  27  8, 9  4  36  17, . . .
Now, draw a circle and divide it into n  1 parts. In this example,
19  1  18, so the circumference of the circle in Figure 5.22 is
divided into 18 equal parts. Label those parts 1, 2, 3, . . . . Connect
the points formed by the products; that is connect 9 and 1, 2 and
18, 3 and 8, and so on. We call this the 119, 92 modular design.
Level  2
32. Assume that today is Monday (day 2). Determine the day of
the week it will be at the end of each of the following periods.
(Assume no leap years.) 
a. 24 days
b. 155 days
c. 365 days
d. 2 years
33. Assume that today is Friday (day 6). Determine the day of the
week it will be at the end of each of the following periods.
(Assume no leap years.) 
a. 30 days
b. 195 days
c. 390 days
d. 3 years
34. Your doctor tells you to take a certain medication every
8 hours. If you begin at 8:00 A.M., show that you will
not have to take the medication between midnight and
7:00 A.M. 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
1
2
3
4
5
6
FIGURE 5.22 The (19, 9) design
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10102  9152  8132  7142  6132  5142  4102  3112
 2152  148  5
This means that for check digit x, 5  x  0, (mod 11). The one-
digit solution to this equation is x  6, so the check digit is 6. What
is the check digit for a book with the given ISBN in Problems
53–54? 
53. a. 0-534-13728-x
b. 0-691-02356-x
54. a. 0-8028-1430-x
b. 9-68-7270-82-x
55. What are the possible check digits for ISBNs? What is
the check digit for the 10th edition of The Nature of
Mathematics with ISBN 0-534-40023-X? What do you think
the X stands for in this ISBN?
56. If it is now 2 P.M., what time will it be 99,999,999,999 hours
from now?
57. Write a schedule for 12 teams so that each team will play
every other team once and no team will be idle.
58. One Hundred Fowl Problem (an old Chinese puzzle)
A man buys 100 birds for $100. A rooster is worth $10, a hen
is worth $3, and chicks are worth $1 a pair. How many roost-
ers, hens, and chicks did he buy if he bought at least one of
each type?
59. Chinese Remainder Problem
A band of 17 pirates decided
to divide their doubloons into equal portions. When they found
that they had 3 coins remaining, they agreed to give them to
their Chinese cook, Wun Tu. But 6 of the pirates were killed in
a fight. Now when the treasure was divided equally among
them, there were 4 coins left that they considered giving to
Wun Tu. Before they could divide the coins, there was a ship-
wreck and only 6 pirates, the coins, and the cook were saved.
This time equal division left a remainder of 5 coins for the
cook. Now Wun Tu took advantage of his culinary position to
concoct a poison mushroom stew so that the entire fortune in
doubloons became his own. What is the smallest number of
coins that the cook would have finally received?*
60. What is the next smallest number of coins that would satisfy
the conditions of Problem 59?
Problem Solving  3
An International Standard Book Number (ISBN) is used to identify
books. The ISBN for the 9th edition of  The Nature of Mathematics
was 0-534-36890-5. The first digit, 0, indicates the book is
published in an English-speaking country. The next three digits,
534, identify the publisher (Brooks/Cole), and the next five digits
identify the particular book. The last digit is a check digit, which is
used as follows. Multiply the first digit by 10, the next digit by 9,
and so on: 
10102  9152  8132  7142  6132  5162  4182  3192 
2102  1152  209
This number is congruent to 0, (mod 11). This is not by
chance. The check digit, 5, is chosen so that this sum is 0,
(mod 11). In other words, the check digit x for the book with ISBN
0-534-34015-x is found by considering 
240
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
*This problem is from Sun Zi (ca. AD 250), who wrote a mathematical manual during
the Three Kingdoms period in China.
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
1
2
3
4
5
6
By shading in alternate regions, interesting patterns can be found,
as shown in Figure 5.23.
FIGURE 5.23 Shaded (19, 9) design
Create the modular designs in Problems 47–52.
47. 119, 22
48. 119, 182
49. 121, 52
50. 121, 102
51. 165, 22
52. 165, 32
5.8  Cryptography
Cryptography is the art of writing or deciphering messages in code. Work in cryptogra-
phy combines theoretical foundations with practical applications. It involves, at some
level, ways to generate random-looking sequences and to detect and evaluate nonrandom
effects. You might think of governments, covert operations, and spies when you think of
cryptography, but there are many applications outside government. Cable television com-
panies, whose signals are easily intercepted from satellite relays, use encryption schemes
to prevent unauthorized use of their transmissions. Banks encrypt financial transactions
and records in their computers for purposes of authenticity and integrity—that is, to make
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.8
Cryptography
241
sure that the sender and contents are really as they appear—as well as for privacy. Cryp-
tography figured prominently in a recent movie on the war against the drug cartel in
Colombia. A cryptologist needs skills in communications, engineering, speech research,
signals processing, and the design of specialized computers. 
Simple Codes
Simple codes can be formed by replacing one letter by another. You may have seen this
type of code in a children’s magazine, or as a puzzle problem in a newspaper. The televi-
sion show Wheel of Fortune uses a variation of this simple code-breaking skill. The car-
toon at the left is from a popular game magazine. Codes such as this can easily be broken
by using some logic and a knowledge of our language. Here is an analysis of how this
code could be broken.
RAE WA XLHH XDL WAYLTSAT XDNX VM DL KALZS’X
PAIIEXL IR LGLPEXVAS, V FVHH SLYLT YAXL MAT DVI
NWNVS!
We have color-coded the solution by showing the new material at each step in color.
1. The hint for this puzzle was “A four-letter word that starts and ends with the same let-
ter is often THAT.” From this, we conclude that the coded word XDNX is that, so that
X is T, D is H, N is A. Fill in these letters above the letters of the puzzle:
T
TH
THAT
H
T
RAE WA XLHH XDL WAYLTSAT XDNX VM DL KALZS’X 
T
T
T
H
PAIIEXL IR LGLPEXVAS, V FVHH SLYLT YAXL MAT DVI 
A
A
NWNVS! 
TH
2. The three-letter word XDL is probably the word the, so fill in E for L: 
TE
THE
E
THAT
HE
E
T
RAE WA XLHH XDL WAYLTSAT XDNX VM DL KALZS’X 
TE
E E
T
E E
TE
H
PAIIEXL IR LGLPEXVAS, V FVHH SLYLT YAXL MAT DVI 
A
A
NWNVS! 
3. The single letter V is not A since N is A, so we guess that it is I: 
TE
THE
E
THAT
I
HE
E
T
RAE WA XLHH XDL WAYLTSAT XDNX VM DL KALZS’X 
TE
E E
T I
I
I
E E
TE
HI
PAIIEXL IR LGLPEXVAS, V FVHH SLYLT YAXL MAT DVI 
A
A I
NWNVS! 
4. The coded word XLHH begins with TE_ _; since the last two letters are the same, we
assume that H is the letter L: 
TELL THE
E
THAT I
HE
E
T
RAE WA XLHH XDL WAYLTSAT XDNX VM DL KALZS’X 
TE
E E
T I
I
I LL E E
TE
H
I
PAIIEXL IR LGLPEXVAS, V FVHH SLYLT YAXL MAT DVI 
A
A I
NWNVS! 
Games magazine, December 1985
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5. The coded word FVHH ends with _ILL; assume F is W. Also we see the
coded word VM which is I_, so we also assume that the coded M is decoded as F: 
TELL THE
E
THAT IF
HE
E
T
RAE WA XLHH XDL WAYLTSAT XDNX VM DL KALZS’X 
TE
E E
T I
I WI LL E E
TE F
H I
PAIIEXL IR LGLPEXVAS, V FVHH SLYLT YAXL MAT DVI 
A
A I
NWNVS! 
6. Now, observing the context of the cartoon and making some assumptions about what
a prisoner might be saying, we make some trial-and-error guesses: He wants a pardon
from the governor, so we count letters and fill in the blanks for the word governor: 
O
GO TELL THE  GOVERNOR THAT IF HE OE N T
RAE WA XLHH XDL  WAYLTSAT XDNX VM DL KALZS’X 
O
TE
E E
T I ON I W I LL NEVER VOTE F OR HI
PAIIEXL IR LGLPEXV AS, V  F VHH S LYLT YAXL MAT DVI 
AGA I N
NWNVS! 
7. We can now fill in the completed deciphered message. Note that spaces translate as
spaces: 
YOU GO TELL THE GOVERNOR THAT IF HE DOESN’T COMMUTE 
MY EXECUTION, I WILL NEVER VOTE FOR HIM AGAIN! 
Modular Codes*
One common code is based on modular arithmetic, and it is known as a modular code.
Rather than simply substituting one letter for another (which is an easily broken code),
more sophisticated codes can be developed. To encrypt a message means to scramble it
by something called an encoding key. The result is a secret or coded message, called ci-
phertext. The coded message is then unscrambled using a secret decoding key. This cod-
ing procedure requires that both the sender and the receiver know, and conceal, the
encoding and decoding keys. Suppose, for example, that we wish to send the following
secret message:
THE FBI HAS BED BUGS.
Suppose we select some encoding key—say, multiply by 2. Then we code the mes-
sage according to some given modular number, say 29, as shown in Figure 5.24 on
page 243. Notice that we use 29 instead of 0; this is still considered a modulo 29 sys-
tem since 29
0, (mod 29).
We look up the numerical value for each letter, space, and punctuation mark
according to
20
8
5 29 6
2
9 29 8
1
19 29 2
5
4
29
2
21
7
19 28
Message:
T
H E
F B I
H A 
S 
B E D 
B U
G
S . 
Note that the “code” 20-8-5-29-6-2-9-29-8-1-19-29-2-5-4-29-2-21-7-19-28 would be
“easy” to break. Why? 
Now we encode by multiplying each of these numbers by the encoding key; then we
modulate, or write each of these answers modulo 29: 
;
242
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
European mathematicians 
Pomerance, Rumely, and 
Adleman, building on recent 
work by theorists in the 
United Sates, have solved a 
3,000-year-old problem in 
mathematics, an achievement 
that raises questions about the 
security of recently developed 
secret codes.
   The problem, one of the 
oldest in mathematics, is how 
to determine whether a 
number is prime—that is, 
whether it can be divided by 
any number other than itself 
and 1.  The smallest prime 
numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, and 11.
   Using the new method, a 
test on a 97-digit number, 
which previously could have 
taken as long as 100 years 
with the fastest computer, was 
done in 77 seconds.
   It's possible that the method 
may help determine the 
divisors of a large number that 
is not prime.  One way to tell 
whether a number is prime is 
to try to divide it by other 
numbers.  If the number is 
very large, trying to divide it 
by other numbers is hopeless.
   In 1640, Pierre de Fermat 
invented a test for determin-
ing primes without doing 
division.  In the last decade, 
mathematicians decided that 
they could run Fermat's test 
on a suspected prime number 
many times, and if it consis-
tently passed, there was a high 
probability that the number 
was prime.
*This code requires Section 5.7.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20 8
5 29 6 2 9 29 8 1 19 29 2
5 4 29 2 21 7 19 28
Message:
T
H E
F B I
H A S
B E D
B U G S
. 
Numerical value:
20- 8- 5- 29- 6- 2- 9- 29- 8- 1- 19- 29- 2- 5- 4- 29- 2- 21- 7- 19- 28
Encode (encoding key 2):
40- 16- 10- 58- 12- 4- 18- 58- 16- 2- 38- 58- 4- 10- 8- 58- 4- 42- 14- 38- 56 
Modulate:
11- 16- 10- 29- 12- 4- 18- 29- 16- 2- 9- 29- 4- 10- 8- 29- 4- 13- 14- 9- 27
Coded message:
K
P
J
L D R
P B I
D J H
D M N
I 
, 
The coded message is
KPJ LDR PBI DJH DMNI, 
The decoding key is the inverse of the encoding key. Since the encoding key is to multi-
ply by 2, the decoding key is to divide by 2. 
Section 5.8
Cryptography
243
On October 11, 1988, Mark S. 
Manasse of Digital Corporation's 
Systems and Arjen K. Lenstra of 
the University of Chicago linked 
over a dozen users of some 400 
computers on three continents to 
find the factors of a 100-digit 
number.
    Several of the most secure 
cipher systems invented in the 
past decade are based on the fact 
that large numbers are extremely 
difficult to factor, even using the 
most powerful computers for a 
long period of time. The 
accomplishment of factoring a 
100-digit number "is likely to 
prompt cryptographers to 
reconsider their assumptions 
about cipher security," Lenstra 
said in a telephone interview. ... 
Using larger numbers makes the 
work of cryptographers more 
cumbersome.
AB CD EFG
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
,
. space
1
30
59
2 3 4 5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
31 32 33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
etc.
FIGURE 5.24. Modular 29 code
Example
1
Decode message
Decode the following message for which the encoding key is to multiply by 2:
NBXXMC RI B CAXX FBK,
Solution
First use Figure 5.24 to find the numerical value:
14-2-24-24-13-3-29-18-9-29-2-29-3-1-24-24-29-6-2-11-27
The decoding key is to divide by 2, so we look at the code and write the odd numbers so
that they are evenly divisible by 2, (mod 29):
The Mathematics Teacher, Jan. 1990, p.70.
Unbreakable Codes
In 1970, mathematicians Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman showed a way to make the
keys public. Suppose a code has two keys, an encoding key and a decoding key, and also
suppose it is impossible to compute one key from the other in the sense that no person or
14 - 2 - 24 - 24 - 42 - 32 - 58 - 18 - 38 - 58 - 2 - 58 - 32 - 30 - 24 - 24 - 58 - 6 - 2 - 40 - 56
Decoding key (divide by 2):
7 - 1 - 12 - 12 - 21 - 16 - 29 - 9 - 19 - 29 - 1 - 29 - 16 - 15 - 12 - 12 - 29 - 3 - 1 - 20 - 28 
Decoded message (Figure 5.24):
G - A - L - L  -  U - P -
-
I  - S - - A   -   -   P -  O -  L - L -   -   C - A - T  -  .
The decoded message is: GALLUP IS A POLL CAT.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

244
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
It is easy to multiply two large 
prime numbers to obtain a large 
number as the answer.  But the 
reverse process—factoring a 
large number to determine its 
components—presents a 
formidable challenge.  The 
problem appears so hard that the 
difficulty of factoring underlies 
the so-called RSA method of 
encrypting digital information.  
An international team of 
computer scientists recently 
spent 8 months finding the 
factors of a 129-digit number 
that was suggested 17 years 
ago as a test of the security of 
the RSA cryptographic scheme.  
This effort demonstrates the 
strength of the RSA crypto-
system.  However, this effort 
also demonstrates that 
significantly larger numbers 
may be necessary in the future 
to ensure security.
Science News, May 7, 1994
Level  1
Number the letters of the alphabet from 1 to 26; code a comma as
27, period as 28, and space as 29. Encode the messages in
Problems 1–4.
1. NEVER SAY NEVER.
2. THE EAGLE HAS LANDED.
3. YOU BET YOUR LIFE.
4. MY BANK BALANCE IS NEGATIVE.
Number the letters of the alphabet from 1 to 26 and code a blank
as 29. Decode the messages in Problems 5–8.
5. 1-18-5-29-23-5-29-8-1-22-9-14-7-29-6-21-14-29-25-5-20 
6. 9-29-12-15-22-5-29-13-1-20-8-5-13-1-20-9-3-19
7. 6-1-9-12-21-18-5-29-20-5-1-3-8-5-19-29-19-21-3-3-5-19-19
8. 19-17-21-1-18-5-29-13-5-1-12-19-29-13-1-11-5-29-18-15-21-
14-4-29-16-5-15-16-12-5
Give the decoding key for the encoding keys in Problems 9–14.
9. Multiply by 8.
10. Divide by 6.
11. Times 20, add 2.
12. Divide by 4, minus 3.
13. Multiply by 4 and add 2, then double the result.
14. Multiply by 3 and subtract 3, then divide the result 
by 2.
Level 2
Use Figure 5.24 to encode or decode the messages
in Problems 15–23.
15. Encoding key: Multiply by 3: NEVER SAY NEVER.
16. Encoding key: Multiply by 5. THE EAGLE HAS LANDED. 
17. Encoding key: Multiply by 2 and add 5. YOU BET 
YOUR LIFE.
18. Encoding key: Multiply by 4 and subtract 10. 
MY BANK BALANCE IS NEGATIVE.
19. Encoding key: Multiply by 3. 
XEJSBQ LEJSBQ,. C RCGG UEQZ
20. Encoding key: Multiply by 2 and add 10.
LJMQKVTSSKQJ.SJKITJ,ZKJULECSJ. 
IJSKGTKITJTESTSJSETTM 
21. Encoding key: Multiply by 2 and subtract 7.
SKAXBVIXAVXVGKQDV.WSYQCLT 
22. Encoding key: multiply by 2 and subtract 11. 
ALL PERSONS BY NATURE DESIRE KNOWLEDGE. 
23. Encoding key: Multiply by 3 and add 5. SHOW ME A
DROPOUT FROM A DATA PROCESSING SCHOOL 
AND I WILL SHOW YOU A NINCOMPUTER.
Problem Set 5.8
computer would be able to do it; then this would constitute an unbreakable code. Here is
the way such a code works. Everyone owns a unique pair of keys, one of which remains
private, but the other is public in the sense that it is listed in a readily available directory.
To send a message, you look up the public key for the person to whom the message is to
be sent. You use the public key to scramble the message. The receiver then uses his or her
private key to decode the message with total secrecy and privacy.
Three mathematicians, Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman, created a
public key algorithm known as RSA, from their initials. This method depends on ideas of
prime numbers and factoring studied in this chapter. Consider two prime numbers, say,
11 and 7. Now if I hand you their product, 77, this product can be made public, while the
factors 11 and 7 remain secret. To encode you need the number 77, but to decode you
need the factors. Now, if the factors are large enough (say, 200 digits each), then the prod-
uct is so large that it can never be factored, and the result is an unbreakable code.*
Why would we need an unbreakable public-key code? Some applications include
protecting money transfers from tampering, shielding sensitive business data from com-
petitors, and protecting computer software from viruses. The government has published a
digital signature algorithm (DSA), which depends on a single very large prime number.
*RSA Laboratories, Redwood City, CA, tests its ability to create difficult ciphers by establishing a series of cryptographic
contests. Its first challenge required 140 days to solve. The coded message was “Strong cryptography makes the world a better
place.” If you are interested in this type of challenge, check out www.rsa.com for additional information.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problem Solving 3   
The ciphers in Problems 24–27 are taken from Games 
December 1985.
24. L FPHWDJ QJPQFJ TDP MJJQ BPKR. WDJU HVJ
IPTHVBR TDP DHXJG’W KPW WDJ KSWR WP ALWJ
QJPQFJ WDJNRJFXJR. (Hint: Ciphertext pattern QJPQFJ 
often represents PEOPLE.)
25. GHJWHY NDW LOGKL TGRLBK, UBLRGXV, GHV 
XYOZLD WH DZL DWR VWS ZL RXBOJ G UGH MWX
GOO LYGLWHZHSL. (Hint: A three letter word after a series
of words set off by commas is often AND.)
26. GRAPE MA QLMVFGCB, BLLCRQU XRUX GPMRQUB,
TFQBMPQMEK BTXLYNEL DLBM BXFVB PUPRQBM
LPTX FMXLG. (Hint: Ciphertext B represents S. Note its high
frequency as a first and last letter. Bonus hint: The fifth word is
not THAT.)
27. MZDGBWV-MVCWZ WTZ HR ZHMAD XHKEBWTEG
NZHLTUCG TUCWV CELTZHEXCEB RHZ PCWBSCZ
GBWBTHE. (Hint: The five vowels, A to U, are represented
by C, H, K, T, and W, but not necessarily in that order.)
Section 5.9
Chapter Summary
245
Cryptic arithmetic is a type of mathematics puzzle in which
letters have been replaced by digits. Replace each letter by a digit
(the same digit for the same letter throughout; different digits for
different letters), and the arithmetic will be performed correctly.
Break the codes in Problems 28–30.
28.
SEND
 MORE
________
MONEY
29.
THIS
IS
 VERY
________
EASY
30.
DAD
SEND
 MORE
________
MONEY
5.9
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Properties of numbers: closure property [5.1]; commutative property [5.1]; associative
property [5.1]; distributive property [5.1]; identity [5.6]; inverse [5.6]; groups [5.6]; 
fields [5.6]
Relationships among the following sets of numbers:
natural numbers [5.1]; whole numbers [5.3]; integers [5.3]; rational numbers [5.4];
irrational numbers [5.5]; real numbers [5.6]
Meanings of fundamental operations:
addition, multiplication [5.1]; subtraction [5.1]; division [5.2]; the difference between a
square root and an irrational number [5.5]
Rules of divisibility [5.2]
Operations among the following sets of numbers: integers [5.3]; rationals [5.4];
irrationals [5.5]; reals [5.6]
Least number of divisors [5.3]
Fundamental theorem of arithmetic [5.3]
Fundamental property of fractions [5.4]
Pythagorean theorem [5.5]
Elementary operations [5.7]
More new jobs will
require more
postsecondary
mathematics education.
A CHALLENGE OF NUMBERS, 
MSEB, 1990
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First
review these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes in this
chapter, as well as the types of problems that were introduced. You will maximize
your understanding of this chapter by working the problems in this section only after
you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test help in studying
for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.  
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

246
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Chapter
5
Review Questions
Perform the indicated operations in Problems 1–8.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Reduce each fraction in Problems 9–13. If it is reduced, so state.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
Find the decimal representation for each number in Problems
14–18, and classify it as rational or irrational.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
Find the prime factorization of each number given in Problems
19–23. If it is prime, so state.
19. 89
20. 101
21. 349
22. 1,001
23. 6,825
Solve the equations in Problems 24–26 for x.
24.
, (mod 8)
25.
, (mod 7)
26.
, (mod 2)
27. Find the greatest common factor for the set of numbers
.
28. Find the least common multiple for the set of numbers
.
29. If 
, what is the value of
30. If a c b stands for the larger number of the pair and a T b
stands for the lesser number of the pair, what is the value of
(1 T 2) c (2 T 3)
Define each of the operations given in Problems 31–33.
31. multiplication
32. subtraction
33. division
11(22(13(42?
a(b 5 a 3 b 1 a 1 b
549, 1001, 24016
549, 1001, 24016
2x2 1 7x 1 1 ; 0
2x ; 3
x
5 ; 2
3
13
125
20
3
7 
7
3
3
8
1,209
2,821
184
207
100
825
16
18
8
3
23 1 "32 1 4122 132
2122
27
9 # 99
174 1 27
9 # 75
174
321 1 421
6
A11
12 1 2B 1 211
12
2"10 # "10
7
30 1 5
42 1 5
99
4
7 1 5
9
24 1 51232
34. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain why we cannot divide 
by zero.
35. Find an irrational number between 34 and 35. 
36. What is a field? Describe each property.
37. Consider the set  and let a, 
. Let /D be an operation
defined by a /D b  g.c.f. of a and b. Is  a commutative
group for the operation of /D?
38. Do You Weigh Too Much? In the United States, a fat person
is defined as anyone with a “body mass index” (or BMI) of
27.6 or higher. The World Health Organization defines a fat
person as one with a BMI of 25 or higher. To determine BMI,
multiply your weight in pounds by 703, and then divide that
result by your height (in inches) squared. Write this in
formula form using w for weight in pounds and h for height
in inches. Calculate the BMI (rounded to the nearest tenth)
for each of these people:
a. 5 ft 5 in., 165 lb
b. 6 ft, 185 lb
c. What is the weight (rounded to the nearest pound) for a 
5-ft, 6-in. tall person who wants a BMI of 25?
39. The news clip is from the column “Ask Marilyn,” Parade
Magazine, April 15, 1990. Answer the question asked in the
article.
b [
There are 1,000 tenants and 
1,000 apartments.  The first 
tenant opens every door.  The 
second closes every other door.  
The third tenant goes to every 
third door, opening it if it is 
closed and closing it if it is 
open.  The fourth tenant goes to 
every fourth door, closing it if it 
is open and opening it if it is 
closed.  This continues with 
each tenant until the 1,000th 
tenant closes the 1,000th door.  
Which doors are open?
Anita Mueller Arnold, MD
40. Suppose you are building a stairway (such as shown in Figure
5.25). Assume that the vertical rise is 8 ft, the horizontal run
is 12 ft, and the maximum rise for each step is 8 inches. How
many steps are necessary?
What is the total length of
the segments making up the stairs, and what is the length of
the diagonal?
246
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
Reprinted with permission from Parade, © 1990
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.9
Chapter Summary
247
Rise 8 ft
Run 12 ft
FIGURE 5.25 Building a stairway
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on one of these books:
Estimation and Mental Computation, Harold L. Schoen
and Marilyn J. Zweng (Reston, VA: Yearbook of the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 1986). 
The Man Who Knew Infinity, S. Kanigel (New York:
Charles Scribners, 1991).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b. Consider the following possibilities: 
Can you formulate any conclusions about the appropriate hypotheses for the
Babylonian approximation? 
c. Put this formula into a historical context. 
0 b 0 , a2  0 b 0 5 a2  0 b 0 . a2
248
CHAPTER 5
The Nature of Numbers
This Babylonian approximation for 
is found by 
With a calculator, we obtain 
3.31662479. Write a paper about this approxi-
mation method. Here are some questions you might consider: 
a. Can b be negative?
211 
"11 <  3 1
2
2132 < 3.3333 c
211
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with others to
communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other students to submit
a single report based on each of the following questions.
G16. With only a straightedge and compass, use a number line and the Pythagorean
theorem to construct a segment whose length is 
. Measure the segment as
accurately as possible, and write your answer in decimal form. Do not use a 
calculator or any tables. Now, continue your work to construct segments whose
lengths are
, 
, 
, . . . .
G17. Four Fours
Write the numbers from 1 to 100 (inclusive) using exactly four fours.
See Problem 60, Problem Set 5.3, to help you get started.
G18. Pythagorean Theorem
Write out three different proofs of the Pythagorean
theorem.
G19. Modular Art
Many interesting designs such as those shown in Figure 5.26 can be
created using patterns based on modular arithmetic. (You might also wish to look at
Problem 46, Section 5.7, p. 93. Prepare a report for class presentation based on the
article “Using Mathematical Structures to Generate Artistic Designs” by Sonia
Forseth and Andrea Price Troutman, The Mathematics Teacher, May 1974, 
pp. 393–398. Another source is “Mod Art: The Art of Mathematics” by Susan
Morris, Technology Review, March/April 1979.
"5
"4
"3
"2
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
G20. The Babylonians estimated square roots using the following formula: 
If
For example, if n  11, then n  9  2, so that n  11, a  3, and b  2.
c
perfect square
n  a2  b, then 2n  a  b
2a
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Section 5.9
Chapter Summary
249
Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas in this chapter. You can find references
to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 5.1 In the text we tried some formulas that might have generated only primes,
but, alas, they failed. Below are some other formulas. Show that these, too, do not
generate only primes.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
an even integer
PROJECT 5.2 For what values of 
a prime?
PROJECT 5.3 A formula that generates all prime numbers is given by David Dunlop and
Thomas Sigmund in their book Problem Solving with the Programmable Calculator
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1983). The authors claim that the formula 
produces every prime number except 2 and 3, but give no proof or refer-
ence to a proof. Create a table, and give an argument to support or find a counter-
example to disprove their claim.
PROJECT 5.4 A large prime, 
2 1, is a number that has 9,152,052 digits. A num-
ber this large is hard to comprehend. Write a paper making the size of this number
meaningful to a nonmathematical reader.
PROJECT 5.5 Investigate some of the properties of primes not discussed in the text. Why
are primes important to mathematicians? Why are primes important in mathematics?
What are some of the important theorems concerning primes?
PROJECT 5.6 Historical Quest
We mentioned that the Egyptians wrote their fractions
as sums of unit fractions. Show that every positive fraction less than 1 can be written
as a sum of unit fractions.
PROJECT 5.7 Historical Quest
The Egyptians had a very elaborate and well-developed
system for working with fractions. Write a paper on Egyptian fractions.
PROJECT 5.8 Form a group using a geoboard. Go to www.mathnature.com for some
ideas about writing this paper.
PROJECT 5.9 Prove that y
is irrational.
PROJECT 5.10 Historical Quest
Write a paper or prepare an exhibit illustrating the
Pythagorean theorem.
PROJECT 5.11 Write a paper on the symmetries of a cube. Go to www.mathnature.com
for some ideas about writing this paper.
PROJECT 5.12 What is a Diophantine equation?
PROJECT 5.13 Prepare an exhibit on cryptography. Include devices or charts for writing
and deciphering codes, coded messages, and illustrations of famous codes from
history. For example, codes are found in literature in Before the Curtain Falls by 
J. Rives Childs, The Gold Bug by Edgar Allan Poe, and Voyage to the Center of
Earth by Jules Verne.
PROJECT 5.14 Write a paper on the importance of cryptography for the Internet.
"2
230,402,457
"1 1 24n
n is11 # 14n 1 1
n2 1 1, n
9n2 2 498n 1 6,683
2n2 1 29
n2 2 79n 1 1,601
n2 1 n 1 41
www.mathnature.com 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
6.1 Polynomials
251
Terminology, simplification, shortcuts
with products, binomial theorem, 
polynomials, and areas
6.2 Factoring
258
Using areas to factor, using algebra 
to factor
6.3 Evaluation, Applications, 
and Spreadsheets
264
Evaluate an application from genetics,
spreadsheets
6.4 Equations
274
Terminology, linear equations, 
quadratic equations
6.5 Inequalities
283
Comparison property, solving linear
inequalities
6.6 Algebra in Problem 
Solving
288
Number relationships, distance relation-
ships, Pythagorean relationships
6.7 Ratios, Proportions, and
Problem Solving
300
Ratios, proportions
6.8 Percents
308
Percent, fractions/decimals/percents,
estimation, the percent problem
6.9 Modeling Uncategorized 
Problems
317
6.10 Chapter Summary
326
Important terms, types of problems, 
review problems, book reports, group 
research projects, individual research
projects
6
Outline
“Well, it’s a can of Coke. Will that not work?”
asked Hannah.
“That’s really silly, Hannah,” said Jane
sarcastically.
Hannah quickly responded, “Not if the weights of
the can of Coke and the trunk are the same. You 
do not know how much each of these containers
weighs, and I’m prepared to show you that they
weigh exactly the same!”
Overview
It has been said that algebra is the greatest labor-saving 
device ever invented. Even though you have probably had 
algebra sometime in your past, the essential algebraic ideas
you will need for the rest of this text are covered or reviewed
in this chapter. We begin with the basic building blocks of 
algebra—namely, polynomials and operations with polyno-
mials. There are four main processes in algebra: simplify
(Section 6.1), factor (Section 6.2), evaluate (Section 6.3),
and solve (Sections 6.4, 6.5, and 6.7). Some applications of
these ideas are introduced in the last four sections of this
chapter. We look at an application from genetics; take a peek
at computer spreadsheets; and solve application problems
with numbers, ratios, proportions, percents, distance, and
Pythagorean relationships.
THE NATURE OF ALGEBRA
C
O
L
A
Co
Coke
Will these objects balance?
C
O
L
A
Co
Coke
What in the World?
Hannah, a very small person, is moving into the
dorms at her school and she needs to move a very
large, heavy chest. She does not know what to do,
so she asks her friend, Jane, for help. Jane tells
Hannah, “Let’s get a big board. I remember from
school that you can move a big object with a lever.”
“I get it!” Hannah cried loudly. “I have just the
right stuff out back. Let’s see. . . . Look at how I’ve
put this together.”
“What is that you’ve put on the other end of the
lever?” asked Jane.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.1
Polynomials
251
6.1  Polynomials
The fact that algebra has its origin in arithmetic, . . . led Sir Isaac
Newton to designate it “Universal Arithmetic,” a designation
which, vague as it is, indicates its character better than any other.
GEORGE E. CHRYSTAL
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
Many people think of algebra as simply a high school mathematics course in which
variables (symbols used to represent an unspecified member of some set) are manipu-
lated. This chapter reviews many of these procedures; however, the word algebra refers
to a structure, or a set of axioms that forms the basis for what is accepted and what is not.
For example, in the previous chapter we defined a field, which involves a set, two opera-
tions, and 11 specified properties. If you studied Section 5.7, you investigated an algebra
with a finite number of elements. As you study the ordinary algebra presented in this
chapter, you should remember this is only one of many possible algebras. Additional
algebras are often studied in more advanced mathematics courses.
In this chapter we will review much of the algebra you have previously studied.
There are four main processes in algebra, which we will review in this chapter: simplify,
factor, evaluate, and solve.
Terminology
Recall that a term is a number, a variable, or the product of numbers and variables. Thus,
10x is one term, but 
is not (because the terms 10 and x are connected by addition
and not by multiplication). A fundamental notion in algebra is that of a polynomial,
which is a term or the sum of terms. We classify polynomials by the number of terms and
by degree:
A polynomial with one term is called a monomial.
A polynomial with two terms is called a binomial.
A polynomial with three terms is called a trinomial.
There are other words that could be used for polynomials with more than three terms,
but this classification is sufficient. To classify by degree, we recall that the degree of a
term is the number of variable factors in that term. Thus, 3x is first-degree, 5xy is second-
degree, 10 is zero-degree, 
is second-degree, and 
is fifth-degree. The degree of
a polynomial is the largest degree of any of its terms. A first-degree term is sometimes
called linear, and a second-degree term is sometimes referred to as quadratic. The
numerical part of a term, usually written before the variable part, is called the numeri-
cal coefficient. In 3x, it is the number 3, in 5xy it is the number 5, and in 
it is the
number 9.
9x 2y3
9x 2y3
2x 2
10 1 x
Historical
Algebra and algebraic ideas date
back 4,000 years to the Babyloni-
ans and the Egyptians; the Hindus
and the Greeks also solved
algebraic problems. The title 
of Arab mathematician 
al-Khwârizmî’s text (about A.D. 825),
Hisâb al-jabr w’almugâbalah, is the
origin of the word algebra. The
book was widely known in Europe
through Latin translations. The
word al-jabr or al-ge-bra became
synonymous with equation
solving. Interestingly enough, the
Arabic word al-jabr was also used
in connection with medieval bar-
bers. The barber, who also set
bones and let blood in those times,
was known as an algebrista. In 
the 19th century, there was a 
significant change in the prevalent
attitude toward mathematics: Up
to that time, mathematics was 
expected to have immediate and
direct applications, but now math-
ematicians became concerned with
the structure of their subject and
with the validity, rather than the
practicality, of their conclusions.
Thus, there was a move toward
pure mathematics and away from
applied mathematics.
NOTE
You may think this
terminology is not very
important, but be care-
ful! It is essential that
you know how to use
these boldface terms
correctly.
1
2
3
5 ?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

252
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
1
Classify polynomials
Classify each polynomial by number of terms and by degree. If the expression is not a
polynomial, so state.
a. x
b. x2  5x  7
c. x3 
d. x2 y3  xy2
e. 5 
Solution
a. Monomial, degree 1
b. Trinomial, degree 2 
c. Not a polynomial because it involves division by a variable. Notice that x3 
is a
polynomial because it can be written as x3  x and fractional coefficients are
permitted. 
d. Binomial, degree 5
e. Monomial, degree 0
1
2
x
2
2
x
Example
2
Simplify algebraic expressions
Simplify the given algebraic expressions.
a. 12x  (5)x
b. 3x  6x  2x
c. 2x  3y  5x  2y
d. 5xy2  xy2  4x2y
e. (4x  5)  (5x2  2x  3)
f. (4x  5)  (5x2  2x  3)
Solution
a. 12x  (5x)  12x  5x  7x
Add the opposite of (5x).
b. 3x  6x  2x  7x
c. 2x  3y  5x  2y  7x  y
Note the similar terms.
d. 5xy2  xy2  4x2y  4xy2  4x2y
e. (4x  5)  (5x2  2x  3)  5x2  (4x  2x)  (5  3)
 5x2  6x  8
f. Recall that to subtract a polynomial, you subtract each term of that polynomial:
(4x  5)  (5x2  2x  3)  4x  5  5x2  2x  (3)
 5x2  2x  2
When writing polynomials, it is customary to arrange the terms from the highest-
degree to the lowest-degree term. If terms have the same degree they are usually listed in
alphabetical order.
Simplification
When working with polynomials, it is necessary to simplify algebraic expressions. The
key ideas of simplification are similar terms and the distributive property. Terms that dif-
fer only in the numerical coefficients are called like terms or similar terms.
When the algebraic expressions that we are simplifying are polynomials, we specify the
form of the simplified expression.
This is the first of the
four main processes 
of algebra.
To simplify a polynomial means to carry out all operations (according to the
order-of-operations agreement) and to write the answer in a form with the
highest-degree term first, with the rest of the terms arranged by decreasing degree.
If there are two terms of the same degree, arrange those terms alphabetically.
Simplify Polynomials
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Remember from beginning algebra that x  (1)x, so to subtract a polynomial you
can do it as shown in Example 2f—by subtracting each term—or you can think of it as an
application of the distributive property:
(4x  5)  (5x2  2x  3)  4x  5  (1)(5x2  2x 3)
 4x  5  (1)(5x2)  (1)(2x)  (1)(3)
 5x2  2x  2
The distributive property is also important in multiplying polynomials. 
Section 6.1
Polynomials
253
Example
4
Use FOIL to multiply
Simplify:
a. (2x  3)(4x  5)
b. (5x  3)(2x  3)
c. (4x  3)(3x  2)
Solution
a. (2x  3)(4x  5)  (2x  3)(4x)  (2x  3)(5)
Distributive property
 8x2

12x  (10x)
 (15)
123
144424443
14243
c
c
c
Product of 
Sum of products of 
Product of
first terms
inner terms and outer terms
last terms
 8x2  2x  15
Example
3
Simplify algebraic expressions with parentheses
Simplify the given algebraic expressions.
a. 3x(x2  1)
b. (2x  3)(x  1)
c. (x  2)(x2  5x  2)
d. (2x  1)3
Solution
In each case, we will distribute the expression on the left: 3x, (2x  3),
(x  2), and (2x  1), respectively. You will find your work easier to read if you
work down with the equal signs aligned rather than across your paper. And finally, 
we use the laws of exponents (Section 1.3, p. 36) to simplify expressions such as 
x(x2)  x1x2  x12  x3. 
a. 3x(x2  1)  3x(x2)  3x(1)
This step is usually done mentally, and is not written down.
 3x3  3x
b. (2x  3)(x  1)  (2x  3)(x)  (2x  3)(1)
Mental step 
 2x2  3x  2x  3
Distributive property
 2x2  x  3
Add similar terms.
c. (x  2)(x2  5x  2)  (x  2)(x2)  (x  2)(5x)  (x  2)(2)
 x3  2x2  5x2  10x  2x  4
 x3  7x2  8x  4
d.
Definition of cube
  8x3  12x2  6x  1
  8x3  4x2  8x2  4x  2x  1
  (2x  1)(4x2)  (2x  1)(4x)  (2x  1)(1)
  (2x  1)(4x2  4x  1)
  (2x  1)[4x2  2x  2x  1]
  (2x  1)[(2x  1)(2x)  (2x  1)(1)]
 (2x  1)3  (2x  1)(2x  1)(2x  1)
Note that 
(2x)3  (1)3  8x3  13
 (2x  1)3.
Shortcuts with Products
It is frequently necessary to multiply binomials, and even though we use the distributive
property, we want to be able to carry out the process quickly and efficiently in our heads.
Consider the following example, which leads us from multiplication using the distribu-
tive property to an efficient process that is usually called FOIL.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b. (5x  3)(2x  3)  10x2

(15x  6x)

(9)
Mentally
123
1442443
123
c
c
c
FIRST terms 
OUTER terms and  
LAST terms
INNER terms 
 10x2  9x  9
c. (4x  3)(3x  2)  12x2  17x  6
Mentally
254
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
You are encouraged to carry out the binomial multiplication mentally, as shown in
Example 4c. To help you remember the process, we sometimes call this binomial multi-
plication FOIL to remind you.
First terms  Outer terms  Inner terms  Last terms 
To multiply two binomials, carry out this mental step.
(ax  b)(cx  d)  acx2

(ad  bc)x

bd
123
1442443
123
c
c
c
First terms 
Outer   
Last terms

Inner
Foil Binomial Product
Example
5
Mentally multiply
Simplify (mentally):
a. (2x  3)(x  3)
b. (x  3)(3x  4)
c. (5x  2)(3x  4) 
Solution
a. (2x  3)(x  3)  2x2  3x

9
c
O  I
c
F
L
b. (x  3)(3x  4)  3x2  5x  12
c. (5x  2)(3x  4)  15x2  14x  8
5
5
5
A second shortcut involves raising a binomial to an integral power—for example,
or 
. We look for a pattern with the following example.
1a 1 b2 8
12x 1 12 3
Example
6
Expand a binomial
Expand (multiply out) the expression (a  b)8.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. We could begin by using the definition of 8th power and the
distributive property:
(a  b)8  (a  b)(a  b)    (a  b)
14444444244444443
8 factors of a  b
However, we soon see that this is too lengthy to complete directly.
Devise a Plan. We will consider a pattern of successive powers; that is, consider
(a  b)n for n  0, 1, 2,
.
c
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Carry Out the Plan. We begin by actually doing the multiplications:
n  0: (a  b)0 
1
n  1: (a  b)1 
1  a  1  b
n  2: (a  b)2 
1  a2  2  ab  1  b2
n  3: (a  b)3 
1  a3  3  a2b  3  ab2  1  b3
n  4: (a  b)4 
1  a4  4  a3b  6  a2b2  4  ab3  1  b4
o
o
o
First, ignore the coefficients (shown in color) and focus on the variables: 
(a  b)1:
a
b
(a  b)2:
a2
ab
b2
(a  b)3:
a3
a2b
ab2
b3
(a  b)4:
a4
a3b
a2b2
ab3
b4
o
o
Do you see a pattern? As you read from left to right, the powers of a decrease and the
powers of b increase. Note that the sum of the exponents for each term is the same as
the original exponent:
(a  b)n:
anb0
an1b1
an2b2
  
anrbr
  
a2bn2
a1bn1
a0bn
Next, consider the numerical coefficients (shown in color):
(a  b)0:
1
(a  b)1:
1
1
(a  b)2:
1
2
1
(a  b)3:
1
3
3
1
(a  b)4:
1
4
6
4
1
o
o
Do you see the pattern? Recall Pascal’s triangle from Section 1.1 (see Figure 6.1).
Section 6.1
Polynomials
255
Right Diagonals
Left Diagonals
Rows
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
4
6
4
5
10
10
5
6
15
20
6
15
7
7
21
35
35
21
8
28
56
70
56
28
8
9
9
36
36
84
126
126
84
10
10
45
45
120
120
210
210
252
11
11
55
55
165
165
330
330
462
462
12
12
66
66
220
220
495
495
792
792
924
13
13
78
78
286
286
715
715 1287
1287
1716
1716
14
14
91
91
364
364
1001 2002 3003 3432 3003 2002 1001
15
15
105
105
455
455
1365
1365
3003
3003 5005
5005
6435
6435
FIGURE 6.1 Pascal’s triangle
To find (a  b)8, we look at the 8th row of Pascal’s triangle for the coefficients to com-
plete the product:
(a  b)8  a8  8a7b  28a6b2  56a5b3  70a4b4  56a3b5  28a2b6  8ab7  b8
Look Back. Does this pattern seem correct? We have verified the pattern directly for 
n  0, 1, 2, 3, and 4. With a great deal of algebraic work, you can verify by direct 
multiplication that the pattern checks for (a  b)8.
Historical
Niels Abel 
(1802–1829)
Our modern approach to algebra
can be traced to the work of Niels
Abel. Now considered to be 
Norway’s greatest mathematician,
he was, for the most part, ignored
during his lifetime. He investigated
fifth-degree equations, infinite 
series, functions, and integral 
calculus, as well as solutions of
the general class of equations now
called “Abelian.” Although he died
at the age of 26, “of poverty, 
disappointment, malnutrition, 
and chest complications,” he left
mathematicians enough material
to keep them busy for several 
centuries.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Binomial Theorem
The pattern we discovered for 
is a very important theorem in mathematics. It
is called the binomial theorem. The difficulty in stating this theorem is in relating the
coefficients of the expansion to Pascal’s triangle. We write 
to represent the number in
row 4, diagonal 2 of Pascal’s triangle (see Figure 6.1). We see
 6
 15
 10
 6,435
We summarize this pattern in the following box.
a15
7 b
a5
3b
a6
4b
a4
2b
a4
2b
1a 1 b2 8
256
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
You should actually
FIND these numbers
using Figure 6.1. Spend
some time studying
this theorem. There is a
lot of notation here,
and you should make
sure you understand
what it means.
For any positive integer n,
(a  b)n 
an 
an1b 
an2b2     
abn1 
bn
where 
is the number in the nth row, rth diagonal of Pascal’s triangle.
an
rb
an
nb
a
n
n 2 1b
an
2b
an
1b
an
0b
Binomial Theorem
Pascal’s triangle is efficient for finding the numerical coefficients for exponents that are
relatively small, as shown in Figure 6.1. However, for larger exponents we will need some
additional work, which will be presented in Chapter 12. To expand a polynomial is to
carry out the operations to simplify the expression.
Example
7
Expand using the binomial theorem
Expand (x  2y)4. 
Solution
In this example, let a  x and b  2y, and look at row 4 of Pascal’s
triangle for the coefficients. 
(a  b)4  a4  4a3b  6a2b2  4ab3  b4
Binomial theorem; n  4, a  x, b  2y
(x  2y)4  x4  4x3(2y)  6x2(2y)2  4x(2y)3  (2y)4
 x4  8x3y  24x2y2  32xy3  16y4
Polynomials and Areas
We assume that you know the area formulas for squares and rectangles:
Area of a square: A  s2
Area of a rectangle: A  Ow
Areas of squares and rectangles are often represented as trinomials. Consider the area
represented by the trinomial 
. This expression is made up of three terms: 
,
3x, and 2. Translate each of these terms into an area:
x 2
x2 1 3x 1 2
3x is three
boxes of area x:
x
1
1
1
x
and two 1-by-1
boxes:
x
Area
x2
Now you must rearrange these pieces into a rectangle. Think of them as cutouts and move
them around. There is only way (not counting order) to fit them into a rectangle:
or put together it looks like:
x  1
x  2
This is EASY if you cut
out these figures and
use them as manipula-
tives. Rearrangement of
strips is hard to show
in a book, but if you try
it with cutout pieces,
you will like it!
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note: The rectangle with dimensions x  2 by x  1 has the same area as one with 
dimensions x  1 by x  2.
Thus, (x  2)(x  1)  x2  3x  2. These observations provide another way 
(besides the distributive property) for verifying the shortcut method of FOIL. 
Section 6.1
Polynomials
257
Example
8
Binomial product two ways
Find the product 
both algebraically and geometrically.
Solution
Algebraic:
Geometric: Draw a rectangle with sides that measure 
and 
:
There is one square:
x2
four rectangles:
4x
three units:
3
Thus, (x  3)(x  1)  x2  4x  3.
x 1 1
x 1 3
1x 1 32 1x 1 12 5 x2 1 4x 1 3
1x 1 32 1x 1 12
x  1
x  3
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a polynomial?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the degree of a polynomial? 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the process for adding and
subtracting polynomials. 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the process of multiplying
polynomials using the distributive property. 
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the process of multiplying
binomials using FOIL. 
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the process of multiplying
binomials using areas. 
7. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the binomial theorem? 
Simplify each expression in Problems 8–22. Classify each answer
by number of terms and degree. 
8. (x  3)  (5x  7)
9. (2x  4)  (3x  4)
10. (x  y  2z)  (2x  5y  4z)
11. (x  y  z)  (2x  5y  3z)
12. (5x2  2x  5)  (3x2  5x  7)
13. (2x2  5x  4)  (3x2  2x  11)
14. (x  2y  3z)  (x  5y  4z)
15. (x2  4x  3)  (2x2  9x  6)
16. (3x  x2)  5(2  x)  (2x  3)
17. 3(x  5)  2(x  8)
18. 6(x  1)  2(x  1)
19. 3(2x2  5x  5)  2(5x2  3x  6)
20. 2(4x2  3x  2)  3(x2  5x  8)
21. 2(x  3)  3(x2  3x  1)  4(x  5)
22. 3(x  1)  2(x2  4x  5)  5(x  8)
In Problems 23–29, multiply mentally. 
23. a. (x  3)(x  2)
b. (y  1)(y  5) 
c. (z  2)(z  6)
d. (s  5)(s  4)
24. a. (x  1)(x  2)
b. (y  3)(y  2)
c. (a  5)(a  3)
d. (b  3)(b  4) 
25. a. (c  1)(c  7)
b. (z  3)(z  5)
c. (2x  1)(x  1)
d. (2x  3)(x  1)
26. a. (x  1)(3x  1)
b. (x  1)(3x  2)
c. (2a  3)(3a  2)
d. (2a  3)(3a  2)
27. a. (x  y)(x  y)
b. (x  y)(x  y) 
c. (x  y)(x  y)
d. (a  b)(a  b)
28. a. (5x  4)(5x  4)
b. (3y  2)(3y  2)
c. (a  2)2
d. (b  2)2
29. a. (x  4)2
b. (y  3)2
c. (s  t)2
d. (u  v)2
Problem Set 6.1
Level  2
Simplify the expressions in Problems 30–37. 
30. (5x  1)(3x2  5x  2)
31. (2x  1)(3x2  2x  5)
32. (3x  1)(x2  3x  2)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

33. (5x  1)(x3  2x2  3x)
34. (5x  1)(3x2  5x  2)  (x3  4x2  x  4)
35. 3(3x2  5x  2)  4(x3  4x2  x  4)
36. (x  2)(2x  3)  (x  1)(x  5)
37. (2x  3)(3x  2)  (x  2)(x  3)
Find each product in Problems 38–43 both algebraically and
geometrically.
38. (x  1)(x  4)
39. (x  2)(x  4)
40. (x  2)(x  5)
41. (x  3)(x  4) 
42. (2x  1)(2x  3)
43. (2x  3)(3x  2) 
258
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
56. Each apartment in a building rents for 800  d dollars per
month. What is the monthly income from 6d  12 units?
57. If a boat is traveling at a rate of 6b  15 miles per hour for a
time of 10  2b hours, what is the distance traveled by the
boat?
Problem Solving 3   
58. Binomial products can be used to do mental calculations. For
example, to multiply a pair of two-digit numbers whose tens
digits are the same and whose units digits add up to 10, men-
tally multiply the units digits and then multiply the tens digit
of the first number by one more than the tens digit of the
second. For example, 
8  9  72
T
84  86  7 2 2 4
4  6 
Mentally multiply the given numbers. 
a. 62  68
b. 57  53
c. 63  67
d. 952
e. 752
59. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Suppose the given numbers for
a mental calculation (see Problem 58) are 10x  y and 10x  z.
Notice that these two numbers have the same tens digit. Also
assume that y  z  10, which says that the units digits of the
two numbers sum to 10. Algebraically show why the mental
calculation described in Problem 58 “works.” 
60. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Devise a procedure for mentally
multiplying three-digit numbers with the same first two digits
and units digits that add up to 10.
Use the binomial theorem to expand each binomial given in
Problems 44–51.
44. (x  1)3
45. (x  1)3
46. (x  y)5
47. (x  y)6
48. (x  y)7
49. (x  y)8
50. (5x  2y)3
51. (2x  3y)4
Level 3
52. Write out the first three terms in the expansion
(x  y)12.
53. Write out the last three terms in the expansion 
(x  y)14.
54. The number of desks in one row is 5d  2. How many desks
are there in a room of 2d  1 rows if they are arranged in a
rectangular arrangement?
55. An auditorium has 6x  2 seats in each row and 51x  7 rows.
If the chairs are in a rectangular arrangement, how many seats
are there in the auditorium?
6.2 Factoring
We have called numbers that are multiplied factors. In Section 5.2 we defined a prime
number and the prime factorization of numbers. The same process can be applied to alge-
braic expressions. To factor an expression means to write it in factored form. That is, the
word “factor” is sometimes a noun and sometimes a verb.
In this section, we look at the process of factoring; we complete our discussion of
this topic in Section 6.4 when we use factoring to solve quadratic equations. Factoring is
also used extensively in algebra, so to understand some of the algebraic processes, it is
necessary to understand factoring.
The approach we take in this section is different from that you will normally see in
an algebra course. So often algebra is learned by brute force and memorization or symbol
manipulation, but our development uses a geometric visualization that may help in your
understanding not only of algebraic processes, but of geometric ones as well.
This is the second of 
the four main processes
of algebra.
S
S
S
S
5
5
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Using Areas to Factor
In the previous section, we showed how areas can be used to understand multiplication of
binomials. We now use areas to factor polynomials.
Section 6.2
Factoring
259
Example
1
Factor using areas
Factor 2x2  7x  6 using areas. 
Solution
First draw the areas for the terms:
Rearrange to form a rectangle: 
Push these pieces together to form a single rectangle: 
Thus, 2x2  7x  6  (2x  3)(x  2).
x  2
2x  3
7x
6
2x2
The following example shows how to use areas when factoring a polynomial with a
subtraction, as well as a polynomial that is not factorable. 
Evariste Galois 
(1811–1832)
Galois is another important name
in the history of algebra. Like
Abel, he also was not recognized
during his lifetime. He had trouble
with his teachers in school
because of his ability to do a great
amount of work in his head; his
teachers always wanted him to
“show all of his work.” At 16, he
wrote up several of his discoveries
and sent them to a famous mathe-
matician, Augustin Cauchy, who
promised to present Galois’
results. However, Cauchy lost 
Galois’ work. Galois tried again by
sending his work to another math-
ematician, Joseph Fourier. This
time Galois’ work was lost
because Fourier died before he
could read it. When Galois was 20,
he fought a duel over a woman.
He spent the entire night before
the duel writing out as many of his
discoveries as he could. On May 30,
1832, at the age of 20, Galois was
shot in the duel, and he died the
next day. Two days after his death,
a letter was received stating that
he was appointed to a professor-
ship at the University of Berlin—
the fulfillment of his lifelong dream.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Historical
Example
2
Factor using areas—advanced types
Factor the following polynomials, if possible, by using areas.
a. x2  2x  3
b. x2  5x  8 
Solution
a. First draw the rectangles for the terms: 
From these rectangles we must subtract three squares; we will indicate these squares
to be subtracted by 
.
2x
x2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

260
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
First arrange the positive pieces and then place the negative pieces (the gray ones)
on top of the positive pieces:
Thus, x2  2x  3  (x  3)(x  1). 
b.
There is no way of arranging all the pieces to form a rectangle. 
We see that this trinomial is not factorable.
1
1
left over:
x2
x
x
x
1
1
1
x
x
1
1
1
x2
1
x
x
x
x
1
1
1
x
1
1
1
1
left over:
x
x2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
x
x
x
x
x
x2
5x
8


x  1
x  3
This is x  1; move this piece over here
x
x  2
Using Algebra to Factor
By thinking through the steps for factoring trinomials by using areas, we can develop a
process for algebraic factoring. Consider 
and compare the process below
with the discussion at the beginning of this section. We consider the first term and the last
term of the given trinomial.
First term:
Area of the large square with side x
T
T
T
x2  3x  2  (x
2)(x
1)
c
c
c
Last term: 
Area of two squares with sides of length 1
There may be several ways of rearranging the areas for these first two steps (first term
and last term). What you want to do is to rearrange them so that they form a rectangle. By
looking at the binomial product and recalling the process we called FOIL, you see that
the sum of the outer product and the inner product, which gives the middle term of the
trinomial, will be the factorization that gives a rectangular area:
outer product

outer  inner
inner product
T
T
T T
T
x2  3x  2  (x  2)(x  1)
This method of factorization is called FOIL.
x 2 1 3x 1 2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.2
Factoring
261
Example
3
Use FOIL to factor
Factor 
using FOIL.
Solution
This is the same as Example 1, but now we use FOIL. 
First term:
2x2  7x  6  (2x
)(x
) 
Last term:
There are several possibilities: 
(2x  6)(x  1) 
(2x  1)(x  6) 
(2x  2)(x  3) 
(2x  3)(x  2) 
These are equivalent to the different arrangements of “pieces” to form the rectangle in
the area method shown in Example 1. Only one will form a rectangle and that is pre-
cisely the one that will give the middle term of the trinomial, namely, 7x: 
outer product

outer  inner
inner product
T
T
T T
T
Middle term:
2x2  7x  6  (2x  3)(x  2)
This factorization is unique (except for the order of the factors).
2x2 1 7x 1 6
To factor a trinomial:*
Step 1
Find the factors of the second-degree term, and set up the binomials.
Step 2
Find the factors of the constant term, and consider all possible binomials
(mentally). Think of the factors that will form a rectangle.
Step 3
Determine the factors that yield the correct middle term. If no pair of
factors produces the correct full product, then the trinomial is not factorable
using integers.
This factoring approach is called FOIL.
Procedure for Factoring Trinomials
This is a very common
process; make sure you
thoroughly understand
how to factor trinomials.
Example
4 Factor—advanced types
Factor, if possible.
a.
b.
Solution
a. 2x2  11x  12  (2x
)(x
)
Try (mentally): 1, 12; 12, 1; 2, 6; 6, 2; 3, 4; and 
4, 3. Use the pair that gives the middle term, 11x. 
2x2  11x  12  (2x  3)(x  4)
b. x2  3x  5  (x
)(x
)
Try (mentally): 1, 5; and 5, 1.
Since neither of these gives the middle term, 3x, we say that the trinomial is not
factorable.
x 2 1 3x 1 5
2x 2 1 11x 1 12
*In this book, we factor using integers only.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Common Factoring
If several terms share a factor, then that factor is called a common factor. For example,
the binomial 
has three common factors: 5, x, and 5x. To factor this sum of two
terms, we must change it to a product, and this can be done several ways:
The last of these possibilities has the greatest common factor as a factor, and is said to be
completely factored.
When combining common factoring with trinomial factoring, the procedure will be
easiest if you look for common factors first.
5x2 1 10x 5 5x1x 1 22
5x2 1 10x 5 x15x 1 102
5x2 1 10x 5 51x2 1 2x2
5x2 1 10x
262
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
5 Completely factor
Completely factor 
.
Solution
Common factor first
 3x(2x
)(x
)
Now use FOIL, first terms.
 3x(2x  1)(x  4)
Last terms
Difference of Squares 
The last type of factorization we will consider is called a difference of squares. Suppose
we start with one square, a2: 
From this square, we wish to subtract another square, b2: 
This gray square should be smaller than the first (a2  b2). Place this square (since it is
gray) on top of the larger square:
Rearrange these two pieces by moving the smaller one from the bottom and positioning it
vertically at the right:
The dimensions of this new arrangement are (a  b) by (a  b). Thus, 
a2  b2  (a  b)(a  b)
a  b
a
b
Moved piece
Cut this off so that there are two pieces
with dimensions a(a  b) and (a  b)b
a
a
b
b
Move this piece.
a
a
 6x3 2 21x2 2 12x 5 3x12x2 2 7x 2 42
6x3 2 21x2 2 12x
a2 2 b2 5 1a 2 b2 1a 1 b2
Difference of Squares
You need to remember
this formula.  
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.2
Factoring
263
Example
6 Completely factor—mixed types
Completely factor each expression, if possible.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a.
x2  36  (x  6)(x  6)
Difference of squares
b. 8x2  50  2(4x2  25)
Common factor first
 2(2x  5)(2x  5)
Difference of squares
c. 6x4  18x2  24  6(x4  3x2  4)
Common factor
 6(x2  4)(x2  1)
FOIL
 6(x  2)(x  2)(x2  1)
Difference of squares
6x4 2 18x2 2 24
8x2 2 50
x2 2 36
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Outline a procedure for factoring.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a difference of squares?
If possible, completely factor the expressions in Problems 3–36.
3. 10xy  6x
4. 5x  5
5. 8xy  6x
6. 6x  2
7. x2  4x  3
8. x2  2x  3
9. x2  5x  6
10. x2  x  6
11. x2  7x  12
12. x2  7x  8
13. x2  x  30
14. x2  9x  14
15. x2  2x  35
16. x2  6x  16
17. 3x2  7x  10
18. 2x2  7x  15
19. 2x2  7x  3
20. 3x2  10x  3
21. 3x2  5x  2
22. 6y2  7y  1
23. 2x2  9x  4
24. 7x2  4x  3
25. 3x2  x  2
26. 3x2  7x  2
27. 5x3  7x2  6x
28. 8x3  12x2  4x
29. 7x4  11x3  6x2
30. 3x4  3x3  36x2
31. x2  64
32. x2  169
33. 25x2  50
34. 16x2  25
35. x4  1
36. x8  1
Level 2
Factor each expression in Problems 37–48 by using areas. 
37. x2  5x  6
38. x2  7x  12 
39. x2  4x  3
40. x2  5x  4 
41. x2  6x  8
42. x2  2x  2 
43. x2  1
44. x2  4
45. x2  x  2
46. x2  x  6
47. x2  x  2
48. x2  x  6
Level 3
49. The area of a rectangle is x2  2x  143 square feet. What are
the dimensions of the figure?
50. What are the dimensions of a rectangle whose area is 
x2  4x  165 square feet?
51. What is the time needed to travel a distance of 
6x2  5x  4 miles if the rate is 3x  4 mph?
52. If an auditorium has x2  50x  600 seats arranged in a rectan-
gular fashion, what is the number of rows and how many seats
are there in each row?
Factor each expression in Problems 53–58, if possible. 
53. (x  2)(x  4)  (5x  6)(x  1)
54. (2x  1)(3x  2)  (3x  5)(x  2)
55. x6  13x4  36x2
56. x6  26x4  25x2
57. 20x2y2  17x2yz  10x2z2
58. 12x2y2  10x2yz  12x2z2
Problem Solving 3   
59. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Pick any three consecutive
integers—for example, 4, 5, and 6. The square of the middle
term is 1 more than the product of the first and third; for exam-
ple, 25 is 1 more than 4(6)  24. Prove this is true for any
three consecutive integers. 
60. Illustrate the property in Problem 59 geometrically.
Problem Set 6.2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

264
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
6.3
Evaluation, Applications, and Spreadsheets
If 
, then x and a name the same number; x may then be replaced by a in any expres-
sion, and the value of the expression will remain unchanged. When you replace variables
by given numerical values and then simplify the resulting numerical expression, the
process is called evaluating an expression.
Evaluate
To evaluate an expression means to replace the variable (or variables) with given values,
and then to simplify the resulting numerical expression.
x 5 a
This is the third of the
four main processes of
algebra.
Example
1 Evaluate an expression
Evaluate 
, where 
, 
, and 
.
Solution
a  cb
Remember, cb means c times b.
Step 1 Replace each variable with the corresponding numerical value. You may 
need additional parentheses to make sure you don’t change the order of 
operations. 
a  c  b
T T T T T
2  31112
Parentheses are necessary so that the product cb is not changed to 311.
Step 2 Simplify: 2  31112  2  33
Multiplication before addition
 35
c 5 3
b 5 11
a 5 2
a 1 cb
Example
2 Evaluate with exponents; order of operations
Evaluate the following, where 
and 
.
a.
b. 1
22
Solution
a. a2  b2  32  42
Remember the order of operations: Multiplication comes first,
 9  16
and 32  3  3, 42  4  4, which is multiplication.
 25
b. 1a  b22  13  422
Order of operations; parentheses first
 72
 49
Notice that a2  b2  1a  b22.
Remember that a particular variable is replaced by a single value when an expression
is evaluated. You should also be careful to write capital letters differently from lowercase
letters, because they often represent different values. This means that you should not
assume that 
just because 
. On the other hand, it is possible that other vari-
ables might have the value 3. For example, just because 
, do not assume that another 
variable—say t—cannot also have the value 
.
t 5 3
a 5 3
a 5 3
A 5 3
a 1 b
a2 1 b2
b 5 4
a 5 3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.3
Evaluation, Applications, and Spreadsheets
265
Example
3 Evaluate with mixed operations
Let a  1, b  3, c  2, and d  4. Find the value of the given capital letters. 
a. G  bc  a
b. H  3c  2d
c. I  3a  2b
d. R  a2  b2d
e.
f.
Solution
After you have found the value of a capital letter, write it in the box that
corresponds to its numerical value. This exercise will help you check your work. 
a. G  bc  a
b. H  3c  2d
 3122  1
 3122  2142
 6  1
 6  8
 5
 14
c. I  3a  2b
d. R  a2  b2d
 3112  2132
 12  32142
 3  6
 1  9142
 9
 37
e. S 
f.






 6
After you have filled in the appropriate boxes, the result is
37
9
5
14
6
R
I
G
H
T
12
2
7
2
3 1 6 1 3
2
2172
4
3112 1 3122 1 3
2
213 1 42
2122
T  3a  bc  b
c
21b 1 d2
2c
37
9
5
14
6
T  3a  bc  b
c
S  2(b  d)
2c
In algebra, variables are usually represented by either lowercase or capital letters.
However, in other disciplines, variables are often represented by other symbols or combi-
nations of letters. For example, I recently took a flight on Delta Air Lines and a formula
was given as an approximation for the distance you can see from a
Delta jet (or presumably any other plane). The article defined VM as the distance you can
view in miles when flying at an altitude of A feet. For this example VM is interpreted as a
single variable, and not as V times M as it normally would be in algebra.
An Application from Genetics
This application is based on the work of Gregor Mendel (1822–1884), an Austrian monk,
who formulated the laws of heredity and genetics. Mendel’s work was later amplified and
explained by a mathematician, G. H. Hardy (1877–1947), and a physician, Wilhelm
Weinberg (1862–1937). For years Mendel taught science without any teaching credentials
because he had failed the biology portion of the licensing examination! His work, however,
laid the foundation for the very important branch of biology known today as genetic science.
Assume that traits are determined by genes, which are passed from parents to their 
offspring. Each parent has a pair of genes, and the basic assumption is that each offspring
VM 5 "A 3 3.56
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

inherits one gene from each parent to form the offspring’s own pair. The genes are selected
in a random, independent way. In our examples, we will assume that the researcher is
studying a trait that is both easily identifiable (such as color of a rat’s fur) and determined by a
pair of genes consisting of a dominant gene, denoted by A, and a recessive gene, denoted by a.
The possible pairings are called genotypes:
AA is called dominant, or homozygous. 
Aa is called hybrid, or heterozygous; genetically, the genotype aA is the same as Aa. 
aa is called recessive. 
The physical appearance is called the phenotype:
Genotype AA has phenotype A. 
Genotype Aa has phenotype A (since A is dominant). 
Genotype aA has phenotype A. 
Genotype aa has phenotype a.
In genetics, a square called a Punnett square is used to display genotype. For
example, suppose two individuals with genotypes Aa are mated, as represented by the fol-
lowing Punnett square: 
Parent 2
A
a
Parent 1
A
AA
Aa
a
aA
aa
We see the result is AA  Aa  aA  aa  AA  2Aa  aa. This reminds us of the
binomial product 
1p  q22  p2  2pq  q2
Let’s use binomial multiplication to find the genotypes and phenotypes of a particular ex-
ample. In population genetics, we are interested in the percent, or relative frequency, of
genes of a certain type in the entire population under study. In other words, imagine tak-
ing the two genes from each person in the population and putting them into an imaginary
pot. This pot is called the gene pool for the population. Geneticists study the gene pool to
draw conclusions about the population.
266
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
4 Find the population percents of phenotypes
Suppose a certain population has two eye color genes: B (brown eyes, dominant) and b
(blue eyes, recessive). Suppose we have an isolated population in which 70% of the genes
in the gene pool are dominant B, and the other 30% are recessive b. What fraction of the
population has each genotype? What percent of the population has each phenotype?
Solution
Let p  0.7 and q  0.3. Since p and q give us 100% of all the genes in the
gene pool, we see that p  q  1. Since 
1p  q22  p2  2pq  q2
we can find the percents: 
genotype BB:
p2  10.722  0.49, so 49% have BB genotype 
genotype bB or Bb:
2pq  210.7210.32  0.42, so 42% have this genotype 
genotype bb:
q2  10.322  0.09, so 9% have bb genotype 
Check genotypes:
0.49  0.42  0.09  1.00 
As for the phenotypes, we look only at outward appearances, and since brown is dominant,
BB, bB, and Bb all have brown eyes; this accounts for 91%, leaving 9% with blue eyes.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Spreadsheets
In Section 4.5 we discussed the notion of computer software and mentioned that one of
the most important computer applications is in using something called a spreadsheet.
A spreadsheet is a computer program used to manipulate data and carry out calculations
or chains of calculations. If you have access to a computer and software such as Excel®,
Lotus 1–2-3®, or Quattro-Pro®, you might use that software in conjunction with this sec-
tion. However, it is not necessary to have this software (or even access to a computer) to
be able to study variables and the evaluation of formulas using the ideas of a spreadsheet.
In fact, your first inclination when reading this might be to skip over this and say to your-
self, “I don’t know anything about a spreadsheet, so I will not read this. Besides, my
instructor is not requiring this anyway.” However, regardless of whether this is assigned,
chances are that sooner or later you will be using a spreadsheet.
One of the most interesting, and important, new ways of representing variables is as
a cell, or a “box.”
Initial value
Output value from “some formula” in cell A1
T
T
Cell
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¡
T
Output from “second
formula, A2” is the
T
composition of the two
composite value
formulas.
The information in a spreadsheet is stored in a rectangular array of cells. The content
of each cell can be a number, text, or a formula. The power of a spreadsheet is that a cell’s
numeric value can be linked to the content of another cell. For example, it is possible to
define the content of one cell as the sum of the contents of two other cells. Furthermore,
if the value of a cell is changed anywhere in the spreadsheet, all values dependent on it
are recalculated and the new values are displayed immediately.
Instead of designating variables as letters (such as x, y, z, . . .) as we do in algebra,
a spreadsheet designates variables as cells (such as B2, A5, Z146, . . .). If you type something
into a cell, the spreadsheet program will recognize it as text if it begins with a letter, and as a
number if it begins with a numeral. It also recognizes the usual mathematical symbols of 
, , * (for ),  (for ), and ^ (for raising to a power). Parentheses are used in the usual
fashion as grouping symbols. To enter a formula, you must begin with , @, or , depend-
ing on the position in the spreadsheet. Compare some algebraic and spreadsheet evaluations: 
B
A2
A1
Section 6.3
Evaluation, Applications, and Spreadsheets
267
Algebra
Comment
Spreadsheet
Comment
31x  y2
Variables are x and y. 3*1A1  A22
Variables are in contents 
of cells A1 and A2. 
x2  2x  5 Variable is x.
B3^2  2*B3  5 Variable is the content of 
cell B3. Begins with “” to 
indicate that it is a formula. 
Formula for the 
1A3  A422
Variables are the contents of 
average of the 
cells A3 and A4. 
variables A and B
A 1 B
2
Example
5 Evaluate using a spreadsheet
Translate each formula into spreadsheet notation.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a. A1  A22
where the value of x is the content of cell A1 and the value of y is
the content of cell A2. 
232 1 1252 2 1 z3 1 1z 1 32 2
6x 2 1 y
2x
x 1 y
2
32 is negative and
1522 is positive.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For our purposes, we will assume that a spreadsheet program has an almost unlim-
ited number of rows and columns. We will represent a typical spreadsheet as follows:
268
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
b. 16*A1^2  A2212*A12
where the value of x is the content of cell A1 and the
value of y is in cell A2. 
c. 13^22  152^2  A3^3  1A3  32^2
where the value of z is the content of
cell A3.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
2
3
4
5
Spreadsheet Application
H
I
J
K
As an example, we will consider the way in which a spreadsheet program could be
used to set up an electronic checkbook. We might fill in the spreadsheet as follows:
After some entries are filled in, the spreadsheet might look like the following:
The power of a spreadsheet derives from the way variables are referenced by cells.
For example, if you go back to the spreadsheet and enter a beginning balance of 
in cell D2, all the other entries automatically change:
$2,500
Spreadsheet Application
A
B
C
D
E
F
1 DESCRIPTION
DEBIT
DEPOSIT
BALANCE
2 Beginning balance
3
+D2-B3+C3
4
+D3-B4+C4
5
+D4-B5+C5
Spreadsheet Application
A
B
C
D
E
F
1 DESCRIPTION
DEBIT
DEPOSIT
BALANCE
2 Beginning balance
1000.00
3 School bookstore
250.00
750.00
4 Paper route
100.00
850.00
5 Ski trip
300.00
550.00
Spreadsheet Application
A
B
C
D
E
F
1 DESCRIPTION
DEBIT
DEPOSIT
BALANCE
2 Beginning balance
2500.00
3 School bookstore
250.00
2250.00
4 Paper route
100.00
2350.00
5 Ski trip
300.00
2050.00
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Once the spreadsheet has been set up, the user will enter information in column A
and, depending on whether a check has been written or a deposit made, make an entry in
either column B or column C. The entries in column D (beginning with cell D3) are auto-
matically calculated by the spreadsheet program. Empty cells are assumed to have the
value 0.
It should be clear that each cell from D3 downward needs to contain a different
formula. In this example, the column letters and operations of the formula remain un-
changed, but each row number is increased by 1 from the cell above. If each of these
formulas had to be entered by hand, one by one, it is obvious that setting up a spread-
sheet would be very time-consuming. This is not the case, however, and a typical
spreadsheet program allows the user to copy the formula from one cell into another
cell and at the same time automatically change its formula references. Thus, with a
single command, each cell in column D is given the correct formula. We will call this
command replicating a formula or cell. Formulas replicated down a column have their
row numbers incremented, and formulas replicated across a row have the column
letters incremented.
Section 6.3
Evaluation, Applications, and Spreadsheets
269
Example
6 Replicate using a spreadsheet
Consider the following spreadsheet with the indicated formulas.
a. Describe what the spreadsheet would show if cells A3 . . . D3 were replicated in
rows 4 and 5. 
b. Describe what the spreadsheet would show if column D were replicated in column E. 
Solution
a.
Spreadsheet Application
x
y = 10x
x + y
x ^2
+10*A2
+A2+B2
+A2^2
+A2+1
+10*A3
+A3+B3
+A3^2
Spreadsheet Application
x
y = 10x
x + y
x ^2
+10*A2
+A2+B2
+A2^2
+A2+1
+10*A3
+A3+B3
+A3^2
+A3+1
+10*A4
+A4+B4
+A4^2
+A4+1
+10*A5
+A5+B5
+A5^2
Spreadsheet Application
x
y = 10x
x + y
x ^2
x ^2
+10*A2
+A2+B2
+A2^2
+B2^2
+A2+1
+10*A3
+A3+B3
+A3^2
+B3^2
b.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

270
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
7 Find cell value
Given that cell A2 has the value 12, show what the spreadsheet shown in the solution
for Example 6a would look like.
Solution
Example
8 Find a formula using a spreadsheet
Suppose we look at a spreadsheet and see the entries 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55 in
successive entries in column A. Suppose that 1 is entered into cell A1 and 1 into cell
A2. What is the formula to be placed into cell A3?
Example
9 Account value using a spreadsheet
If $100 is deposited into an account that pays 5% interest compounded yearly, then at
the end of the first year, the account will contain 100  10.052*100  $105. At the end
of two years, the account will contain 105  10.052*105  $110.25. Suppose cell A1
Spreadsheet Application
x
y = 10x
x + y
x ^2
12
120
132
144
13
130
143
169
14
140
154
196
15
150
165
225
Spreadsheet
Application
A
B
1
1
2
1
3
2
4
3
5
5
6
8
7
13
8
21
9
34
10
55
11
C
We might once again remind you of the power of a computer spreadsheet. Note that
the entire answer shown in Example 7 would immediately be filled in as soon as you fill
in the number 12 in cell A2. If you now go back and reenter another number into cell A2,
the entire spreadsheet would immediately change because every cell is ultimately defined
in terms of the content of cell A2 in this example spreadsheet.
Solution
Cell A3 should contain the formula 
. Note that if this formula
were replicated down column A through cell A10, the given numbers would be shown.
1A1 1A2
The real power of a spreadsheet program lies not in its ability to perform calcula-
tions, but rather in its ability to answer “what-if” types of questions. For instance, for the
set of numbers in Example 8, what if the number in cell A1 is divided by A2, and then
the number in cell A2 is divided by A3, and so on for 50 such numbers? In the problem
set you are asked to use a spreadsheet to detect a pattern for these quotients.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.3
Evaluation, Applications, and Spreadsheets
271
contains the value 100. Then what formula must be placed in cell A2 if it is to contain
the amount in the account at the end of the first year? 
Solution
Cell A2 should contain the formula A1  10.052*A1. Note that if this
formula were replicated down column A to cell A11, the column would show the
amount in the account at the end of each year through 10 years.
Spreadsheet Application
A
B
C
D
E
1
2
3
4
5
Interest rate =
YEAR NUMBER
BALANCE
0
+A3+1
+B3+B1*B3
Spreadsheet Application
A
B
C
D
E
1 Interest rate =
0.04
2 YEAR NUMBER
BALANCE
3
0
1000.00
4
1
1040.00
5
2
1081.60
6
3
1124.86
7
4
1169.86
Note that when a number is inserted into cell B1, that number will act as the interest
rate, and the number inserted into cell B3 will act as the amount of deposit. Therefore,
we see that B1 is the variable representing the interest rate and B3 is the variable repre-
senting the beginning balance. If row 4 is replicated into rows 5 to 10, we will then ob-
tain the data for the next 7 years. The problem with this replication, however, is that the
reference to cell B1 will change as the replication takes place down column B. This dif-
ficulty is overcome by using a special character that holds a column or a row constant.
The symbol we will use for this purpose is $. (Some spreadsheets use the symbol # for
this purpose.) Thus, we would change the formula in cell B4 above to 
B3$B$1*B3
to mean that we want not only column B to remain constant, but also we want row 1 to
remain unchanged when this entry is replicated. Note that $ applies only to the character
directly following its placement. We show the first 7 rows (4 years) of such a spreadsheet
for which the rate is 4% and the initial deposit is $1,000. 
To take advantage of the “what-if power of a spreadsheet, the previous example
could be set up to allow for any interest rate. This could be done in the following way:
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a variable? 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a spreadsheet? 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
A colleague of mine speculated over
lunch a few years ago: 
“Someday there will be just one programming language.
IBM and Macintosh formats will merge. The trend is just
Problem Set 6.3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

272
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
the same as it is with the languages we speak in the world.
Someday the entire world will speak English.” 
Comment on this statement. 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Although the terms program and
software can often be interchanged, there is a subtle difference
in their usage. Discuss. What is meant when the term user-
friendly is used to describe software? 
In Problems 5–12, write each expression in spreadsheet notation.
Let x be in cell A1, y in A2, and z in A3.
5. a.
x2
b. 5x2  6y2
6. a. 3x2  17
b. 14y2  12x2
7. a. 121x2  42
b.
8. a.
b. 3x 
9. a. 15  x21x  322
b. 61x  3212x  722
10. a. 1x  1212x  321x2  42
b. 12x  3213x2  12
11. a.
b.
12. a.
b.
In Problems 13–18, write each spreadsheet expression in ordinary
algebraic notation. Let cell A1 represent the variable x, A2 the
variable y, A3 the variable z; B1 is a, B2 is b, and B3 is c. 
13. a. 4*A13
b. 5*A1^2  3*A14
14. a. 36*A3^2  13*A32
b. 13*A2^211522
15. a. 1542*A114^2 
b. 154*A1142^2 
16. a. 5*A1^23*A24
b. 4*1A1^252*13*A1^2  32^2
17. a. A1A2*A3
b. A11A2*A32
18. a. B2B1*$B$3
b. A1  $B2^2
In Problems 19–42, let w  2, x  1, y  2, and z  4. Find the
values of the given capital letters. 
19. A  x  z  8
20. B  5x  y  z
21. C  10  w
22. D  3z
23. E  25  y2
24. F  w1y  x  wz2
25. G  5x  3z  2
26. H  3x  2w
27. I  5y  2z
28. J  2w  z
29. K  wxy
30. L  x  y2
31. M  1x  y22
32. N  x2  2xy  y2  1
33. P  y2  z2
34. Q  w1x  y2
35. R  z2  y2  x2
36. S  1x  y  z22
37. T  x2  y2z
38.
39.
40.
41. X  1x2z  x22z
42. Y  1wy22  w2y  3x
W  3w  6z
xy
V  3wyz
x
U  w  y
z
1 2 x
yz
1 2 x
yz
2
3x2 1 1
3x 2 17
1
4x2 2 1
2x 1 12
1
12
3x 1 1
12
15x 1 7
2
2
3
Level 2
43. This problem will help you check your work in Problems
19–42. Fill in the capital letters from Problems 19–42 to corre-
spond with their numerical values (the letter O has been filled
in for you). Some letters may not appear in the boxes. When
you are finished, darken all the blank spaces to separate the
words in the secret message. Notice that some of the blank
spaces have also been filled in to help you.
Suppose that a spreadsheet contains the following values: 
Determine the value of cell E1 if it contains the formula given in
Problems 44–45. 
44. a. A1  B1
b. 2*A1  3*B1
c. C1*1A1  3*B12
d. A1    D1 or @sum1A1 . . D12
45. a. A1  B1C1
b. 1A1  B12C1
c. A1C1*D1
d. 1A1    D122 or @sum1A1 . . D122
Draw a spreadsheet like the one shown and fill in the values of the
missing cells assuming that the formula given in Problems 46–47
has been entered in cell C1 and replicated across row 1.
Spreadsheet Application
A
B
C
D
E
1
 
3
2
3
4
5
1
Spreadsheet Application
A
B
C
D
E
1
6
-4
2
3
2
3
4
5
17
7
18
21
1
11
9
13
2
20
11
8
21
49
3
11
49
21
49
18
13
5
19
21
13
13
11
21
13
18
8
17
11
49
5
48
21
10
27
12
10
13
18
2
5
20
9
2
49
21
48
13
5
1
13
17
21
O
O
O
O
O
,
,
.
,
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.3
Evaluation, Applications, and Spreadsheets
273
46. a. A1  B1
b. A1  B1
47. a. $A$1  B1
b. $A$1*B1 
In Problems 48–49, consider the following spreadsheet, in which the
formula for each cell except B1 is displayed. Determine the value of
each cell given the value in cell B1.
48. a. 1
b. 10
49. a. 0
b. 100 
50. Show how you might use a spreadsheet to calculate the balance
at the end of each year if $1,000 is deposited into an account
paying 8% compounded yearly.
51. The owner of an auto dealership would like to create a spread-
sheet in which sales performance information regarding each
salesperson can be tabulated. She would like to use the follow-
ing format:
Column A is to contain the name of each salesperson; column
B, the gross sales; column C, the cost; column D, the profit;
and column E, the commission, calculated at 8% of the profit.
Construct a spreadsheet for 20 employees.
52. A certain population has two eye color genes: B (brown eyes,
dominant) and b (blue eyes, recessive). Suppose we have an iso-
lated population in which 75% of the genes in the gene pool are
dominant B, and the other 25% are recessive b. What percent of
the population has each genotype? What percent of the popula-
tion has each phenotype?
53. A certain population has two fur color genes: B (black, domi-
nant) and b (brown, recessive). Suppose we have an isolated
population in which 65% of the genes in the gene pool are
dominant B, and the other 35% are recessive b. What percent
of the population has each genotype? What percent of the
population has each phenotype?
Spreadsheet Application
A
B
C
D
E
1
NAME
SALES
COST
PROFIT
COMMISSION
2
John Adams
100,000
80,000
20,000
1,600
3
4
5
Spreadsheet Application
A
B
C
D
E
1
+C2+1
+B2+1
2
+C3+1
+A3+1
+C1+1
3
+A2+1
+A1+1
+B1+1
4
5
54. A population of self-pollinating pea plants has two genes;
T (tall, dominant) and t (short, recessive). Suppose we have an
isolated population in which 50% of the genes in the gene pool
are dominant T, and the other 50% are recessive t. What
percent of the population has each genotype? What percent of
the population has each phenotype?
55. When flowers known as “four-o’clocks” are crossed, there
is an incomplete dominance. A four-o’clock is red if the
genotype is rr and white if it is ww. If rr is crossed with ww, 
a hybrid rw results. Suppose a population of 20% red 
four-o’clocks is mixed with a population of 80% white 
four-o’clocks. What percent of the population has each geno-
type? What percent of the population has each phenotype?
Problem Solving 3   
56. What do you notice about the nine cells of the spreadsheet
given in Problems 48–49?
57. A certain population has two fur color genes: B (black, domi-
nant) and b (brown, recessive). Suppose you look at a popula-
tion that is 25% brown and 75% black. Estimate the
percentages in the gene pool that are B and b.
58. A population of self-pollinating pea plants has two genes:
T (tall, dominant) and t (short, recessive). Suppose you look at
a population that is 36% short. Estimate the percentages in the
gene pool that are T and t.
59. Earlobes can be characterized as attached or free hanging. Free
hanging (F) are dominant, and attached ( f ) are recessive. Sur-
vey your class to determine the percentage that are attached.
Let q2 be this number between 0 and 1; this represents the ff
genotype. Estimate the gene pool for your class.
60. There are three genes in the gene pool for blood, A, B, and O.
Two of these three are present in a person’s blood: A and B
dominate O, whereas A and B are codominant. This gives the
following possibilities: 
Genotype
Phenotype
AA
type A blood 
AO
type A blood 
AB
type AB blood 
BO
type B blood 
BB
type B blood 
OO
type O blood
Let p, q, and r represent the relative frequencies of the genes
A, B, and O, respectively, in the blood gene pool. Suppose a
certain population has 20% type A, 30% type B, and 50% type
O. Construct a Punnett square and find 1p  q  r22 to answer
the following questions. What percent of the population has
each genotype? What percent of the population has each
phenotype?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

274
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
6.4  Equations
Even though there are many aspects of algebra that are important to the scientist and
mathematician, the ability to solve simple equations is important to the layperson and can
be used in a variety of everyday applications.
Terminology
An equation is a statement of equality. There are three types of equations: true, false,
and open.
An open equation is one with a variable. A true equation is an equation without a
variable, such as
A false equation is an equation without a variable, such as
Our focus is on open equations, those equations with a variable, or unknown.
The values that make an open equation true are said to satisfy the equation and are
called the solutions or roots of the equation. To solve an open equation is to find all re-
placements for the variable(s) that make the equation true.
There are three types of open equations. Those that are always true, as in
are called identities. Those that are always false, as in
are called contradictions. Most open equations are true for some replacements of the vari-
able and false for other replacements, as in
These are called conditional equations. Generally, when we speak of equations we mean
conditional equations. Our concern when solving equations is to find the numbers that
satisfy a given equation, so we look for things to do to equations to make the solutions or
roots more obvious. Two equations with the same solutions are called equivalent equa-
tions. An equivalent equation may be easier to solve than the original equation, so we try
to get successively simpler equivalent equations until the solution is obvious. There are
certain procedures you can use to create equivalent equations. In this section, we will dis-
cuss solving the two most common types of equations you will encounter: linear and
quadratic.
Linear equations:
Quadratic equations:
Linear Equations
To solve a linear equation, you can use one or more of the following equation
properties.
ax 2 1 bx 1 c 5 0  1a 2 02
ax 1 b 5 0  1a 2 02
2 1 x 5 15
x 1 3 5 4 1 x
x 1 3 5 3 1 x
2 1 3 5 15
2 1 3 5 5
Pay attention to the
difference between an
expression and an equa-
tion. Also, note that “to
solve ” is not the same
as “to simplify.”
This is the fourth (last)
of the four main
processes of algebra.
“There are known knowns. 
There are things we know
we know. We also know
there are known unknowns.
That is to say, we know 
there are some things we
do not know. But there are
also unknown unknowns,
the ones we don't know we
don't know.”
Donald Rumsfeld, news briefing on 
February 12, 2002.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When these properties are used to obtain equivalent equations, the goal is to isolate the
variable on one side of the equation, as illustrated in Example 1. You can always check
the solution to see whether it is correct; substituting the solution into the original equa-
tion will verify that it satisfies the equation. Notice how the equation properties are used
when solving these equations.
Section 6.4
Equations
275
Addition property
Adding the same number to both sides of an equation
results in an equivalent equation.
Subtraction property
Subtracting the same number from both sides of an
equation results in an equivalent equation.
Multiplication property
Multiplying both sides of a given equation by
the same nonzero number results in an equivalent
equation.
Division property
Dividing both sides of a given equation by the 
same nonzero number results in an equivalent 
equation.
Equation Properties
These properiies lead to a
procedure for solving
equations.
Example
1 Solve simple linear equations; basic operations
Solve the given equations.
a. x  15  25
b. x  36  42
c. 3x  75
d.
 12
e. 15  x  0
Solution
a.
x  15  25
Given equation
x  15  15  25  15
Subtract 15 from both sides.
x  10
Carry out the simplification.
The root (solution) of this simpler equivalent equation is now obvious (it is 10). We
often display the answer in the form of this simpler equation, x  10, with the vari-
able isolated on one side. 
b.
x  36  42
Given equation
x  36  36  42  36
Add 36 to both sides.
x  78
Simplify.
c. 3x  75
Given equation
Divide both sides by 3.
x  25
Simplify.
d.
Given equation
Multiply both sides by 5.
x  60
Simplify.
e.
15  x  0
Given equation
15  x  x  0  x
Add x to both sides.
15  x
Simplify.
The equation 15  x is the same as x  15. This is a general property of equality
called the symmetric property of equality: If a  b, then b  a. 
5ax
5b 5 512122
x
5 5 212
3x
3 5 75
3
x
5
The goal is to isolate
the variable on one side
of the equal sign.
Perform the opposite
operation to find a
simpler equivalent
equation.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

276
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
2 Find the root of a linear equation
Find the root of the given equations.
a. 5x  3  4x  6  9
b. 6x  3  5x  7  11(2)
c. 5x  2  4x  7
d. 4x  x  20
e. 3(m  4)  5  5(m  1)  2
Solution
a. 5x  3  4x  6  9
Given equation
x  3  15
Simplify.
x  12
Subtract 3 from both sides.
b. 6x  3  5x  7  11(2)
Given equation
x  4  22
Simplify.
x  18
Add 4 to both sides.
c. 5x  2  4x  7
Given equation
x  2  7
Subtract 4x from both sides.
x  9
Subtract 2 from both sides.
d. 4x  x  20
Given equation 
5x  20
Simplify.
x  4
Divide both sides by 5.
e. 3(m  4)  5  5(m  1)  2
Given equation
3m  12  5  5m  5  2
Simplify (distributive property).
3m  17  5m  7
Simplify.
17  2m  7
Subtract 3m from both sides.
24  2m
Add 7 to both sides.
12  m
Divide both sides by 2.
An equation is like a mystery
   thriller,
It grips you once you've begun it.
You are the sleuth who stalks the
   killer,
X represents "whodunit."
I'M SICK OF BEING
AN UNKNOWN!
Tom Sampson, Blakelack High School
To change a repeating decimal to fractional form:
Step 1
Let 
.
Step 2
Multiply both sides of the equation by 
, where k is the number of digits
repeating.
Step 3
Subtract the original equation.
Step 4
Solve the resulting equation for n.
10k
n 5 repeating decimal
Decimal to Fraction
While Example 1 illustrates the basic properties of equations, you will need to solve
more complicated linear equations. In the following examples, some of the steps are left
for mental calculations. 
An interesting application of solving equations occurs in changing a decimal fraction
to a common fraction. If the decimal is terminating, no equations are necessary because
we simply write the decimal as a fraction, for example
However, if the decimal is repeating, we carry out the procedure outlined in the
following box.
 5 157
25
 6.28 5 628
100
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
a. Let 
Multiply both sides of the equation of 
.
Subtract the original equation.
Solve for n.
Thus, 
.
b. This is not a repeating decimal, so we simply write it as a fraction:
c. Let 
Multiply both sides of the equation of
.
Subtract the original equation.
Solve for n.
Thus, 
.
d. Let 
Multiply both sides of the equation of 
.
Subtract the original equation.
Solve for n.
Thus, 
.
Quadratic Equations
To solve quadratic equations, you must first use the equation properties to write the equa-
tion in the form
There are two commonly used methods for solving quadratic equations. The first uses
factoring, and the second uses the quadratic formula. Both of these methods require that
you apply the linear equation properties to obtain a 0 on one side. Next, look to see
whether the polynomial is factorable. If so, use the zero-product rule to set each factor
equal to 0, and then solve each of those equations. If the polynomial is not factorable,
then use the quadratic formula.
ax 2 1 bx 1 c 5 0
7.564 5 7,489
990
 5 7,489
990
 n 5 748.9
99
# 10
10
 99n 5 748.9000c
100n 5 756.4646c
102
 n 5 7.56464c
n 5 7.56464c
0.123 5 41
333
n 5 123
999 5 41
333
999n 5 123.000c
1,000n 5 123.123c
103
n 5 0.123123c
n 5 0.123123c
 5 123
1,000
 n 5 0.123
0.7 5 7
9
 n 5 7
9
 9n 5 7.000c
 10n 5 7.777c
101
 n 5 0.777c
n 5 0.7777c
Section 6.4
Equations
277
If 
, then 
or 
, or 
.
If the product of two numbers is 0, then at least one of the factors must be 0.
A 5 B 5 0
B 5 0
A 5 0
A # B 5 0
Zero-Product Rule
Note that you must first
have a zero on one side.
Example
3 Changing a repeating decimal to fractional form
Change each decimal to fractional form.
a.
b. 0.123
c.
d. 7.564
0.123
0.7
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

278
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
4 Solve simple quadratic equations
Solve each equation:
a. x2  x
b. x(x  8)  4(x  9)
Solution 
a.
x2  x
Given equation
x2  x  0
Subtract x from both sides.
x(x  1)  0
Factor, if possible.
x  0,
x  1  0
Zero-product rule; set each factor equal to 0.
x  1
Solve each of the resulting equations.
The equation has two roots, x  0 and x  1. Usually you will set each factor equal
to 0 and solve mentally.
b.
x(x  8)  4(x  9)
Given equation
x2  8x  4x  36
Simplify.
x2  12x  36  0
Subtract 4x from both sides and add 36 to both sides.
(x  6)(x  6)  0
Factor.
x  6
Set each factor equal to 0 and mentally solve.
Since the factors are the same, there is one root, 6. In such a case we say the root of 6
has multiplicity two.
If the quadratic expression is not easily factorable (after you obtain a 0 on one side), then
you can use the quadratic formula, which is derived in most high school algebra books.
First obtain a O on one
side.
Historical
As early as 2000 B.c., the
Babylonians had a well-developed
algebra. It did not have the
symbolism we associate with
modern-day algebra but was
written out in words. Even without
the symbolism, however, the
Babylonians did solve quadratic
equations by using a general
formula.
NOTE
If 
, then 
x 5 2 b 6 "b2 2 4ac
2a
ax 2 1 bx 1 c 5 0, a 2 0
Quadratic Formula
Example
5 Use the quadratic formula
Solve the given equations:
a. 2x 2  4x  1  0
b. x 2  6x  13
Solution
a. Note that 2x 2  4x  1  0 has a 0 on one side and also that the left-hand side does
not easily factor, so we will use the quadratic formula. We begin by (mentally) identi-
fying a  2, b  4, and c  1. 
2x 2  4x  1  0
Given equation.
Simplify under the square root.
Simplify radical.
Reduce the fraction.
5 22 6 "2
2
5 2122 6 "22
4
5 24 6 2"2
4
5 24 6 "8
4
 x 5 2142 6 "42 2 4122 112
2122
Substitute for a, b, and c in the 
quadratic formula.
Factor a 2 out of the numerator so
that we can reduce the fraction. 
This step is usually done mentally.
This is one of the all time
“BIGGIES” in algebra. You
should remember it.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b.
x 2  6x  13
Given equation
x 2  6x  13  0
Get a 0 on one side.
Simplify.
The square root of a negative number is not defined in the set of real numbers. Thus,
since we are working in the set of real numbers, we say there is no real value.
5 6 6 "216
2
x 5 21262 6 "1262 2 2 4112 1132
2112
Section 6.4
Equations
279
Example
6 Approximate roots with the quadratic formula
Solve 5x 2  2x  2  0 and approximate the roots to the nearest hundredth. 
Solution
From the quadratic formula, where a  5, b  2, and c  2:
 0.46, 0.86
5 21 6 "11
5
5 22 6 "44
2152
5 22 6 "22 2 4152 1222
2152
x 5 2b 6 "b2 2 4ac
2a
Substitute for a, b, and c in the
quadratic formula.
Historical
The convention followed in this section of using the last letters of the alphabet for variables
and the first letters for constants is credited to René Descartes (1596–1650). Many symbols
had been used before his time. In the earliest forms of algebra, statements were written out in
words. “A certain number” gave way to the names of colors that were used by some Arabian
mathematicians. Cosa, censo, cubo were abbreviated by co, ce, cu, then by Q, S, C before
Descartes used x, x2, and x 3. The quadratic formula, as you see it today, is the result of a slow
and tedious evolution of ideas and symbols and is not the work of a single person.
NOTE
Since most of us have access to a calculator, we often estimate the roots of quadratic
equations with radicals as rational (decimal) approximations. We illustrate this with the
next calculator example.
Example 6 begs the use of a calculator, and for the most part we do not show calcu-
lator steps to solve problems because there are many different types of calculators.
Although the computational window offers some suggestions, remember to check the
owner’s manual for the calculator you are using.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

280
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Solve 5x2  2x  2  0 using an algebraic calculator. To approximate these roots: 
b
a
T
T
c
This is b2  4ac.
Find the square root and store for later use.
a
b
T
This gives the first root.
a
b
T
This gives the second root.
Some of the steps shown here could be combined because these are simple num-
bers. These steps give the numerical approximation for a quadratic equation with
real roots. For this quadratic equation the roots are (to four decimal places)
0.4633 and 0.8633.  
Since you will have occasion to use the quadratic formula over and over again,
and since many calculators have programming capabilities, this is a good time to
consider writing a simple program to give the real roots for a quadratic equation.
First write the equation in the form ax2  bx  c  0 and input the a, b, and c
values into the calculator as A, B, and C. The program will then output the two real
values (if they exist). Each brand of graphing calculator is somewhat different, but it
is instructive to illustrate the general process. Press the 
key. You will then be
asked to name the program; we call our program QUAD. Next, input the formula for
the two roots (from the quadratic formula). Finally, display the answer: 
:(B
(B2  4AC)) (2A) 
:Disp Ans 
:(B
(B2  4AC)) (2A) 
:Disp Ans
Continuing with Example 6, input the A, B, and C values as follows: 
QUAD
Then run the program for the DISPLAY:
.4633249581
.8633249581
Finally, today many calculators have a 
key and the only requirement
for solving the equation is to check your owner’s manual for the correct format.
For Example 6, input 
solve (5x 2  2x  2  0, x)
which gives the solution as 
Note that the form here is equivalent to (but not the same as) x 
obtained in Example 6.
21 6 "11
5
x 5 21"11 1 12
5
 or x 5 "11 2 1
5
SOLVE
PRGM
C
STO S
B
STO S
2
A
STO S
5
/
"  
/
"  
PRGM

5

2


RCL
2

5
2
2
STO

2
5
4

x2
2
COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
144244
43
2
144244
43
144244
43
2




 
 


      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.4
Equations
281
An exciting new topic in mathematics and an attempt to bring 
order to the universe has been labeled chaos theory, which 
provides refreshing insight into how very simple beginnings can 
yield structures of incredible complexity and of enchanting beauty.  
Let's trace a chaos path to simple beginnings.
   Water flowing through a pipe offers one of the simplest physical 
models of chaos.  Pressure is applied to the end of the pipe and the 
water flows in straight lines.  More pressure increases the speed of 
the laminar flow until the pressure reaches a critical value, and a 
radically new situation evolves—turbulence.  A simple laminar 
flow suddenly changes to a flow of beautiful complexity consisting 
of swirls within swirls. Before turbulence, the path of any particle 
was quite predictable.  After a minute change in the pressure, 
turbulence occurred and predictability was lost.  Chaos is 
concerned with systems in which minute changes suddenly 
transform predictability into unpredictability. 
   The simple quadratic equation zn + 1 = zn2 – c (where z is a 
complex number, a number you considered in algebra, but is not in 
the domain of real numbers we are assuming in this book) offers a 
fascinating mathematical example of chaos.  With this equation 
and a computer, a graph of unimaginable complexity and 
surprising beauty can be constructed.  To create a graph we plot a 
grid of points (often more than a million) from a 4 × 4 square 
region R centered at the origin of the complex plane.  We let z0 = 0 
and c = a + bi be a point in the region R.  Substitute z1 and c into 
the right-hand side of the equation to obtain a second number z2.  
After many such iterations, we obtain the sequence of numbers z0, 
z1 ..., zi, ..., which approaches a fixed value or it does not.  If it 
does approach a fixed value, we paint a black dot on the computer 
screen at a + bi; otherwise, we paint a white dot.  This process of 
selecting a point from region R, done millions of times, produces 
regions of black and white dots.  If the boundary between the 
convergent and divergent regions is connected, a bumpy curve 
called the Mandelbrot set is formed.  The graph is painted black on 
the interior of the Mandelbrot set and white on the exterior.  We 
find that points selected far from the Mandelbrot set (the boundary) 
behave in a very predictable fashion (like the laminar flow in the 
pipe).  However, when we choose points near the Mandelbrot set 
(the boundary), the behavior is quite unpredictable.  We have 
encountered chaos.  Because of the complexity of the Mandelbrot 
set, it is difficult to determine whether a given point is outside or 
inside the set.
   This path to chaos has led to the Mandelbrot set, the most 
complicated set in mathematics, and it turns out to be fractal in 
nature, yet it is generated from a simple quadratic equation.  That 
is, from a very simple quadratic equation, a set of surprising 
complexity and beauty emerges.  Regions of chaotic behavior, 
under magnification, reveal a self-similar fractal.  Our 
mathematical analogy awakens the possibility that the universe 
may also originate from a few simple relations that evolve into 
profoundly complex structures, like our brain, capable of 
understanding its own origins and still asking about its origins.  
This chaos path to simple beginnings seems to be fractal.
Guest Essay:  CHAOS
Jack Wadhams, Golden West College
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe a procedure for solving
first-degree equations. 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe a procedure for solving
second-degree equations.
Solve the equations in Problems 3–5.
3. a. x  5  10
b. 6  x  2
c. 8  x  4
d. 18  x  10
4. a.
 8
b.
 11
c.
d. 2x 5 5
4x 5 12
x
24
x
4
Problem Set 6.4
A newer topic in mathematics is chaos, which is featured in the following Guest
Essay. The patterns shown in the article are the results of solving a quadratic equation,
and they are also related to fractals, which are discussed in Chapter 8.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

282
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
5. a.
b.
c.
d.
Express each of the numbers in Problems 6–9 as the quotient of
two integers.
6. a.
b.
7. a.
b.
8. a.
b. 16.4752
9. a.
b.
Solve the equations in Problems 10–25.
10. a. A  13  18
b. 5  3  B
11. a. 5X  1
b. 6  C  4
12. a. 2D  2  10
b. 15E  5  0
13. a. 16F  5  11
b. 6  5G  24
14. a. 4(H  1)  4
b. 5(I  7)  0
15. a.
 3
b.
 6
16. a.
 5
b. 1 
 7
17. a. 7 
 11
b. 5 
18. a.
 4
b.
 5
19. 5(6S  81)  3(15  5S)
20. 3T  3(T  2)  (T  4)  11  0
21. 3(U  3)  2(U  12)  18
22. 6(V  2)  4(V  3)  10  42
23. 5(W  3)  6(W  5)  0
24. 6(Y  2)  4  5(Y  4)
25. 5(Z  2)  3(Z  3)  9
5R 2 1
2
2 2 5Q
3
2P 1 1
3
2N
3
2M
3
3L
4
2K
3
J
5
0.62
0.3939
16.4752
0.522
0.1111
0.234
0.45
8 2 3x 5 2
2x 2 5 5 11
21
2x 5 0
13x 5 0
Solve the equations in Problems 27–48.
27. x 2  10x
28. x 2  14x
29. 5x  66  x 2
30. 15x 2  4x  4
31. x 3  4x
32. x 3  x
33. 4x(x  9)  9(1  4x)
34. 4(9x  1)  9x(4  x)
35. x 2  7x  2  0
36. x 2  3x  1  0
37. x 2  5x  3  0
38. x 2  6x  9  0
39. x 2  6x  7  0
40. x 2  6x  6  0
41. 3x 2  5x  4  0
42. 2x 2  x  3  0
43. 4x 2  2x  5
44. 6x 2  13x  6
45. 3x 2  11x  4
46. 6x 2  17x  3
47. 6x 2  5x
48. 9x 2  2x
Use a calculator to obtain solutions correct to the nearest
hundredth in Problems 49–54.
49. x 2  4  3
x
50. x 2  4
x  9  0
51.
x 2  2x  3  0
52. 4x 2  2
x  2  0
53. 0.02x 2  0.831x  0.0069  0
54. 68.38x 2  4.12x  198.41  0
Level 3
55. Young’s Rule for calculating a child’s dosage for medication is
a. If an adult’s dose of a particular medication is 100 mg, what
is the dose for a 10-year-old child?
b. If a 12-year-old child’s dose of a particular medication is 
10 mg, what is the adult’s dose?
56. Fried’s Rule for calculating an infant’s dosage for medication is
INFANT’S DOSE
a. If an adult’s dose of a particular medication is 50 mg, what
is the dosage for a 10-month-old infant?
b. If a 15-month-old infant is to receive 7.5 mg of a
medication, what is the equivalent adult dose?
Problem Solving 3   
57. Let a  b  1. Consider 
a  b  c
Given
(a  b)2  c(a  b)
Multiply both sides by (a  b).
a2  2ab  b2  ac  bc
Expand by multiplication.
a2  2ab  ac  bc  b2
Subtract ac and b2 from both sides.
a2  ab  ac  ab  b2  bc
Subtract ab from both sides.
a(a  b  c)  b(a  b  c)
Common factor.
a  b
Divide both sides by a  b  c.
But since a  b  1, we see a  1.
What is wrong here?
5 age of infant in months
150
3 adult dose 
 child’s dose 5
age of child
age of child 1 12 3 adult dose 
"5
"2
"3
"2
Level 2
26. This problem should help you check your work in Problems
10–25. Fill in the capital letters from Problems 10–25 to corre-
spond with their numerical values (the letter O has been filled
in for you). Some letters may not appear in the boxes. When
you are finished, darken all the blank spaces to separate the
words in the secret message. Notice that one of the blank
spaces has also been filled in to help you.
12
3
7
8
0
2
15 7
1
3
3
1
5
8
3
28
3
7
1
6
4
7
6
7
8
9
11
6 4
2
3
4
28
8
7
8
5
7
6
12
6
8
O
O
O
O
!
!
11
5
20
3
1
3
4
5
20
3
20
3
20
3
11
5
11
5
11
5
1
3
1
4
1
6
1
6
1
3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.5
Inequalities
283
59. HISTORICAL QUEST
Al-Khwârizmî solved the equation 
x2  10x  39
a. Solve this equation.
b. Here is a translation of his solution:
. . . a square and 10 roots are equal to 39 units. The ques-
tion therefore in this type of equation is about as follows:
What is the square which combined with ten of its roots
will give a sum total of 39? The manner of solving this
type of equation is to take one-half of the roots just men-
tioned. Now the roots in the problem before us are 10.
Therefore take 5, which multiplied by itself gives 25, an
amount which you add to 39 giving 64. Having taken then
the square root of this which is 8, subtract from it half the
roots, 5, leaving 3. The number three therefore represents
one root of this square, which itself, of course is 9. Nine
therefore gives the square. 
Follow these directions to find a solution. Show each step
using modern algebraic notation.
60. HISTORICAL QUEST
a. Consult an algebra textbook and look up the procedure of
completing the square. Solve Al-Khwârizmî’s equation in
Problem 59 by completing the square.
b. Do you think the translation of the solution in Problem 59b
better describes what you did in solving the equation in Prob-
lem 59a or what you did in solving the equation in part a?
Krzysztof Zmij/iStockphoto.com
6.5
Inequalities
The techniques of the previous section can also be applied to quantities that are not equal.
Comparison Property
If we are given any two numbers x and y, then obviously either
x  y
or
x  y
If x  y, then either 
x  y
or
x  y
This property is called the comparison property.*
For any two numbers x and y, exactly one of the following is true:
1. x  y
x is equal to (the same as) y
2. x  y
x is greater than (larger than) y
3. x  y
x is less than (smaller than) y
Comparison Property
*Sometimes this is called the trichotomy property.
58. An approximation for p can be obtained from 
a. Solve for p.
b. Find an approximation for p using the first 20 terms.
c. Compare your answer to part b with an approximation 
of p you probably used in grade school, 
namely, .
22
7
p2
6 5 1 1 1
22 1 1
32 1 1
42 1 c
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

284
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
1
Solve simple linear inequalities
Graph the solution sets for the given inequalities. 
a. x  3
b. x  5
c. 2  x
Solution
a. Notice that in this example the endpoint is included because with x  3, it is possi-
ble that x  3. This is shown as a solid dot on the number line:
b. x  5
c. 2  x
Although you can graph this directly, you will have less chance of making a mistake
when working with inequalities if you rewrite them so that the variable is on the left;
that is, reverse the inequality to read x  2. Notice that the direction of the arrow
has been changed, because the symbol requires that the arrow always point to the
smaller number. When you change the direction of the arrow, we say that you have
changed the order of the inequality. For example, if 2  x, then x  2, and we
say the order has been changed. The graph of x  2 is shown on the following
number line:
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
Solving Linear Inequalities
The comparison property tells us that if two quantities are not exactly equal, we can re-
late them with a greater-than or a less-than symbol (called an inequality symbol). The
solution of
x  3
has more than one value, and it becomes very impractical to write “The answers are 2, 1,
110, 0, 2 , 2.99, . . . .” Instead, we relate the answer to a number line, as shown in Fig-
ure 6.2. The fact that 3 is not included (3 is not less than 3) in the solution set is indicated
by an open circle at the point 3.
FIGURE 6.2 Graph of x  3 
If we want to include the endpoint x  3 with the inequality x  3, we write x  3 and
say “x is less than or equal to 3.” We define two additional inequality symbols: 
x  y
means
x  y or x  y
x  y
means
x  y or x  y
A statement of order, called an inequality, refers to statements that include one or more
of the following relationships:
less than 12
less than or equal to 12
greater than 12
greater than or equal to 12
1
0
1
2
3
4
1
2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.5
Inequalities
285
On a number line, if x  y , then x is to the left of y. Suppose the coordinates x and y
are plotted as shown in Figure 6.3.
y
x
FIGURE 6.3 Number line showing two coordinates, x and y
y
x
x  c
y  c
c
c
FIGURE 6.6 Adding negative values to x and y
If you add 2 to both x and y, you obtain x  2 and y  2. From Figure 6.4, you see that 
x  2  y  2.
FIGURE 6.4 Number line with 2 added to both x and y
If you add some number c, there are two possibilities. 
c  0
1c  0 is read “c is positive”2
c  0
1c  0 is read “c is negative”2
If c  0, then x  c is still to the left of y  c, as shown in Figure 6.5.
FIGURE 6.5 Adding positive values to x and y
If c  0, then x  c is still to the left of y  c. In both cases, x  y, which justifies the
following property (see Figure 6.6).
y
x
x  c
y  c
c
c
y
x
x  2
y  2
2
2
Because this addition property of inequality is essentially the same as the addition
property of equality, you might expect that there is also a multiplication property of in-
equality. We would hope that we could multiply both sides of an inequality by some num-
ber c without upsetting the inequality. Consider some examples.
Let c  2:
5  2  10  2
10  20
True
Let c  0:
5  0  10  0
0  0 
False
Let c  2:
5122  10122
 
10  20
False
If x  y, then
x  c  y  c
Also,
if x  y, then x  c  y  c
if x  y, then x  c  y  c
if x  y, then x  c  y  c
Addition Property of Inequality
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In summary, given x  y, x  y, x  y, or x  y:
The inequality symbols are the same if you
1. Add the same number to both sides. 
2. Subtract the same number from both sides. 
3. Multiply both sides by a positive number. 
4. Divide both sides by a positive number. 
The inequality symbols are reversed if you
1. Multiply both sides by a negative number.
2. Divide both sides by a negative number.
3. Interchange the x and the y. 
You can see that you cannot multiply both sides of an inequality by a constant and be sure
that the result is still true. However, if you restrict c to a positive value, then you can mul-
tiply both sides of an inequality by c. On the other hand, if c is a negative number, then
the order of the inequality should be reversed. This is summarized by the multiplication
property of inequality.
286
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Positive multiplication 1c  02
Negative multiplication 1c  02
If x  y, then
If x  y, then
cx  cy
cx  cy
c
c
Order unchanged
Order reversed
Also, for c  0,
Also, for c  0, 
if x  y, then cx  cy
if x  y, then cx  cy
if x  y, then cx  cy
if x  y, then cx  cy
if x  y, then cx  cy
if x  y, then cx  cy
Multiplication Property of Inequality
The same properties hold for positive and negative division. We can summarize with the
following statement, which tells us how to solve an inequality.
The procedure for solving linear inequalities is the same as the procedure for solving
linear equations except that if you multiply or divide by a negative number, you
reverse the order of the inequality symbol.
Solution of Linear Inequalities
Spend some time with
this summary.
Here is where inequalities
differ from equations.
∂This works the same as with equations.
¶ This is where inequalities and equations differ.
Example
2
Solve linear inequalities
Solve:
a. x  2
b.
c. 5x  3  7
Solution
a. x  2 
x  2
Multiply both sides by 1 and remember to reverse the order of the inequality.
Now, with the variable on the left of the inequality, we graph the solution on a number line:
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
x
23 , 1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.5
Inequalities
287
b.
 1
x  3
Multiply both sides by 3 and reverse the order of the inequality.
c.
5x  3  7
5x  3  3  7  3
5x  10
x  2
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
5x
5  10
5
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
x
3
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the comparison property? 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe a procedure for solving a
first-degree inequality.
Graph the solution sets in Problems 3–16.
3. x  5
4. x  6
5. x  3
6. x  2
7. 4  x
8. 1  x
9.
 3
10. 4 
11. 2 
12. x  50
13. x  100
14. x  125
15. x  75
16. 40  x
Solve the inequalities in Problems 17–40.
17. x  7  3
18. x  2  5
19. x  2  4
20. 10  5  y
21. 4  2  y
22. 3  5  y
23. 2  s
24. t  3
25. m  5
26. 5  4  y
27. 3  2  x
28. 5  1  w
29. 2x  6  8
30. 3y  6  9
31. 3  s  9
32. 2  2s  8
33. 4  a  2
34. 3  2b 13
35. 3s  2  8
36. 5t  7  8
37. 7u  5  9
38. 9  2v  5
39. 5  3w  8
40. 2  x  3x  10
x
24
x
2
x
2
Problem Set 6.5
Level 2
Solve the inequalities in Problems 41–50.
41. 7  5A  2A  7
42. B  311  B2
43. 3C  C  19
44. 21D  72  2  D
45. 5E  4  3E  6
46. 313F  22  4F 3
47. 4G  1  31G  22
48. 514  H2  31H  12
49. 2  3I  711  I2
50. 71J  22  5  312  J2
51. Suppose that seven times a number is added to 35 and the 
result is positive. What are the possible numbers?
52. If the opposite of a number must be greater than twice the num-
ber, what are the possible numbers?
53. Suppose that three times a number is added to 12 and the result
is negative. What are the possible numbers?
54. If the opposite of a number must be less than 5, what are the
possible numbers satisfying this condition?
Problem Solving 3   
55. If a number is four more than its opposite, what are the
possible numbers?
56. If a number is six less than twice its opposite, what are the 
possible numbers?
57. If a number is less than four more than its opposite, what are
the possible numbers?
58. If a number is less than six minus twice its opposite, what are
the possible numbers?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

59. Parcel Post services allow that a package can be shipped if its
girth plus length (longest side) is no larger than 130 inches. If
you have a square package whose length is six times the length
of a shorter side, what are the possible lengths for a side of the
box?
288
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
60. Current postal regulations state that no package may be sent if
its combined length, width, and height exceed 72 in. What are
the possible dimensions of a box to be mailed with equal height
and width if the length is four times the height?
Girth
Length
6.6 Algebra in Problem Solving
One of the goals of problem solving is to be able to apply techniques that you learn in the
classroom to situations outside the classroom. However, a first step is to learn to solve
contrived textbook-type word problems to develop the problem-solving skills you will
need outside the classroom.
In this section, we will focus on common types of word problems that are found
in most textbooks. You might say, “I want to learn how to become a problem solver,
and textbook problems are not what I have in mind; I want to do real problem solv-
ing.” But to become a problem solver, you must first learn the basics, and there is good
reason why word problems are part of a textbook. We start with these problems to
build a problem-solving procedure that can be expanded to apply to problem solving
in general.
The most useful axiom in problem solving is the principle of substitution: If two
quantities are equal, one may be substituted for the other without changing the truth or
falsity of this statement.
Example
1
Find the perimeter
A billiard table is 4 ft by 8 ft. Find the perimeter.
Solution
Use an appropriate formula, P  2  2w, where P  PERIMETER,   LENGTH,
and w  WIDTH. Substitute the known values into the formula:
  8
w  4
T
T
P  2 1 8 2  2 1 4 2
These arrows mean 
 16  8 
substitution.
 24
The perimeter is 24 ft.
If 
, then a may be substituted for b in any mathematical statement without
affecting the truth or falsity of the given mathematical statement.
a 5 b
Substitution Property
The simplest way to illustrate the substitution property is to use it in evaluating a 
formula.
“For a minute I thought we
had him stymied!”
Illustration © SEPS, licensed by Curtis Licensing,
Indpls, IN. All Rights Reserved
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.6
Algebra in Problem Solving
289
We will now rephrase Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines in a setting that is 
appropriate to solving word problems. This procedure is summarized in the follow-
ing box.
Step 1
Understand the Problem. This means you must read the problem and note
what it is about. Focus on processes rather than numbers. You cannot work a
problem you do not understand. A sketch may help in understanding the
problem.
Step 2
Devise a Plan. Write down a verbal description of the problem using 
operation signs and an equal or inequality sign. Note the following com-
mon translations.
Symbol
Verbal Description

is equal to; equals; is the same as; is; was; becomes; will
be; results in

plus; the sum of; added to; more than; greater than;
increased by; combined; total

minus; the difference of; the difference between; is
subtracted from; less than; smaller than; decreased by; is
diminished by
	
times; product; is multiplied by; twice 12 	 2; triple 
13 	 2; of (as in 40% of 3002.

divided by; quotient of; ratio of; proportional to
Step 3
Carry out the Plan. In the context of word problems, we need to proceed
deductively by carrying out the following steps.
Choose a variable. If there is a single unknown, choose a variable. If there
are several unknowns, you can use the substitution property to reduce the
number of unknowns to a single variable. Later we will consider word prob-
lems with more than one unknown. 
Substitute. Replace the verbal phrase for the unknown with the variable. 
Solve the equation. This is generally the easiest step. Translate the
symbolic statement (such as x  32 into a verbal statement. Probably
no variables were given as part of the word problem, so x  3 is not an 
answer. Generally, word problems require an answer stated in words. Pay 
attention to units of measure and other details of the problem.
Step 4
Look Back. Be sure your answer makes sense by checking it with the 
original question in the problem. Remember to answer the question 
that was asked.
Procedure for Problem Solving in Algebra
Problem solving depends not only on the substitution property, but also on translating
statements from English to mathematical symbols, using variables as necessary. On a much
more advanced level, this process is called mathematical modeling (we will consider some
mathematical modeling later in this book). However, for now, we will simply call it trans-
lating. Example 2 reviews some of the terminology introduced in the previous procedure
box. These terms include sum to indicate the result obtained from addition, difference for
the result from subtraction, product for the result of a multiplication, and quotient for the
result of a division.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

290
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
2
Translate word statements
Write the word statement or phrase in symbols. Do not simplify the translated expressions.
a. The sum of seven and a number 
b. The difference of a number subtracted from seven 
c. The quotient of two numbers 
d. The product of two consecutive numbers 
e. The difference of the squares of a number and two 
f. The square of the difference of two from a number 
g. The sum of two times a number and six is equal to two times the sum of a number
and three 
Solution
a. Since sum indicates addition, this can be rewritten as 
1SEVEN2  1A NUMBER2
Now select some variable—say, s  A NUMBER. The symbolic statement is 7  s. 
b. First we translate the statement into mathematics symbols: 1SEVEN2  1A NUMBER2. Let
d  A NUMBER; then the expression is 7  d. 
c. The quotient of two numbers means 
. If there is more than one 
unknown in a problem and no relationship between those unknowns is given, more
than one variable may be needed. Let m  A NUMBER and n  ANOTHER NUMBER.
Then the expression is
. 
d. The product of two consecutive numbers means [1A NUMBER2 1NEXT CONSECUTIVE NUMBER2].
If there is more than one unknown in a problem but a given relationship exists
between those unknowns, do not choose more variables than you need for the prob-
lem. In this problem, a consecutive number means one more than the first number:
NEXT CONSECUTIVE NUMBER  A NUMBER  1
Thus, 
1A NUMBER2 1NEXT CONSECUTIVE NUMBER2  1A NUMBER2 1A NUMBER  12
Let x  A NUMBER; then the variable expression is 
x1x  12
e. A difference of squares means 1A NUMBER22  22. Let x  A NUMBER; then 
x2  22
Remember, this is called a difference of squares.
f. The square of a difference means 1A NUMBER222; compare with part e. Let 
x  A NUMBER; then 
1x  222
Remember, this is called a square of a difference.
g. If “a number” is referred to more than once in a problem, it is assumed to be the same
number.
21A NUMBER2  6  21A NUMBER  32
Let n  A NUMBER;
2n  6  21n  32
m
n
a number
another number
Historical
The Egyptians solved many equa-
tions. They used the word AHA or
HEAP in place of the variable.
Some ancient problems are given
in the problem set. As you look at
the problems of this section, you
might reflect on the advantages of
having an efficient notation for
representing variables.
NOTE
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Number Relationships
The first type of word problem we consider involves number relationships. These are de-
signed to allow you to begin thinking about the procedure to use when solving word
problems.
Section 6.6
Algebra in Problem Solving
291
Example
3
Formulate an equation
If you add 10 to twice a number, the result is 22. What is the number?
Solution
Read the problem carefully. Make sure you know what is given and what is
wanted. Next, write a verbal description (without using variables), using operation signs
and an equal sign, but still using the key words. This is called translating the problem.
10  21A NUMBER2  22
When there is a single unknown, choose a variable.
With more complicated problems you will not know at the start what the variable 
should be. 
Let n  A NUMBER. Use the substitution property:
10  21A NUMBER2  22
T
10  2n  22
Solve the equation and check the solution in the original problem to see if it makes sense. 
10  2n  22
2n  12
n  6 
Check: Add 10 to twice 6 and the result is 22. State the solution to a word problem in
words: The number is 6.
Example
4
Find consecutive numbers
Find three consecutive integers whose sum is 42.
Solution
Read the problem. Write down a verbal description of the problem, using
operation signs and an equal sign:
INTEGER  NEXT INTEGER  THIRD INTEGER  42
This problem has three variables, but they are related. If 
x  INTEGER, then 
x  1  NEXT INTEGER
x  2  THIRD INTEGER
IMPORTANT: Do not
BEGIN by choosing a 
variable; choose a 
variable only AFTER you
have translated the 
problem.
The second type of number problem involves consecutive integers. If n  AN
INTEGER, then 
THE SECOND CONSECUTIVE INTEGER  n  1,
and 
THE THIRD CONSECUTIVE INTEGER  n  2 
Also, if E  AN EVEN INTEGER and if F  AN ODD INTEGER, then 
E  2  THE NEXT CONSECUTIVE EVEN INTEGER
F  2  THE NEXT CONSECUTIVE ODD INTEGER
Notice that you add 2
when you are writing
down consecutive evens
or consecutive odds.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Distance Relationships
The first example of a problem with several variables that we will consider involves 
distances. The relationships may seem complicated, but if you draw a figure and remem-
ber that the total distance is the sum of the separate parts, you will easily be able to ana-
lyze this type of problem.
292
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Substitute the variables into the verbal equation:
INTEGER  NEXT INTEGER  THIRD INTEGER  42
T
T
T
x

x  1

x  2 
 42
Solve the equation. 
x  x  1  x  2  42
3x  3  42
3x  39
x  13
Check: 13  14  15  42; the integers are 13, 14, and 15.
Example
5
Distance puzzle
The drive from Buffalo to Albany is 293 miles across northern New York 
State. On this route, you pass Rochester and then Syracuse before reaching the capital city
of Albany. It is 57 miles less from Buffalo to Rochester than from Syracuse to Albany, and
14 miles farther from Rochester to Syracuse than from Buffalo to Rochester. How far is it
from Rochester to Syracuse?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. First, you should begin by examining the problem. Remember
that you cannot solve a problem you do not understand. It must make sense before math-
ematics can be applied to it. All too often poor problem solvers try to begin solving the
problem too soon. Take your time when trying to understand the problem. Start at the
beginning of the problem, and make a sketch of the situation, as shown in Figure 6.7.
The cities are located in the order sketched on the line.
Pólya’s 
Method
New York
Vt.
Mas
Con
Rochester
Syracuse
Albany
Buffalo
Montpelier
Buffalo
Rochester
Syracuse
Albany
B
R
S
A
Devise a Plan. The cities are located in the order sketched in Figure 6.7, but how can
that fact give us an equation? To have an equation, you must find an equality. Which
quantities are equal? The distances from Buffalo to Rochester, from Rochester to Syra-
cuse, and from Syracuse to Albany must add up to the distance from Buffalo to Albany.
That is, the sum of the parts must equal the whole distance—so start there. This is what
we mean when we say translate.
TRANSLATE.
1DIST. B TO R2  1DIST. R TO S2  1DIST. S TO A2  1DIST. B TO A2
Notice that there appear to be four variables. We now use the substitution property to
evolve.
FIGURE 6.7 Distance problem
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EVOLVE. With this step we ask whether we know the value of any quantity in
the equation. The first sentence of the problem tells us that the total distance is
293 miles, so 
1DIST. B TO R2  1DIST. R TO S2  1DIST. S TO A2  1DIST. B TO A2
T Buffalo to Albany
1DIST. B TO R2  1DIST. R TO S2  1DIST. S TO A2  293
Also, part of evolving the equation is to use substitution for the relationships that are
given as part of the problem. We now translate the other pieces of given information by
adding to the smaller distance in each case. 
1DIST. B TO R2  57  1DIST. S TO A2
1DIST. R TO S2  1DIST. B TO R2  14
We now use substitution to let the equation evolve into one with a single unknown. 
Carry Out the Plan. Pólya’s method now tells us to carry out the plan. We use substitu-
tion on the above equations:
1DIST. B TO R2  1DIST. R TO S2  1DIST. S TO A2  293
c
c
1DIST. B TO R  142
1DIST. B TO R2  57
1DIST. B TO R2  [1DIST. B TO R2  14]  [1DIST. B TO R2  57]  293 
This equation now has a single variable, so we let d  DIST. B TO R and substitute into
the equation: 
d  [d  14]  [d  57]  293
Solve.
3d  71  293
3d  222
d  74
The equation is solved. Does that mean that the answer to the problem is “d  74”? 
No, the question asks for the distance from Rochester to Syracuse, which is d  14. So
now interpret the solution and answer the question: The distance from Rochester to
Syracuse is 88 miles.
Look Back. Notice that the steps we used above can be summarized as translate,
evolve, solve, and answer.
Pólya’s procedure requires that we look back. To be certain that the answer makes
sense in the original problem, you should always check the solution.
74  88  174  572  293
293  293
✓
Section 6.6
Algebra in Problem Solving
293
Remember this summary.
Example
6
Zeno’s dilemma
Once upon a time (about 450 B.C.), a Greek named Zeno made up several 
word problems that became known as Zeno’s paradoxes. This problem is not a paradox,
but was inspired by one of Zeno’s problems. Consider a race between Achilles and a 
tortoise. The tortoise has a 100-meter head start. Achilles runs at a rate of 10 meters per
second, whereas the tortoise runs 1 meter per second (it is an extraordinarily swift 
tortoise). How long does it take Achilles to catch up with the tortoise?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

294
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Rendezvous
point
Distance tortoise
travels
Head start of 100 m
Distance Achilles travels
Tortoise
Achilles
FIGURE 6.8 Achilles and tortoise problem
Devise a Plan. The plan we will use is translate, evolve, solve, and answer.
Carry Out the Plan.
TRANSLATE.
Understand the Problem. Before you begin, make sure you understand the problem. It
is often helpful to draw a figure or diagram to help you understand the problem. The sit-
uation for this problem is shown in Figure 6.8.
1ACHILLES’ DISTANCE TO RENDEZVOUS2  1TORTOISE’S DISTANCE TO RENDEZVOUS2  1HEAD START2
EVOLVE. The equation we wrote has three unknowns. Our goal is to evolve this equa-
tion into one with a single unknown so that we can choose that as our variable. The
evolution of the equation requires that we use the substitution property to replace the
unknowns with known numbers or with other expressions that, in turn, will lead to an
equation with one unknown. We will begin this problem by substituting the known
number. 
1ACHILLES’ DISTANCE TO RENDEZVOUS2  1TORTOISE’S DISTANCE TO RENDEZVOUS2  1HEAD START2
T
1ACHILLES’ DISTANCE TO RENDEZVOUS2  1TORTOISE’S DISTANCE TO RENDEZVOUS2  100
There are still two unknowns, which we can change by using the following distance-
rate-time formulas: 
1ACHILLES’ DISTANCE TO RENDEZVOUS2  1ACHILLES’ RATE2 1TIME TO RENDEZVOUS2
1TORTOISE’S DISTANCE TO RENDEZVOUS2  1TORTOISE’S RATE2 1TIME TO RENDEZVOUS2
These values are now substituted into the equations: 
1ACHILLES’ DISTANCE TO RENDEZVOUS2  1TORTOISE’S DISTANCE TO RENDEZVOUS2  100
T
T
1ACHILLES’ RATE2 1TIME TO RENDEZVOUS2  1TORTOISE’S RATE2 1TIME TO RENDEZVOUS2  100
There are now three unknowns, but the values for two of these unknowns are given in
the problem. 
1ACHILLES’ RATE2 1TIME TO RENDEZVOUS2  1TORTOISE’S RATE2 1TIME TO RENDEZVOUS2  100
T
T
10 1TIME TO RENDEZVOUS2

11TIME TO RENDEZVOUS2  100
The equation now has a single unknown, so let 
t  TIME TO RENDEZVOUS
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The last step in the evolution of this equation is to substitute the variable: 
10t  t  100
SOLVE.
10t  t  100 
9t  100 
t  
ANSWER. It takes Achilles 11 seconds to catch up with the tortoise. 
Look Back. Does this answer make sense? How long does it take a person to run
100 meters? The problem says Achilles runs at 10 msec, so at that rate it would take 10
seconds. The answer seems about right. 
1
9
100
9
Section 6.6
Algebra in Problem Solving
295
Example
7
Use the Pythagorean theorem
If the area of a right triangle is one square unit, and the height is two units longer than
the base, find the lengths of the sides of the triangle to the nearest thousandth.
Solution
Draw a picture to help you understand the relationships.
TRANSLATE.
AREA  
1BASE2 1HEIGHT2
EVOLVE. The area is known, so begin by substituting 1 for AREA: 
AREA  
1BASE2 1HEIGHT2
T
1  
1BASE2 1HEIGHT2
Next, the problem tells us that HEIGHT  BASE  2. Therefore, 
1  
1BASE2 1HEIGHT2
T
1  
1BASE2 1BASE  22
SOLVE. There is now a single unknown, so we choose a variable for the unknown. Let
b  base. Then 
2  b1b  22
1  1
2b(b  2)
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
a
b
hypotenuse
height
base
c
Pythagorean Relationships
Many word problems are concerned with relationships involving a right triangle. If two
sides of a right triangle are known, the third can be found by using the Pythagorean 
theorem. Remember, if a right triangle has sides a and b and hypotenuse c, then
a2 1  b2 5  c2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

296
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Positive value only, since hypotenuse 
represents a distance.
Have you ever wondered why sidewalks, pipes, and tracks have expansion joints
every few feet? The next example may help you to understand why; it considers the un-
likely situation in which 1-mile sections of pipe are connected together.
Example
8 Pipeline problem
A 1-mile-long pipeline connects two pumping stations. Special joints 
must be used along the line to provide for expansion and contraction due to changes in
temperature. However, if the pipeline were actually one continuous length of pipe fixed at
each end by the stations, then expansion would cause the pipe to bow. Approximately how
high would the middle of the pipe rise if the expansion were just 1 inch over the mile?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. First, understand the problem. Draw a picture as shown in
Figure 6.9.
Pólya’s 
Method
Patrick Abanathy/iStockphoto.com
a
x inches
mile
1
2
mile 
1
2
1
2 inch
x
1 mile
1
mil
e
 1
in
ch
FIGURE 6.9 Pipeline problem
2  b2  2b
0  b2  2b  2
Quadratic formula



Since the base cannot be negative, we have 
BASE 
 0.7320508
HEIGHT  BASE  2 
The Pythagorean theorem is necessary for finding the third side. When finding the 
hypotenuse, be sure not to work with the approximate values. You should round only
once in a problem, at the end when you are stating your answer. 
1HYPOTENUSE22  11  
22  11  
22
 1  2
 3  1  2
 3
 8
It follows that 
HYPOTENUSE  ;
 2
ANSWER. State the answer to the specified number of decimal places. The lengths of
the sides of the triangle are 0.732, 2.732, and 2.828.
 2.8284271
22
28
23
23
23
23
 2.7320508
1  23  2  1  23
1  23
1 ; 23
2 ; 223
2
2 ; 212
2
b  2 ; 222  4(1)(2)
2(1)
Historical
Hypatia 
1370–415)
The number of important women
in the history of mathematics is
small when compared to the num-
ber of men. One reason for this is
that for centuries, women were
discouraged from studying mathe-
matics and in most cases were
unable to attend standard educa-
tional institutions. The first 
known woman in the history of
mathematics is Hypatia. She was a
professor of mathematics at the
University of Alexandria. She
wrote several major works, but
her scientific rationalism caused
her problems with the Church, and
she was considered a heretic. At
the age of 45, she was pulled from
her carriage, tortured, and
murdered for her scientific beliefs.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Before beginning the solution to this example, try to guess the answer. Consider the
following choices for the rise in pipe:
A. 1 inch
B. 1 foot
C. 1 yard
D. 5 yards
E. 1 mile 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.6
Algebra in Problem Solving
297
Go ahead, choose one of these. This is one problem for which the answer was not intu-
itive for the author. I guessed incorrectly when I first considered this problem. 
Devise a Plan. For purposes of solution, notice from Figure 6.9 that we are assuming
that the pipe bows in a circular arc. A triangle would produce a reasonable approxima-
tion since the distance x should be quite small compared to the total length. Since a right
triangle is used to model this situation, the Pythagorean theorem may be used. The
method we will use is to translate, evolve, solve, and answer.
Carry Out the Plan. Translate. 
1SIDE22  1HEIGHT22  1HYPOTENUSE22
EVOLVE. The side is one-half the length of pipe, so it is 0.5 mile. Also, since the
expansion is 1 inch, one-half the arc would have length 0.5 mile  0.5 inch. 
1SIDE22  1HEIGHT22  1HYPOTENUSE22
T
T
10.5 mile22  1HEIGHT22  10.5 mile  0.5 in.22
There is a single unknown, so let h  HEIGHT. Also, notice that there is a mixture of
units. Let us convert all measurements to inches. We know that
1 mile  5,280 ft  5,280 112 in.2  63,360 in. 
mile  31,680 in. 
10.5 mile22  1HEIGHT22  10.5 mile  0.5 in.22
T
T
131,68022  x2
 131,680  0.522
SOLVE.
x2  131,680.522  131,68022
ANSWER. The pipe rises about 180 in. in the middle.
Look Back. The solution, 177.99 in., is approximately 14.8 ft (choice D). This is an
extraordinary result if you consider that the pipe expanded only 1 inch. The pipe would bow
approximately 14.8 ft at the middle. This answer may not seem correct, but in re-examining
the steps, we see that it is! This answer is paradoxical or, at least, counterintuitive.
<177.99
x 5 "131,680.52 2 2 131,6802 2
1
2
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Outline a procedure for solving word
problems in algebra. 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain what is meant by translate,
evolve, and solve.
Rewrite the word statement or phrase in Problems 3–10, using
symbols. Translate and then simplify, 
3. a. The sum of three and the product of two and four 
b. The product of three and the sum of two and four
4. a. The quotient of three divided by the sum of two and four
b. Ten times the sum of four and three
Problem Set 6.6
5. a. Eight times nine plus ten
b. Eight times the sum of nine and ten
6. a. The sum of three squared and five squared
b. The square of the sum of three and five
7. a. The square of three increased by the cube of two
b. The cube of three decreased by the square of two
8. a. The square of a number plus five
b. Six times the cube of a number
9. a. The sum of the squares of 4 and 9
b. The square of the sum of 4 and 9
10. a. The sum of the squares of 5 and 8
b. The square of the sum of 5 and 8
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Level 2
Solve Problems 26–48. Because you are practicing a procedure,
you must show all of your work. Start with a verbal description and
end with a sentence answering the question. 
26. If you add seven to twice a number, the result is seventeen.
What is the number?
27. If you subtract twelve from twice a number, the result is six.
What is the number?
28. If you multiply a number by five and then subtract negative
ten, the difference is negative thirty. What is the number?
29. If 6 is subtracted from three times a number, the difference is
twice the number. What is the number?
Find the requested number(s2 in Problems 11–16. Classify the
equation as true, false, or open, and if it is open tell whether it is 
a conditional, identity, or contradiction. 
11. a. Three times the sum of a number and four is equal to sixteen.
b. Five times the sum of a number and one is equal to the sum
of five times the number and five.
12. a. The sum of a number and one is equal to one added to the
number.
b. The difference of the squares of 3 and 4 is one.
13. a. The sum of the squares of 3 and 4 is 25.
b. The sum of the squares of the first three counting numbers is n.
14. a. The square of negative eight is equal to the opposite of
eight squared.
b. Two added to a number is equal to the sum of the number
and two.
15. a. The sum of six times a number and twelve is equal to six
times the sum of the number and two.
b. A number times the sum of seven and the number is equal
to zero.
16. a. The sum of a number squared and five times the number is
equal to six.
b. The square of a number plus eight times the number is equal
to the number times the sum of eight and the number.
In Problems 17–25, write a formula to express the given relation.
17. The area A of a parallelogram is the product of the base b and
the height h.
18. The area A of a triangle is one-half the product of the base b
and the height h.
19. The area A of a rhombus is one-half the product of the
diagonals p and q.
20. The area A of a trapezoid is the product of one-half the height
h and the sum of the bases a and b.
21. The volume V of a cube is the cube of the length s of an edge.
22. The volume V of a rectangular solid is the product of the
length , the width w, and the height h.
23. The volume V of a cone is one-third the product of pi, the
square of the radius r, and the height h.
24. The volume V of a circular cylinder is the product of pi, the
square of the radius r, and the height h.
25. The volume V of a sphere is the product of four-thirds pi and
the cube of the radius r.
30. Find two consecutive integers whose sum is 117.
31. Find two consecutive even integers whose sum is 94.
32. The sum of three consecutive integers is 105. What are the 
integers?
33. The sum of four consecutive integers is 74. What are the integers?
34. A house and a lot are appraised at $212,400. If the value of the
house is five times the value of the lot, how much is the house
worth?
35. A cabinet shop produces two types of custom-made cabinets. 
If the price of one type of cabinet is four times the price of the
other, and the total price for one of each type of cabinet is
$4,150, what is price of each cabinet?
36. To stimulate his daughter in the pursuit of problem solving, 
a math professor offered to pay her $8 for every equation cor-
rectly solved and to fine her $5 for every incorrect solution. 
At the end of the first 26 problems of this problem set, neither
owed any money to the other. How many problems did the
daughter solve correctly?
37. A professional gambler reported that at the end of the first race
at the track he had doubled his money. He bet $30 on the sec-
ond race and tripled the money he came with. He bet $54 on
the third race and quadrupled his original bankroll. He bet $72
on the fourth race and lost it, but still had $48 left. With how
much money did he start?
38. A 10-ft pole is to be erected and held in the ground by four guy
wires attached at the top. The guy wires are attached to the ground
at a distance of 15 ft from the base of the pole. What is the exact
length of each guy wire? How much wire should be purchased if
it cannot be purchased in fractions of a foot?
39. A diagonal brace is to be placed in the wall of a room. The
height of the wall is 8 ft, and the wall is 14 ft long. What is the
exact length of the brace, and what is the length of the brace to
the nearest foot?
40. In traveling from Jacksonville to Miami, you pass through Orlando
and then through Palm Beach. It is 10 miles farther from Orlando
to Palm Beach than it is from Jacksonville to Orlando. The
distance between Jacksonville and Orlando is 90 miles more than
the distance from Palm Beach to Miami. If it is 370 miles from
Jacksonville to Miami, how far is it from Jacksonville to Orlando?
41. The drive from New Orleans to Memphis is 90 miles shorter
than the drive from Memphis to Cincinnati, but 150 miles 
farther than the drive from Cincinnati to Detroit. If the total
highway distance of a New Orleans–Memphis–Cincinnati–
Detroit trip is 1,140 miles, find the length of the Cincinnati–
Detroit leg of the trip.
42. Traveling from San Antonio to Dallas, you first pass through
Austin and then Waco before reaching Dallas, a total distance
of 280 miles. From Austin to Waco is 30 miles farther than
from San Antonio to Austin, and also 20 miles farther than
from Waco to Dallas. How far is it from Waco to Dallas?
43. Two persons are to run a race, but one can run 10 meters per
second, whereas the other can run 6 meters per second. If the
slower runner has a 50-meter head start, how long will it be 
before the faster runner catches the slower runner, if they 
begin at the same time?
44. If the rangefinder on the Enterprise shows a fleeing shuttle-
craft 4,500 km away, how long will it take to catch the shuttle
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.6
Algebra in Problem Solving
299
Photos 12 / Alamy
Starship Enterprise
45. A speeding car is traveling at 80 mph when a police car starts
pursuit at 100 mph. How long will it take the police car to catch
up to the speeding car? Assume that the speeding car has a 
2-mile head start and that the cars travel at constant rates.
46. Two people walk daily for exercise. One is able to maintain 
4.0 mph and the other only 3.5 mph. The slower walker has a
mile head start when the other begins, yet they finish together.
How far did each walk?
47. Two joggers set out at the same time from their homes 21 miles
apart. They agree to meet at a point somewhere in between in
an hour and a half. If the rate of one is 2 mph faster than the
rate of the other, find the rate of each.
48. Two joggers set out at the same time in opposite directions. If
they were to maintain their normal rates for four hours, they
would be 68 miles apart. If the rate of one is 1.5 mph faster than
the rate of the other, find the rate of each.
Level 3
49. The area of a right triangle is 17.5 cm2. One leg is 2 cm longer
than the other. What is the length of the shortest side?
50. The hypotenuse of a right triangle is 13.0, and one leg is 
6.0 units shorter than the other. Find the dimensions of the 
figure (rounded to the nearest tenth2.
51. Find the base and height of a triangle with area 3.0 square feet
if its base is 2.0 feet (rounded to the nearest tenth2 longer than
its height.
52. Find the base and height of a triangle (rounded to the nearest tenth)
with area 75.0 in.2 if its base is 10.0 in. longer than its height.
53. The annual rate, r, compounded annually, it takes for 1 dollar to
grow to A dollars in 2 years is given by the formula A  11  r22.
Find the rate necessary for a dollar to double in 2 years.
54. If P dollars is invested at an annual rate r compounded
annually, at the end of 2 years it will have grown to an amount
A according to the formula A  P11  r22. At what rate will
$1,000 grow to $1,500 in 2 years?
Problem Solving 3   
55. A 1-mile-long pipeline connects two pumping stations. Special
joints must be used along the line to provide for expansion and
contraction due to changes in temperature. However, if the
pipeline were actually one continuous length of pipe fixed at
each end by the stations, then expansion would cause the pipe to
bow. Approximately how high would the middle of the pipe rise
if the expansion were just one-half inch over the mile?
Historical
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
11807–1882)
Well known as a poet, Longfellow was also an accomplished
mathematician. He resigned from Harvard University to find time
to write, and that writing included some works in mathematics.
Problems 56–60 were solved by Longfellow; see an article by
Charles E. Mitchell in the May 1989 issue of The Mathematics
Teacher.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
56. HISTORICAL QUEST
(from Bhaskara, ca. A.D. 1120)
“In
a lake the bud of a water lily was observed, one cubit above the
water, and when moved by the gentle breeze, it sank in the water
at two cubits’ distance.” Find the depth of the water.
57. HISTORICAL QUEST
(from Bhaskara, ca. A.D. 1120)
“One-third of a collection of beautiful water lilies is
offered to Mahadev, one-fifth to Huri, one-sixth to the Sun, one-
fourth to Devi, and the six which remain are presented to the
spiritual teacher.” Find the total number of lilies.
58. HISTORICAL QUEST
(from Bhaskara, ca. A.D. 1120)
“One-fifth of a hive of bees flew to the Kadamba flower; one-
third flew to the Silandhara; three times the difference of these
two numbers flew to an arbor, and one bee continued flying
about, attracted on each side by the fragrant Keteki and the
Malati.” Find the number of bees.
59. HISTORICAL QUEST
(from Brahmagupta, ca. A.D. 630)
“A tree one hundred cubits high is distant from a well two hun-
dred cubits; from this tree one monkey climbs down the tree
and goes to the well, but the other leaps in the air and descends
by the hypotenuse from the high point of the leap, and both
pass over an equal space.” Find the height of the leap.
60. HISTORICAL QUEST
“Ten times the square root of a 
flock of geese, seeing the clouds collect, flew to the Manus lake;
one-eighth of the whole flew from the edge of the water amongst
a multitude of water lilies; and three couples were observed 
playing in the water.” Find the number of geese.
Water
depth
1
2
Water
level
if the shuttle travels at 12,000 kph and the Enterprise is
traveling at 15,000 kph?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

300
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
6.7  Ratios, Proportions, and Problem Solving
Ratios and proportions are powerful problem-solving tools in algebra. Ratios are a way
of comparing two numbers or quantities, whereas a proportion is a statement of equality
between two ratios.
Ratios
A ratio expresses a size relationship between two sets and is defined as the quotient of
two numbers. Some examples include the compression ratio of a car, the gear ratio of a
transmission, the pitch of a roof, the steepness of a road, or a player’s batting average. It
is written using the word to, a colon, or a fraction; that is, if the ratio of men to women is
5 to 4, this could also be written as 
or .
5
4
5 : 4
We will emphasize the idea that a ratio can be written as a fraction (or as a quotient of
two numbers). Since a fraction can be reduced, a ratio can also be reduced.
Example
1
Reduce a ratio
Reduce the given ratios to lowest terms.
a. 4 to 52
b. 15 to 3
c. 1 to 2
d. 1 to 3
Solution
a. A ratio of 4 to 52
This is a ratio of 1 to 13. 
4
52  1
13
3
4
2
3
1
2
The expression is called the ratio of a to b. The two parts a and b are
called its terms.
a
b
Ratio
c. A ratio of 1 to 2
This is a ratio of 3 to 4. 
  3
4
  3
2  1
2
 11
2
2  11
2  2
1
2
b. A ratio of 15 to 3
Write this as because a ratio compares two
numbers. This is a ratio of 5 to 1.
5
1
15
3  5
d. A ratio of 1 to 3
This is a ratio of 4 to 9.
  4
9
  5
3  4
15
  5
3  15
4
 12
3
33
4
 12
3  33
4
3
4
2
3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.7
Ratios, Proportions, and Problem Solving
301
Historical
The symbol “:” for a ratio was first
used by the astronomer Vincent
Wing in 1651. Prior to this, a ratio
was represented by a single dot,
as in 
, to mean
In a book published in 1633,
Johnson’s Arithmetik, the colon is
used to represent a fraction.
4
5
4 # 5
NOTE
Proportions
A proportion is a statement of equality between ratios. In symbols,
c
c
c
“a is to b” “as” “c is to d”
The notation used in some books is a : b :: c : d. Even though we won’t use this notation,
we will use words associated with this notation to name the terms: 
In the more common fractional notation, we have 
a
b

c
d
Means
Extremes
a  :  b  :  :  c  :  d
Means
Extremes
a
b  5  c
d
Example
2
Terminology review
Read each proportion, and name the means and the extremes.
a.
b.
Solution
a.
Read:
Two is to three as ten is to fifteen. 
Means:
3 and 10
Extremes:
2 and 15
b.
Read:
m is to five as three is to eight. 
Means:
5 and 3
Extremes:
m and 8
m
5 5 3
8
2
3 5 10
15
m
5 5 3
8
2
3 5 10
15
The following property is fundamental to our study of proportions and percents.
If the product of the means equals the product of the extremes, then the ratios form
a proportion.
Also, if the ratios form a proportion, then the product of the means equals the
product of the extremes. In symbols,
1
4243
14243
c
c
product of means  product of extremes 
b  c  a  d
a
b  c
d
Property of Proportions
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
3
Form a proportion, if possible
Tell whether each pair of ratios forms a proportion.
a.
b.
Solution
a. Means
Extremes
b. Means
Extremes
4  36
3  48
16  7
5  22
144  144
112  110
Thus,
Thus,
They form a proportion.
They do not form a proportion.
5
16  7
22
3
4  36
48
5
16, 7
22
3
4, 36
48
Example
4
Insert appropriate relation symbol
Insert 
or 
as appropriate.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
a.
b.
31242
?
41182
1132
?
2112
72
?
72
3
?
2


1
3
1
2
18
24
3
4
4
7
3
5
7
8
2
3
1
3
1
2
18
24
3
4
.
5, ,,
You can use the cross-product method not only to see whether two fractions form a
proportion, but also to compare the sizes of two fractions. For example, if a and c are
whole numbers, and b and d are counting numbers, then the following property can be
used to compare the sizes of two fractions: 
If ad  bc, then 
If ad  bc, then 
If ad  bc, then a
b . c
d.
a
b , c
d.
a
b 5 c
d.
c.
d.
2182
?
3172
3172
?
5142
16
?
21
21
?
20


4
7
3
5
7
8
2
3
Comparing decimal numbers can sometimes be confusing; for example, which is
larger,
0.6
or
0.58921?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.7
Ratios, Proportions, and Problem Solving
303
Example
5
Insert inequality system
Insert
or
as appropriate.
a. 0.28 ____ 0.3
b. 0.001
0.01
c. 0.005 ____ 0.004823
d. 3
0.98712
Solution
a. 0.28 ____ 0.3
b. 0.001
0.01
.
,
The larger number is 0.6. To see this, simply write each decimal with the same number of
places by affixing trailing zeros, and then compare. That is, write
0.60000 
0.58921 
Now, it is easy to see that 
because 60,000 hundred thousandths is
larger than 58,921 hundred thousandths.
0.60000 . 0.58921
Solving Proportions
The usual setting for a proportion problem is that three of the terms of the proportion are
known and one of the terms is unknown. It is always possible to find the missing term
by solving an equation. However, when given a proportion, we first use the property of
proportions (which is equivalent to multiplying both sides of the equation by the same
number).
Example
6
Find missing term in a proportion
Find the missing term of each proportion. 
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
a.
PRODUCT OF MEANS  PRODUCT OF EXTREMES
4w  31202
Solve by dividing both sides by 4.
Notice that 4 is the number
opposite the unknown.
w 5 31202
4
3
4 5 w
20
t
15 5 3
5
2
x 5 8
9
3
4 5 27
y
3
4 5 w
20
0.28 
0.30
since 28  30
0.001 
0.010
since 1  10
____
____
c. 0.005
____ 0.004823
d. 3
____ 0.98712
0.005000 
0.004823
3.00000 
0.98712
____
____
w  15
b.
PRODUCT OF MEANS  PRODUCT OF EXTREMES
41272  3y
36  y
Divide both sides by 3;
Notice that 3 is the number opposite the
unknown.
4(27)
3
 y
3
4 5 27
y
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
c.
PRODUCT OF MEANS  PRODUCT OF EXTREMES
8x  2192
d.
PRODUCT OF MEANS  PRODUCT OF EXTREMES
31152  5t
9  t
Divide both sides by 5.
Notice that 5 is the number opposite
the unknown.
31152
5
5 t
t
15 5 3
5
x  9
4
Divide both sides by 8.
Notice that 8 is the number opposite
the unknown.
x 5 2192
8
2
x 5 8
9
Example
7
Solve a proportion
Solve the proportion for the unknown term. 
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a.  5
6  55
y
21
2
5 5 a
8
5
b 5 3
4
5
6 5 55
y
Notice that the unknown term can be in any one of four positions, as illustrated by the
four parts of Example 6. But even though you can find the missing term of a proportion
(called solving the proportion) by the technique used in Example 6, it is easier to think
in terms of the cross-product divided by the number opposite the unknown. This
method is easier than actually solving the equation because it can be done quickly using a
calculator, as shown in the following examples.
Given a proportion:
Step 1
Find the product of the means or the product of the extremes, whichever
does not contain the unknown term.
Step 2
Divide this product by the number that is opposite the unknown term.
Procedure for Solving Proportions
d Product of the means
d Number opposite the unknown
 y  6  55
5
You can cancel to simplify many of these problems.
b.  5
b  3
4

5

55

6
  66
  6  55
5
d Product of the extremes
d Number opposite the unknown
 b  5  4
3

3

4

5
  20
3 or6 2
3
Proportions are quite easy
to solve with a calculator.
You can multiply the
cross-terms and divide by
the number opposite the
variable all in one calcula-
tor sequence.
Notice that your answers
don’t have to be whole
numbers. This means that
the correct proportion is
5
62
3
 3
4.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.7
Ratios, Proportions, and Problem Solving
305
c.
Many applied problems can be solved using a proportion. Whenever you are work-
ing an applied problem, you should estimate an answer so that you will know whether the
result you obtain is reasonable.
When setting up a proportion with units, be sure that like units occupy corresponding
positions, as illustrated in Examples 8–11. The proportion is obtained by applying the
sentence “a is to b as c is to d” to the quantities in the problem.
  4

5

8

2.5
  20
5
 
5
2  8
1
5
d Product of the extremes
d Number opposite the unknown
 a  21
2  8
5
 21
2
5  a
8
Example
9
Gasoline needed for a trip
If a 120-mile trip took 
gallons of gas, how much gas is needed for a 240-mile trip? 
Solution
“120 miles is to 
gallons as 240 miles is to how many gallons?”
miles
miles
T
T
c
c
gallons gallons
The trip will require 17 gallons. 
  17
 x 
17
2  240
120
120
81
2
 240
x
81
2
81
2
Example
8 Cost of a can
If 4 cans of cola sell for $1.89, how much will 6 cans cost? 
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example. 
Understand the Problem. We see that 4 cans sell for $1.89 and 8 cans sell for
21$1.892  $3.78. We need to find the cost for 6 cans, which must be somewhere
between $1.89 and $3.78. 
Devise a Plan. There are many possible plans for solving this problem. We will form a
proportion. 
Carry Out the Plan. Solve “4 cans is to $1.89 as 6 cans is to what?” 
Look Back. We see that 6 cans will cost $2.84.
  2.835
 x  1.89  6
4
 
4 cans
1.89 dollars  6 cans
x dollars
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

306
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example 10 Tax on a home
If the property tax on a $375,000 home is $1,910, what is the tax on a $450,000 home?
Solution
“$375,000 is to $1,910 as $450,000 is to what?”
value
value
T
T
c
c
tax
tax
A calculator is useful here.
The tax is $2,292.
  2,292
 x  1,910  450,000
375,000
375,000
1,910
 450,000
x
Example 11 Formulate a mixture
In a can of mixed nuts, the ratio of cashews to peanuts is 1 to 6. If a given machine
releases 46 cashews into a can, how many peanuts should be released? 
Solution
First, understand the problem. This problem is comparing two quantities,
cashews and peanuts, so consider writing a proportion. 
TRANSLATE.
This is the given ratio. 
T
EVOLVE. The NUMBER OF CASHEWS  46, so by substitution
Let p  NUMBER OF PEANUTS; then the equation is 
SOLVE. 61462  p
276  p
ANSWER. Thus, 276 peanuts should be released.
46
p  1
6
46
number of peanuts 5 1
6
number of cashews
number of peanuts 5 1
6
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by ratios and
proportions? 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
How does the property of
proportions relate to solving equations? 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
How does the procedure for solving
proportions relate to solving equations? 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe a process for setting
up a proportion, given an applied problem. 
Problem Set 6.7
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Write the ratios given in Problems 5–10 as simplified ratios. 
5. A cement mixture calls for 60 pounds of cement for 3 gallons
of water. What is the ratio of cement to water?
6. What is the ratio of water to cement in Problem 5?
7. About 106 baby boys are born for every 100 baby girls. Write
this as a simplified ratio of males to females.
8. What is the ratio of girls to boys in Problem 7?
9. If you drive 279 miles on 
gallons of gas, what is the 
simplified ratio of miles to gallons?
10. If you drive 151.7 miles on 8.2 gallons of gas, what is the 
simplified ratio of miles to gallons?
Tell whether each pair of ratios in Problems 11–14 forms a
proportion. 
11. a.
b.
c.
12. a.
b.
c. 20
70, 4
14
403
341, 13
11
85
18, 42
9
3
6, 5
10
6
8, 9
12
7
1, 21
3
151
2
Section 6.7
Ratios, Proportions, and Problem Solving
307
13. a.
b.
c.
14. a.
b.
c.
Insert , , or  as appropriate in Problems 15–18. 
15. a.
b.
c.
16. a.
b.
c.
17. a. 0.8 
0.8001
b. 0.8 
0.7999
c. 2.8 
2.81
d. 2.8 
2.88
18. a.
3.1416
b.
1.4142
c.
1.7320508
d.
2.0000
Solve each proportion in Problems 19–42 for the item represented
by a letter. 
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42. Z
21
3
5
11
2
41
5
9
Y 5
11
2
32
3
3
5
1
2
5 X
2
3
1
5 
2
3
5
3
4
V
U
11
2
5
1
2
3
4
33
21
5
5
33
4
T
11
3
1
9
5 S
22
3
5
R 5
7
12 3
5
5
2 5 Q
123
5
P
4 5
41
2
6
4
22
3
5 3
N
71
5
9 5 M
5
L
18 5 5
6
3
K 5 2
5
4
5 5 3
J
2
3 5 I
24
4
H 5 3
15
G
24 5 14
16
12
15 5 20
F
12
18 5 E
12
7
D 5 1
8
C
2 5 5
1
1
9 5 4
B
5
1 5 A
6
24
23
22
p
7
12
11
16
42
45
14
15
10
2
25
5
1
8
1
5
1
3
1
4
1
8
1
6
1
3, 
331
3
100
51
5
7 , 4
5
3
2, 5
31
2
5
3, 
71
3
4
2
3, 67
100
3
4, 75
100
Level  2
43. If 4 melons sell for $0.52, how much would 7 melons 
cost?
44. If a 121-mile trip took 
gallons of gas, how many miles can
be driven with a full tank of 13 gallons?
45. If a family uses 
gallons of milk per week, how much milk
will this family need for four days?
46. If 2 quarts of paint are needed for 75 ft of fence, how many
quarts are needed for 900 ft of fence?
47. If Jack jogs 3 miles in 40 minutes, how long will it take 
him (to the nearest minute) to jog 2 miles at the same 
rate?
48. If Jill jogs 2 miles in 15 minutes, how long will it take her (to
the nearest minute) to jog 5 miles at the same rate?
49. A moderately active 140-pound person will use 2,100 calories
per day to maintain that body weight. How many calories per
day are necessary to maintain a moderately active 165-pound
person?
50. This problem will help you check your work in Problems 19–42.
Fill in the capital letters from Problems 19–42 to correspond with
their numerical values in the boxes. For example, if
Now find the box or boxes with number 10 in the corner and
fill in the letter C. This has already been done for you. (The
letter O has also been filled in for you.) Some letters may not
appear in the boxes. When you are finished filling in the
letters, darken all the blank spaces to separate the words in the
secret message. Notice that one of the blank spaces has also
been filled in to help you. 
30
15
8
36
21
9
30
6
16
32
10
19
1–4
20
8
6
21
9
9
43
8
30
1–4
8
32
1–4
15
30
36
32
30
5–2
16
2
21
8
56
5–2
16
10
8
43
8
5–2
8
9
23
56
8
1–4
2
8
5–2
2
16
O
C
.
C
2  5
1thenC  2  5
1
 10
31
2
51
2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

308
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
the drawing is 6 in., how long is the longer side of the scale
drawing?
57. If the property tax on a $180,000 home is $1,080, what is the
tax on a $130,000 home?
Problem Solving 3   
58. To dilute a medication you can use the following formula: 
How many units of a 10% solution are needed to prepare
500 units of a 2% solution?
59. At a certain hamburger stand, the owner sold soft drinks out of
two 16-gallon barrels. At the end of the first day, she wished to
increase her profit, so she filled the soft-drink barrels with
water, thus diluting the drink served. She repeated the
procedure at the end of the second and third days. At the end
of the fourth day, she had 10 gallons remaining in the barrels,
but they contained only 1 pint of pure soft drink. How much
pure soft drink was served in the four days?
60. Answer the question in the following Peanuts cartoon strip. 
amount of strong solution needed
amount of diluted solution wanted
 percent of diluted solution
percent of original solution 5
Level 3
51. If  

, find V when V  175, T  300, and T  273.
52. If 

, find V when V  12, P  2, T  300, P  8, 
and T  400.
53. The pitch of a roof is the
ratio of the rise to the half-
span. If a roof has a rise of
8 feet and a span of 24 feet,
what is the pitch?
54. What is the pitch of a roof (see Problem 53) with a 3-foot rise
and a span of 12 feet?
55. You’ve probably seen advertisements for posters that can be
made from any photograph. If the finished poster will be 2 ft
by 3 ft, it’s likely that part of your original snapshot will be cut
off. Suppose you send in a photo that measures 3 in. by 5 in.
If the shorter side of the enlargement will be 2 ft, what size
should the longer side of the enlargement be so that the entire
snapshot is shown in the poster?
56. Suppose you wish to make a scale drawing of your living
room, which measures 18 ft by 25 ft. If the shorter side of 
PrVr
Tr
PV
T
Vr
Tr
V
T
Peanuts: © 2010 Peanuts Worldwide LLC.,
dist by UFS, Inc.
6.8 Percents
We frequently use percents, and you have, no doubt, worked with percents in your previ-
ous mathematics classes. However, we include this section to review percents and the
equivalence of the decimal, fraction, and percent forms.
Percent
We begin with a definition of percent.
Percent is the ratio of a given number to 100. This means that a percent is the
numerator of a fraction whose denominator is 100.
Percent
Span
Rise
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.8
Percents
309
The symbol % is used to indicate percent. Since a percent is a ratio, percents can easily
be written in fractional form.
Example
1
Write a percent as a fraction
Write the following percents as simplified fractions.
a. “Sale 75% OFF”
b. “SALARIES UP 6.8%”
Solution
a. 75% means a “ratio of 75 to 100”:
b. 6.8% means a “ratio of 6.8 to 100”: 
 6 4
5  100
6.8  100  6 8
10  100
75
100 5 3
4
Example
2
Write a percent as a decimal
Write each percent in decimal form. 
a. 8 percent
b. 6.8%
c. 33 %
d.
% 
Solution
a. 8 % 
c____ If a decimal point is not shown, it is always understood to be at the right of the whole number.
0. 08 % 
c

____
Shift the decimal point two places to the left; add zeros as placeholders, if necessary. 
Delete percent symbol. 
Answer:
8%  0.08 
b. 6.8%
Think:
6. 8%
c_________
Shift two places, add placeholders as necessary, and delete 
percent symbol. 
Answer:
6.8%  0.068
c. 33 %
Think:
33 %
c______ Decimal point is understood.
Answer:
33 %  0.33
or 0.333 . . .  
1
3
1
3
1
3
1
3
1
2
1
3
17
5 34
5 3
1
100
        50
 17
250
Fractions/Decimals/Percents 
Percents can also be written as decimals. Since a percent is a ratio of a number to 100, we
can divide by 100 by moving the decimal point.
To express a percent as a decimal, shift the decimal point two places to the left and
delete the % symbol. If the percent involves a fraction, write the fraction as a
decimal; then shift the decimal point.
Procedure for Changing a Percent to a Decimal
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

d. %
 0.5, so
%  0.5%
Think:
00. 5% 
c____
Answer:
0.5%  0.005
1
2
1
2
1
2
310
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
3
Write a fraction as a percent
Write each fraction in percent form. 
a.
b.
Solution
a. Look under the fraction heading in Table 6.1, and follow the directions for changing
a fraction to a percent. 
Step 1
Step 2
0. 62 5  62.5%
_____c
Two places; add zeros as placeholders as necessary; 
add percent symbol.
Answer:
62.5%
5
8  0.625
5
6
5
8
As you can see from the examples, every number can be written in three forms: frac-
tion, decimal, and percent. Even though we discussed changing from fraction to decimal
form earlier in the text, we’ll review the three forms in this section. The procedure for
changing from one form to another is given in Table 6.1.
TABLE 6.1
Fraction/Decimal/Percent Conversion Chart
To/From
Fraction
Decimal
Percent
Fraction
Divide the numerator 
(top) by the denominator
(bottom). Write as a 
terminating or as a
repeating decimal (bar
notation).
First change the fraction to a decimal by 
carrying out the division to two decimal
places and writing the remainder as a
fraction. Then move the decimal point 
two places to the right, and affix a percent
symbol.
Terminating
decimal
Write the decimal without
the decimal point, and
multiply by the decimal
name of the last digit
(rightmost digit).
Shift the decimal point two places to the
right, and affix a percent symbol.
Percent
Write as a ratio to 100
and reduce the fraction. 
If the percent involves a
decimal, first write the
decimal in fractional form,
and then multiply by 
.
If the percent involves a
fraction, delete the
percent symbol and 
multiply by 
.
1
100
1
100
Shift the decimal point
two places to the left, and
delete the percent
symbol. If the percent in-
volves a fraction, first
write the fraction as a
decimal, and then shift
the decimal point.
   0.625
85.000
48
  20
  16
    40
    40
     0
Spend some time with
this table. In fact, you
may want to place a
marker on this page for
future reference.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.8
Percents
311
Example
4
Write a decimal as a percent and as a fraction
Write decimal forms as percents and fractions.
a. 0.85
b. 2.485 
Solution
a. Step 1
0. 85  85 %
_____c
c
Two places Decimal understood
Step 2
85% means 
b. Step 1
2.485  248.5%
Step 2
248.5% means 248.5 
1
100  2481
2 
1
100
85
100  17
20
0.83
65.000
48
  20
  18
   2
b. Step 1
Step 2
0. 83
 83 %
_____c
The decimal point is understood.
Answer:
%
831
3
1
3
1
3
5
6  0.83 1
3
 497
2

1
100
 497
200 or 2 97
200
Example
5
Estimating percents
Estimate the following percentages:
a. 25% of 312
b. 50% of 843
c. 33 % of 1,856
d. 25% of 43,350 
Solution
a. Estimate 25% of 312 by rounding 312 so that it is easily divisible by 4: 
Find 320  4  80.
1
4 3 320 5 80
1
3
Estimation
Percent problems are very common. We conclude this section with a discussion of esti-
mation and some percent calculations.
The first estimation method is the unit fraction-conversion method, which can 
be used to estimate the common percents of 10%, 25%, 33 %, and 50%. To estimate the
size of a part of a whole quantity, which is sometimes called a percentage, rewrite the
percent as a fraction and mentally multiply, as shown by the following example. 
50% of 800:
 800  400
THINK: 800  2  400
25% of 1,200:
 1,200  300
THINK: 1,200  4  300
33 % of 600:
 600  200
THINK: 600  3  200
10% of 824:
 824  82.4
THINK: 824  10  82.4
If the numbers for which you are finding a percentage are not as “nice” as those given
here, you can estimate by rounding the number, as shown in Example 5. 
1
10
1
3
1
3
1
4
1
2
1
3
Unit Fraction Comparison
Percent
Fraction
10%
25%
33 %
50%
1
2
1
3
1
3
1
4
1
10
Carry out the division two
places and save the remainder
as a fraction: 
.
2
6 5 1
3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
6
Estimate percents
Estimate the following percentages.
a. 75% of 943
b. 66 % of 8,932
c. 60% of 954
d. 80% of 0.983
Solution
a. 75% of 943 
 1,000  3(  1,000)  3(250)  750 
b. 66 % of 8,932   9,000  2(  9,000)  2(3,000)  6,000 
c. 60% of 954 
 1,000  6(
 1,000)  6(100)  600 
d. 80% of 0.983  
 1  0.8
8
10
1
10
6
10
1
3
2
3
2
3
1
4
3
4
2
3
A second estimation procedure uses a multiple of a unit fraction. For example,
Think of 75% as , which is 3  . 
Think of 66 % as , which is 2  .
Think of 60% as , which is 6 
. 
1
10
6
10
1
3
2
3
2
3
1
4
3
4
b. Estimate 50% of 843 by rounding 843 so that it is easily divisible by 2: 
Find 840  2  420.
c. Estimate 33 % of 1,856 by rounding 1,856 so that it is easily divisible by 3:
Find 1,800  3  600.
d. Estimate 25% of 43,350 by rounding 43,350 so that it is easily divisible by 4: 
1
4 3 44,000 5 11,000
1
3 3 1,800 5 600
1
3
1
2 3 840 5 420
The Percent Problem
Many percentage problems are more difficult than these. The following quotation was
found in a recent publication: “An elected official is one who gets 51 percent of the vote
cast by 40 percent of the 60 percent of voters who registered.” Certainly, most of us will
have trouble understanding the percent given in this quotation; but you can’t pick up a
newspaper without seeing dozens of examples of ideas that require some understanding
of percents. A difficult job for most of us is knowing whether to multiply or divide by the
given numbers. In this section, I will provide you with a sure-fire method for knowing
what to do. The first step is to understand what is meant by the percent problem.
A
is
P%
of
W
T
T
T
This is the given
The percent is written
This is the whole quantity.
amount.
.
It always follows the 
word “of.”
P
100
The Percent Problem
The percent problem won’t always be stated in this form, but notice that three quan-
tities are associated with it:
1. The amount—sometimes called the percentage
2. The percent—sometimes called the rate
3. The whole quantity—sometimes called the base
Now, regardless of the form in which you are given the percent problem, follow these
steps to write a proportion.
Study this percent prob-
lem. If you learn this, you
get a written guarantee
for correctly working 
percent problems.
{
f
{
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.8
Percents
313
Step 1
Identify the percent first; it will be followed by the symbol % or the word
percent. Write it as a fraction: 
Step 2
Identify the whole quantity next; it is preceded by the word “of.” It is the
denominator of the second fraction in the proportion:
d This is the quantity following the word “of.”
Step 3
The remaining number is the partial amount; it is the numerator of the
second fraction in the proportion: 
d This is the last quantity to be inserted into the problem.
P
100 5 A
W
P
100  W
P
100
Procedure for Solving the Percent Problem
Example
7
Write a percent problem
For each of the following cases, identify the percent, the whole quantity, and the amount
(the percentage or part), and then write a proportion. 
a. What number is 18% of 200?
b. 18% of 200 is what number? 
c. 150 is 12% of what number?
d. 63 is what percent of 420? 
e. 18% of what number is 72?
f. 120 is what percent of 60? 
Solution
Percent
Whole
Amount
Proportion
P(%)
W (“of”)
A (part)
a. What number is 18% of 200?
18
200
unknown
b. 18% of 200 is what number?
18
200
unknown
c. 150 is 12% of what number?
12
unknown
150
d. 63 is what percent of 420?
unknown
420
63
e. 18% of what number is 72?
18
unknown
72
f. 120 is what percent of 60?
unknown
60
120
c
c
c
Regardless of the arrangement of
This number is identified last.
the question, identify P first.
Second, identify the number following the word “of.”
P
100  120
60
18
100  72
W
P
100  63
420
12
100  150
W
18
100  A
200
18
100  A
200
P
100  A
W
Since there are only three letters in the proportion
there are three types of percent problems. These possible types were illustrated in Example 7.
To answer a question involving a percent, write a proportion and then solve the proportion.
Try solving each proportion in Example 7. The answers are: a.
; b.
; 
c.
; d.
; e.
; f.
.
P 5 200
W 5 400
P 5 15
W 5 1,250
A 5 36
A 5 36
P
100 5 A
W
Read these steps—
SLOWLY!
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

314
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
8
Find the lowest C grade
In a certain class there are 500 points possible. The lowest C grade is 65% of the possi-
ble points. How many points are equal to the lowest C grade?
Solution
What is 65% of 500 points?
d The whole amount follows the word “of.”
65
100  A
500
Example
9
Salary withholding
If your monthly salary is $4,500 and 21% is withheld for taxes and Social Security, how
much money will be withheld from your check on payday? 
Solution
How much is 21% of $4,500? 
 945
Check by estimation:
21% of 4,500  2(
 4,500)  900. 
The withholding is $945.
1
10
A 5 21 3 4,500
100
21
100 5
A
4,500
Example
10 Find the tax rate
You make a $25 purchase, and the clerk adds $2.25 for sales tax. This doesn’t seem right
to you, so you want to know what percent tax has been charged. 
Solution
What percent of $25 is $2.25? 
9  P
Check by estimation:
9% of 25 
 25  2.50. 
The tax charged was 9%.
1
10
100 3 2.25
25
5 P
P
100 5 2.25
25
Example
11 Find total income
Your neighbors tell you that they paid $44,370 in taxes last year, and this amounted to
29% of their total income. What was their total income? 
Solution
29% of total income is $44,370. 
29
100 5 44,370
W
Check by estimation:
65% of 500  6(
 500)  300. 
The lowest C grade is 325 points.
1
10
          5
A 5 65 3 500
100
           
1
5 325
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.8
Percents
315
153,000  W
Check by estimation:
29% of 153,000  3(
 150,000)  3(15,000)  45,000.
Since $45,000 is an estimate for $44,370, we conclude the result is correct. Their total
income was $153,000.
1
10
100 3 44,370
29
5 W
Example
12 Find percent increase
If 45 is increased to 105, what is the percent increase? 
Solution
The amount of increase is 105  45  60, so as a percent problem we have
“60 is what percent of 45?” 
The percent increase is 133 %.
1
3
 133.33
P  100  60
45
P
100  60
45
WARNING! You must be careful not to add percents. For example, suppose you have $100
and spend 50%. How much have you spent, and how much do you have left?
Amount Spent
Remainder
$50
$50
Now, suppose you spend 50% of the remainder. How much have you spent, and how
much is left? 
New Spending 
Old Spending
Remainder
$25
$50
$25
This means you have spent $75 or 75% of your original bankroll. A common ERROR is
to say “50% spending  50% spending  100% spending.” Remember, if you add
percents, you often obtain incorrect results. 
Example
13
Critique a percent headline
A newspaper headline proclaimed: 
Teen drug
use soars
105%
WASHINGTON —Teen drug use 
rose 105% between 1995 and 1997.
A national survey showed that 
between 1995 and 1996 youth drug 
use rose 30%, but between 1996 and 
1997 usage soared 75%.
Over the two-year period, the rise of 
105% was attributed to...
What is wrong with the headline? 
Solution
We are not given all the relevant numbers, but consider the following possi-
bility: Suppose there are 100 drug users, so a rise of 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100 to 130 is a 30% increase 
130 to 227 is a 75% increase 
100 to 227 is a 127% increase, NOT 105% 
Remember, adding percents can give faulty results.
316
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Level  1
In Problems 1–21, change the given form into the two missing
forms.
Fraction
Decimal
Percent
1.
0.75
2.
0.2
3.
40%
4.
100%
24. a. 50% of 9,985
b.
of 3,600
25. a. 25% of 819
b. 25% of 790
26. a. 75% of 1,058
b. 75% of 94
27. a. 40% of 93
b. 90% of 8,741
28. a.
of 8,600
b.
of 35
Write each sentence in Problems 29–46 as a proportion, and then
solve to answer the question.
29. What number is 15% of 64?
30. What number is 120% of 16?
31. 14% of what number is 21?
32. 40% of what number is 60?
33. 10 is what percent of 5?
34. What percent of $20 is $1.20?
35. 4 is what percent of 5?
36. 2 is what percent of 5?
37. What percent of 12 is 9?
38. What percent of 5 is 25?
39. 49 is 35% of what number?
40. 3 is 12% of what number?
41. 120% of what number is 16?
42. 21 is 66 % of what number?
43. 12 is 33 % of what number?
44. What is 8% of $2,425?
45. What is 6% of $8,150?
46. 400% of what number is 150?
1
3
2
3
662
3%
662
3%
331
3%
Problem Set 6.8
5.
6.
7.
0.85
8.
60%
9.
10.
45%
11.
120%
12.
13.
0.05
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
0.35
19.
0.175
20.
21.
0.0025
Estimate the percentages in Problems 22–28.
22. a. 50% of 2,000
b. 25% of 400
23. a. 10% of 95,000
b. 10% of 85.6
1
12
222
9%
5
6
1
6
61
2%
2
3
3
8
1
5
1
3
Level  2
47. If 11% of the 210 million adult Americans live in poverty, how
many adult Americans live in poverty?
48. If 6.2% of the 210 million adult Americans are unemployed,
how many adult Americans are unemployed?
49. If the sales tax is 6% and the purchase price is $181, what is
the amount of tax?
50. If the sales tax is 5.5% and the purchase price is $680, what is
the amount of tax?
51. If you were charged $151 in taxes on a $3,020 purchase, what
percent tax were you charged?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.9
Modeling Uncategorized Problems
317
52. If 20 is increased to 25, what is the percent increase?
53. If 80 is decreased to 48, what is the percent decrease?
54. Government regulations require that, for certain companies to
receive federal grant money, 15% of the total number of
employees must meet minority requirements. If a company
employs 390 people, how many minority people should be
employed to meet the minimum requirements?
55. If Brad’s monthly salary is $8,200, and 32% is withheld for
taxes and Social Security, how much money is withheld each
month?
56. A certain test is worth 125 points. How many points 
(rounded to the nearest point) are needed to obtain a score 
of 75%?
57. If Carlos answered 18 out of 20 questions on a test correctly,
what was his percentage right?
58. If Wendy answered 15 questions correctly and obtained 75%,
how many questions were on the test?
59. Shannon Sovndal received an 8% raise, which amounted to
$100 per month. What was his old wage, and what will his
new wage be?
60. An advertisement for a steel-belted radial tire states that this
tire delivers 15% better gas mileage. If the present gas mileage
is 25.5 mpg, what mileage would you expect if you purchased
these tires? Round your answer to the nearest tenth of a mile
per gallon.
6.9  Modeling Uncategorized Problems
One major criticism of studying the common types of word problems presented in most
textbooks is that students can fall into the habit of solving problems by using a template
or pattern and be successful in class without ever developing independent problem-
solving abilities. Even though problem solving may require algebraic skills, it also re-
quires many other skills; a goal of this book is to help you develop a general
problem-solving ability so that when presented with a problem that does not fit a tem-
plate, you can apply techniques that will lead to a solution.
Most problems that do not come from textbooks are presented with several variables,
along with one or more relationships among those variables. In some instances, insuffi-
cient information is given; in others there may be superfluous information or inconsistent
information. A common mistake when working with these problems is to assume that you
know which variable to choose as the unknown in the equation at the beginning of the
problem. This leads to trying to take too much into your memory at the start, and as a
result it is easy to get confused.
Now you are in a better position to practice Polya’s problem-solving techniques
because you have had some experience in carrying out the second step of the process,
which we repeat here for convenience.
If you work hard 
mastering this section,
you will have gained an
important life skill.
Step 1
Understand the Problem. Ask questions, experiment, or otherwise rephrase
the question in your own words.
Step 2
Devise a Plan. Find the connection between the data and the unknown.
Look for patterns, relate to a previously solved problem or a known
formula, or simplify the given information to give you an easier problem.
Step 3
Carry out the Plan. Check the steps as you go.
Step 4
Look Back. Examine the solution obtained.
Guidelines for Problem Solving
Remember that the key to becoming a problem solver is to develop the skill to solve
problems that are not like the examples shown in the text. For this reason, the problems in
this section will require that you go beyond copying the techniques developed in the first
part of this chapter.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

318
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
1
School ADA
In California, state funding of education is based on the average daily 
attendance (ADA). Develop a formula for determining the ADA at your school.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Most attempts at mathematical modeling come from a real problem that needs to be
solved. There is no “answer book” to tell you when you are correct. There is often the
need to do additional research to find necessary information, and the need not to use cer-
tain information that you have to arrive at a solution. 
Understand the Problem. What is meant by ADA? The first step might be a call to your
school registrar to find out how ADA is calculated. For example, in California it is based
on weekly student contact hours (WSCH), and 1 ADA  525 WSCH. Thus, you might
begin by writing the formula 
Devise a Plan. Mathematical modeling requires that we check this formula to see
whether it properly models the TOTAL ADA at your school. How is the WSCH
determined? In California, the roll sheets are examined at two census dates, and WSCH
is calculated as the average of the census numbers. In mathematical modeling, you
often need formulas that are not specified as part of the problem. In this case, we need a
formula for calculating an average. We use the mean:
We now have a second attempt at a formula for TOTAL ADA: 
Carry Out the Plan. Does this properly model the TOTAL ADA? Perhaps, but suppose a
taxpayer or congressperson brings up the argument that funding should take into account
absent people, because not all classes have 100% attendance each day. You might include
an absence factor as part of the formula. In California, the agreed absence factor for fund-
ing purposes is 0.911. How would we incorporate this into the TOTAL ADA calculation? 
This formula could be simplified to 
TOTAL ADA  0.0008676190476(c1  c2)
where c1 and c2 are the numbers of students on the roll sheets on the first and second
census dates, respectively. 
Look Back. In fact, a Senate bill in California states this formula as 
This is equivalent to the formula we derived.
Census 1 WSCH  Census 2 WSCH
2
 0.911 Absence factor
525
 total ada
Census 1  Census 2
2
 Absence factor
525
 total ada
Census 1  Census 2
2
 525  total ada
WSCH  Census 1  Census 2
2
WSCH
525
 total ada
Pólya’s 
Method
Example
2
DVR recording
Suppose you wish to record a 30 hours on your DVR and want to
obtain the best-quality recording possible. Explain how you could do this. There are
two modes for recording on your DVR: HD (high definition will record 20 hours)
Pólya’s 
Method
This means that 525
WSCH is
ADA or 1050 WSCH is
ADA. In other
words, we divide the
WSCH by 525 to find
the ADA.
1050
525 5 2
525/525 5 1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.9
Modeling Uncategorized Problems
319
and SR (standard resolution will record 40 hours). The best-quality recording is
on HD.*
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example. 
Understand the Problem. We cannot record all 30 hours in HD. If we record in SR we
will be able to record the 30 hours but an empty 10 hour space would be left, and we
would be sacrificing quality by recording in SR mode. It seems that the solution is to
begin in the SR mode and at some “crucial moment” switch to the HD mode with the
goal that the 30 hours would just fill the available space.
Devise a Plan. We begin with some assumptions. In reality, the actual space required on
different DVRs are not exact. We will assume, however, that the times specified in the
problem are exact. That is, a DVR will record for exactly 20 or 40 hours depending on
the chosen quality. We also assume a linear relationship between recording time and the
amount of tape used.
Let us begin by drawing a picture of our problem:
Let x be the length of time that we record in SR mode. Then 30  x is the length of
time that we record in HD mode.
How do we represent the fraction that is recorded in the SR mode?
If 
, then of the DVR capacity is used; remember that 40 hours can be
recorded in SR format
If 
, then of the DVR capacity is used.
If 
, then of the DVR is used.
Thus, the model seems to be 
How do we represent the fraction that is recorded in the HD mode? Since the DVR is
full in this mode 20 hours, we see that the fraction of the capacity in the HD is
Since we want to use the entire 30 hours, both fractions must add up to 1. 
Carry Out the Plan. Simplify this equation by multiplying both sides by 40. 
The mode should be changed after 20 hours. 
Look Back. If we record for 20 hours in SR, we have used up of the tape. We then
switch to the HD mode and record for 10 hours, which uses up the other half of the DVR. 
1
2
 20 5 x
 60 2 x 5 40
 x 1 2130 2 x2 5 40
 x
40 1 30 2 x
20
5 1
time recording in the hd mode
20
5 30 2 x
20
time recording in the sr mode
40
5 x
40
1
4
x 5 10
2
4
x 5 20
3
4
x 5 30
Three-hour movie
Start
End
Length of time
in HD mode
x
Length of time
 in SR mode
*The idea for this example is from an article by Gregory N. Fiore in The Mathematics Teacher, October 1988.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

320
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
3
Time to fill swimming pool
An inlet pipe on a swimming pool can be used to fill the pool in 24 hours. 
The drain pipe can be used to empty the pool in 30 hours. If the pool is half-filled and
then the drain pipe is accidentally opened, how long will it take to fill the pool? 
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example. 
Understand the Problem. Draw a picture, if necessary. 
Pólya’s 
Method
WORK
DONE BY
INLET PIPE
 (RATE OF INLET PIPE)(TIME TO FILL)
WORK
DONE BY  (RATE OF DRAIN)(TIME TO DRAIN)
DRAIN
Time   time 
to fill 
to drain
 1
30 (time)
 1
24 (time)
Water comes into the pool until it is half full. Then water begins draining out of the pool
at the same time it is coming in. Is there a solution? What if the drain pipe alone emp-
tied the pool in 20 hours? In that case, the pool would never be more than half full, and
instead we could ask when it would be empty. Estimate an answer. Since it takes less
time to fill than to drain, the inlet pipe is working faster than the drain, so it will fill.
How long? Well, you might guess that it must be longer than 24 hours.
Devise a Plan. Let us denote the amount of water drained as the amount of work done.
Then we see 
WORK DONE BY INLET PIPE  WORK DONE BY DRAIN  ONE JOB COMPLETED
But wait, is this correct? The drain works only after the pool is half full. One of Pólya’s
suggestions is to work a simpler problem. How long does it take to fill the first half of
the pool? That’s easy. Since the pool fills in 24 hours, it must be half full in 12 hours.
Now, we can focus on filling the second half of the pool, so we come back to the guide
we wrote down above.
Another step we can take when devising a plan is to ask whether there is an appro-
priate formula. In this case,
Swimming pool
(cross-section)
Fill
Drain
Carry Out the Plan. Substitute these formulas into the guide (for the second half of 
the pool): 
WORK DONE BY INLET PIPE  WORK DONE BY DRAIN  ONE-HALF JOB COMPLETED
T
T
T


Let t  TIME
Remember that this is the time required to fill the second half of the pool.
Multiply both sides by 120.
 t  60
 5t  4t  60
 11202 1
24 t 2 11202 1
30 t 5 1
2 11202
 1
24 t  1
30 t  1
2
1
2
1
30 (time)
1
24 (time)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.9
Modeling Uncategorized Problems
321
Example
4
Peanuts age problem
A man has a daughter and a son. The son is three years older than the 
daughter. In one year the man will be six times as old as the daughter is now, and in ten
years he will be fourteen years older than the combined ages of his children. What is the
man’s present age? 
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example. 
Understand the Problem. There are three people: a man, his daughter, and his son. We
are concerned with their ages now, in one year, and in ten years. 
Devise a Plan. Does this look like any of the problems we have solved? We need to dis-
tinguish among the persons’ ages now and some time in the future. Let us begin by
translating the known information: 
Pólya’s 
Method
It will take 12 hours to fill the first half of the pool, but it will take 60 more hours to fill
the second half. Thus, it will take 72 hours to fill the pool. 
Look Back. Does this answer make sense? In 72 hours, 
swimming pools could
be filled. The drain is working for 60 hours, so this is the equivalent of 
swim-
ming pools drained. Let’s see: 3  2  1 swimming pool, so it checks. 
60
30  2
72
24  3
We have refrained from working so-called age problems because they seem to be a
rather useless type of word problem—one that occurs only in algebra books. They do,
however, give us a chance to practice our problem-solving skill, so they are worth consid-
ering. By the way, the precedent for age problems in algebra books goes back over 2,000
years (see Problem 60 about Diophantus). The age problem given in the next example
was found in the first three frames of a Peanuts cartoon.
Peanuts: © 2010 Peanuts Worldwide LLC.,
dist by UFS, Inc.
Ages Now
Ages in One Year
Ages in Ten Years
MAN’S AGE NOW
MAN’S AGE NOW  1
MAN’S AGE NOW  10 
DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW
DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW  1
DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW  10
SON’S AGE NOW
SON’S AGE NOW  1
SON’S AGE NOW  10 
We are given that 
First equation:
SON’S AGE NOW  DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW  3
and 
MAN’S AGE NOW  1  6(DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW) 
This is the same as 
Second equation: MAN’S AGE NOW  6(DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW)  1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Finally, we are given that 
MAN’S AGE NOW  10  (SON’S AGE NOW 10)  (DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW  10)  14
c
14 years older
If we simplify this equation we obtain: 
Third equation:
MAN’S AGE NOW  SON’S AGE NOW  DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW  24
The plan is to begin with the third equation and evolve it into an equation we can solve. 
Carry Out the Plan.
MAN’S AGE NOW  SON’S AGE NOW  DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW  24
c
c
SON’S AGE NOW  DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW  3
322
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Example
5
Estimation puzzle
To number the pages of a bulky volume, the printer used 4,001 digits. It
was estimated that the volume has 1,000 pages. Is this a good estimate? How many actual
pages has the volume? 
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example. 
Understand the Problem. Page 1 uses one digit; page 49 uses two digits; page 125 uses
three digits. Assume that the first page is page 1 and that the pages are numbered con-
secutively. 
Devise a Plan. This does not seem to fit any of the problem types we have considered in
this book. Can you reduce this to a simpler problem? If the book has exactly 9 numbered
pages, how many digits does the printer use? If the book has exactly 99 numbered pages,
how many digits does the printer use? The plan is to count the number of digits on single-
digit pages, then those on double-digit pages, then on triple-digit pages. 
Carry Out the Plan.
Single-digit pages:
9 digits total 
Double-digit pages: 2(90)  180 digits total
Do you see why this is not 2(99)? Remember, you are counting 
90 pages (namely, from page 10 to page 99).
Triple-digit pages:
3(900)  2,700 digits total
We have now accounted for 2,889 digits. Since we are looking for 4,001 digits and
since we can estimate four-digit pages to have 4(9,000)  36,000 digits, we need to
Pólya’s 
Method
Third equation
First equation
Second equation
MAN’S AGE NOW  6(DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW)  1
6(DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW)  1  DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW  3  DAUGHTER’S AGE NOW  24
Let d  daughter’s age now
 4d  28
 6d  1  2d  27
 6d  1  d  3  d  24
d  7
daughter’s age now  7
man’s age now  6 (daughter’s age now) 1
man’s age now  6(7) 1  41 
The man’s present age is 41. 
Look Back. From the first equation, SON’S AGE NOW  7  3  10. In one year the
man will be 42, and this is 6 times the daughter’s present age. In ten years the man will be
51 and the children will be 20 and 17; the man will be 14 years older than 20  17  37.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.9
Modeling Uncategorized Problems
323
know how many pages past 999 are necessary. Let x be the total number of pages. Then
the number of digits on four-digit pages is 
Four-digit pages:
4(x  999)
Now we can solve for x by using the following equation: 
Look Back. The book has 1,277 pages. 
 x  1,277
 4x  5,108
 4x  1,107  4,001
 4x  2,889  3,996  4,001
 9  180  2,700  4(x  999)  4,001
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the difference between solv-
ing word problems in textbooks and problem solving outside
the classroom. 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
In the first problem set of this
book, we asked you to discuss Pólya’s problem-solving
model. Now that you have spent some time reading this
book, we ask the same question again to see whether your
perspective has changed at all. Discuss Pólya’s problem-
solving model. 
Read each of the given problems and then select the best of the
given answers in Problems 3–29. 
3. The Hidden Valley Summer Camp is taking a field trip to the
Exploratorium. There are ten children who are 12 years old
or younger, six teens whose ages range from 13 years
to 18 years, and three chaperones. The field trip includes trans-
portation and lunch. The costs of the field trip are given:
$150
Bus and driver 
$2.50/person
Lunch 
$5.00/child
Admission
$6.00/teen
Admission 
$7.00/adult
Admission 
The bus driver will eat lunch, but will not visit the Explorato-
rium. What is the total cost for the field trip?
A. $307
B. $287
C. $314
D. $157 
4. An animal shelter has two purebred Labradors among the
48 dogs available for adoption. It is also known that 78 of the
dogs are mongrels. How many of the dogs are purebreds?
A. 42
B. 8
C. 4
D. 6 
5. Shannon needs to have a term paper printed on a laser printer
at Kinko’s. The paper is 30 pages long (including a cover page
and a bibliography page). Kinko’s charges $10.00 for each
30 minutes (with a minimum charge of one hour), plus
10¢/sheet, and a binding fee of $1.25. He will also copy the
original at a cost of 7¢/page. If the laser printing takes 45 min-
utes, what are the total charges?
A. $26.35
B. $21.35
C. $30.00
D. $16.35 
6. Hannah is selling snow cones to earn money for a train trip.
She sold 23 cones for $1.25 each and spent $4.95  $0.35 tax.
In addition, she received $3.50 in tips. What is the total profit
for Hannah’s endeavor?
A. $27.00
B. $26.95
C. $32.25
D. $23.45 
7. When Melissa went to purchase a purse from a street vendor,
she negotiated a purchase price that was 15% less than the
$125.00 marked price, plus 7% sales tax on the purchase price.
If she has $325.00 in her checking account, how much did she
pay for the purse?
A. $113.69
B. $211.31
C. $20.06
D. $304.94 
8. Linda finds that her $560 car payment is 28% of her gross
monthly income. She knows that $510 is deducted from her pay-
check each month, for income tax and Social Security. What is
Linda’s gross monthly income (rounded to the nearest dollar)?
A. $2,000
B. $157
C. $1,490
D. $930 
9. Lou figures that his monthly car insurance payment of $180 is
equal to 35% of the amount of her monthly auto loan payment.
What is his total combined monthly expense for auto loan pay-
ment and insurance (rounded to the nearest dollar)?
A. $577
B. $694
C. $514
D. $63 
10. Ben wants to finance the purchase of a guitar that is priced at
$1,500. He contacts ABC Finance Company, and they believe
the value of the guitar to be worth 10% less than that, and their
policy is to lend only 80% of the value of the guitar. What is
the down payment?
A. $420
B. $1,320
C. $1,080
D. $1,350 
11. Søren’s major bills are a variable-rate mortgage, car payments
($325/mo), food ($525/mo), and utilities ($215/mo). Last year
his monthly mortgage payment was $2,320. This year, his mort-
gage payment increased by 3%. How much (rounded to the near-
est dollar) will his monthly mortgage payment increase?
A. $3,385
B. $2,390
C. $835
D. $70 
Problem Set 6.9
$25 discount for
25 persons or more
f
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23. An annual salary of $83,000 is equivalent to what hourly
salary? Assume a 40-hour work week.
A. $38.00
B. $38.90
C. $39.90
D. $41.50 
24. How many prime numbers are divisible by 2?
A. 0
B. 1
C. 2
D. 3 
25. How many prime numbers are less than 100?
A. 23
B. 24
C. 25
D. 26 
26. How far up a wall does a 10-ft ladder reach if the bottom
is placed 3 ft from the base of the wall? (Answer to the nearest
foot.)
A. 8
B. 9
C. 10
D. 11 
27. In order to secure a 10-ft TV antenna, three guy wires are
needed. If the guy wires are 12 ft from the base of the antenna,
how many feet of wire should be purchased if the packages
available are:
A. 20 ft
B. 50 ft
C. 75 ft
D. 100 ft 
28. The number of distinct (different) factors of 100 is:
A. 2
B. 4
C. 8
D. 9 
29. The number of distinct (different) prime factors of 100 is:
A. 2
B. 4
C. 8
D. 9 
30. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Look back over your method of solu-
tion for any of Problems 3–29. Did you answer any of those by
inspection? That is, discuss the role of estimation and common
sense in problem solving. 
31. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
In this chapter we have been
discussing a problem-solving technique. Look back over your
method of solution for any of Problems 3–29 that you have
answered. Did you use the method discussed in the text or did
you use other procedures? Discuss your own “method of
attack” that you actually used. 
12. Theron bought an HDTV for $1,280 retail price and paid 7%
state tax. He also received a rebate of 5% of the retail price.
What was the total amount that he paid, including tax, for the
HDTV?
A. $1,369.60
B. $1,305.60 
C. $1,433.60
D. $1,340.20 
13. A swimming pool holds 25,500 gallons of water. It will
be filled by a pair of 0.5-in.-diameter hoses, each of which
supplies 2.50 gallons of water per minute. How many hours
will it take for the hoses to fill the pool?
A. 170
B. 83
C. 85
D. 125 
14. Cole, a gardener, gives the following estimate for an
installation. Each manifold will cost $85 to install, and each
one will have three sprinkler heads at a cost of $9.50 each.
Overhead adds 10% to the total bill. What is the total cost for
this installation, consisting of four manifolds?
A. $113.50
B. $499.40 
C. $454.00
D. $103.95 
15. A 40-member committee voted on whether to send a certain bill
to the governing board. One-fourth voted in favor, 35 voted
against, and the rest abstained. How many abstained?
A. 6
B. 24
C. 34
D. 7 
16. In Karl’s math class with 28 students, 17 are receiving an A
grade, 14 are B’s, 11 are C’s, and the rest are D’s or F’s. How
many are D’s or F’s?
A. 4
B. 7
C. 6
D. 22 
17. Alice paid $350 for her flight from San Francisco to Denver,
but Bobbie paid $278 for the same flight. Cal, on the other
hand, paid 8% less than Alice. How much was paid for the
three seats (rounded to the nearest dollar)?
A. $950
B. $656
C. $1,006
D. $978 
18. Doug’s monthly salary was $1,250 when he received a 5%
raise. Six months later, he received another 2% raise. What is
his annual salary, after receiving both raises?
A. $1,337.50
B. $1,338.75
C. $16,050.00
D. $16,065.00 
19. Aaron Rodgers (Green Bay Packers) threw 541 passes during the
2009 season. He ran with the ball 25 times. Of the 541 passes,
184 were incomplete, 7 were intercepted, and the rest were com-
pleted. What percent of the passes were complete?
A. 64.7%
B. 57.4%
C. 34.0%
D. 35.3% 
20. In 2009, Pablo Sandoval (San Francisco Giants) had 633 plate
appearances, with 189 hits and 25 home runs. He was paid
$401,750. If he played 153 games, approximately how much
was he paid for each game he played?
A. $3,000
B. $30,000 
C. $300,000
D. $61,000,000 
21. An investor has $2,500 at 2.5%, $21,300 at 3.2%, and $8,540
at 3.8%. If this investor is in a 38% tax bracket, how much
interest income, after taxes, is realized?
A. $1,068.62
B. $32,340 
C. $662.54
D. $406.08 
22. An hourly salary of $25 is equivalent to what annual salary?
Assume a 40-hour work week.
A. $50,000
B. $52,000
C. $41,600
D. $52,850 
324
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
Level  2
32. The product of two consecutive positive even numbers is 440.
What are the numbers?
33. The product of two consecutive positive odd numbers is 255.
What are the numbers?
34. The sum of an integer and its reciprocal is . What is the
integer?
35. The sum of a number and twice its reciprocal is 3. What are
the numbers?
36. Suppose your monthly salary is $7,415 with the following
deductions. (Answers should be the nearest cent.) 
a. What is the federal tax (38%)?
b. What is the state tax (6.2%)?
c. What is the retirement deduction (10%)?
d. What are the miscellaneous deductions (4.5%)?
e. What is your take-home salary?
37. Suppose your stock market portfolio was $251,000 at the start
of 2000. By the start of 2002, the value was $112,950. 
a. What is the percent loss in the two-year period?
b. What is the percent gain necessary for your portfolio to
regain its value in the next two years?
5
2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.9
Modeling Uncategorized Problems
325
38. The top three women in the 2002 WNBA playoffs scored a total
of 360 points. The leader, Tamika Whitmore (New York Liberty),
scored 13 and 14 more points than the next two scorers. What
are the points scored by these three players?
39. The Standard Oil and the Sears buildings have a combined
height of 2,590 ft. The Sears Building is 318 ft taller. What is
the height of each of these Chicago towers?
40. The combined area of New York and California is 
204,192 square miles. The area of California is 108,530 square
miles more than that of New York. Find the land area of 
each state.
48. After paying a real estate agent a commission of 6% on
the selling price, $2,525 in other costs, and $65,250 on the
mortgage, you receive a cash settlement of $142,785. What
was the selling price of your house?
49. An investor has $100,000 to invest and can choose between in-
sured savings at 3.5% interest or annuities paying 6.25%. If the
investor wants to earn an annual income of $4,490, how much
should be invested in each?
Problem Solving 3   
Problems 50–60 do not match the examples in this book, but all the
problem-solving techniques necessary to answer these questions
have been covered in this book. These problems are designed to
test your problem-solving abilities.
50. A swimming pool is 15 ft by 30 ft and an average of 5 ft in
depth. It takes 25 minutes longer to fill than to drain the pool.
If it can be drained at a rate of 15 ft3/min faster than it can be
filled, what is the drainage rate?
51. The longest rod that will just fit inside a rectangular box,
if placed diagonally top to bottom, is 17 inches. The box is
1 inch shorter and 3 inches longer than it is wide. How much
must you cut off the rod so that it will lie flat in the bottom of
the container? What are the dimensions of the box?
52. A canoeist rows downstream in 1.5 hours and back upstream in
3 hours. What is the rate of the canoe if the distance rowed is
9 miles in each direction?
53. A plane makes a 630-mile flight with the wind in 2.5 hours;
the return flight against the wind takes 3 hours. Find the wind
speed.
54. A plane makes an 870-mile flight in 3 hours against a strong
head wind, but returns in 50 minutes less with the wind. What
is the plane’s speed without the wind?
55. A tour agency is booking a tour and has 100 people signed up.
The price of a ticket is $2,500 per person. The agency has
booked a plane seating 150 people at a cost of $240,500. Addi-
tional costs to the agency are incidental fees of $500 per person.
For each $5 that the price is lowered, a new person will sign up.
How much should be charged for a ticket so that the income
and expenses will be the same? The lower price will be charged
to all participants, even those already signed up.
56. Imagine that you have written down the numbers from 1 to
1,000,000. What is the total number of zeros you have written
down?
57. Suppose you have a large bottle with a canary inside. The bottle
is sealed, and it’s on a scale. The canary is standing on the bot-
tom of the bottle. Then the canary starts to fly around inside of
it. Does the reading on the scale change?
58. An ancient society called a number sacred if it could be writ-
ten as the sum of the squares of two counting numbers.
a. List five sacred numbers.
b. Is the product of every two sacred 
numbers sacred?
1
3
Level  3
41. What is the sum of the first 100 consecutive even numbers? 
42. A survey of 100 persons at Better Widgets finds that 40 jog,
25 swim, 16 cycle, 15 both swim and jog, 10 swim and cycle,
8 jog and cycle, and 3 persons do all three. How many people
at Better Widgets do not take part in any of these three exercise
programs?
43. A survey of executives of Fortune 500 companies finds that
520 have MBA degrees, 650 have business degrees, and 450
have both degrees. How many executives with MBAs have
nonbusiness degrees?
44. An inlet pipe on a swimming pool can be used to fill the pool
in 24 hours. The drain pipe can be used to empty the pool in
30 hours. If the pool is two-thirds filled and then the drain pipe
is accidentally opened, how long will it take to fill the pool?
45. An inlet pipe on a swimming pool can be used to fill the pool
in 36 hours. The drain pipe can be used to empty the pool in
40 hours. If the pool is half filled and then the drain pipe is 
accidentally opened, how much longer will it take to fill the
pool?
46. Solve the DVR example for recording a total of O hours where
20  O  40. (If O  20, then the solution is obvious; just use
the SR mode).
47. Reconsider Problem 0 if you are recording by eliminating the
commercials from the recording process. Suppose that record-
ing time is O hours and that there are c minutes of commercials
each hour.
EPA/TIBOR ILLYES/Landov
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

326
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
59. HISTORICAL QUEST
A army general of the cavalry would
always deploy his army in formation, and that formation was in
the form of a square. However, when he did this, he saw that he
had 284 soldiers left over that would not fit into the square
formation. So, he decided to regroup the soldiers into another
square formation by increasing each side by one soldier, but this
time he was short 25 soldiers. How many soldiers are in this
general’s army? This question formulated from a problem by the
famous mathematician Colin Maclaurin (1698–1746).*
60. HISTORICAL QUEST
Diophantus wrote the following
puzzle about himself in Anthologia Palatina:
Here lies Diophantus. The wonder behold—
Through art algebraic, the stone tells how old:
“God gave him his boyhood one-sixth of this life,
One-twelfth more as youth while whiskers grew rife;
And then yet one-seventh their marriage begun;
In five years there came a bouncing new son.
Alas, the dear child of master and sage
Met fate at just half his dad’s final age.
Four years yet his studies gave solace from grief; 
Then leaving scenes earthly he, too, found relief.”
What is Diophantus’ final age?
*“Colin Maclaurin’s Quaint Word Problems” by Bruce Hedman, in The College Mathematics Journal, Sept. 2000.
6.10
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Binomial product (FOIL) [6.1]
Binomial theorem [6.1]
Procedure for factoring trinomials [6.2]
Difference of squares [6.2]
Evaluate an expression [6.3]
Use a spreadsheet [6.3]
Equation properties [6.4]
Zero product rule [6.4]
Quadratic formula [6.4]
Linear inequalities [6.5]
Addition property of inequality [6.5]
Multiplication property of inequality [6.5]
Procedure for problem solving [6.6]
Property of proportions [6.7]
Procedure for solving proportions [6.7]
Change forms: fraction/decimal/percent [6.8]
Be able to estimate answers to percent problems [6.8]
Solve applied percent problems [6.8]
Guidelines for problem solving [6.9]
Problem-solving examples: genetics [6.3], linear and quadratic equations [6.4], linear
inequalities [6.5], number relationships [6.6], distance relationships [6.6], Pythagorean
theorem applications [6.6], proportion problems [6.7], percent problems [6.8]
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online,
you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of
problems that were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by
working the problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test help in studying
for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
Algebra is generous, she
often gives more than is
asked of her.”
D’ALEMBERT
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.10
Chapter Summary
327
Chapter
6
Review Questions
1. a. What is algebra?
b. Briefly name and describe each of the four major
processes of algebra.
2. Simplify the given expressions. 
a. (x  1)(x2  2x  8)
b. x2(x2  y)  xy(x2  1)
3. Evaluate the given expressions for x  2 and y  3. 
a. x3  y3
b. (x  y)(x2  xy  y2)
4. Factor the given expressions. 
a. 3x2  27
b. x2  5x  6
5. Solve the given equations. 
a. 8x  12  0
b. 8x  12  2x2
6. Factor x2  5x  6 using areas.
Solve the equations and inequalities in Problems 7–15. 
7. a. 2x  5  13
b. 3x  1  7x
8. a.
 6
b. 2x  7  5x
9. a.
b.
10. x2  4x  5
11. 4x2  1  6x
12. 3  x
13. 2  x 
 4
14. 3x  2  x  6
15. 14  5x  1
16. Fill in , , or : 
a.
b.
c.
d. 0.05
0.1
e. 0.99
0.909
92
107
23
27
75
100
3
4
67
100
2
3
25
W  80
12
P
100  3
20
2x
3
17. In a recipe for bread, flour and water are to be mixed in a 
ratio of 1 part water to 5 parts flour. If 2 cups of water is
called for, how much flour (to the nearest tenth cup) is
needed?
18. The sum of four consecutive even integers is 100. Find the
integers.
19. A population of self-pollinating pea plants has two genes: T
(tall, dominant) and t (short, recessive). Suppose we have an
isolated population in which 52% of the genes in the gene
pool are dominant T, and the other 48% are recessive t. What
fraction of the population has each genotype? What fraction
of the population has each phenotype?
20. The airline distance from Chicago to San Francisco is 1,140
miles farther than the flight from New York to Chicago, and
540 miles shorter than the distance from San Francisco to
Honolulu. What is the length of each leg of the 4,980-mile
New York–Chicago–San Francisco–Honolulu flight?
1
2
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on this book:
Hypatia’s Heritage, Margaret Alic (Boston: Beacon Press,
1986). This book is a history of women in science from 
antiquity through the 19th century. Since most of recorded
history has been male-dominated, history books reflect this
male bias and have ignored the history of women. This
book is a rediscovery of women in science.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

328
CHAPTER 6
The Nature of Algebra
*Ibid., p. 287.
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G21. Is 
rational or irrational? Give a convincing argument to support your answer.
G22. Historical Quest
The Babylonians solved the quadratic equation 
x2  px  q
(q  0) without the benefit of algebraic notation. Tablet 6967 at
Yale University finds a positive solution to this equation to be
Using modern algebraic notation, show that this result is correct.
G23. Historical Quest
In 1907, the University of Göttingen offered the Wolfskehl Prize
of 100,000 marks to anyone who could prove Fermat’s last theorem, which seeks any
replacements for x, y, and z such that xn  yn  zn (where n is greater than 2 and x, y,
and z are counting numbers). In 1937, the mathematician Samuel Drieger announced
that 1324, 731, and 1961 solved the equation. He would not reveal n—the power—
but said that it was less than 20. That is, 
1,324n  731n  1,961n
However, it is easy to show that this cannot be a solution for any n. See if you can
explain why by investigating some patterns for powers of numbers ending in 4 and 1. 
G24. Historical Quest
This problem, called “The Ptolematic Riddle,” is reported to be
an ancient Greek problem, told by the mathematician Colin Maclaurin
(1698–1746).*
I am a bronze lion.
Out of my mouth, the sole of my right foot, and my two eyes come four pipes that
fill a cistern in different times.
The right eye fills it in two days.
The left eye fills it in three days.
The sole of my foot fills it in four days.
But my mouth takes six days to fill the cistern.
Find how many days all these will fill it together.
G25. JOURNAL PROBLEM
(From Journal of Recreational Mathematics, Vol. II, No.2)
Translate the following message: Wx utgtuz f pbkz tswx wlx xwozm pbkzr, f exbmwo
cxlzm xm ts jzszmfi fsv cxlzm lofwzgzm tswx wlx cxlzmr xe woz rfnz uzsxntsfwtxs
fkxgz woz rzpxsu tr tncxrrtkiz, fsu T ofgz frrbmzuiv exbsu fs funtmfkiz cmxxe xe wotr
kbw woz nfmjts tr wxx sfmmxl wx pxswfts tw. Ctzmmz uz Ezmnfw
x 5 Å a
p
2b
2
1 q 2 p
2
"2
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.10
Chapter Summary
329
Historical
Pierre de Fermat
(1601–1665)
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas in this chapter. You can find references
to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 6.1 Write a paper on the relationship between geometric areas and algebraic
expressions.
PROJECT 6.2 Write out a derivation of the quadratic formula.
PROJECT 6.3 Find any replacements for x, y, and z such that xn  yn  zn, where n is
greater than 2 and where x, y, and z are counting numbers. Write a history of this
problem, known as Fermat’s Last Theorem.
www.mathnature.com 
Pierre de Fermat was a lawyer by profession,
but he was an amateur mathematician in his
spare time. He became Europe’s finest mathe-
matician, and he wrote over 3,000 mathematical
papers and notes. However, he published only
one, because he did them just for fun. Every
theorem that Fermat said he proved has subse-
quently been verified—with one defying
solution until 1993! This problem, known as
Fermat’s Last Theorem (see the Group Research
Project G23), was written by Fermat in the
margin of a book:
To divide a cube into two cubes, a
fourth power, or in general any power
whatever above the second, into powers
of the same denomination, is impossi-
ble, and I have assuredly found an
admirable proof of this, but the margin
is too narrow to contain it.
Many of the prominent mathematicians since his
time have tried to prove or disprove this conjec-
ture, and on June 23, 1993, during the third of a
series of lectures at a conference held at the
Newton Institute in Cambridge, it was reported
that British mathematician Andrew Wiles of
Princeton had proved a theorem for which 
Fermat‘s Last Theorem is a corollary.
Fermat’s Last Theorem has been mentioned
in literary works ranging from Sherlock Holmes
to Star Trek: The Next Generation. There are
many references to this great discovery, and
perhaps the best is on DVD as part of the NOVA
series on the Public Broadcasting System. The
title is The Proof and it was first aired in 1997.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
7.1 Geometry
331
Greek (Euclidean) geometry, 
transformational geometry
7.2 Polygons and Angles
340
Polygons, angles, angles with parallel
lines, perpendicular lines
7.3 Triangles
349
Terminology, angles of a triangle,
isosceles triangle property
7.4 Similar Triangles
356
7.5 Right-Triangle 
Trigonometry
363
Trigonometric ratios, inverse
trigonometric ratios
7.6 Mathematics, Art, and 
Non-Euclidean 
Geometries
370
Golden rectangles, mathematics and art,
Projective geometry, non-Euclidean
geometry
7.7 Chapter Summary
384
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
THE NATURE OF GEOMETRY
7
Outline
What in the World?
“Carol, where have you been? I haven’t seen you
in over a year!” said Tom.
“I’ve been on an archeological dig,” Carol
responded. “Donald and I have been looking at
the Garden Houses of Ostia. They were built in the
second century as part of the Roman Empire, and
they were excavated in the first part of this
century.”
“I’ve never heard of Ostia,” Tom said with a
swing in his arm. “Where or what is Ostia?” 
“Ostia was a boom town in the second century,”
Carol said with enthusiasm. “Take a look at the
map. The Tiber river was the lifeblood of the city
Ostia, whose population reached 50,000 at its peak.
They constructed an artificial harbor on the Tyrrhen-
ian Sea, and the city became a major port of Rome,
which is about 25 kilometers away. Many apartment
buildings were built, many four stories high, and
they included not only living space, but also shops
and gardens. We are trying to reconstruct life in the
city. You can see plans and a three-dimensional
reconstruction of the city at the following website,
www.ostia-antica.org/indexes.htm.
Overview
Geometry, or “earth measure,” was one of the first branches
of mathematics. Both the Egyptians and the Babylonians
needed geometry for construction, land measurement, and
commerce. They both discovered the Pythagorean theorem,
although it was not proved until the Greeks developed
geometry formally. This formal development utilizes deduc-
tive logic (which was briefly discussed in Chapter 3), begin-
ning with certain assumptions, called axioms or postulates.
Historically, the first axioms that were accepted seemed to
conform to the physical world. In this chapter, we look at
that body of mathematics known as geometry.
Map of Ostia, from ‘Civitates Orbis Terrarum’ by Georg Braun (1541–1622)
and Frans Hogenberg (1535–90) c.1572–1617 (coloured engraving), 
Hoefnagel, Joris (1542–1600) (after) / Private Collection / The Stapleton
Collection / The Bridgeman Art Library International 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Historical
Euclid 
(ca. 300 B.C.)
We know very little about the actual life of Euclid, but we do know that he was the first professor
of mathematics at the University of Alexandria. The Elements was a 13-volume masterpiece of
mathematical thinking. It was described by Augustus De Morgan (1806–1871) as follows: “The
thirteen books of Euclid must have been a tremendous advance, probably even greater than that
contained in the Principia of Newton.”
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Section 7.1
Geometry
331
7.1  Geometry
Geometry is the science created to give understanding and mastery
of the external relations of things; to make easy the explanation and
description of such relations and the transmission of this mastery.
G. B. HALSTED
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
5
5
4
2
1
1
0
5
2
3
3
3
4
8
5
3
2
5
7
When we refer to Euclidean geometry, we are talking about the geometry known to the
Greeks as summarized in a work known as Euclid’s Elements. This 13-volume set of books
collected all the material known about geometry and organized it into a logical deductive
system. It is the most widely used and studied book in history, with the exception of the
Bible. An overview of the history of mathematics, and of geometry in particular, is pre-
sented in the prologue of this book, and it includes the geometry of both the Egyptians and
the Greeks. We do not know very much about the life of Euclid except that he was the first
professor of mathematics at the University of Alexandria (which opened in 300 B.C.).
Greek (Euclidean) Geometry
Geometry involves points and sets of points called 
lines, planes, and surfaces. Certain concepts in 
geometry are called undefined terms. For example, 
what is a line? You might say, “I know what a 
line is!” But try to define a line. Is it a set of 
points? Any set of points? What is a point?
1. A point is something that has no length, width, 
or thickness.
2. A point is a location in space.
Certainly these are not satisfactory definitions 
because they involve other terms that are not 
defined. We will therefore take the terms point, 
line, and plane as undefined.
Illustration © SEPS, licensed by Curtis Licensing, Indpls, IN. All Rights Reserved
Author’s
Early civilizations observed
from nature certain simple
shapes such as triangles, 
rectangles, and circles. The
study of geometry began with
the need to measure and
understand the properties of
these simple shapes.
NOTE
?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Geometry can be separated into two categories:
1. Traditional (which is the geometry of Euclid)
2. Transformational (which is more algebraic than the traditional approach)
When Euclid was formalizing traditional geometry, he based it on five postulates,
which have come to be known as Euclid’s postulates. A postulate or axiom is a state-
ment accepted without proof. In mathematics, a result that is proved on the basis of some
agreed-upon postulates is called a theorem.
We often draw physical models or pictures to represent these concepts; however, we
must be careful not to try to prove assertions by looking at pictures, since a picture may
contain hidden assumptions or ambiguities. For example, consider Figure 7.1. Do you see
an old woman or a young woman? Is the fly in Figure 7.2 on the cube or in the cube? The
point we are making is that although we may use a figure in geometry to help us under-
stand a problem, we cannot use what we see in a figure as a basis for our reasoning.
332
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
FIGURE 7.1 An old woman or a young woman?
FIGURE 7.2 Is the fly on the cube
or in it? On which face?
Edna St. Vincent Millay
1. A straight line can be drawn from any point to any other point.
2. A straight line extends infinitely far in either direction.
3. A circle can be described with any point as center and with a radius equal to any
finite straight line drawn from the center.
4. All right angles are equal to each other.
5. Given a straight line and any point not on this line, there is one and only one line
through that point that is parallel to the given line.*
Euclid’s Postulates
The first four of these postulates were obvious and noncontroversial, but the fifth one
was different. This fifth postulate looked more like a theorem than a postulate. It was
much more difficult to understand than the other four postulates, and for more than 
*The fifth postulate stated here is the one usually found in high school geometry books. It is sometimes called Playfair’s axiom
and is equivalent to Euclid’s original statement as translated from the original Greek by T. L. Heath: “If a straight line falling
on two straight lines makes the interior angle on the same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced in-
finitely, meet on that side on which the angles are less than the two right angles.”
Euclid alone has looked on Beauty 
   bare.
Let all who prate on Beauty
   hold their piece
And lay them prone upon the
   earth and cease
To ponder on themselves,
   the while they stare
At nothing, intricately drawn
   nowhere
In the shape of shifting lineage;
   let geese
Gabble and hiss, but heroes seek
   release
From dusty bondage into
   luminous air.
O binding hour, O holy, terrible
   day,
When first the shaft into his
   vision shone
Of light anatomized Euclid alone
Has looked on Beauty bare.
   Fortunate they
Who, though once only and then
   from far away,
Have heard her massive sandal
   set on stone.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.1
Geometry
333
20 centuries mathematicians tried to derive it from the other postulates or to replace it by
a more acceptable equivalent. Two straight lines in the same plane are said to be parallel
if they do not intersect.
Today we can either accept the fifth postulate as a postulate (without proof) or deny
it. If it is denied, it turns out that no contradiction results; in fact, if it is not accepted,
other geometries called non-Euclidean geometries result. If it is accepted, then the
geometry that results is consistent with our everyday experiences and is called Euclidean
geometry.
Let’s look at each of Euclid’s postulates. The first one says that a straight line can be
drawn from any point to any other point. To connect two points, you need a device called
a straightedge (a device that we assume has no markings on it; you will use a ruler, but
not to measure, when you are treating it as a straightedge). The portion of the line that
connects points A and B in Figure 7.3 is called a line segment. We write 
(or 
). We
contrast this notation with 
which is used to name the line passing through the points
A and B. We use the symbol 
for the length of segment 
The second postulate says that we can draw a straight line. This seems straightfor-
ward and obvious, but we should point out that we will indicate a line by putting arrows
on each end. If we consider a point on a line, that point separates the line into parts: two
half-lines and the point itself. If the arrow points in only one direction, the figure is called
a ray. We write 
(or 
) for the ray with endpoint A passing through B. These defini-
tions are illustrated in Figure 7.3.
BA
v
AB
h
AB.
0 AB 0
AB
g,
BA
AB
A
B
Line segment, AB
Line AB
A
B
P
B
A
B
A
Half-line, PB
P
B
Ray, AB
Ray, BA
FIGURE 7.3 Portions of lines
To construct a line segment of length equal to the length of a given line segment, we
need a device called a compass. Figure 7.4 shows a compass, which is used to mark off
and duplicate lengths, but not to measure them.
If objects have exactly the same size and shape, they are called congruent. We can
use a straightedge and compass to construct a figure so that it meets certain require-
ments. To construct a line segment congruent to a given line segment, copy a segment
on any line . First fix the compass so that the pointer is on point A and the pencil is
on B, as shown in Figure 7.5a. Then, on line , choose a point C. Next, without chang-
ing the compass setting, place the pointer on C and strike an arc at D, as shown in
Figure 7.5b.
,
,
AB
Pointer
Pencil
FIGURE 7.4 A compass
A
B
C
D
a.
b.
FIGURE 7.5 Constructing a line segment
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Euclid’s third postulate leads us to a second construction. The task is to construct a
circle, given its center and radius. These steps are summarized in Figure 7.6.
334
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
A
B
O
A
B
O
O
a. Given, a point
and a radius
of length |AB|.
b. Set the legs of the compass
on the ends of radius AB;
move the pointer to point O
without changing the setting.
c. Hold the pointer at point O
and move the pencil end to
draw the circle.
FIGURE 7.6 Construction of a circle
We will demonstrate the fourth postulate in the next section when we consider
angles.
The final construction of this section will demonstrate the fifth postulate. The task is
to construct a line through a point P parallel to a given line , as shown in Figure 7.7a.
First, draw any line through P that intersects at a point A, as shown in Figure 7.7b.
,
,
a. Given line
b. Draw line
c. Strike arc
d. Determine point Y
P
A
P
A
X
Y
P
A
X
FIGURE 7.7 Construction of a line parallel to a given line through a given point
Now draw an arc with the pointer at A and radius 
and label the point of intersec-
tion of the arc and the line X, as shown in Figure 7.7c. With the same opening of the com-
pass, draw an arc first with the pointer at P and then with the pointer at X. Their point of
intersection will determine a point Y (Figure 7.7d). Draw the line through both P and Y.
This line is parallel to .,
AP,
Escher’s Drawing Hands
M.C. Escher’s, “Drawing Hands” © 2003 Cordon
Art-Baarn-Holland. All rights reserved 
See www.mathnature.com
for some Escher links.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Transformational Geometry
We now turn our attention to the second category of geometry. Transformational geometry
is quite different from traditional geometry in that it deals with the study of transformations.
A transformation is the passage from one geometric figure to another by means of
reflections, translations, rotations, contractions, or dilations. For example, given a line L
and a point P, as shown in Figure 7.8, we call the point 
the reflection of P about the
line L if 
is perpendicular to L and is also bisected by L.
Each point in the plane has exactly one reflection point corresponding to a given line L.
A reflection is called a reflection transformation, and the line of reflection is called the line
of symmetry. The easiest way to describe a line symmetry is to say that if you fold a paper
along its line of symmetry, then the figure will fold onto itself to form a perfect match, as
shown in Figure 7.9.
PPr
Pr
Section 7.1
Geometry
335
L
P
P
FIGURE 7.8 A reflection
FIGURE 7.9 Line symmetry on the maple leaf of Canada
FIGURE 7.10 Examples of line
symmetry
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
© Stock Montage
Snowflakes
Taj Mahal
Chrysler logo
The Pentastar Logo is a registered trademark of
DaimlerChrysler and is used with permission.
Many everyday objects exhibit a line of symmetry. From snowflakes in nature, to the
Taj Mahal in architectural design, to many flags and logos, we see examples of lines of
symmetry (see Figure 7.10).
Other transformations include translations, rotations, dilations, and contractions,
which are illustrated in Figure 7.11.
FIGURE 7.11 Transformations of a fixed geometric figure
Given
Translation
L
L 9
Given
L
L 9
Rotation
Given
triangle
Reflection
triangle
L
Dilation
triangle
Contraction
triangle
Given triangle
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Similarity
Geometry is also concerned with the study of the relationships between geometric
figures. A primary relationship is that of congruence. A second relationship is called
similarity. Two figures are said to be similar if they have the same shape, although not
necessarily the same size. These ideas are considered in Sections 7.3 and 7.4.
If we were to develop this text formally, we would need to be very careful about
the statement of our postulates. The notion of mathematical proof requires a very pre-
cise formulation of all postulates and theorems. However, since we are not formally
developing geometry, we simply accept the general drift of the statement. Remember,
though, that you cannot base a mathematical proof on general drift. On the other hand,
there are some facts that we know to be true that tell us that certain properties are
impossible. For example, if someone claims to be able to trisect an angle with a
straightedge and compass, we know without looking at the construction that the con-
struction is wrong. This can be frustrating to someone who believes that he or she has
accomplished the impossible. In fact, it was so frustrating to Daniel Wade Arthur that
he was motivated to take out a paid advertisement in the Los Angeles Times, which is
reproduced in the News Clip.
336
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
Calligraphers sometimes experiment 
with some inversion transformations.
John Longdon has been creating 
such word designs for about 15 years,
and the two shown here are from 
the book Wordplay. The following 
inversion was found in the April 1992
issue of OMNI magazine.
Here is a favorite of mine from 
Longdon’s book: 
John Langdon, OMNI, April 1992, p. 4.
See www.mathnature.com
for one student’s attempt at
trisecting an angle.
Advertisement by Daniel Wade Arthur, from the Los Angeles Times.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe what you see in the
following illustration.
Section 7.1
Geometry
337
Level  1
1. Is the woman in the figure a young woman or an old 
woman?
In Problems 9–10, label each cartoon as illustrating a translation,
reflection, rotation, dilation, or a contraction.
9.
Problem Set 7.1
From Charles E. Gilber, “All is Vanity,” ca. 1920, “Masters of 
Deception” by Al Sekel, New York: Sterling Publishing
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Why do you think Problem 1 is
included in this problem set? How does this question relate to
working problems in geometry?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe a procedure for construct-
ing a line segment congruent to a given segment.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe a procedure for construct-
ing a circle with a radius congruent to a given segment.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss what it means to be an
undefined term. What is the difference between an axiom and
a theorem?
7. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe line symmetry.
8. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What are the two categories into
which geometry is usually separated?
Saul Steinberg, Untitled, 1977 Pencil and colored pencil
on paper, 18 x 24 inches © The Saul Steinberg Founda-
tion/Artists Rights Society (ARS) New York
Use the illustration in Figure 7.12 to draw the figures requested in
Problems 11–19.
P
Q
R
S
FIGURE 7.12 Number line
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
Find at least one line of symmetry for each of the illustrations
in Problems 20–27, if possible. If there is no line of symmetry,
so state.
20.
21.
22.
23.
  PS
RS
PQ
v
SR
h
PQ
h
RS
g
PQ
g
RS
  PQ
h
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Image not available due to copyright restrictions

44. Wallpaper by: Walter Crane 45. Sculpture by: Indian School 
24.
25.
26.
27.
Level  2
Carry out the constructions requested in Problems 28–39.
28. A line segment
29. A line segment 
congruent to 
congruent to 
30. A line segment
31. A line segment 
congruent to 
congruent to 
32. Circle with radius
33. Circle with radius 
congruent to 
.
congruent to 
.
34. Circle with radius
35. Circle with radius 
congruent to 
.
congruent to 
.
36. Line through P
37. Line through Q
parallel to 
parallel to m
Q
m
,
Y
Z
S
T
YZ
ST
U
V
W
X
UV
WX
G
H
GH
EF
C
D
CD
AB
338
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
A
B
E
F
P
38. Line through R
39. Line through S
parallel to n.
parallel to k.
Which of the pictures in Problems 40–47 illustrate a line
symmetry?
40. Chambered nautilus
41. Butterfly
42. Human brain
43. Human face
S
k
R
n
FlamingPumpkin/iStockphoto.com
© Tim Zurowski/CORBIS
DNY59/iStockphoto.com
Amanda Mack/iStockphoto.com
‘Swan, Rush and Iris’ wallpaper design, Crane,
Walter (1845–1915) / Victoria & Albert Museum,
London, UK / The Stapleton Collection / The
Bridgeman Art Library International 
Avolokitesvara in the form of Padmapani, 11th cen-
tury (copper), Indian School (11th century) / Detroit
Institute of Arts, USA / Gift of H. Kevorkian / The
Bridgeman Art Library International
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.1
Geometry
339
© Dorling Kindersley, Ltd.
hkannn/Shutterstock.com
46. Human circulatory
47. Empire State 
system
Building
Level 3
Study the patterns shown in Figure 7.13. When folded they will
form cubes spelling CUBE. Letter each pattern in Problems 48–53.
C U B E
C U B
E
FIGURE 7.13 CUBE pattern
48.
49.
50.
51.
U
U
U
U
52.
53.
Start with the given cube and then rotate this cube 
in the
directions indicated by the arrows, as shown in Figure 7.14. In
Problems 54–58, select the cube marked A, B, C, or D to indicate
which most closely matches the result.
90°
U
U
B
C
A
B
A

To the right
B
C
A
B
C

Upward
B
C
A
C

Downward
B
C
A
A
Downward, then to
the right

B
C
C

To the left
A
A
A
FIGURE 7.14 Rotating a cube
Y
W
X
Y
W
W
W
W
A
Rotation
B
C
D
L
T
V
V
A
B
C
D
V
V
T
Rotation
A
B
C
D
Rotation
54.
55.
56.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

57.
58.
340
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
Rotation
A
B
C
D
N
N
N
N
N
Rotation
A
B
C
D
P
P
S
P
%
P
S
S
%
P
“Mirror Image” by Diane Dawson, reprinted from Games Magazine, May/June 1979.
Problem Solving 3
59. The letters of the alphabet can be sorted into the following
categories: (1) FGJLNPQRSZ; (2) BCDEK; (3) AMTUVWY;
and (4) HIOX. What defines these categories?
60. The “Mirror Image” illustration shows a problem condensed
from Games magazine. Answer the questions asked in that
problem.
7.2  Polygons and Angles
When the Euclidean geometry introduced in the preceding section is studied in high
school as an entire course, it is usually presented in a formal manner using definitions,
axioms, and theorems. The development of this chapter is informal, which means that we
base our results on observations and intuition. We begin by assuming that you are famil-
iar with the ideas of point, line, and plane.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Angles
A connecting point of two sides is called a vertex (plural vertices) and is usually desig-
nated by a capital letter. An angle is composed of two rays or segments with a common
endpoint. The angles between the sides of a polygon are sometimes also denoted by a
capital letter, but other ways of denoting angles are shown in Figure 7.15.
Section 7.2
Polygons and Angles
341
Angle A or /A
Angle 2 or /2
Angle CDE or /CDE
Angle EDC or /EDC
A
2
E
D
C
FIGURE 7.15 Ways of denoting angles
This notation for
angles is used
throughout all of
mathematics.
Example
1
Find angles
Locate each of the following angles in Figure 7.16.
A
D
C
B
O
1
2
4
3
FIGURE 7.16
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
Solution
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
We return to the constructions first introduced in the last section. To construct 
an angle with the same size as a given angle B, first draw a ray from 
as shown in
Figure 7.17a.
Br,
A
D
C
B
O
1
2
4
3
A
D
C
B
O
1
2
4
3
A
D
C
B
O
1
2
4
3
/4
/3
/DOC
A
D
C
B
O
1
2
4
3
A
D
C
B
O
1
2
4
3
A
D
C
B
O
1
2
4
3
/BOA
/COB
/AOB
/4
/3
/DOC
/BOA
/COB
/AOB
B
B9
X
a.
B
C
A
B
C
A
B9
X
b.
C9
B9
c.
C9
A 9
X
B9
d.
C9
A 9
X
FIGURE 7.17 Construction of an angle congruent to a given angle
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Experience leads us to see the plausibility of Euclid‘s fourth postulate that all right
angles are congruent to one another.
Next, mark off an arc with the pointer at the vertex of the given angle and label the
points A and C. Without changing the compass, mark off a similar arc with the pointer at
, as shown in Figure 7.17b. Label the point 
where this arc crosses the ray from 
Place the pointer at C and set the compass to the distance from C to A. Without changing
the compass, put the pointer at 
and strike an arc to make a point of intersection 
with
the arc from 
, as shown in Figure 7.17c. Finally, draw a ray from 
through 
Two angles are said to be equal if they describe the same angle. If we write m in
front of an angle symbol, we mean the measure of the angle rather than the angle itself.
Notice in Example 1 that parts a and c name the same angle, so 
Also
notice the single and double arcs used to mark the angles in Example 1; these are used to
denote angles with equal measure, so 
and 
but 
(since they are not the same angle). Denoting an angle by a single
letter is preferred except in the case (as shown by Example 1) where several angles share
the same vertex.
Angles are often measured using a unit called a degree, which is defined to be 
of
a full revolution. The symbol is used to designate degrees. To measure an angle, you can
use a protractor, but in this book the angle whose measures we need will be labeled as in
Figure 7.18.
°
1
360
/COD 2 /AOB
m/COD 5 m/AOB,
m/COB 5 m/AOD
/AOB 5 /BOA.
Ar.
Br
Cr
Ar
Cr
Br.
Cr
Br
342
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
M
130°
m /M 5 130°
F
E
D
90°
m /E 5 90°
This mark is all that
 is necessary
to indicate a 90° angle
B
A
C
45°
m /B 5 45°
H
I
332°
G
m /H 5 28°;
the named angle is
the one less than
180°
180°
J
K
L
m /K 5 180°
°
FIGURE 7.18 Labeling angles
Angles are sometimes classified according to their measures, as shown in Table 7.1.
TABLE 7.1
Types of Angles
Angle Measure
Classification
Less than 90°
Acute
Equal to 90°
Right
Between 
and 180°
90°
Obtuse
Equal to 180°
Straight
Remember these names
for types of angles.
Example
2
Classify angles
Label the angles B, E, H, K, and M in Figure 7.18 by classification.
Solution
is acute; 
is right; 
is acute; 
is straight; 
is obtuse.
/M
/K
/H
/E
/B
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.2
Polygons and Angles
343
Two angles with the same measure are said to be congruent. If the sum of the
measures of two angles is 
they are called complementary angles, and if the sum is
they are called supplementary angles.
Consider any two distinct (different) intersecting lines in a plane, and let O be the
point of intersection as shown in Figure 7.19.
These lines must form four angles. Angles with a common ray, common vertex, and
on opposite sides of their common sides are called adjacent angles. We say that 
and
and 
as well as 
and 
are pairs of adjacent angles. We also
say that 
and 
as well as 
and 
are pairs of vertical angles—that is, two angles
for which each side of one angle is a prolongation through the vertex of a side of the other.
/4
/2
/3
/1
/1
/4
/4,
/2, /2 and /3, /3
/1
180°,
90°,
1
2
3
4
O
FIGURE 7.19 Angles formed by
intersecting lines
Example
3
Classify angle pairs
Classify the named angles or pairs of angles shown in Figure 7.20.
90°
150°
30°
30°
150°
P
E
C
F
B
A
D
O
,1
,2
,3
FIGURE 7.20 Classifying angles
a.
b.
c.
d.
and 
e.
and 
f.
and 
g.
and 
Solution
a. Acute
b. Obtuse
c. Right
d. Supplementary and adjacent
e. Congruent
f. Vertical
g. Supplementary and adjacent
Polygons
A polygon is a geometric figure that has three or more straight sides, all of which lie on a
flat surface or plane so that the starting point and the ending point are the same. Polygons
can be classified according to their number of sides, as shown in Figure 7.21. We say any
polygon is regular if its sides are the same length.
/EPO
/FPE
/COP
/AOB
/OPE
/BOC
/BOC
/AOB
/DAO
/BOC
/AOB
Polygons (not pictured)
Heptagon: 7 sides 
Octagon: 8 sides 
Nonagon: 9 sides 
Decagon: 10 sides
Dodecagon: 12 sides 
n-gon: n sides
Quadrilateral
Pentagon
Hexagon
Triangle
FIGURE 7.21 Polygons classified according to number of sides
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Angles with Parallel Lines
Consider three lines arranged similarly to those shown in Example 3. Suppose that two of
the lines, say, , and 
, are parallel (that is, they lie in the same plane and never intersect),
and also that a third line 
intersects the parallel lines at points P and Q, as shown in Fig-
ure 7.22. The line 
is called a transversal. The notation we use for parallel lines is ,1 0 0  ,2.
,3
,3
,2
,
A polygon with four sides is a quadrilateral. Some other classifications are given in
the following box.
344
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
6
P
Q
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
,3
,1
,2
FIGURE 7.22 Parallel lines cut by a transversal
We make some observations about angles:
Vertical angles are congruent.
Alternate interior angles are pairs of angles whose interiors lie between the paral-
lel lines, but on opposite sides of the transversal, each having one of the lines for
one of its sides. Alternate interior angles are congruent.
Alternate exterior angles are pairs of angles that lie outside the parallel lines, but
on opposite sides of the transversal, each with one side adjacent to each parallel.
Alternate exterior angles are congruent.
Corresponding angles are two nonadjacent angles whose interiors lie on the same
side of the transversal such that one angle lies between the parallel lines and the
other does not. Corresponding angles are congruent.
Quadrilaterals are classified as follows:
A trapezoid is a quadrilateral with exactly one pair of parallel sides.
A parallelogram is a quadrilateral with opposite sides parallel.
A rhombus is a parallelogram with adjacent sides equal.
A rectangle is a parallelogram that contains a right angle.
A square is a rectangle with two adjacent sides of equal length.
Classification
Trapezoid
Parallelogram
Rhombus
Rectangle
Square
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.2
Polygons and Angles
345
Example
4
Angle pair terminology
Consider Figure 7.23.
FIGURE 7.23 Angles formed by parallel lines and a transversal
6
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
,1
,2
,3
a. Name the vertical angles.
b. Name the alternate interior angles. 
c. Name the corresponding angles.
d. Name the alternate exterior angles. 
Solution 
a. The vertical angles are: 
and 
; 
and 
; 
and 
; 
and 
b. The alternate interior angles are: 
and 
; 
and 
c. The corresponding angles are: 
and 
; 
and 
; 
and 
; 
and 
d. The alternate exterior angles are: 
and 
; 
and /8
/2
/7
/1
/8
/4
/7
/3
/6
/2
/5
/1
/5
/3
/6
/4
/8
/6
/7
/5
/4
/2
/3
/1
To summarize the results from Example 4, notice that the following angles are con-
gruent, written
and
Also, all pairs of adjacent angles are supplementary.
/2 . /4 . /6 . /8
/1 . /3 . /5 . /7
. :
Example
5
Find angles with parallel lines and transversal
Find the measures of the eight numbered angles in Figure 7.23, where 
and 
are
parallel. Assume that 
Solution
Corresponding angles
1 and 
2 are supplementary.
3 and 
1 are vertical angles.
Vertical angles
Given
Supplementary angles
Vertical angles
Supplementary angles
Perpendicular Lines
If two lines intersect so that the adjacent angles are equal, then the lines are perpendicu-
lar. Simply, lines that intersect to form angles of 
(right angles) are called perpendicu-
lar lines. In Figure 7.24, lines 
and 
intersect to form a right angle, and therefore they
are perpendicular lines.
,4
,3
90°
m/8 5 130°
m/7 5 50°
m/6 5 130°
m/5 5 50°
m/4 5 130°
/
/
m/3 5 50°
/
/
m/2 5 180° 2 50° 5 130°
m/1 5 50°
m/5 5 50°.
,2
,1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In a diagram on a printed page, any line that is parallel to the top and bottom edge of the
page is considered horizontal. Lines that are perpendicular to a horizontal line are consid-
ered to be vertical. In Figure 7.24, line 
is a horizontal line and line 
is a vertical line.
,6
,5
346
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
,3
,4
Horizontal line
Vertical line
,5
,6
FIGURE 7.24 Horizontal, vertical, and perpendicular lines
,1
,2
,3
,4
FIGURE 7.25 Lines in the same plane
Example
6
Horizontal and vertical angles
The diagram in Figure 7.25 shows lines in the same plane. Which of the given state-
ments are true?
a. Lines 
and 
are parallel and horizontal.
b. Lines 
and 
are intersecting and not perpendicular.
c. Lines 
and 
are intersecting lines.
Solution 
a. Lines 
and 
are parallel, but they are not horizontal. Thus, the statement (which
is a conjunction) is false.
b. Lines 
and 
are both intersecting and perpendicular. The statement is false.
c. Lines 
and 
are intersecting. Recall that the arrows on 
indicate that it goes on
without end in both directions, so it will intersect 
This statement is true.
,2.
,3
,3
,2
,2
,4
,2
,1
,3
,2
,2
,4
,2
,1
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is an angle?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Distinguish between equal angles
and congruent angles.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Distinguish between a half-line and
a ray.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a quadrilateral? Describe
five different classifications of quadrilaterals.
Problem Set
7.2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Distinguish between horizontal and
vertical lines.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe right angles, acute angles,
and obtuse angles.
7. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe adjacent, vertical, and
corresponding angles.
8. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe parallel lines.
Name the polygons in Problems 9–14 according to the 
number of sides.
9. a.
b.
10. a.
b.
11. a.
b.
12. a.
b.
13. a.
b.
14. a.
b.
Determine whether each sentence in Problems 15–19 is 
true or false.
15. a. Every square is a rectangle.
b. Every square is a parallelogram.
16. a. Every square is a rhombus.
b. Every rhombus is a square.
17. a. Every square is a quadrilateral.
b. Every parallelogram is a rectangle.
18. a. A rectangle is a parallelogram.
b. A trapezoid is a quadrilateral.
19. a. A quadrilateral is a trapezoid.
b. A parallelogram is a trapezoid.
Section 7.2
Polygons and Angles
347
For the quadrilaterals named in Problems 20–24, answer “yes” or
“no” to indicate whether each of the following properties is satisfied:
a. Opposite sides are parallel.
b. Opposite sides have equal length.
c. Opposite angles have equal measure.
d. Interior angles are right angles.
e. Diagonals have equal length.
20. rectangle
21. square
22. parallelogram
23. trapezoid
24. rhombus
Level  2
Using only a straightedge and a compass, reproduce the angles
given in Problems 25–30.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
In Problems 31–35 classify the requested angles shown in 
Figure 7.26, where 
and 
are parallel.
,2
,1
FIGURE 7.26 Parallel lines cut by transversals
4
16
8
3
7
1
2
5 6
9
12
13
14
15
10
11
20 18
19
17
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j. Name an angle congruent to /DOB.
/DOA
/AOC
/COB
/C
/DOB
/CAB
/DBC
/AOB
/DOC
31. a.
if 
is 
b.
if 
is 
32. a.
if 
is 
b.
if 
is 
33. a.
if 
is 
b.
if 
is 
34. a.
if 
is 
b.
if 
is 
35. a.
if 
is 
b.
if 
is 
In Problems 36–43 classify the pairs of angles shown in 
Figure 7.26.
36.
and 
37.
and 
38.
and 
39.
and 
40.
and 
41.
and 
42.
and 
43.
and 
Each of the four diagrams in Figure 7.27 shows lines in the same
plane. Classify each of the statements in Problems 44–49 as true 
or false.
/13
/7
/18
/12
/11
/9
/17
/9
/10
/9
/12
/9
/14
/13
/4
/2
88°
m/15
/5
130°
m/2
/1
110°
m/19
/BCA
120°
m/16
/CBA
30°
m/15
/16
90°
m/11
/10
70°
m/11
/19
105°
m/17
/18
90°
m/5
/ABC
30°
m/1
/BAC
348
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
a1
a3
a2
120°
50°
b1
b2
b3
60
60°
a.
b.
d1
d3
d2
c2
c1
c.
d.
FIGURE 7.27 Intersecting lines in the same plane
44. The lines 
and 
are both intersecting and parallel.
45. The lines 
and 
are vertical.
46. The lines 
and 
are not intersecting.
47. The lines 
and 
are intersecting.
d3
d1
c2
c1
b2
b1
a3
a1
48. The lines 
and 
are horizontal.
49. The lines 
and 
are both vertical and parallel.
In Problems 50–55, find the measures of all the angles in 
Figure 7.28.
a3
a2
d2
c2
FIGURE 7.28
is parallel to ,2
,1
6
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
1
2
3
50. Given 
51. Given 
52. Given 
53. Given 
54. Given 
55. Given 
56. Consider the angles in the accompanying figure. Classify the
named angles as acute, right, straight, or obtuse.
m/3 5 163°
m/5 5 120°
m/1 5 153°
m/6 5 19°
m/2 5 65°
m/7 5 110°
35°
15°
40°
50°
130°
A
D
C
O
B
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j. Name an angle congruent to 
57. Consider the angles in the accompanying figure. Classify the
named angles as acute, right, straight, or obtuse.
/DOB.
/DOA
/AOC
/COB
/C
/DOB
/CAB
/DBC
/AOB
/DOC
25°
5°
20°
155°
65°
C
B
A
D
O
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.3
Triangles
349
58. This problem anticipates a major result derived in the next
section. Show that the sum of the measures of the interior
angles of any triangle is
a. Draw three triangles, one with all acute angles, one with a
right angle, and a third with an obtuse angle. A triangle
with all acute angles is shown here:
180°.
60. HISTORICAL QUEST
Allow me to start you on a journey
in Golygon City. You can take a similar trip in Manhattan,
Tokyo, or almost any large city whose streets form a grid of
squares. Here are your directions. Stroll down a city block, and
at the end turn left or right. Walk two more blocks, turn left or
right, then walk another three blocks, turn once more, and so
on. Each time you turn, you must walk straight one block far-
ther than before. If after a number of turns you arrive at your
starting point, you have traced a golygon, as shown in Fig-
ure 7.29. A golygon consists of straight-line segments that
have lengths (measured in miles, meters, or whatever unit you
prefer) of one, two, three, and so on units. Draw some
golygons. Can you make a conjecture about golygons?*
b. Tear apart the angles of each triangle you’ve drawn, and
place them together to form a straight angle at the bottom,
as shown here:
Problem Solving  3
59. The first illustration in the accompanying figure shows a cube
with the top cut off. Use solid lines and shading to depict seven
other different views of a cube with one side cut off.
7.3
Triangles
One of the most frequently encountered polygons is the triangle. In this section we take
a closer look at them.
Terminology
Every triangle has six parts: three sides and three angles. We name the sides by naming
the endpoints of the line segments, and we name the angles by identifying the vertex (see
Figure 7.30).  
A
B
C
Sides
Angles
AC
A
CB
B
AB
C
FIGURE 7.30 A standard triangle showing the six parts
A triangle and the parts
of a triangle are essential
ideas.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Image not available due to copyright restrictions

350
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
Triangles are classified both by sides and by angles (single, double, and triple marks are
used to indicate segments of equal length):
By Sides
By Angles 
Scalene: No equal sides
Acute: Three acute angles
Isosceles: Two equal sides
Right: One right angle
Equilateral: Three equal sides
Obtuse: One obtuse angle
Obtuse triangle
Equilateral triangle
Right triangle
Isosceles triangle
Acute triangle
Scalene triangle
We say that two triangles are congruent if they have the same size and shape. Sup-
pose that we wish to construct a triangle with vertices D, E, and F, congruent to 
as
shown in Figure 7.30. We would proceed as follows (as shown in Figure 7.31):
1. Mark off segment 
so that it is congruent to 
. We write this as 
2. Construct angle E so that it is congruent to angle B. We write this as 
3. Mark off segment 
You can now see that, if you connect points D and F with a straightedge, 
the resulting ^DEF has the same size and shape as ^ABC. The procedure we used
here is called SAS, meaning we constructed two sides and an included angle (an angle
between two sides) congruent to two sides and an included angle of another triangle.
We call these corresponding parts. There are other procedures for constructing
congruent triangles; some of these are discussed in the problem set. For this example,
we say ^
^DEF. From this we conclude that all six corresponding parts are
congruent.
ABC
DEF
Acorresponds to D 
B corresponds to E 
C corresponds to F 
ABC 
EF  BC.
E  B.
DE  AB.
AB
DE
DABC
D
E
D
E
F
D
E
F
FIGURE 7.31 Constructing
congruent triangles
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Example
1
Corresponding angles with congruent triangles
Name the corresponding parts of the given triangles.
a.
b.
Solution  
a.
corresponds to  
b.
corresponds to 
corresponds to  
corresponds to 
corresponds to  
corresponds to 
corresponds to 
corresponds to 
corresponds to 
corresponds to 
corresponds to 
corresponds to 
Angles of a Triangle
One of the most basic properties of a triangle involves the sum of the measures of its
angles. To discover this property for yourself, place a pencil with an eraser along one side
of any triangle as shown in Figure 7.32a.
/UST
/RST
/Cr
/C
/UTS
/RTS
/Br
/B
/U
/R
/Ar
/A
ST
ST
BrCr
BC
UT
RT
ArCr
AC
US
RS
ArBr
AB
S
R
U
T
A
C
B
A9
C9
B 9
^ RST  ^UST
^ ABC  ^ ABC
Section 7.3
Triangles
351
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
a.
b.
c.
d.
FIGURE 7.32 Demonstration that the sum of the measures of the angles in a triangle is 180°
Now rotate the pencil to correspond to the size of 
as shown in Figure 7.32b. You see
your pencil is along 
. Next, rotate the pencil through 
, as shown in Figure 7.32c.
Finally, rotate the pencil through 
. Notice that the pencil has been rotated the same
amount as the sum of the angles of the triangle. Also notice that the orientation of the
pencil is exactly reversed from the starting position. This leads us to the following impor-
tant theorem.
/B
/C
AC
/A
You will frequently need to
use this property.
The sum of the measures of the angles in any triangle is 
.  
180°
Angles in a Triangle
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

352
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
Example
2 Find angles in a triangle
Find the missing angle measure in the triangle in Figure 7.33.
65°
x
82°
FIGURE 7.33 What is x?  
Solution
Let x represent the missing angle measure.
The missing angle’s measure is 
.
33°
 x 5 33
 147 1 x 5 180
 65 1 82 1 x 5 180
Example
3 Use algebra to find angles in a triangle
Find the measures of the angles of a triangle if it is known that the measures are x,
and 
degrees.
Solution
Using the theorem for the sum of the measures of angles in a triangle, we have
Sum of the measures of the angles is 180°.
Eliminate parentheses.
Combine similar terms.
Subtract 36 from both sides.
Divide both sides by 6.
Now find the angle measures:
The angles have measures of 
, and 
.
An exterior angle of a triangle is the angle on the other side of an extension
of one side of the triangle. An example is the angle whose measure is marked as x in
Figure 7.34.
Notice that the following relationships are true for any 
with exterior angle x:
and
Thus,
Subtract 
from both sides.
m/C
m/A 1 m/B 5 x
m/A 1 m/B 1 m/C 5 m/C 1 x
m/C 1 x 5 180°
m/A 1 m/B 1 m/C 5 180°
DABC
123°
24°, 33°
31x 1 172 5 3124 1 172 5 123
2x 2 15 5 21242 2 15 5 33
x  24
x  24
6x  144
6x  36  180
x  2x  15  3x  51  180
 x 1 12x 2 152 1 31x 1 172 5 180
31x 1 72
2x 2 15,
A
C
B
x
FIGURE 7.34 Exterior angle x
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.3
Triangles
353
Example
4 Find the exterior angle
Find the value of x in Figure 7.35.
63°
42°
x
FIGURE 7.35 What is x?
Sum of interior angles
Exterior angle
T
Solution
The measure of the exterior angle is 
.
Isosceles Triangle Property
In an isosceles triangle, there are two sides of equal length and the third side is called its
base. The angle included by its legs is called the vertex angle, and the angles that include
the base are called base angles.
There is an important theorem in geometry that is known as the isosceles triangle
property.
105°
105 5 x
63 1 42      5       x
In other words, if a triangle is isosceles, then the base angles have equal measures. The
converse is also true; namely, if two angles of a triangle are congruent, the sides opposite
them have equal length.
Example
5 Equiangular implies equilateral
Give a reasonable argument to prove that if a triangle is equiangular, it is also equilateral.
Solution
If 
is equiangular, then 
Since 
from the converse of the isosceles triangle property, we have 
Again, since
we have 
Thus, we see that all three sides have the same
length, and consequently 
is equilateral.
DABC
0 AC 0 5 0 AB 0 .
m/B 5 m/C,
0BC 0 5 0 AC 0 .
m/A 5 m/B,
m/A 5 m/B 5 m/C.
DABC
142443
The measure of the exterior angle of a triangle equals the sum of the measures of the
two interior angles.  
Exterior Angle Property
If two sides of a triangle have the same length, then angles opposite them are
congruent.
Isosceles Triangle Property
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

354
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a triangle?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the sum of the measures 
of the angles of a triangle?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the notation
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain why the musical instrument
called a “triangle” is not a good example of a geometric triangle.
Name the corresponding parts of the triangles in Problems 5–10.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
B
X
P
T
O
J
L M
P
N
K
X
Y
W
Z
R
S
T
U
G
I
H
G
H
I
A
C
B
D
F
E
DABC . DDEF.
In Problems 11–16, find the measure of the third angle in 
each triangle. 
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
Find the measure of the indicated exterior angle in each of the
triangles in Problems 17–22. 
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
65°
55°
x
60°
30°
80°
x
70°
85°
25°
x
20°
100°
x
43°
52°
x
40°
35°
x
98°
33°
83°
41°
135°
10°
15°
20°
58°
60°
46°
46°
Problem Set 7.3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Using only a straightedge and a compass, reproduce the triangles
given in Problems 23–28.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
Level  2
Use algebra to find the value of x in each of the triangles in
Problems 29–34. Notice that the measurement of the angle is not
necessarily the same as the value of x.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
Find the numerical measures of the angles of the triangle whose
angle measures are given in Problems 35–40. 
35. x, x, x
36. x, x, 2x
37. x, x  10°, x  20°
38. x, x  10°, x  10°
39. x, 14°  3x, 31x  25°2
40. x, 3x  10°, 3155°  x2
4x + 50°
5x + 40°
3x – 10°
4x + 42°
5x
6x 
2x
5x
3x + 50°
x
3(x + 10°)
2(x + 12°)
3x
9x
6x
3x
5x
x
Section 7.3
Triangles
355
In Problems 41–44, assume that the given angles have been
measured, and calculate the angles (marked as x) that could not 
be found by direct measurement. 
41.
42.
43.
44.
Draw an example of each of the triangles described in Problems
45–52. If the figure cannot exist, write “impossible.” 
45. acute scalene
46. acute isosceles 
47. acute equilateral
48. right scalene 
49. right isosceles
50. right equilateral 
51. obtuse scalene
52. obtuse isosceles 
Level 3
53. In the text we constructed congruent triangles by using SAS.
Reproduce the triangle shown in Problem 25 by using SSS.
This means to construct the triangle by using the lengths of
the three sides.
54. In the text we constructed congruent triangles by using SAS.
Reproduce the triangle shown in Problem 26 by using SSS.
This means to construct the triangle by using the lengths of the
three sides.
55. In the text we constructed congruent triangles by using SAS.
Reproduce the triangle shown in Problem 27 by using ASA.
This means to construct the triangle by using a side included
between two angles.
56. In the text we constructed congruent triangles by using SAS.
Reproduce the triangle shown in Problem 28 by using ASA.
This means to construct the triangle by using a side included
between two angles.
57. The legs of a picnic table
form a triangle where 
and 
have the same
length, as shown in
Figure 7.36. 
Find the measures of the
angles x and y so that the
top of the table will be par-
allel to the ground, given
the following measurements.
a. m ACB  90°
b. mACB  85°
c. mACB  92°
BC
AC
Swamp
19°
120°
x
32°
28°
x
Lake
38°
x
40°
x
A
B
x
y
C
FIGURE 7.36 Picnic table 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Show that the sum of the measures of
the interior angles of any quadrilateral is 360° by carrying out
the following steps: 
a. Draw any quadrilateral, as illustrated in Figure 7.37 (but
draw your quadrilateral so it has a different shape from the
one shown here).
b. Divide the quadrilateral into two triangles by drawing a
diagonal (a line segment connecting two nonadjacent
vertices). Label the angles of your triangles as shown in
Figure 7.37. 
FIGURE 7.37 Quadrilateral
1
6
5
4
3
2
356
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
c. What is the sum m1  m2  m3?
d. What is the sum m4  m5  m6?
e. The sum of the measures of the angles of the 
quadrilateral is 
(m1  m2  m3)  (m4  m5  m6)
What is this sum?
f. Do you think this argument will apply for any
quadrilateral?
Problem Solving 3
59. Look at Problem 58. What is the sum of the measures of the
interior angles of any pentagon?
60. Look at Problem 58. What is the sum of the measures of the
interior angles of any octagon?
7.4  Similar Triangles
Congruent figures have exactly the same size and shape. However, it is possible for
figures to have exactly the same shape without necessarily having the same size. Such
figures are called similar figures. In this section we will focus on similar triangles. If
is similar to 
, we write
Similar triangles are shown in Figure 7.38.
mA  mD, so these are corresponding angles.
mB  mE, so these are corresponding angles.
mC  mF, so these are corresponding angles.
Side 
is opposite A and side 
is opposite D, 
so we say that 
corresponds to 
.
corresponds to 
.
corresponds to 
.
Since these figures have the same shape, we talk about corresponding angles and
corresponding sides. The corresponding angles of similar triangles are those angles
that have equal measure. The corresponding sides are those sides that are opposite
equal angles.
Even though corresponding angles are equal, corresponding sides do not need
to have the same length. If they do have the same length, the triangles are congruent.
DE
AB
DF
AC
EF
BC
EF
BC
DABC , DDEF
DDEF
DABC
A
C
B
a
c
b
F
E
d
f
e
D
FIGURE 7.38 Similar triangles
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.4
Similar Triangles
357
Primary ratios:
Reciprocals:
We summarize with an important property of similar triangles called the similar
triangle theorem.
b
a 5 e
d c
a 5 f
d c
b 5 f
e
a
b 5 d
e a
c 5 d
f b
c 5 e
f
Two triangles are similar if two angles of one triangle are congruent to two angles 
of the other triangle. If the triangles are similar, then their corresponding sides are
proportional.
Similar Triangle Theorem
This result is used in
many applications.
Example
1
Identify similar triangles
Identify pairs of triangles that are similar in Figure 7.39.
A
C
B
60°
62°
40°
40°
S
U
R
Q
T
L
60°
58°
J
K
30°
N
M
P
Z
45°
Y
X
F
D
50°
E
50°
H
I
G
FIGURE 7.39 Which of these triangles are similar?
Solution
DABC , DJKL; DDEF , DGIH; DSQR , DSTU
Example
2
Find lengths given similar triangles
Given the similar triangles in Figure 7.40, find the unknown lengths marked 
and .
cr
br
A
C
B
a 5 8
c 5 14.4
b 5 12
C9
A9
B9
b9
a9 5 4
c9
FIGURE 7.40 Given DABC , DArBrCr
However, when they are not the same length, we can say they are proportional. From
Figure 7.38 we see that the lengths of the sides are labeled a, b, c and d, e, f. When we
say the sides are proportional, we mean
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Identifying similar triangles is simplified even further if we know that the triangles
are right triangles, because then the triangles are similar if one of the acute angles of one
triangle has the same measure as an acute angle of the other.
358
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
Solution
Since corresponding sides are proportional (other proportions are possible),
we have
 br 5 6
 br 5 41122
8
 8
12 5 4
br
 a
b 5 ar
br
 cr 5 7.2
 cr 5 14.4142
8
 8
14.4 5 4
cr
 a
c 5 ar
cr
Example
3
Find tree height
Find the height of a tree that is difficult to measure directly.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. We need to find the height of some tree without measuring it
directly.
Devise a Plan. We assume that it is a sunny day, and we will measure the height of the
tree by measuring its shadow on the ground. For reference, we also measure the length
of the shadow of an object of known height (say our own height, a meterstick, or a yard-
stick). We will then use similar triangles and proportions to find the height of the tree.
Carry Out the Plan. Suppose that a tree and a yardstick are casting shadows as shown
in Figure 7.41.
Pólya’s 
Method
 Sun's rays
Assume Sun’s rays are
parallel
Yardstick
S
T
G
G9
T9
S9
FIGURE 7.41 Finding the height of a tall object by using similar triangles
If the shadow of the yardstick is 3 yards long and the shadow of the tree is 12 yards
long, we use similar triangles to estimate h, the height of the tree, if we know that
Since 
and 
are right angles, and since 
Therefore, corresponding sides are proportional.
m/S 5 m/Sr, DSGT , DSrGrTr.
/Gr
/G
m/S 5 m/Sr
Historical
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Benjamin Banneker
(1731–1806)
Geometrical concepts are
extremely important in surveying.
One of the most perfectly planned
cities is Washington, D.C. The cen-
ter of the city is the Capitol, and
the city is divided into four
sections: Northwest, Northeast,
Southwest, and Southeast. These
are separated by North, South,
East, and Capitol Streets, all of
which converge at the Capitol. The
initial surveying of this city was
done by a group of
mathematicians and surveyors that
included one of the first African-
American mathematicians,
Benjamin Banneker. He was born
in 1731 in Maryland and showed
remarkable talent in mathematics
without the benefit of formal edu-
cation. His story, as well as those
of other prominent black
mathematicians, can be found in a
book by Virginia K. Newell, Joella
H. Gipson, L. Waldo Rich, and
Beauregard Stubblefield, entitled
Black Mathematicians and Their
Works (Ardmore, Pennsylvania:
Dorrance, 1980).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.4
Similar Triangles
359
You solved proportions like this in the previous chapter.
Look Back. The tree is 4 yards, or 12 ft, tall.
h 5 4
h 5 11122
3
1
3 5 h
12
A
B
C
a
b
c
FIGURE 7.42 A right triangle
In ABC with right angle at C:
The hypotenuse is c;
The side adjacent to A is b;
The side adjacent to B is a.
D
There is a relationship between the sizes of the angles of a right triangle and the
ratios of the lengths of the sides. In a right triangle, the side opposite the right angle is
called the hypotenuse. Each of the acute angles of a right triangle has one side that is the
hypotenuse; the other side of that angle is called the adjacent side. (See Figure 7.42.)
We also talk about an opposite side. The side opposite 
is a, and the side opposite 
is b.
/B
/A
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Contrast congruent and similar
triangles.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does it mean when we say 
the corresponding sides of two congruent triangles are
proportional?
In Problems 3–8, tell whether it is possible to conclude that the
triangles are similar.
3.
4.
a
b
c
A
B
C
20°
d
e
f
D
E
F
20°
a
b
c
A
B
C
20°
d
e
f
D
E
F
20°
Problem Set 7.4
5.
6.
7.
m
n
p
M
N
P
60°
q
r
s
Q
R
S
30°
G
I
H
g
i
h
70°
60°
J
L
K
j
l
k
60°
70°
a
b
c
A
B
C
20°
d
e
f
D
E
F
20°
68°
70°
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

360
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
8.
List the measures for all six angles for the figures given in
Problems 9–14.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
36°
C
A
B
A
C
B
44°
A
C
B
D
F
E
38°
68°
32°
110°
K
J
L
G
I
H
25°
A
75°
C
B
t
v
u
T
V
U
45°
45°
w
y
x
W
Y
X
45°
14.
List the lengths of all six sides for the figures given in 
Problems 15–20.
15.
16.
17.
18.
C
A
B
5
4
3
15
D
E
F
20
I
G
H
16
12
14
H
I
G
D
F
E
16
8
12
22
A
B
C
22
11
11
5
E
F
D
60°
20°
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19.
20.
Given two similar triangles, as shown in Figure 7.43, find the
unknown lengths in Problems 21–28.
D
E
F
15
6
9
17
C
A
B
6
8
10
5
Section 7.4
Similar Triangles
361
31.
32.
33.
34.
Level  2
35. Given 
is perpendicular to 
, and 
is an equilateral
triangle. Show that 
36. Given 
. Show that 
37. Given that 
bisects both 
and 
. Show that
A
T
C
O
DCAT , DCOT.
/ATO
/ACO
CT
A
C
D
E
B
DABD , DCBE.
m/D 5 m/E
A
C
B
M
DABM , DCBM.
DABC
MB
AC
z
14
20
15
y
20
55
30
3
x
5
2
5
10
18
x
C
B
A
c
b
a
C
B
A
c
b
a
FIGURE 7.43 Similar triangles
21.
find c.
22.
find .
23. a  4, b  8, a  2; find b.
24. b  5, c  15, b  3; find c.
25. c  6, a  4, c  8; find a.
26. a  7, b  3, a  5; find b.
27. b  8, c  12, c  4; find b.
28. c  9, a  2, c  5; find a.
Each figure in Problems 29–34 contains two similar triangles.
Find the unknown measure indicated by a variable. Answer to the
nearest tenth.
29.
30.
h
40
60
20
30
10
25
h
cr
ar 5 7, br 5 3;
a 5 4, b 5 8;
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48. If a tree casts a shadow of 8 ft 3 in. at the same time that a 5-ft
10-in. person casts a shadow of 2 ft 7 in., find the height of
the tree (to the nearest inch).
49. If a tree casts a shadow of 4 ft 5 in. at the same time that a 5-ft
9-in. person casts a shadow of 3 ft 10 in., find the height of
the tree (to the nearest inch).
50. If lines are drawn on a map, a triangle can be formed by the
cities of New York City, Washington, D.C., and Buffalo, New
York. On the map, the distance between New York City and
Washington, D.C., is 2.1 cm, New York to Buffalo is 2.5 cm,
and Buffalo to Washington, D.C., is approximately 2.85 cm. 
If the actual straight-line distance from Buffalo to Washington
is 285 miles, how far is it between the other pairs of cities?
51. If lines are drawn on a map, a triangle can be formed by the
cities of New Orleans, Louisiana; Denver, Colorado; and
Chicago, Illinois. On the map, the distance between 
New Orleans and Denver is 10.8 cm, Chicago to New
Orleans is 9.5 cm, and Chicago to Denver is 10.2 cm. 
If the actual straight-line distance from Chicago to 
New Orleans is 950 miles, how far is it between the other
pairs of cities?
52. Suppose a 6-ft person wishes to determine the height 
of a bridge above the bottom of a canyon, as shown in
Figure 7.46.
38. Given that 
bisects 
and 
. Show that
.
39. Use similar triangles and a proportion to find the length of the
lake shown in Figure 7.44.
A
W
O
R1
R2
DAOR1 , DAOR2
/R1OR2
/R1AR2
AW
362
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
50.0 ft
P
210 ft
140 ft
To do this, this person stands at one end of the bridge (point A)
and looks down to a point directly below the other end (point B).
With the help of a companion, point P is determined to form two
triangles.
a. Identify the two triangles.
b. Are the triangles similar? Why or why not?
c. Find the distance to the bottom of the canyon, if 
ft and 
53. Suppose a 6-ft person wishes to determine the height of a foot-
bridge connecting two buildings, as shown in Figure 7.47.
0 PB 0 5 40ft
0 AP 0 5 10
FIGURE 7.44 Determining the length of a lake
FIGURE 7.45 Determining the height of a building
4 ft
6 ft
16 ft
P
T
B
A
H
FIGURE 7.46 Height of a bridge
S
H
P
B
T
FIGURE 7.47 Height of a footbridge
40. Suppose the distances in Problem 39 are changed as follows:
150 ft instead of 210 ft and 90 ft instead of 140 ft. What is the
length of this lake (to the nearest foot)?
41. Use similar triangles and a proportion to find the height of the
house siding shown in Figure 7.45.
42. Suppose the 6 ft distance in Problem 41 is 5 ft 8 in. Use this
information to find the height of the house (to the nearest inch)
shown in Figure 7.45.
43. A building casts a shadow 75 ft long. At the same time, the
shadow cast by a vertical yardstick is 5 ft long. How tall is the
building?
44. Suppose the shadow of the building in Problem 43 is 75 ft 3 in.
How tall is the building (to the nearest inch)?
45. A bell tower casts a shadow 45 ft long. At the same time, the
shadow cast by a vertical yardstick is 23 in. long. How tall is
the bell tower (to the nearest foot)?
46. If a tree casts a shadow of 12 ft at the same time that a 6-ft per-
son casts a shadow of 2 ft, find the height of the tree (to the
nearest foot).
47. If a tree casts a shadow of 10 ft at the same time that a 5-ft
person casts a shadow of 3 ft, find the height of the tree (to the
nearest foot).
1
2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.5
Right-Triangle Trigonometry
363
56. A useful theorem that uses proportionality, but not triangles, is
the following:
If two lines connect the endpoints of parallel segments of dif-
ferent lengths, then a line through the intersection of the two
lines connecting those endpoints divides the parallel segments
proportionally. (See Figure 7.48.)
To do this, this person stands at one end of the bridge (point S)
and looks down to a point directly below the other end 
(point T). With the help of a companion, point P is determined
to form two triangles.
a. Identify the two triangles.
b. Are the triangles similar? Why or why not?
c. Find the height of the footbridge, if 
ft and
ft
Level  3
54. Given 
and M midpoint of 
. Show that
.
55. Given 
and 
. Show that
.
A
C
D
E
B
DADC , DCEA
0 AB 0 5 0 BC 0
m/D 5 m/E
A
C
B
M
DABM , DCBM
AC
0 AB 0 5 0 BC 0
0 PT 0 5 35
0 SP 0 5 10
Using this result, divide the following line segment into a 
2-to-3 ratio:
A
B
F
C
D
E
P
FIGURE 7.48 Suppose 
then 
0  CE 0
0 DE 0
0  AF 0
0 BF 0 5
AB 0 0 CD;
7.5  Right-Triangle Trigonometry
An important theorem from geometry, the Pythagorean theorem, has an important
algebraic representation, and is important in our study of triangles.
For any right triangle with sides of lengths a and b and hypotenuse of length c,
Also, if a, b, and c are the lengths of the sides of a triangle so that 
, then
the triangle is a right triangle.
a2 1 b2 5 c2
a2 1 b2 5 c2
Pythagorean Theorem
You should be familiar with
this theorem.
A correctly labeled right triangle is shown in Figure 7.49. In a right triangle, the sides that
are not the hypotenuse are sometimes called legs.
57. Divide the segment given in Problem 56 into two parts in a 
3-to-7 ratio.
58. Present an argument showing that if two triangles are equilat-
eral, then they are similar triangles.
59. For any right triangle ABC (right angle at C), drop a perpendi-
cular from point C to base 
at the point D. Show that the
two triangles thus formed are similar.
60. Present an argument showing that two triangles similar to a
third triangle are similar to each other.
AB
A
C
B
c
b
a
FIGURE 7.49 Right triangle
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

364
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
Example
1
Build a right angle
A carpenter wants to make sure that the corner of a closet is square (a right angle). If
she measures out sides of 3 feet and 4 feet, how long should she make the diagonal
(hypotenuse)?
Solution
The length of the hypotenuse is the unknown, so use the Pythagorean
theorem:
The sides are 3 and 4.
She should make the diagonal 5 feet long.
 5 5
 5 "25
 5 "32 1 42
 c 5 "a2 1 b2
Trigonometric Ratios
Of interest to us in this section is the value found by forming the ratios of the lengths of the
sides of a right triangle. There are six possible ratios for the triangle shown in Figure 7.49.
Primary Ratios
Reciprocal Ratios
b
a
, c
a
, c
b
a
b
, a
c
, b
c
In this section, we study the relationship of the primary ratios with the angles A and B.
These ratios, called the trigonometric ratios, and are defined in the box.
This is the essential
definition of this
section. It also forms
the basis for a
trigonometry course.
Example
2
Find angles in a triangle using trigonometry
Given a right triangle with sides of length 5 and 12, find the trigonometric ratios for the
angles A and B. Show your answers in both common fraction and decimal fraction form,
with decimals rounded to four places. 
Solution
First use the Pythagorean theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse.
sin B 5 12
13 < 0.9231; cos B 5 5
13 < 0.3846; tan B 5 12
5 < 2.4
sin A 5 5
13 < 0.3846; cos A 5 12
13 < 0.9231; tan A 5 5
12 < 0.4167
 5 13
 5 "169
 5 "25 1 144
 c 5 "52 1 122
C
c
B
A
12
5
In a right triangle ABC with right angle at C,
sin A (pronounced “sine of A”) is the ratio 
cos A (pronounced “cosine of A”) is the ratio 
tan A (pronounced “tangent of A”) is the ratio opposite side of A
adjacent side of A
adjacent side of A
hypotenuse
opposite side of A
 hypotenuse
Trigonometric Ratios
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.5
Right-Triangle Trigonometry
365
Example
3
Exact values for 45° angle
Find the cosine, sine, and tangent of 
.
Solution
If one of the angles of a right triangle is 
, then the other acute angle must
also be 
(because the sum of the angles of a triangle is 
). Furthermore, since the
base angles have the same measure, the triangle is isosceles. By the Pythagorean theorem,
Note that x is positive.
Now use the definition of the trigonometric ratios.
Thus, 
, and tan 
.
45° 5 1
cos 45° 5 sin 45° 5
1
!2
 aor 1
!2 5
1
!2 # !2
!2 5 !2
2 b
tan 45° 5 x
x 5 1
sin 45° 5 x
r 5
1
!2
cos 45° 5 x
r 5
x
!2
  x 5
1
!2
"2x 5 r
2x2 5 r2
x2 1 x2 5 r2
180°
45°
45°
45°
x
r
x
45°
45°
Tables of ratios for different angles are available and most calculators have keys for
the sine, cosine, and tangent ratios. Check with your calculator owner’s manual to see
how to use your calculator for these problems.
Example
4
Trigonometric ratios by calculator
Find the trigonometric ratios by using a calculator. Round your answers to four decimal
places.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a.
; press 
.*
Compare with Example 3: 
b.
; press 
.
c.
; press 
.
19
tan
tan 19° < 0.3443
32
cos
cos 32° < 0.8480
sin 45° 5 !2
2 < 0.7071.
45
sin
sin 45° < 0.7071
tan 19°
cos 32°
sin 45°
Example
5
Find the height of a pyramid
The angle from the ground to the top of the Great Pyramid of Cheops is 
if a point
on the ground directly below the top is 351 ft away. (See Figure 7.50.) What is the
height of the pyramid?
Solution
From Figure 7.50, we see that for height h
 tan 52° 5
h
351
52°
Trigonometric ratios are useful in a variety of situations, as illustrated in the next
example.
351 ft
52˚
FIGURE 7.50 Calculating the
height of the Great Pyramid 
of Cheops
*Or 
, depending on brand and model of calculator. Also, be sure your calculator is set to DEGREE mode.
sin
45
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Inverse Trigonometric Ratios
We can also use right-triangle trigonometry to find one of the acute angles if we know the
trigonometric ratio. For example, suppose we know (as we do from Example 3) that
Also suppose that we do not know the angle . In other words, we ask, “What is the
angle ?” We answer by saying, “ is the angle whose tangent is 1.” In mathematics, we
call this the inverse tangent and we write
To find the angle , we turn to a calculator. Find the button labeled 
, and press*
The display is 45, which means 
.
We now define the inverse trigonometric ratios for a right triangle.
u 5 45°

1
tan1
tan1
u
u 5 tan211
u
u
u
tan u 5 1
366
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
For 
an acute angle in a right triangle,
cos21a adj
hypb 5 u  sin21a opp
hypb 5 u  tan21aopp
adjb 5 u
u
Inverse Trigonometric Ratios
We return to Example 2.
C
c
B
A
12
5
*On some calculators, you press 
or 
. Also make sure your calculator is set 
DEGREE mode.
†There is usually more than one ratio that can be used to find a particular angle. For this example, we could also have used 
A 5 cos1
22.6° or A  tan1
22.6° and B  cos1
67.4° or B  tan1
67.4°.
<
12
5
<
5
13
<
5
12
<
12
13
ENTER
1
tan1

tan1
1
Solving for h by multiplying both sides by 351, we obtain
Now we need to know the ratio for 
. By calculator, press 
,
which displays 449.2595129. The height of the Great Pyramid of Cheops is about 449 ft.

52
tan

351
tan 52°
h 5 351 tan 52°
This definition is used to
find angles in a right
triangle when the sides
are known.
Example
6
Find angles of a triangle using inverse 
trigonometric ratios
Given a right triangle with sides of length 5 and 12, find the measures of the angles of
this triangle.
Solution
From Example 2, we see the hypotenuse is 13. Also from Example 2,
and
Our task here is to find the measures of angles A and B. What is A? We might say, “A is
the measure of the angle whose sine is .” This is the inverse sine, and we write†
and
B 5 sin2112
13 < 67.4°
A 5 sin21 5
13 < 22.6°
5
13
sin B 5 12
13 < 0.9231
sin A 5 5
13 < 0.3846
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.5
Right-Triangle Trigonometry
367
Right-triangle trigonometry can be used in a variety of applications. One of the most
common has to do with an observer looking at an object.
The angle of elevation is the acute angle measured up from a horizontal line to the line
of sight, whereas if we take the climber’s viewpoint, and measure from a horizontal down
to the line of sight, we call this angle the angle of depression.
Line of sight
Horizontal line
Angle of depression
Line of sight
Horizontal line
Angle of elevation
Remember to measure
from the horizontal.
Example
7 Find the height of a tree from angle of elevation
The angle of elevation to the top of a tree from a point on the ground 42 ft from its base
is 
. Find the height of the tree (to the nearest foot).
Solution
Let 
Then
The tree is 27 ft tall.
 < 27.28
 h 5 42 tan 33°
 tan u 5 h
42
u 5 angle of elevation and h 5 height of tree.
33°
h
42
Bigshots/Getty Images
Bigshots/Getty Images
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

368
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
Level  1
1. What is the Pythagorean theorem?
2. What is a sine?
3. What is a cosine?
4. What is a tangent?
5. HISTORICAL QUEST
The mathematics of the early
Egyptians was practical and centered around surveying,
construction, and recordkeeping. They used a simple device to
aid surveying—a rope with 12 equal divisions marked by
knots, as shown in Figure 7.51.
FIGURE 7.51 Egyptian measuring rope
When the rope was stretched and staked so that a triangle was
formed with sides 3, 4, and 5, the angle formed by the shorter
sides was a right angle. This method was extremely useful in
Egypt, where the Nile flooded the rich lands close to the river
each year. The lands needed to be resurveyed when the waters
subsided. 
Which of the following ropes would form right 
triangles?
Rope A:
30 knots (sides 5, 12, and 13) 
Rope B:
9 knots (sides 2, 3, and 4) 
Use the right triangle in Figure 7.52 to answer the questions in
Problems 6–16.
A
B
C
a
b
c
3
5
4
3
4
5
6. What is the side opposite A?
7. What is the side opposite B?
8. What is the side adjacent A?
9. What is the side adjacent B?
10. What is the hypotenuse?
11. What is sin A?
12. What is sin B?
13. What is cos A?
14. What is cos B?
15. What is tan A?
16. What is tan B?
Find the trigonometric ratios in Problems 17–28 by using a
calculator. Round your answers to four decimal places. 
17. sin 56°
18. sin 15°
19. sin 61°
20. sin 18°
21. cos 54°
22. cos 8°
23. cos 90°
24. cos 34°
25. tan 24°
26. tan 52°
27. tan 75°
28. tan 89°
Find the angles (to the nearest degree) for the information given in
Problems 29–37.
29. sin
30. cos
31. tan
32. cos
33. tan
34. sin
35. tan
36. sin
37. cos
Level  2
In Problems 38–47, decide if the given triangle is a right triangle.
If it is, find the sine, cosine, and tangent for the angle A. 
38.
39.
B
A
C
12
13
5
A
B
C
12
5
13
10.8
10.35
11.5
10
123
1
 22
2
11
11
1
 1
2
Problem Set 7.5
FIGURE 7.52 ABC
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.5
Right-Triangle Trigonometry
369
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48. If the angle from the horizontal to the top of a building is 
and the horizontal distance from its base is 90 ft, what is the
height of the building (to the nearest foot)?
49. If the angle from the horizontal to the top of a tower is 
and
the horizontal distance from its base is 85 ft, what is the height
of the tower (to the nearest foot)?
50. A building’s angle of elevation from a point on the ground
30 m from its base is 
. Find the height of the building
(to the nearest meter).
51. From a cliff 150 m above the shoreline, a ship’s angle of
depression is 
. Find the distance of the ship (to the nearest
meter) from a point directly below the observer.
37°
35°
52°
38°
C
B
A
√2
3
√7
A
C
B
1
6
√37
A
C
B
1
2
√3
B
C
A
1
2
√3
A
C
B
6
1
√35
C
B
A
2
1
√3
A
C
B
6
5
1
A
B
C
4
5
3
52. From a police helicopter flying at 1,000 ft, a stolen car is
sighted at an angle of depression of 
. Find the distance
of the car (to the nearest ft) from a point directly below the
helicopter.
53. A 16-ft ladder on level ground is leaning against a house. If the
ladder’s angle of elevation is 
, how far above the ground (to
the nearest inch) is the top of the ladder?
54. Find the height of the Barrington Space Needle (to the nearest
foot) if its angle of elevation at 1,000 ft from a point on the
ground directly below the top is 
55. The world’s tallest chimney is the stack at the International
Nickel Company. Find its height (to the nearest foot) if its an-
gle of elevation at 1,000 ft from a point on the ground directly
below the top stack is 
56. HISTORICAL QUEST
The angle of elevation of the top of
the Great Pyramid of Khufu (or Cheops) from a point on the
ground 351 ft from a point directly below the top is 52.0°.
Find the height of the pyramid (to the nearest foot).
51.36°.
58.15°.
52°
71°
Historical
The angle of elevation for a pyramid is the angle between the
edge of the base and the slant height, the line from the apex
of the pyramid to the midpoint of any side of the base. It is
the maximum possible ascent for anyone trying to climb the
pyramid to the top. In an article, “Angles of Elevation to the
Pyramids of Egypt,” in The Mathematics Teacher (February
1982, pp. 124–127), author Arthur F. Smith notes that the
angle of elevation of these pyramids is either about 
or
. Why did the Egyptians build pyramids using these
angles of elevation? (See Project 7.5, p. 387).
Smith states that (according to Kurt Mendelssohn, The
Riddle of the Pyramids, New York: Praeger Publications,
1974) Egyptians might have measured long horizontal
distances by means of a circular drum with some convenient
diameter such as one cubit. The circumference would then
have been  cubits. In order to design a pyramid of conven-
ient and attractive proportions, the Egyptians used a 4:1 ratio
52°
44°
NOTE
2   n
4n
     n
     n
     n
Arctan  
43.7°
3–
Adapted from “Angles of Elevation of the Pyramids of Egypt,” in The
Mathematics Teacher, February 1982, pp. 124–127.
(continued)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problem Solving  3
57. In a 30°–60°–90° triangle, the length of the side adjacent to the
30° angle is 
times the length of the side opposite the 30°
angle. Use this information to find the exact values for cos 30°,
sin 30°, and tan 30°.   
58. What is the radius of the largest circle you can cut from a rec-
tangular poster board with measurements 11 in. by 17 in.? (See
Figure 7.53.)
FIGURE 7.53 Circle in a rectangle 
13
370
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
for the rise relative to revolutions of the drum. Smith then
shows that the angle of elevation of the slant height is
If a small angle of elevation was desired (as in the case of
the Red Pyramid), a 1:3 ratio might have been used. In that
case, the angle of elevation of the slant height is
tan21 3
p < 43.7°
tan21 4
p < 51.9°
59. What is the width of the largest rectangle with length 16 in.
you can cut from a circular piece of cardboard having a radius
of 10 in.? (See Figure 7.54.)
FIGURE 7.54 Rectangle in a circle 
60. a. If the distance from the earth to the sun is 92.9 million
miles, and the angle formed between Venus, the earth, and
the sun is 47° (as shown in Figure 7.55), find the distance
from the sun to Venus (to the nearest hundred thousand
miles).
FIGURE 7.55 Earth, Venus, and the Sun
b. Find the distance from the earth to Venus (to the nearest
hundred thousand miles).
47°
Earth
92,900,000
Venus
Sun
7.6  Mathematics, Art, and Non-Euclidean Geometries
The topic of this section is certainly ambitious, and if treated thoroughly would take
volumes. In this section, we will simply introduce some of the connections between art
and mathematics. Others are found elsewhere in this text, while even more are linked on
the website.
Golden Rectangles
Certain rectangles hold some special interest because of the relationship between their
height and width. Consider a rectangle with height h and width w, as shown in Figure 7.56.
© Richard T. Nowitz/CORBIS
h
w
FIGURE 7.56 Golden rectangle
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.6
Mathematics, Art, and Non-Euclidean Geometries
371
The square in Figure 7.57 is shown with its interior shaded. Now divide the square
into two equal parts, as shown by the dashed segment 
Set your compass so that it
measures the length of 
Draw an arc, with center at A and radius equal to the length
of 
so that it intersects the extension of side 
label this point E. Now draw side
The resulting rectangle EFGH is a golden rectangle; CDEF is also a golden
rectangle.
There are many interesting properties associated with the golden ratio 
Consider
the pattern of numbers
1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, c
t.
EF.
HD;
AC,
AC.
AB.
Consider the proportion
This relationship is called the divine proportion. If 
we can solve the resulting
equation for w:
Quadratic formula
Since w is a length, we disregard the negative value to find 
w  1  15
2
 1.618033989
  1 ; 15
2
 w 5 1 6 "1212 2 2 4112 1212
2112
 w2  w  1  0
 1  w  w2
 1
w 
w
1  w
h 5 1,
h
w 5
w
h 1 w
Historical
The divine proportion has many
interesting properties. It was
derived by the 15th century math-
ematician Luca Pacioli. He defined
it by dividing a line segment into
two parts so that the length of the
smaller part is proportional to
the length of the larger part as the
length of the larger part is to the
length of the entire segment.
Would you mind repeating that?
Consider a segment of unit length
and divide it into two parts with
lengths x and 
. Then the
divine proportion is
If you can solve this equation for
x you will find 
. George
Markowsky points out in his arti-
cle “Misconceptions About the
Golden Ratio” that the first time
the term golden section was seen
in print (in German) was in a book
by Martin Ohm, and it first
appeared in English in the 1875
edition of Encyclopedia Britannica.
x 5 1/t
1 2 x
x
5 x
1
1 2 x
NOTE
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
FIGURE 7.57 Constructing a golden rectangle EFGH
This number is called the golden ratio and is denoted by 
(pronounced phi) or 
(pronounced tau). We will use in this book. 
A rectangle that satisfies this proportion for finding the golden ratio is called a
golden rectangle and can easily be constructed using a straightedge and a compass. Con-
sider the proportion
which means the ratio of the height (h) to the width (w) is the same as the ratio of the
width (w) to the sum of its height and width. To draw such a rectangle, we can begin with
any square CDHG, as shown in Figure 7.57.
h
w 5
w
h 1 w
t
t
f
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Example
1
Number puzzle
Find some numbers with the property that the number and its reciprocal 
differ by 1.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. We know, for example, that if x is such a number, then 
must be equal to the original number.
Devise a Plan. We let x be any nonzero number. Then we need to set 
equal to x,
and solve the resulting equation.
Carry Out the Plan.
Multiply both sides by x.
Look Back. We recognize the positive value as 
Use your calculator to find the reciprocal 1
t 5 "5 2 1
2
< 0.618033989.
t 5 1 1 "5
2
< 1.618033989
t:
  1 ; 15
2
 x  1 ; 2(1)2  4(1)(1)
2(1)
 x2  x  1  0
 x2  1  x
 x 5 1
x 1 1
1
x 1 1
1
x 1 1
Pólya’s 
Method
which is formed by adding the first two terms for the third term, and then continues by
adding successive pairs of numbers. Suppose we consider the ratios of the successive
terms in this list:
If you continue to find these ratios, you will notice that the sequence oscillates about a
number approximately equal to 1.618, which is 
Suppose we repeat this same procedure, except we start with any two nonzero num-
bers, say 4 and 7:
4, 7, 11, 18, 29, 47, 76, 123, 199, 322, 
Next, form the ratios of the successive terms:
These ratios are oscillating about the same number, t.
7
4 5 1.750; 11
7 < 1.571; 18
11 < 1.636; 29
18 < 1.611; 47
29 < 1.621; . . .
c
t.
89
55 < 1.618
55
34 < 1.618;
34
21 < 1.619;
21
13 < 1.615;
13
8 5 1.625;
8
5 5 1.6000;
5
3 < 1.667;
3
2 5 1.5000;
2
1 5 2.0000;
1
1 5 1.0000;
It has been said that many everyday rectangular objects have a length-to-width ratio of
about 1.6:1, as illustrated in Figure 7.58.
Mathematics and Art
Psychologists have tested individuals to determine the rectangles they find most pleasing; the
results are those rectangles whose length-to-width ratios are near the golden ratio. George
Markowsky, on the other hand, in the article “Misconceptions About the Golden Ratio,”*
372
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
FIGURE 7.58 An 18-oz box of
Kellogg’s Rice Krispies is 32 cm
by 20 cm, for a ratio of 1:6; a 1-lb
box of C&H sugar is 17 cm by 10
cm, for a ratio of 1.7.
*Vol. 23, No. 1, January 1992, The College Mathematics Journal.
David Lee / Alamy
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.6
Mathematics, Art, and Non-Euclidean Geometries
373
FIGURE 7.59 La Parade by the French impressionist Georges Seurat
The Metropolitan Museum of Art / Art Resource, NY
Example
2
Golden ratio in the Parthenon
If the Parthenon is 101 feet wide, what is its height (to the nearest foot)
if we assume the dimensions are in a golden ratio?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Pólya’s 
Method
The Parthenon in Nashville’s 
Centennial Park is a replica of the
original Parthenon in Athens
suggests that among rectangles with greatly different length-to-width ratios, the golden rec-
tangle is the most pleasing; but when confronted with rectangles with ratios “close” to the
golden ratio, subjects are unable to select the “best” rectangle.
We can see evidence of golden rectangles in many works of art. Whether the artist
had such rectangles in mind is open to speculation, but we can see golden rectangles in
the work of Albrecht Dürer, Leonardo da Vinci, George Bellows, Pieter Mondriaan, and
Georges Seurat (see Figure 7.59).
Understand the Problem. First, understand the problem. Since the Parthenon is
built to satisfy the golden ratio, the height h and the width w satisfy the following
proportion:
Devise a Plan. The width is 101 feet, so
We will solve this equation for h.
h
101 5
101
h 1 101
h
w 5
w
h 1 w
James M. House/Shutterstock.com
The Parthenon in Athens has been used as an example of a building with a height-to-
width ratio that is almost equal to the golden ratio.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

374
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
Many studies of the human body itself involve the golden ratio (remember 
).
Figure 7.60 shows a drawing of an idealized athlete.
t < 1.62
a
A
B
C
D
E
b
d
c
FIGURE 7.60 Proportions of the human body
David (1501–1504) by
Michelangelo illustrates many
golden ratios.
Nat Brandt/Photo Researchers
Let
 distance from the top of the head to the navel; 
 distance from the navel to the floor; and 
 height. 
Then 
Also, let 
shoulder width and 
arm length. Then 
0bc 0
0ab 0  t
0bc 0 
0ab 0 
0CB 0
0AC 0  tand0AB 0
0CB 0  t
0AB 0
0CB 0
0AC 0
Carry Out the Plan. There is only one unknown, which is written in variable form,
so we now solve the equation for h:
Look Back. The Parthenon is about 62 feet high.
 < 62.4
 5 2101 6 101!1 1 4
2
 h 5 2101 6 "1012 2 4112 1210122
2112
 h2 1 101h 2 1012 5 0
 h1h 1 1012 5 1012
Disregard the negative solution, since 
distances are nonnegative.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.6
Mathematics, Art, and Non-Euclidean Geometries
375
See if you can find other ratios on the human body that approximate 
Figure 7.61 shows
a study of the human face by da Vinci, in which the rectangles approximate golden 
rectangles.
t.
C
D
G
H
C
D
E
F
G
H
C
D
E
F
G
H
G
C
D
E
F
H
J
I
J
I
Begin with any
square and draw a
quarter circle as
shown.
Form a golden rectangle.
Draw a square within the
new rectangle CDEF; draw
a quarter circle as shown.
Repeat the process.  The
resulting curve is called a
logarithmic spiral.
FIGURE 7.62 A spiral is constructed using a golden rectangle
FlamingPumpkin/iStockphoto.com
Dynamic symmetry of a human face
(Leonardo da Vinci)
Proportions of the human
body by Albrecht Dürer
FIGURE 7.61 Golden rectangles used in art
Head of an Old Man in Profile, facsimile copy (pen and ink on paper),
Vinci, Leonardo da (1452–1519) (after) / Bibliotheque des Arts 
Decoratifs, Paris, France / Archives Charmet / The Bridgeman Art
Library International
The last application of the golden rectangle we will consider in this section is related
to the manner in which a chambered nautilus grows. The spiral of the chambered nautilus
can be seen in the photograph below, and can be constructed by following the steps in
Figure 7.62.
In The Chambered
Nautilus, Oliver
Wendell Holmes
wrote:
“Year after year 
beheld the silent
toll
That spread his lus-
trous coil; Still, as
the spiral grew, He
left the past
year's dwelling for
the new.”
Courtesy of the Clendening History of Medicine Library, University
of Kansas Medical Center.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Projective Geometry
As Europe passed out of the Middle Ages and into the Renaissance, artists were at the
forefront of the intellectual revolution. No longer satisfied with flat-looking scenes, they
wanted to portray people and objects as they looked in real life. The artists’ problem was
one of dimension, and dimension is related to mathematics, so many of the Renaissance
artists had to solve some original mathematics problems. How could a flat surface be
made to look three dimensional?
One of the first (but rather unsuccessful) attempts at portraying depth in a painting is
shown in Figure 7.63, Duccio’s Last Supper.
Notice that the figures are in a boxed-in room. This technique is characteristic of the
period, and was an attempt to make perspective easier to define.
Most errors in perspective were attributed to carelessness of the artists. In 1754, the
artist William Hogarth forced artists to confront their inadequacies with his engraving
Perspective Absurdities (Figure 7.64), in which he challenged the viewer to find all the
perspective mistakes.
376
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
FIGURE 7.63 Duccio’s Last Supper
illustrates perspective that is
incorrect.
© Scala/Art Resource, NY
FIGURE 7.64 Hogarth’s Perspective
Absurdities
The importance of knowing perspective, 18th century (engraving) 
(b/w photo), Hogarth, William (1697–1764) & Sullivan, Luke
(1705–71) / Private Collection / Giraudon / The Bridgeman Art
Library International
FIGURE 7.65 The cartoon (above) pokes fun at the idea of perspective, and the
photo shows three people of the same height
B.C. cartoon reprinted by permission of Johnny Hart and 
Creators Syndicate. 
Contemporary examples of false perspective are shown in Figure 7.65.
Courtesy of Matthew Evans
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.6
Mathematics, Art, and Non-Euclidean Geometries
377
The first great painter of the Italian Renaissance was Masaccio, whose painting
The Holy Trinity (Figure 7.66) shows mathematical perspective. The pane at the
right is another drawing by Masaccio (1401–1428) showing the structure of perspec-
tive.* The ideas of shapes, rectangles, triangles, and circles, and how these figures
relate to each other, were important not only to mathematicians, but also to artists
and architects.
FIGURE 7.66 Masaccio’s The Holy Trinity is a study in perspective
Artists finally solved the problem of perspective by considering the surface of the
picture to be a window through which the object was painted. This technique was pio-
neered by Paolo Uccello (1397–1475), Piero della Francesca (1416–1492), Leonardo
da Vinci (1452–1519), and Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528). As the lines of vision from
the object converge at the eye, the picture captures a cross section of them, as shown in
Figure 7.67.
The mathematical study of vanishing points and perspective is part of a branch
of mathematics called projective geometry, the study of those properties of geomet-
ric configurations that do not change (are invariant) under projections.
FIGURE 7.67 Albrecht Dürer’s Draughtsman Drawing a Recumbent Woman shows
how the problem of perspective can be overcome. The point in front of the artist’s
eye fixes the point of viewing the painting. The grid on the window corresponds to
the grid on the artist’s canvas.
Foto Marburg/Art Resource, NY 
*Perspective in Masaccio's Trinity was first analyzed in The Invention of Infinity, J. V. Field, Oxford University Press, 1997.
A summary of the argument about how to find the ideal viewing position is found in this book.
© Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY
Mighty is geometry;
joined with art,
resistless.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As you may know from high school geometry, the summit angles C and D are also
right angles. However, this result uses Euclid’s fifth postulate. Now it is also true that if
the summit angles are right angles, then Euclid’s fifth postulate holds. The problem, then,
was to establish the fact that angles C and D are right angles. Here is the plan:
1. Assume that the angles are obtuse and deduce a contradiction. 
2. Assume that the angles are acute and deduce a contradiction. 
3. Therefore, by the first two steps, the angles must be right angles. 
4. From step 3, Euclid’s fifth postulate can be deduced. 
It turned out not to be as easy as Saccheri thought, because he was not able to establish a
contradiction. He gave up the search because, he said, it “led to results that were repug-
nant to the nature of a straight line.”
Saccheri never realized the significance of what he had started, and his work was
forgotten until 1889. However, in the meantime, Johann Lambert (1728–1777) and
Adrien-Marie Legendre (1752–1833) similarly investigated the possibility of eliminating
Euclid’s fifth postulate by proving it from the other postulates.
By the early years of the 19th century, three accomplished mathematicians began to
suspect that the parallel postulate was independent and could not be eliminated by deducing
it from the others. The great mathematician Karl Gauss, whom we’ve mentioned before,
was the first to reach this conclusion, but since he didn’t publish this finding of his, the
credit goes to two others. In 1811, an 18-year-old Russian named Nikolai Lobachevsky
pondered the possibility of a “non-Euclidean” geometry—that is, a geometry that did
not assume Euclid’s fifth postulate. In 1840, he published his ideas in an article entitled
“Geometrical Researches on the Theory of Parallels.” The postulate he used was subse-
quently named after him.
Non-Euclidean Geometry
Euclid’s so-called fifth postulate (see Section 7.1) caused problems from the time it was
stated. Several different formulations of this postulate are given in the Historical Note
shown in the margin.
It somehow doesn’t seem like the other postulates but rather like a theorem that
should be proved. In fact, this postulate even bothered Euclid himself, since he didn’t use
it until he had proved his 29th theorem. Many mathematicians tried to find a proof for this
postulate.
One of the first serious attempts to prove Euclid’s fifth postulate was made by
Girolamo Saccheri (1667–1733), an Italian Jesuit. Saccheri’s plan was simple. He
constructed a quadrilateral, later known as a Saccheri quadrilateral, with base angles
A and B right angles, and with sides 
and 
the same length, as shown in 
Figure 7.68.
BD
AC
378
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
An interesting interac-
tive site exploring 
some of the ideas of
non-Euclidean geome-
try is found in the links
for this section at
www.mathnature.com.
Historical
There are many ways of stating
Euclid’s fifth postulate, and several
historical ones are repeated here.
1. Poseidonius (ca. 135–51 B.C.):
Two parallel lines are equidistant.
2. Proclus (A.D. 410–485): If a line
intersects one of two parallel
lines, then it also intersects the
other.
3. Legendre (1752–1833): A line
through a point in the interior
of an angle other than a
straight angle intersects at least
one of the arms of the angle.
4. Bolyai (1802–1860): There is a
circle through every set of
three noncollinear points.
5. Playfair (1748–1819): Given a
straight line and any point not
on this line, there is one and
only one line through that point
that is parallel to the given line.
Playfair’s statement is the one
most often used in high school
geometry textbooks. All of these
statements are equivalent, and if
you accept any one of them, you
must accept them all.
NOTE
B
A
D
C
FIGURE 7.68 A Saccheri quadrilateral
The summit angles of a Saccheri quadrilateral are acute.
The Lobachevskian Postulate
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.6
Mathematics, Art, and Non-Euclidean Geometries
379
This axiom, in place of Euclid’s fifth postulate, leads to a geometry that we call
hyperbolic geometry. If we use the plane as a model for Euclidean geometry, what
model could serve for hyperbolic geometry? A rough model for this geometry can be seen
by placing two trumpet bells together as shown in Figure 7.69a. It is called a pseudos-
phere and is generated by a curve called a tractrix (as shown in Figure 7.69b). The trac-
trix is rotated about the line 
. The pseudosphere has the property that, through a point
not on a line, there are many lines parallel to a given line.
AB
g
A
B
A
B
b.   A tractrix rotated about the line AB
a.   A tractrix
FIGURE 7.69 A tractrix can be used to generate a pseudosphere.
Donald M. Welch/Karl Smith Library
Two trumpets placed end to end
model of a pseudosphere 
Georg Riemann (1826–1866), who also worked in this area, pointed out that, al-
though a straight line may be extended indefinitely, it need not have infinite length. It
could instead be similar to the arc of a circle, which eventually begins to retrace itself.
Such a line is called reentrant. An example of a re-entrant line is found by considering
a great circle on a sphere. A great circle is a circle on a sphere with a diameter equal to
the diameter of the sphere. With this model, a Saccheri quadrilateral is constructed on a
sphere with the summit angles obtuse. The resulting geometry is called elliptic geome-
try. The shortest path between any two points on a sphere is an arc of the great circle
through those points; these arcs correspond to line segments in Euclidean geometry. In
1854, Riemann showed that, with some other slight adjustments in the remaining pos-
tulates, another consistent non-Euclidean geometry can be developed. Notice that the
fifth, or parallel, postulate fails to hold because any two great circles on a sphere must
intersect at two points (see Figure 7.70).
FIGURE 7.70 A sphere showing
the intersection of two great 
circles
We have not, by any means, discussed all possible geometries. We have merely
shown that the Euclidean geometry that is taught in high school is not the only possi-
ble model. A comparison of some of the properties of these geometries is shown in
Table 7.2.
Historical
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Georg Bernhard Riemann 
(1826–1866)
Riemann was director of the Güt-
tingen Observatory, serving from
1859 to 1866, when he died
of tuberculosis at the age of 40.
During his short career, he made
significant contributions to mathe-
matics. Another mathematician,
Janos Bolyai (1802–1860), was
working on an alternative geome-
try about the same time as
Lobachevsky and Riemann.
Clearly, the world was nearly ready
to accept the idea that a geometry
need not be based on our physical
experience dictated by Euclid’s
fifth postulate. Because of Bolyai’s
work, hyperbolic geometry is
sometimes referred to as 
Bolyai-Lobachevsky geometry.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

380
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
TABLE 7.2
Comparison of Major Two-Dimensional Geometries
Euclidean Geometry
Hyperbolic Geometry
Elliptic Geometry
Euclid (about 300 B.C.)
Gauss, Bolyai, Lobachevsky (ca. 1830)
Riemann (ca. 1850)
Given a point not on a line, there is
one and only one line through the
point parallel to the given line.
Given a point not on a line, there are 
an inifinite number of lines through the
point that do not intersect the given
line.
There are no parallels.
A representative line in each geometry is shown in color for each model, and the shaded portion showing a Saccheri
quadrilateral is shown directly below the representative models.
Geometry is on a plane:
Lines are infinitely long.
The sum of the angles of a triangle 
is 180.
B
A
C
D
m /D 5 90°
Geometry is on a pseudosphere:
Lines are infinitely long.
The sum of the angles of a triangle is
less than 180.
B
A
C
D
m /D < 90°
Geometry is on a sphere:
Lines are finite length.
The sum of the angles of a triangle is
more than 180.
B
A
C
D
m /D < 90°
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a non-Euclidean geometry? 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Compare the major two-dimensional
geometries. 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Why do you think Euclidean geome-
try remains so prevalent today even though we know there are
other valid geometries? 
4. What is a golden ratio?
5. What is the divine proportion?
6. What is a golden rectangle?
7. What is ?
8. a. Pick any two nonzero numbers. Construct a set of numbers,
in order, by adding these two numbers to find the next num-
ber. Continue by adding the previous two numbers to form
your list of terms.
b. Form the ratios of successive terms, and show that after a
while they oscillate around the golden ratio. 
9. Repeat Problem 8 for two other nonzero numbers.
t
Problem Set 7.6
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.6
Mathematics, Art, and Non-Euclidean Geometries
381
Which of the figures in Problems 25–28 are Saccheri quadrilaterals?
25.
26.
27.
28.
Level  2
29. a. What are the length and width of a standard index 
card?
b. Write the ratio of length to width as a decimal and compare
it with .
30. a. What are the length and width of a standard 
brick?
b. Write the ratio of length to width as a decimal and compare
it with .
31. a. What are the length and width of this textbook?
b. Write the ratio of length to width as a decimal and compare
it with .
Use Figure 7.60 to find the requested measurements in Problems
32–34 using your own body as the model.
32. a.
b.
33. a.
b.
34. a.
b.
35. A plant grows for two months and then adds a new branch.
Each new branch grows for two months, and then adds another
branch. After the second month, each branch adds a new
branch every month. Assume that the growth begins 
in January. 
a. How many branches will there be in March?
b. How many branches will there be in June?
c. How many branches will there be after 12 months?
d. Form a sequence of ratios of successive terms by consider-
ing the number of branches for the first 12 months. How do
these numbers compare with ? 
t
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
0 dc 0  0 bd0
0 AD 0  0 AE 0
0 ac 0  0 bc 0
0 AB 0  0 CB 0
0 bc 0  0 ab0
0 CB 0  0 AC 0
t
t
t
10. Start with 1 and 3, and add these numbers to get the next
number. Continue by adding two successive numbers to get the
next number until you have ten terms, in order, on your list.
Next, find the ratios of the successive terms. How do these
compare with ?
11. HISTORICAL QUEST
If the Parthenon in Greece is 60 ft
tall (at the apex) and 97 ft wide, find the ratio of width to
height and compare it with .
12. HISTORICAL QUEST
The Great Pyramid of Giza has
dimensions as follows: height, h  481 ft; base, b  756 ft;
and slant height, s  612 ft. Is the ratio of any of these dimen-
sions related to ?
13. HISTORICAL QUEST
The American Pyramid of the Sun at
Teotihuacán, Mexico, has a height of 216 ft, a base of 700 ft,
and a slant height of 411 ft. Does the ratio of any of these meas-
urements approximate ?
14. How closely does the ratio of the dimensions of a polo field
(160 yd by 300 yd) approximate ?
15. How closely does the ratio of the dimensions of a basketball
court (36 ft by 78 ft) approximate ?
16. Associate each of the given names with one of the following
geometries: Euclidean, hyperbolic, elliptic. 
a. Karl Gauss
b. Georg Riemann
c. Euclid
d. Janos Bolyai
e. Nikolai Lobachevsky
Name the geometry (Euclidean, elliptic, or hyperbolic) in which
each of the statements in Problems 17–24 is possible. 
17. The sum of the measures of the angles of a triangle is 180°.
18. The sum of the measures of the angles of a triangle is greater
than 180°.
19. The summit angles of a Saccheri quadrilateral are right angles.
20. No line can be drawn through a given point parallel to a given
line.
21. Lines have finite length.
22. Used to measure distances in the construction of the pyramids
in ancient Egypt.
23. The summit angles of a Saccheri quadrilateral are 
acute.
24. The measures of the summit base angles of a Saccheri
quadrilateral are greater than 90°.
t
t
t
b
s
h
1
2 b
t
t
t
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

382
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
46. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Euclid’s treatment of the fifth
axiom . . .
A. . . . shows that he was really smart. 
B. . . . is now known to be wrong. 
C. . . . shows that it is important to question the nature of the
assumptions that are made. 
47. On a globe, locate San Francisco, Miami, and Detroit. Connect
these cities with the shortest paths to form a triangle. Next, use
a protractor to measure the angles. What is their sum?
48. On a globe, locate Tokyo, Seattle, and Honolulu. Connect
these cities with the shortest paths to form a triangle. 
Next, use a protractor to measure the angles. What is 
their sum?
Level  3
49. Consider the spheres shown in Figure 7.71. 
FIGURE 7.71 A “line” on a sphere is a great circle
a. Explain what is meant by a great circle on a sphere. 
b. Do one or both of the lettered curves in the figure at the
right seem to be lines?
c. In Euclidean geometry, we say that a line has no endpoints.
Does this property apply to lines on a sphere?
50. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
In Figure 7.71, the sphere at the left
shows two lines. In Euclidean geometry we know that two lines
are either parallel or cross at exactly one point. Discuss this prop-
erty in relation to what you observe in Figure 7.71.
51. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
In Figure 7.70, the lines on the
sphere at the right appear to be parallel. In Table 7.2, we said
that there are no parallels on a sphere. What’s wrong with our
reasoning? 
52. Walking north or south on the earth is defined as walking
along the meridians, and walking east or west is defined as
walking along parallels. There are points on the surface of the
earth from which it is possible to walk 300 ft south, then a mile
east, then 300 ft north, and be right back where you started.
Find one such point.
53. In Lobachevskian geometry, the sum of the measures of the
angles of a triangle is less than 180°. Discuss the following
statement: In Lobachevskian geometry, the sum of the meas-
ures of the angles of a quadrilateral is less than 360°.
54. In Euclidean geometry, if two triangles are similar, then they
may or may not also be congruent. In Lobachevskian geome-
try, if two triangles are similar, do you think that they must
also be congruent?
P
A
m
,
,
Leo Moser studied the effect that two face-to-face panes of glass
have on light reflected through the panes. If a ray is unreflected, it
has just one path through the glass. If it has one reflection, it can
be reflected two ways. For two reflections, it can be reflected three
ways. Use this information in Problems 36–37.
36. a. Show the possible paths for three reflections.
b. Show the possible paths for four reflections.
c. Make a conjecture about the number of paths for n
reflections.
37. Form a sequence of ratios of the number of successive paths.
How do these numbers compare with ?
38. If a rectangle is to have sides with lengths in the golden ratio, what
is the width if the height (the shorter side) is two units?
39. If a window is to be 5 feet wide, how high should it be, to the
nearest tenth of a foot, to be a golden rectangle?
40. If a canvas for a painting is 18 inches wide, how high should it
be, to the nearest inch, to be in the divine proportion?
41. A photograph is to be printed on a rectangle in the divine pro-
portion. If it is 9 cm high, how wide is it, to the nearest
centimeter?
42. If the Parthenon is 60 ft high, what is its width, to the nearest foot,
if we assume the building conforms to the golden ratio?
In Problems 43–46, choose one of the following statements to com-
plete the sentence, and discuss the reasoning for your selection.
43. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Artists of the Renaissance discovered
how to draw a three-dimensional-looking world on a flat can-
vas by . . .
A. . . . reading about projective geometry from a classic book
on the subject by Leonardo da Vinci. 
B. . . . discovering the use of a vanishing point for parallel
lines. 
C. . . . using non-Euclidean geometry to accurately represent
spherical (or three-dimensional) points on a flat surface
(the canvas). 
44. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Non-Euclidean geometry . . .
A. . . . has no practical applications. 
B. . . . has helped us understand the difference between
provable facts and assumptions. 
C. . . . was a false step in helping us understand the nature of
the world in which we live. 
45. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
The knowledge that the sum of the
measures of the angles of a triangle is 180° is . . .
A. . . . known because of Figure 7.32, p. 351. 
B. . . . certain, so the foundations of geometry would be
destroyed if it were proved false. 
C. . . . sometimes used to decide whether the geometry is on a
plane, a pseudosphere, or a sphere. 
t
0 reflections, 
1 path
1 reflection, 
2 paths
2 reflections, 
3 paths
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.6
Mathematics, Art, and Non-Euclidean Geometries
383
60. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Escher’s work Circle Limit IV is a
tessellation (see Section 8.3) based on Lobachevskian geometry. 
Consider the following model. Draw a circle. 
Now draw a “perpendicular circle,” which is a circle whose
tangents to the original circle at the points of intersection are
perpendicular. The two circles are called orthogonal circles. 
Next, set up another model of Lobachevskian geometry. Points
of the plane are points inside the circle. Lines are both diame-
ters of the circle and arcs of orthogonal circles as well as being
inside the original circle. On the circle you have drawn, draw
several lines for this model. 
Show how these orthogonal circles are used in Escher’s work,
Circle Limit IV.
Problem Solving  3
55. “When is an open book a closed book?”* If the length-
to-width ratio of a book remains unchanged when that book is
opened, then that book is said to be in the librarian’s ratio. 
(Note that the length, L, of the closed book becomes the width
of the opened book, and twice the width of the closed book
becomes the length of the opened book.) Find an approximate
and an exact representation for the constant LW.
56. Does this book satisfy the librarian’s ratio (see 
Problem 55)?
57. a. Show that the solutions to the equation 
x2  x  1  0
are 
and 
.
b. Is there a relationship between the decimal representations of
these numbers? If so, explain.
58. If you form a list of numbers where the first two numbers are
ones, and then find successive terms (in order) by adding these
two numbers to obtain the next, you will find 
1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, . . .
Now, we see that the first number on the list is 1, and the
seventh number is 13. It is known that the nth number on this
list is 
for defined in Problem 57. Use this formula to find the
requested terms. 
a. n  5
b. n  10
c. n  20
59. Find two additional points satisfying the conditions stated in
Problem 52.
t
tn  (t)n
25
t  1  25
2
t  1  25
2
Closed book
L
(Length)
Open book
L
(Width)
2W
(Length)
W
(Width)
*My thanks to Monte J. Zerger of Friends University in Wichita, Kansas, for
this problem. I found it on pp. 17–27 in Vol. 18 (1985–1986) of The Journal of
Recreational Mathematics.
Circle Limit IV
M.C. Escher’s “Circle Limit IV” © 2006 The M.C. Escher
Company-Holland. All rights reserved; www.mcescher.com
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.7
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Euclidean postulates [7.1]
Terminology associated with polygons, angles, and parallel/perpendicular 
lines [7.2]
Sum of the measures of angles in a triangle [7.3]
Exterior angles of a triangle [7.3]
Isosceles triangle property [7.3]
Similar triangle theorem [7.4]
Pythagorean theorem [7.5]
Golden rectangle and golden ratio [7.6]
Lobachevskian postulate [7.6]
Comparison of major two-dimensional geometries [7.6]
Today’s society expects
schools to ensure that
all students have an
opportunity to become
mathematically literate . . .
NCTM STANDARDS
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review these
important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online, you will
find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of problems that
were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by working the
problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test help in studying
for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
1. If a 4-cm cube is painted green and then cut into 64 1-cm
cubes, how many of those cubes will be painted on
a. 4 sides?
b. 3 sides?
c. 2 sides?
d. 1 side?
e. 0 sides?
2. What do you see in the following illustration?
Chapter
7
Review Questions
From The Playful Eye, edited by Julian Rothenstein and Mel Gooding,
Chronicle Books, 2000, courtesy Hordern/Dalgety collection
3. Which of the following ideas (if any) does the illustration for
Problem 2 show: inversion, reflection, contraction, dilation,
or rotation.
4. Which of the following pictures illustrates a reflection?
Saul Steinberg, Untitled, 1977 Pencil and colored
pencil on paper, 18 x 24 inches © The Saul 
Steinberg Foundation/Artists Rights Society 
(ARS) New York
Photo by Olga Leontieva/Courtesy of
Games Magazine, April 2005, p. 80,
www.gamesmagazine-online.com
384
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.7
Chapter Summary
385
a. What is a golden rectangle?
b. Does it look to you like the front of this building forms a
golden rectangle?
8. If the width of Burbon’s Palace building is 280 ft, what is 
the height, assuming that the front forms a golden rectangle?
9. One method for estimating the capacity of a boat is to divide
the product of the length and width of the boat by 15. Write a
formula to represent this idea.
10. Suppose 
and 
are parallel lines. Classify the angle or
pairs of angles shown Figure 7.73.
,2
,1
5. Which of the pictures in Problem 4 is upside down?
6. Which of the following illustrate at least one line of symme-
try? If a figure illustrates symmetry, show a line of symmetry.
If it does not, tell why.
a.
b.
c.
d.
7. Bourbon Palace (Figure 7.72) is home to the Assemblée
Nationale, the French parliament’s lower house.
,
,
,
1
1
2
3
2
4
3
5
6
8
7
FIGURE 7.73 Two parallel lines cut
by a transversal
a.
b.
and 
c.
and 
d.
e.
f.
and 
g. Can you classify any of the lines 
or 
as
perpendicular, horizontal, or vertical?
,3
,1, ,2,
/3
/1
/7
/2
/4
/2
/6
/5
/1
© Steven Le Vourc’h, www.
stevenlevourch.com
FIGURE 7.72 Bourbon Palace
FIGURE 7.74 Distance from ship to shore
B
11. If an angle is 
then ...
a. . . . what is its complement?
b. . . . what is its supplement?
c. . . . if it is an angle in a right triangle, what is the size of
the other acute angle?
12. If 
and 
are angles of a triangle,
then what is x?
13. If a box is 10 in. wide, what is its height (to the nearest inch)
if we assume the dimensions are in a golden ratio?
14. In a right triangle with one leg of length 12 in. and a
hypotenuse of 13 in., what is the length of the other leg?
15. In an isosceles right triangle, if the hypotenuse is 10 in., how
long are the other legs?
16. Find the value of the given trigonometric ratios. Round your
answers to four decimal places.
a. sin 59°
b. tan 0°
c. cos 18°
d. tan 82°
17. The world’s most powerful lighthouse is on the coast of
Brittany, France, and is about 160 ft tall. Suppose you are in
a boat just off the coast, as shown in Figure 7.74. Determine
your distance (to the nearest foot) from the base of the light-
house if /B 5 12°.
x 2 16°
3x 1 20°, 2x 2 40°,
49°,
18. For the die shown in Figure 7.75, fill in the blanks in each of
the given dice.
FIGURE 7.75 A die problem
B
B
U
E
C
T
U
C
B
a.
b.
c.
d.
C
U
B
E
19. What is a Saccheri quadrilateral?
20. Discuss why this quadrilateral leads to different kinds of
geometries.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

386
CHAPTER 7
The Nature of Geometry
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G26. In Figure 7.76 there are eight square rooms making up a maze. Each square room 
has two walls that are mirrors and two walls that are open spaces. Identify the mirrored
walls, and then solve the maze by showing how you can pass through all eight rooms con-
secutively without going through the same room twice. If that is not possible, tell why.
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
G27. At the beginning of this chapter, we
included a picture of a fly on or in a
cube, and we saw that figures can
sometimes be ambiguous. Figure 7.77a
shows a cube with a dot in the middle
of each face. Draw a cube around the
dots in Figure 7.77b so that each dot is
in the middle of a face.
FIGURE 7.76 Mirror Maze
a.
b.
FIGURE 7.77 Dots on a cube puzzle
Adapted from “The Amazing Mirror Maze” by Walter Wick in
Games Magazine, September/October 1981, p. 25.
G28. Place a dollar bill across the top of two glasses that are at least 3.5 in. apart. Now,
describe how you can place a quarter dollar in the middle of the dollar bill without
having it fall.
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on one of these books:
Sphereland, a Fantasy About Curved Spaces and an
Expanding Universe, Dionys Burger (New York: Thomas
Crowell Company, 1965).
Mathematical Recreations and Essays, W. W. R. Ball and
H. S. M. Coxeter (New York: Macmillan, 1962).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.7
Chapter Summary
387
Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas in this chapter. You can find references
to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 7.1 Write a report on optical illusions.
PROJECT 7.2 Create an aestheometry design beginning with an angle.
PROJECT 7.3 Create an aestheometry design beginning with a circle.
PROJECT 7.4 Write a paper discussing the nature of an unsolved problem as compared
with an impossible problem. As part of your paper discuss the problems of trisecting
an angle and squaring a circle.
PROJECT 7.5 Historical Quest
The historical note on page 369 asks, “Why did the
Egyptians build the pyramids using a slant height angle of about 
or 
?” Write
a paper answering this question.
PROJECT 7.6 Do some research on the length-to-width ratios of the packaging of
common household items. Form some conclusions. Find some examples of the
golden ratio in art. Do some research on dynamic symmetry.
PROJECT 7.7 In Example 2 of Section 7.6, we assumed the width of the Parthenon to be
101 ft and found the height to be 62.4 ft (assuming the golden ratio). If you worked
Problem 11 of Section 7.6, you assumed the height to be 60 ft and the width to be 
97 ft. Are the numbers from Example 2 and from Problem 11 consistent? Can you
draw any conclusions?
PROJECT 7.8 Write a paper on perspective. How are three-dimensional objects
represented in two dimensions?
PROJECT 7.9 The discovery and acceptance of non-Euclidean geometries had an impact
on all of our thinking about the nature of scientific truth. Can we ever know truth in
general? Write a paper on the nature of scientific laws, the nature of an axiomatic
system, and the implications of non-Euclidean geometries.
PROJECT 7.10 Find the one composite number in the following set:
31
331
3331
33331
333331
3333331
33333331
333333331
52°
44°
www.mathnature.com 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
8.2 Trees and Minimum 
Spanning Trees
402
Trees, minimum spanning trees
8.3 Topology and Fractals
413
Topology, four-color problem, fractal
geometry, tessellations
THE NATURE OF NETWORKS
AND GRAPH THEORY
8
What in the World?
“Where do you live, Fritz?” asked Lisel.
“I live at 45 Heimelstraße. I’m looking forward 
to seeing you on Sunday!” proclaimed Fritz. “I will
introduce you to my family and some of my friends
on the island. We can take a stroll and I’ll buy you 
a sundae at my favorite shop.”
“Take a stroll?!!” screamed Lisel. “You KNOW 
I don’t get it! Everybody thinks they can cross those
bridges without doubling back, but I’ve never been
able to do it.”
“That’s my secret! I can show you if you come 
on Sunday,” said Fritz with a grin.
Overview
When we use the word “network” today, we probably think
of a computer network, but we use networks every time we
make a phone call, send an e-mail or “snail mail,” drive on
an interstate, or fly in an airplane.
In this chapter we look at mathematical ideas called cir-
cuits, cycles, and trees, which are part of geometry known
as graph theory. When used in the context of graph theory,
the word graph means something different from the way we
use the term in referring to the coordinate plane or the way
we use it to represent statistical data.
Even though these topics sound abstract, they have many
interesting and useful applications such as finding the mini-
mum cost of traveling to a number of locations (known as the
traveling salesperson problem), installing an irrigation system,
using a search engine on the Internet, or even coloring maps
or making realistic-looking original landscapes in movies.
Many of the applications of this chapter are part of a
new branch of mathematics (new in the sense that it began
in the late 1930s) and grew out of mathematical problems
associated with World War II. This branch of mathematics,
called operations research (or operational research), deals
with the application of scientific methods to management
decision making, especially for the allocation of resources.
Some examples include forecasting water pollution or 
predicting the scope of the AIDS epidemic.
Outline
8.1 Euler Circuits and Hamiltonian
Cycles
389
Euler Circuits, applications of Euler
circuits, Hamiltonian cycles
8.4 Chapter Summary
421
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
Public Domain
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.1
Euler Circuits and Hamiltonian Cycles
389
8.1  Euler Circuits and Hamiltonian Cycles
There is nothing in the world except empty space. Geometry bent
one way here describes gravitation. Rippled another way
somewhere else it manifests all the qualities of an electromagnetic
wave. Excited at still another plane, the magic material that is
space shows itself as a particle. There is nothing that is foreign or
“physical” immersed in space. Everything that is, is constructed
out of geometry.
JOHN A. WHEELER
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
We now turn to one of the newer branches of geometry known as graph theory, which
includes circuits, cycles, and trees.
Euler Circuits
In the 18th century, in the German town of Königsberg (now the Russian city of Kalin-
ingrad), a popular pastime was to walk along the bank of the Pregel River and cross over
some of the seven bridges that connected two islands, as shown in Figure 8.1.
1
2
3
4
7
5
6
FIGURE 8.1 Königsberg bridges
One day a native asked a neighbor this question, “How can you take a walk so that you
cross each of our seven bridges once and only once and end up where you started?” The prob-
lem intrigued the neighbor and soon caught the interest of many other people of K¨onigsberg
as well. Whenever people tried it, they ended up either not crossing a bridge at all or else
crossing one bridge twice. This problem was brought to the attention of the Swiss mathemati-
cian Leonhard Euler, who was serving at the court of the Russian empress Catherine the
Great in St. Petersburg. The method of solution we discuss here was first developed by Euler,
and it led to the development of two major topics in geometry. The first is networks, which
we discuss in this section, and the second is topology, which we discuss in Section 8.3.
We will use Pólya’s problem-solving method for the Königsberg bridge problem.
5
6
4
2
3
2
?
1
p
p
h
g
q
q
q
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Understand the Problem. To understand the problem, Euler began by drawing a diagram
for the problem, as shown in Figure 8.2a.
390
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
a. Crossing the bridges
D
C
B
A
b. Labeling network
D
C
B
A
6
1
2
3
4
5
7
FIGURE 8.2 Königsberg bridge problem
Next, Euler used one of the great problem-solving procedures—namely, to change
the conceptual mode. That is, he let the land area be represented as points (sometimes
called vertices or nodes), and let the bridges be represented by arcs or line segments
(sometimes called edges) connecting the given points. As part of understanding the
problem, we can do what Euler did—we can begin by tracing a diagram like the one
shown in Figure 8.2b.
Devise a Plan. To solve the bridge problem, we need to draw the figure without lifting
the pencil from the paper. Figures similar to the one in Figure 8.2b are called networks
or graphs. In a network, the points where the line segments meet (or cross) are called
vertices, and the lines representing bridges are called edges or arcs. Each separated part
of the plane formed by a network is called a region. We say that a graph is connected if
there is at least one path between each pair of vertices.
Historical
Czarina Catherine 
(1729–1796) 
(Catherine the Great)
In 1783, Catherine II of Russia,
originally named Sophie van
Anhalt-Zerbst, appointed Princess
Daschkoff to the directorship of
the Imperial Academy of Sciences
in St. Petersburg. Since women
were seldom so highly honored
in those days, the appointment
received wide publicity. The
Princess decided to begin her
directorship with a short address
to the assembled members of the
Academy. She invited Leonhard
Euler, who at the time was elderly
and blind. Since Euler was then
the most respected scientist in
Russia, he was to have the special
seat of honor. However, as the
Princess sat down, a local profes-
sor named Schtelinn maneuvered
into Euler’s seat. When Princess
Daschkoff saw Schtelinn seating
himself next to her, she turned to
Euler and said, “Please be seated
anywhere, and the chair you
choose will naturally be the seat
of honor.” This act charmed Euler
and all present—except the
arrogant Professor Schtelinn.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Example
1
Count edges, vertices, and regions of a network
Complete the table for each of the given networks.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
Solution
Graph
Edges (E)
Vertices (V)
Regions (R)
V  R  2
a.
3
3
2
3 
b.
4
3
3
4 
c.
5
3
4
5 
d.
4
4
2
4 
e.
5
4
3
5 
f.
6
4
4
6 
Note that V  R  2  E. Do you think this will always be true?
A network is said to be traversable if it can be traced in one sweep without lifting
the pencil from the paper and without tracing the same edge more than once. Vertices
may be passed through more than once. The degree of a vertex is the number of edges
that meet at that vertex.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.1
Euler Circuits and Hamiltonian Cycles
391
Example
2
Test traversablity
List the number of edges and the degree of each vertex shown in Example 1. Find the
sum of the degrees of the vertices, and tell whether each network is traversable.
Solution
Graph
Number of Edges
Degree of Each Vertex
Sum
Traversable
a.
3
2; 2; 2
6
yes 
b.
4
3; 2; 3
8
yes 
c.
5
4; 3; 3
10
yes 
d.
4
2; 2; 2; 2
8
yes 
e.
5
2; 3; 2; 3
10
yes 
f.
6
3; 3; 3; 3
12
no 
First, note that the sum of the degrees of the vertices in Example 2 equals twice the
number of edges. Do you see why this must always be true? Consider any graph. Each
edge must be connected at both ends, so the sum of all of those ends must be twice the
number of vertices.
Now, consider a second observation regarding traversability. It is assumed that you
worked Example 2 by actually tracing out the networks. However, a more complicated
network, such as the K¨onigsberg bridge problem, will require some analysis. The goal is
to begin at some vertex, travel on each edge exactly once, and then return to the starting
vertex. Such a path is called an Euler circuit. We can now rephrase the K¨onigsberg
bridge problem: “Does the network in Figure 8.2 have an Euler circuit?”
To answer this question, we will follow Euler’s lead and classify vertices. Vertex A in
Figure 8.2 is degree 3, so the vertex A is called an odd vertex. In the same way, D is an
odd vertex, because it is degree 5. A vertex with even degree is called an even vertex.
Euler discovered that only a certain number of odd vertices can exist in any network if
you are to travel it in one journey without retracing any edge. You may start at any vertex
and end at any other vertex, as long as you travel the entire network. Also the network
must connect each point (this is called a connected network).
Let’s examine networks more carefully and look for a pattern, as shown in Table 8.1.
Historical
William Rowan Hamilton
(1805–1865)
William Rowan Hamilton has been
called the most renowned Irish
mathematician. He was a child
prodigy who read Greek, Hebrew,
and Latin by the time he was five,
and by the age of ten he knew
over a dozen languages. He was
appointed Professor of Astronomy
and Royal Astronomer of Ireland
at the age of 22. The problem dis-
cussed in this section that bears
his name was discussed by
Leonhard Euler and C. A. Vander-
monde in 1771. The problem is
named after him because of his
invention of a puzzle called
“Traveler’s Dodecahedron,” or 
“A Voyage ’Round the World.” We
discuss this problem in the
problem set.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
TABLE 8.1
Arrivals and Departures for a Vertex in a Network
Number 
of Arcs
Description
Possibilities  
1
1 departure (starting point)
1 arrival (ending point)
2
1 arrival (arrive then depart) and 
1 departure (depart then arrive)
3
1 arrival, 2 departures
2 arrivals, 1 departure
4
2 arrivals, 2 departures
5
2 arrivals, 3 departures (starting point)
3 arrivals, 2 departures (ending point)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We see that, if the vertex is odd, then it must be a starting point or an ending point.
What is the largest number of starting and ending points in any network? [Answer: Two—
one starting point and one ending point.] This discussion allows us to now formulate the
step we have called devise a plan, which we now state without proof.
392
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
Count the number of odd vertices: 
If there are no odd vertices, the network is traversable and any point may be a
starting point. The point selected will also be the ending point. 
If there is one odd vertex, the network is not traversable. A network cannot
have only one starting or ending point without the other. 
If there are two odd vertices, the network is traversable; one odd vertex must be
a starting point and the other odd vertex must be the ending point. 
If there are more than two odd vertices, the network is not traversable. A network
cannot have more than one starting point and one ending point.
Carry Out the Plan. Classify the vertices; there are four odd vertices, so the network is
not traversable.
Look Back. We have solved the K¨onigsberg bridge problem, but you should note that say-
ing it cannot be done is not the same thing as saying “I can’t do the problem.” We can do
the problem, and the solution is certain.
We summarize this investigation.
Every vertex on a graph with an Euler circuit has an even degree, and, conversely, 
if in a connected graph every vertex has an even degree, then the graph has an 
Euler circuit.
Euler’s Circuit Theorem
This is the key idea of this
section.
Example
3
Find an Euler circuit
Which of the following networks have an Euler circuit? Do not answer by trial and 
error, but by analyzing the number of odd vertices.
a.
b.
Solution
a. I first saw this network as a child’s puzzle in elementary school. It has four even
vertices (B, C, D, and E) and two odd vertices (A and F), and it is therefore tra-
versable. To traverse it, you must start at A or F (that is, at an odd vertex). The path
is shown.
3
3
4
3
3
E
A
B
D
C
3
3
4
4
4
2
C
E
A
B
F
D
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note that we do not end at the beginning point, so this network does not have an
Euler circuit (even though it is traversable).
b. This network has one even vertex and four odd vertices, so it is not traversable and
does not have an Euler circuit.
Applications of Euler Circuits
Euler circuits have a wide variety of applications. We will mention a few.
■
Supermarket problem
Set up the shelves in a market or convenience store so that it
is possible to enter the store at the door and travel in each aisle exactly once (once and
only once) and leave by the same door.
■
Police patrol problem
Suppose a police car needs to patrol a gated subdivision and
would like to enter the gate, cruise all the streets exactly once, and then leave by the
same gate.
■
Floor-plan problem
Suppose you have a floor plan of a building with a security
guard who needs to go through the building and lock each door at the end of the day.
■
Water-pipe problem
Suppose you have a network of water pipes, and you wish to
inspect the pipeline. Can you pass your hand over each pipe exactly once without lift-
ing your hand from a pipe, and without going over some pipe a second time?
We will examine one of these applications and leave the others for the problem set.
Let’s look at the floor-plan problem. This problem, which is related to the K¨onigsberg
bridge problem, involves taking a trip through all the rooms and passing through each door
only once. There is, however, one important difference between these two problems. The
K¨onigsberg bridge problem requires an Euler circuit, but the floor-plan problem does not.
In other words, with the bridges we must end up where we started, but the floor plan prob-
lem seeks only traversability. Let’s draw a floor-plan problem as shown in Figure 8.3a.
Section 8.1
Euler Circuits and Hamiltonian Cycles
393
1
6
8
5
4
Start
Finish
3
7
2
B
C
A
D
E
F
B
A
C
D
E
F
a. Six rooms, 7 doors
b. Six rooms, 16 doors
FIGURE 8.3 Floor-plan problem
Label the rooms as A, B, C, D, E, and F. In Figure 8.3a, rooms A, C, E, and F have
two doors, and rooms B and D have three doors; in Figure 8.3b, it looks as if there are five
rooms, but since there are doors that lead to the “outside,” we must count the outside as a
room. So this figure also has six rooms labeled A, B, C, D, E, and F. Rooms A, B, and C
each have 5 doors, rooms D and E each have 4 doors, and room F has 9 doors.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Make a conjecture about the solution to the floor-plan problem. If there are no rooms
with an odd number of doors, then it will be traversable. If there are two rooms with an
odd number of doors, then it will be traversable: Start in one of those rooms, and end up
in the other.
394
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
Example
4
Floor-plan puzzle
Solve the floor-plan problems:
a.
b.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. The floor-plan problem asks, “Can we travel into each room
and pass through every door once?”
Devise a Plan. Classify each room as even or odd, according to the number of doors in
that room. A solution will be possible if there are no rooms with an odd number of
doors, or if there are exactly two rooms with an odd number of doors.
Carry Out the Plan.
a. There are six rooms, and rooms B and D are odd, so this floor plan can be traversed. The
solution requires that we begin in either room B or room D, and finish in the other.
b. There are six rooms, and rooms A, B, C, and F are odd (with D and E even).
Since there are more than two odd rooms, this floor plan cannot be traversed. If one 
of the doors connecting two of the odd rooms is blocked, then the floor plan could
be traversed.
Look Back. We can check our work by actually drawing possible routes, as shown for
part b above.
Hamiltonian Cycles
One application that cannot be solved using Euler circuits is the so-called traveling
salesperson problem: A salesperson starts at home and wants to visit several cities
without going through any city more than once, and then return to the starting city. This
problem is so famous with so many people working on its solution that it is often re-
ferred to in the literature as TSP. The salesperson would like to do this in the most effi-
cient way (that is, least distance, least time, smallest cost, . . .). To answer this question,
we reverse the roles of the vertices and edges of an Euler circuit. Now, we ask whether
Start
Finish
Barricade
B
A
C
D
E
F
B
C
A
D
E
F
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.1
Euler Circuits and Hamiltonian Cycles
395
Example
5
Find a Hamiltonian cycle
Find a Hamiltonian cycle for the network in Figure 8.4.
Solution
Note that this network is the one given in Example 1f. We found in Exam-
ple 2f, that there was not an Euler circuit for this network. On the other hand, it is easy
to find a Hamiltonian cycle:
A S C S B S D S A
FIGURE 8.4 Network
A
B
C
D
Example
6
Identifying cycles
Use Figure 8.5 to decide if the given cycle is Hamiltonian. If it is not, tell why.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
a. This is not a Hamiltonian cycle because it does not visit each vertex, but repeats the
same vertices, which is sometimes called a loop.
b. This is not a Hamiltonian cycle because it does not return to the starting point.
c. This is not a Hamiltonian cycle because it does not return to the starting point.
d. This is a Hamiltonian cycle.
B S C S D S A S E S F S B
D S C S B S A S E S F
C S D S A S B S F S E S A
A S B S C S D S A
FIGURE 8.5 Network with 6 vertices
A
B
D
E
F
C
See www.mathnature.
com for links for solving
the TSP.
we can visit each vertex exactly once and end at the original vertex. Such a path is
called a Hamiltonian cycle.
It seems as if the problem of deciding whether a network has a Hamiltonian cycle
should have a solution similar to that of the Euler circuit problem, but such is not the case.
In fact, no solution is known at this time, and it is one of the great unsolved problems of
mathematics. In this book, the best we will be able to do is a trial-and-error solution. If
you are interested in seeing some of the different attempts at finding a solution to this
problem, you can check the web address shown in the margin.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

396
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
96
173
151
51
129
189
Sac
SF
SJ
Fresno
FIGURE 8.6 TSP for four cities
Example
7
Find the shortest trip
A salesman wants to visit four California cities, San Francisco, Sacra-
mento, San Jose, and Fresno. Driving distances are shown in Figure 8.6. What is the
shortest trip starting and ending in San Francisco that visits each of these cities?
Solution
Since the best we can do is to offer some possible methods of attack, 
we will use this example to help build your problem-solving skills. We use Pólya’s 
problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Part of understanding the problem is to decide what we
mean by the “best” solution. For this problem, let us assume it is the least miles trav-
eled. We also note that, in terms of miles traveled, each route and its reverse are equiv-
alent. That is,
is the same as
Devise a Plan. There are several possible methods of attack for this problem: for exam-
ple brute force (listing all possible routes) and nearest neighbor (at each city, go to the
nearest neighbor that has not been previously visited). Sometimes the nearest-neighbor
plan will form a loop without going to some city, so we repair this problem using a
method called the sorted-edge method. In the sorted-edge method, we sort the choices
by selecting the nearest neighbor that does not form a loop.
Carry Out the Plan.
BRUTE FORCE:
SF 96
S S 173
S F 151
S SJ 51
S SF
Total:
471 miles 
SF 96
S S 129
S SJ 151
S F 189
S SF
Total:
565 miles 
SF 51
S SJ 129
S S 173
S F 189
S SF
Total:
542 miles  
Here are the reverse trips (so we don’t need to calculate these). 
SF S SJ S F S S S SF 
SF S F S SJ S S S SF 
SF S F S S S SJ S SF 
We see that 471 is the minimum number of miles. 
NEAREST NEIGHBOR:
SF 51
S SJ 129
S S 96
S SF
A loop is formed; Fresno is not included because it is
never the nearest neighbor if we start in 
San Francisco.
SORTED EDGE:
For this method, we sort the distances (edges of the graph) from smallest to largest:  51,
96, 129, 151, 173, and 189. This gives the following trip (skipping 96 and 151 because
these choices would form a loop): 
SF 51
S SJ 129
S S 173
S F 189
S SF
Total:
542 miles
Look Back. With this simple problem, it is easy to see that the best overall solution is a
trip with 471 miles, but as you can imagine, for a larger number of cities the solution
may not be at all obvious.
SF S Sacramento S Fresno S San Jose S SF
SF S San Jose S Fresno S Sacramento S SF
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We summarize the sorted-edge method for finding an approximate solution to a
traveling salesperson problem.
Section 8.1
Euler Circuits and Hamiltonian Cycles
397
Draw a graph showing the cities and the distances; identify the starting vertex.
Step 1
Choose the edge attached to the starting vertex that has the shortest distance
or the lowest cost. Travel along this edge to the next vertex.
Step 2
At the second vertex, travel along the edge with the shortest distance or low-
est cost. Do not choose a vertex that would lead to a vertex already visited.
Step 3
Continue until all vertices are visited and arriving back at the original vertex.
Sorted-Edge Method
The sorted-edge method may not produce the optimal solution, so you should also
check other methods. Since the brute-force method requires that we check all the routes, it
is worthwhile to find a formula that tells us the number of routes we need to check. Note in
Example 7 we found three possible routes (along with three reversals). Consider the next
example which generalizes the number of routes we found by brute force in Example 7.
Example
8
Find the number of routes
a. How many routes are there for four cities, say, San Francisco, Sacramento, San Jose,
and Fresno?
b. How many routes are there for n cities?
Solution
a. If we start in San Francisco, there are 3 cities to which we can travel. Then, by the
fundamental counting principle, we have
Since half the routes are reversals of the others, we have
b. Following the steps in part a, we note that from the first city there are 
cities to
visit, so (from the fundamental counting principle) there are
and if we disregard reversals there are
1n 2 12 1n 2 22 1n 2 32 ? p ? 3 ? 2 ? 1
2
 routes
1n 2 12 1n 2 22 1n 2 32 ? p ?  3 ? 2 ? 1 routes
n 2 1
3 # 2 # 1
2
5 3 routes
3 # 2 # 1 5 6 routes
This formula will be used
later in the text.
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the Königsberg bridge
problem. 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the floor-plan problem. 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the solution to the Königs-
berg bridge problem. 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the traveling salesperson
problem. 
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Contrast Euler circuits and
Hamiltonian cycles. 
Problem Set 8.1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Which of the networks in Problems 6–11 are Euler circuits? 
If a network can be traversed, show how. 
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
Which of the networks in Problems 12–17 have Hamiltonian
cycles? If a network has one, describe it. 
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17. A
B
D
C
A
B
D
C
E
E
A
C
D
F
H
G
B
A
B
D
C
E
A
B
D
C
A
B
D
C
E
A
B
C
D
H
I
J
K
L
G
F
E
A
B
D
C
E
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
A
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F
398
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
For which of the floor plans in Problems 18–23 can you pass
through all the rooms while going through each door exactly once?
If it is possible, show how it might be done.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
Level  2
Which of the networks in Problems 24–27 are Euler circuits? 
If a network can be traversed, show how. Note these are the same
networks as those given in Problems 28–31. 
24.
25.
26.
27.
Which of the networks in Problems 28–31 have Hamiltonian
cycles? If a network has one, describe it. Notice these are the same
networks as those given in Problems 24–27.
28.
29. A
B
C
H
G
F
E
D
A
B
C
H
G
F
E
D
A
B
C
G
D
H
E
F
A
B
C
G
F
E
D
A
B
C
H
G
F
E
D
A
B
C
H
G
F
E
D
2
5
3
1
4
Room 1
Room 2
Room 4
Room 3
Room 1
Room 2
Room 5
Room 4
Room 3
Room 1
Room 2
Room 3
Room 4
Room 5
Room 6
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30.
31.
32. After Euler solved the Königsberg bridge problem, an eighth
bridge was built as shown in Figure 8.7. Is this network
traversable? If so, show how.
FIGURE 8.7 Königsberg with eight bridges
33. HISTORICAL QUEST
Traveler’s Dodecahedron
This
problem was sold in the last half of the 19th century as a puzzle
known as the “Traveler’s Dodecahedron” or “A Voyage ‘Round
the World.” It consisted of 20 pegs (called cities), and the point of
the puzzle was to use string to connect each peg only once, arriv-
ing back at the same peg you started from. Find a route (starting at
Brussels—labeled 1) that visits each of the 20 cities on the dodeca-
hedron shown in Figure 8.8. 
FIGURE 8.8 Hamilton’s “traveler’s dodecahedron”
34. HISTORICAL QUEST
Is there an Euler circuit for the Trav-
eler’s Dodecahedron shown in Figure 8.8? If so, show it.
35. Is there an Euler circuit for the graph shown in Figure 8.9?
FIGURE 8.9 Network problem
A
B
C
D
J
E
F
I
H
G
2
8
7
9
10
6
16
17
18
19
20
15
11
14
12
13
1
3
5
4
New bridge
A
B
C
G
D
H
E
F
A
B
C
G
F
E
D
Section 8.1
Euler Circuits and Hamiltonian Cycles
399
36. Suppose you want to get from point A to point B in New York
City (see Figure 8.10), and also suppose you wish to cross over
each of the six bridges exactly once. Is it possible? If so, show
one such path.
FIGURE 8.10 New York City
37. A simplified map of New York
City, showing the subway
connections between Manhattan
and The Bronx, Queens, and
Brooklyn, is shown in Figure 8.11.
Is it possible to travel on the New
York subway system and use
each subway exactly once? You
can visit each borough (The
Bronx, Queens, Brooklyn, or
Manhattan) as many times as
you wish.
38. A portion of London’s Underground transit system is shown
in Figure 8.12. Is it possible to travel the entire system and
visit each station while taking each route exactly once?
FIGURE 8.12 London Underground 
Charing Cross
South Kensington
Piccadilly
Circus
Oxford Circus
Baker Street
Lexington
Notting Hill Gate
Tottenham
Court
Road
Holborn
Leicester Square
King’s Cross
Euston
Bank
A
B
Bridge 6
Bridge 5
Bridge 4
Bridge 3
Bridge 2
Bridge 1
Bridge 1: George Washington Bridge
Bridge 2: Triborough Bridge
Bridge 3: Queensboro (59th Street) Bridge
Bridge 4: Williamsburg Bridge
Bridge 5: Manhattan Bridge
Bridge 6: Brooklyn Bridge 
Manhattan
The Bronx
Queens
Brooklyn
N
S
FIGURE 8.11 New York City subways
Public Domain
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

39. In Massachusetts there is a re-creation of an 1830s 
New England village called Old Sturbridge Village. A map is
shown in Figure 8.13. Is it possible to stroll the streets marked
in color? Give reasons for your answer.
FIGURE 8.13 Old Sturbridge Village 
40. Reconsider the question in Problem 39 if the church across
from the Knight Store is opened.
Level  3
41. The edges of a cube form a three-dimensional network. Are
the edges of a cube traversable?
42. A saleswoman wants to visit each of the  cities New York City,
Boston, Cleveland, and Washington, D.C. Driving distances
are as shown in Figure 8.14. What is the shortest trip starting in
New York that visits each of these cities?
FIGURE 8.14 TSP for four cities 
Find a solution using the brute-force method.
Cleveland
Boston
NYC
Wash.
D.C.
375
667
216
235
481
441
400
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
44. A salesperson wants to visit each of the cities Denver,
St. Louis, Los Angeles, and New Orleans. Driving distances
are as shown in Figure 8.15. What is the shortest trip starting
in Denver that visits each of these cities?
FIGURE 8.15 TSP for four cities 
a. Find a solution if possible using the nearest-neighbor 
method.
b. Find a solution if possible using the sorted-edge method.
45. Repeat Problem 44 using the brute-force method.
46. Count the number of vertices, edges (arcs), and regions 
for each of Problems 6–17. Let V  number of vertices, 
E  number of edges, and R  number of regions. Compare 
V  R with E. Make a conjecture relating V, R, and E. This
relationship is called Euler’s formula for networks.
Problem Solving 3   
47. The saleswoman in Problem 42 needs to add Atlanta to her
itinerary. Driving distances are shown. What is the shortest
trip starting in New York that visits each of these cities?
A
B
C
NYC
D.C.
A
—
1,115
780
887
634
B
1,115
—
667
216
441
C
780
667
—
481
375
NYC
887
216
481
—
235
D.C.
634
441
375
233
—
48. A quality control inspector must visit franchises in Atlanta,
Boston, Chicago, Dallas, and Minneapolis. Since this inspec-
tion must be monthly, the inspector, who lives in Chicago,
would like to find the most efficient route (in terms of
distances). Driving distances are shown. What is the most 
efficient route?
A
B
C
D
M
A
—
1,115
717
691
1,131
B
1,115
—
1,013
1,845
1,619
C
717
1,013
—
937
420
D
691
1,845
937
—
963
M
1,131
1,619
420
963
—
49. What is the sum of the measures of the angles of a tetrahedron?
Hint: Consider the sum of the measures of the face angles of a
cube. A cube has six square faces, and since each face has four
right angles, the sum of the measures of the angles on each face is
360°; hence, the sum of the measures of the face angles of a cube
is 6(360°)  2,160°.
Denver
St. Louis
New Orleans
LA
1,062
2,009
677
879
1,844
1,344
43. Repeat Problem 42 using the indicated method. 
a. Find a solution if possible using the nearest-neighbor
method.
b. Find a solution if possible using the sorted-edge method. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50. What is the sum of the measures of the angles of a pentagonal
prism? (See Figure 8.16.)
FIGURE 8.16 Pentagonal prism 
51. On a planet far, far away, Luke finds himself in a strange building
with hexagon-shaped rooms as shown in Figure 8.17.
FIGURE 8.17 Strange room arrangement 
In his search for the princess, Luke always moves to an
adjacent room and always in a southerly direction. 
a. How many paths are there to room 1?
to room 2?
to room 3?
to room 4?
b. How many paths are there to room 10?
c. How many paths are there to room 13?
52. How many paths are there to room n in Problem 51?
53. Emil Torday told the story of seeing some African children
playing with a pattern in the sand as shown in Figure 8.18.
FIGURE 8.18 African sand game
The children were drawing, and I was at once asked to
perform certain impossible tasks; great was their joy when
the white man failed to accomplish them.*
One task was to trace the figure in the sand with one
continuous sweep of the finger. 
Luke
2
4
6
8
10
12
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
South
Section 8.1
Euler Circuits and Hamiltonian Cycles
401
a. What is the children’s secret for successfully drawing this
pattern?
b. Draw this figure; why is it difficult to do this without know-
ing something about networks?
54. HISTORICAL QUEST
About a century ago,
August Möbius made
the discovery that, if
you take a strip of paper
(see Figure 8.19), give it
a single half-twist, and
paste the ends together, you
will have a piece of paper
with only one side! Construct a Möbius strip, and verify that it
has only one side. How many edges does it have?
55. Construct a Möbius strip (see Problem 54). Cut the strip in half
down the center. Describe the result.
56. Construct a Möbius strip (see Problem 54). Cut the strip in half
down the center. Cut it in half again. Describe the result.
57. Construct a Möbius strip (see Problem 54). Cut the strip along
a path that is one-third the distance from the edge. Describe the
result.
58. Construct a Möbius strip (see Problem 54). Mark a point A on
the strip. Draw an arc from A around the strip until you return
to the point A. Do you think you could connect any two points
on the sheet of paper without lifting your pencil?
59. Take a strip of paper 11 in. by 1 in., and give it three half-twists;
join the ends together. How many edges and sides does this band
have? What happens if you cut down the center of this piece?
60. What is a Klein bottle? Examine the bottle shown in Figure 8.20.
FIGURE 8.20 Klein bottle 
Can you build or construct a physical model? You can use the
limerick as a hint.
*Quoted by Claudia Zaslavsky in Africa Counts (Boston: Prindle, Weber, &
Schmidt, 1973) from On the Trail of the Bushongo by Emil Torday.
Konrad Polthier
A mathematician named Klein
Thought the Möbius strip was divine.
Said he, "If you glue the edges of two,
You'll get a weird  bottle like mine."
FIGURE 8.19 Möbius strip
Aaron Haupt / Photo 
Researchers, Inc.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

402
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
8.2  Trees and Minimum Spanning Trees
In the last section, we considered graphs with circuits: an Euler circuit (which is a round
trip path traveling all the edges) and a Hamiltonian cycle (a path that visits each vertex
exactly once). In this section, we consider another kind of graph, called a tree, which does
not have a circuit.
Trees
Let us begin with an example.
FIGURE 8.21 Personal family tree
Example
1
Draw a family tree
Suppose you wish to draw a family tree
showing yourself, your parents, and your
maternal and paternal grandparents.
Solution
One possibility for showing
this family tree is shown in Figure 8.21.
The family tree shown in Example 1 has two obvious properties. It is a connected
graph because there is at least one path between each pair of vertices, and there are no cir-
cuits in this family tree. A simplified tree diagram for Example 1 is shown in the margin.
Simplified family tree
Example
2
Determine if a network is a tree
Determine which of the given graphs are trees.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Solution
a. This is not a tree because it is not connected.
b. This is a tree.
c. This is a tree.
d. This is not a tree because there is at least one circuit.
e. There is a circuit, so it is not a tree.
A circuit could be
defined as a path/route
that begins and ends
at the same vertex.
In a tree, there is always
exactly one path from
each vertex in the graph
to any other vertex in
the graph. We illustrate
this property of trees
with the following
example.
Me
Mom
Dad
Mom's
Mom
Mom's
Dad
Dad's
Mom
Dad's
Dad
A tree is a graph that is connected and has no circuits.
Tree
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.2
Trees and Minimum Spanning Trees
403
Example
3
Sprinkler system design
Ben wishes to install a sprinkler system to water the areas shown in Figure 8.22. Show
how this might be done.
F
FIGURE 8.22 Locations of a faucet and sprinkler heads
Solution
We know there is at least one way to build a tree from each vertex (in this
case, the faucet, labeled F). We show one such way in Figure 8.23.
F
FIGURE 8.23 Sprinkler system
The solution shown for Example 3 may or may not be an efficient solution to the
sprinkler system problem. Suppose we connect the vertices in Example 3 without regard
to whether the graph is a tree, as shown in Figure 8.24a. Next, we remove edges until the
resulting graph is a tree. A tree that is created from another graph by removing edges but
keeping a path to each vertex is called a spanning tree. Can you form a spanning tree for
the graph in Figure 8.24a? If you think about it for a moment, you will see that any con-
nected graph will have a spanning tree, and that if the original graph has at least one cir-
cuit, then it will have several different spanning trees. Figure 8.24b shows a spanning tree
for the sprinkler problem of Example 3.
F
F
a. A graph 
b. A spanning tree
FIGURE 8.24 Comparison of a graph and spanning tree for Example 3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Minimum Spanning Trees
As we can see from Example 4, there may be several spanning trees. Sometimes the
length of each edge is associated with a cost or a length, called the edge’s weight. In such
cases we are often interested in minimizing the cost or the distance. If the edges of a
graph have weight, then we refer to the graph as a weighted graph.
b. There are many circuits and two possible spanning trees, as shown in Figure 8.26.
404
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
Example
4
Find spanning trees
Find two different spanning trees for each of the given graphs.
a.
b.
Solution
Since a spanning tree must have a path connecting all vertices, but cannot
have any circuits, we remove edges (one at a time) without moving any of the vertices
and without creating a disconnected graph. We show two different possibilities for each
of the given graphs, while noting that others are possible.
a. This graph has three circuits: 
, 
, and 
. To obtain a spanning tree, we must break up each of these circuits, but at the
same time not disconnect the graph. There are many ways we could do this. In the
first tree we remove edges 
, 
, and 
. In the second tree, we remove edges 
,
, and 
, as shown in Figure 8.25.
FG
CD
AB
EF
CE
BC
G S E
E S F S
C S D S E S C
A S B S C S A
A
E
H
F
G
B
C
D
I
J
K
L
B
F
A
G
E
C
D
B
F
A
G
E
C
D
B
F
A
G
E
C
D
A
E
H
F
G
B
C
D
I
J
K
L
A
E
H
F
G
B
C
D
I
J
K
L
FIGURE 8.25 Spanning tree for graph a
FIGURE 8.26 Spanning tree for graph b
A minimum spanning tree is a spanning tree for which the sum of the numbers 
associated with the edges is a minimum.
Minimum Spanning Tree
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Pólya’s 
Method
Section 8.2
Trees and Minimum Spanning Trees
405
Example
5
Find minimum cost
A portion of the Santa Rosa Junior College campus, along with some 
walkways (lengths shown in feet) connecting the buildings, is shown in Figure 8.27.
10
35
35
10
30
10
40
5
5
Beck
Shuhaw
Bussman
Bailey
Baker
Lark
FIGURE 8.27 Portion of campus
Suppose the decision is made to connect each building with a brick walkway, and the
only requirement is that there be one brick walkway connecting each of the buildings.
We assume that the cost of installing a brick walkway is $100/ft. What is the minimum
cost for this project?
Solution
We use Polya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. To make sure we understand the problem, we consider a
simpler problem. Consider the simple graph shown in the margin with costs shown
in color. We consider the vertices to be buildings since the only requirement is that
there be one brick walkway connecting each of the buildings. To find the best way to
construct the walkways, we consider minimum spanning trees. Since this is a circuit,
we can break this circuit in one of three ways: eliminate one of the sides, AB, BC,
or AC.
B
A
C
30
20
B
A
C
10
30
B
A
C
10
20
We see that the cost associated with each of these trees is:
The minimal cost for this simplified problem is 30.
Devise a Plan. We will carry out the steps for the Santa Rosa campus as follows: Look
at Figure 8.27 and find the side with the smallest weight (because we wish to keep the
smaller weights). We see there are two sides labeled 5; select either of these. Next, se-
lect a side with the smallest remaining weight (it is also 5). Continue by each time se-
lecting the smallest remaining weight until every vertex is connected, but do not select
any edge that creates a circuit.
Carry Out the Plan. Following this procedure, we select both of the edges labeled 5, as
well as the three labeled 10. The resulting pathways are shown in Figure 8.28.
20 1 30 5 50  10 1 30 5 40  10 1 20 5 30
B
A
C
10
30
20
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We see that the graph in Figure 8.28 is a minimum spanning tree, so the total distance is
with a total cost of
Look Back. We can try other possible routes connecting all of the buildings, but in each
case, the cost is more than 
.
$4,000
40 3 $100 5 $4,000
5 1 5 1 10 1 10 1 10 5 40
406
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
10
10
10
5
5
Beck
Shuhaw
Bussman
Bailey
Baker
Lark
FIGURE 8.28 Minimum spanning tree
The process used in Example 5 illustrates a procedure called Kruskal’s algorithm.
To construct a minimum spanning tree from a weighted graph, use the following
procedure:
Step 1
Select any edge with minimum weight.
Step 2
Select the next edge with minimum weight among those not yet selected.
Step 3
Continue to choose edges of minimum weight from those not yet selected,
but make sure not to select any edge that forms a circuit.
Step 4
Repeat the process until the tree connects all the vertices of the original
graph.
Kruskal’s Algorithm
Pay attention to this
procedure (algorithm).
There are many websites
that illustrate Kruskal’s
algorithm. You might wish
to explore this idea by
checking the links at
www.mathnature.com.
Example
6
Find the minimum spanning tree
Use Kruskal’s algorithm to find the minimum spanning tree for the weighted graph in
Figure 8.29. The numbers represent hundreds of dollars.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
3
4
5
6
5
3
2
7
9
4
FIGURE 8.29 Find the minimum spanning tree
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
Step 1 Choose the side with weight 1 (see Figure 8.30a).
Step 2 Choose the side with weight 2 (Figure 8.30b).
Step 3 Choose the side with weight 3 (Figure 8.30c). Do not connect AG because that
would form a circuit. Continue with this process to select the two sides with
weights of 4 (Figure 8.30c).
Section 8.2
Trees and Minimum Spanning Trees
407
FIGURE 8.30 Steps in finding a minimum spanning tree
Step 4 When we connect the side with the next lowest weight, namely, ED with weight
5, we know we are finished because we now have a tree with all of the vertices
connected. 
We can now calculate the weight of this tree:
Since these weights are in hundreds of dollars, the weight of the minimum spanning tree
is 
.
$1,900
1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 4 1 5 5 19
The next example is adapted from a standardized test given in the United Kingdom
in 1995.
Example
7
Cost of building a pipeline
A company is considering building a gas pipeline network to connect seven wells (A, B,
C, D, E, F, G) to a processing plant H. The possible pipelines that it can construct and
their costs (in hundreds of thousands of dollars) are listed in the following table.
Pipeline
AB
AD
AE
BC
BE
BF
CG
DE
DF
EH
FG
FH
Cost
23
19
17
15
30
27
10
14
20
28
11
35
What pipelines do you suggest be built and what is the total cost of your suggested
pipeline network?
Solution
Begin by drawing a graph to represent the data. This graph is shown in
Figure 8.31.
FIGURE 8.31 Building a gas pipeline
A
B
C
F
G
H
E
D
23
15
10
11
35
28
17
30
19
14
20
27
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
2
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
2
3
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
3
2
4
4
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
2
3
4
5
4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We now apply Kruskal’s algorithm (in table form).
408
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
Link
Cost
Decision
Step 1
CG
10
Smallest value: add to tree
Step 2
FG
11
Next smallest value; add to tree
Step 3
DE
14
Add to tree; note that the graph does not need to be
connected at this step.
BC
15
Add to tree
AE
17
Add to tree
AD
19
Reject; it forms a circuit ADE
DF
20
Add to tree
AB
23
Reject; it forms a circuit ABCGFDE
BF
27
Reject; it forms a circuit BFGC
Step 4
EH
28
Add to tree; stop because all vertices are now 
included.
The completed minimal spanning tree is shown in Figure 8.32.
A
B
C
F
G
H
E
D
15
10
11
28
17
14
20
FIGURE 8.32 Minimal spanning tree for pipeline problem
The minimal cost is
so, the cost of the pipeline is 
.
$115,000
10 1 11 1 14 1 15 1 17 1 20 1 28 5 115
Note in Example 7 that there were eight given vertices, and that there were seven
links added to form the minimal spanning tree. This is a general result.
If a graph is a tree with n vertices, then the number of edges is 
.
n 2 1
Number-of-vertices-and-edges-in-a-tree theorem
In Problem 59, you are asked to explain why this seems plausible. There is another re-
lated property that says the converse of this property holds for connected graphs. If the
number of edges is one less than the number of vertices in a connected graph, then the
graph is a tree.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.2
Trees and Minimum Spanning Trees
409
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by a tree?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by a spanning tree?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
State Kruskal’s algorithm. When
would you use this algorithm?
Determine whether each of the graphs in Problems 4–11 is a tree.
If it is not, explain why.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
Find two different spanning trees for each graph in 
Problems 12–19.
12.
13.
A
B
D
C
E
A
B
C
D
E
F
14.
15.
16.
17.
Find all the spanning trees for the graphs in Problems 20–25.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
G
H
E
I
F
C
D
A
B
A
C
B
D
B
E
C
D
A
F
C
A
D
B
C
B
A
B
F
G
I
H
A
C
J
E
D
A
B
C
D
E
F
H
G
I
J
A
C
B
D
E
A
B
D
F
E
C
E
D
C
B
A
A
B
F
E
G
D
C
Problem Set 8.2
18.
19.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Draw graphs for each of the molecules in Problems 26–31. If the
graph does not form a tree, tell why.
26. Methane
27. Propane 
28. Butane
29. Isobutane
30. Cyclopropane
31. Cyclohexane
Find the minimum spanning tree for each of the graphs in
Problems 32–41.
32.
33.
34.
35.
E
D
A
C
B
10
10
10
20 30
5
E
A
C
B
D
4
8
6
10
10
8
12
21
A
B
C
D
E
F
10
10
15
15
30
20
20
5
5
A
B
C
D
E
F
10
10
15
15
30
20
5
5
20
In chemistry, molecules are represented as ball-and-stick models or
by bond-line diagrams. For example, the ball-and-stick model for
ethane is shown in Figure 8.33a and the bond-line diagram is
shown in Figure 8.33b. A corresponding tree diagram is shown in
Figure 8.33c.
410
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
FIGURE 8.33 Ethane molecule
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
H
H
H
a. Ball-and-stick model
b. Bond-line drawing
c. Tree diagram
36.
37. 
38.
A
F
E
D
C
B
G
H
3
3
2
5
4
4
7
2
5
1
1
6
A
B
C
D
E
G
H
I
J
F
18
10
25
15
52
20
55
15
70
23
45
40
80
20
25
35
71
61
19
A
B
C
D
I
E
F
G
H
J
K
L
2
2
6
3
4
4
5
5
5
2
2
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
2
40.
A
C
B
J
H
G
F
E
D
30
10
40
5
40
19
45
20
80
30
55
41.
Level 2
42. A chemist is studying a chemical compound with a treelike
structure that contains 39 atoms. How many chemical bonds
are there in this molecule?
43. A chemist is studying a chemical compound with a treelike
structure that contains 65 atoms. How many chemical bonds
are there in this molecule?
44. A website called “The Oracle of Bacon” is hosted by the
University of Virginia. (Go to www.mathnature.com for a
link to this site, if you wish.) It links other actors to Kevin
Bacon by the movies in which the actors appeared. For
example, I entered the movie star from Gone with the Wind,
Clark Gable, and the Oracle told me that Clark Gable had a
Bacon number of two because Clark Gable was in the 1953
movie Mogambo with Donald Siden, and Donald Siden was
A
F
E
D
C
B
G
10
1
1
6
4
8
15
10
20
39.
A
D
C
B
F
E
5
10
40
60
10
50
30
20
20
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.2
Trees and Minimum Spanning Trees
411
in the 1995 movie Balto with Kevin Bacon. I tried it again
with Will Smith, and the Oracle said that he also had a Bacon
number of two since he was in the 2000 movie The Legend of
Bagger Vance with Charlize Theron, who in turn was in the
2002 movie Trapped with Kevin Bacon. Robert De Niro has
a Bacon number of one because he was in the 1996 movie
Sleepers with Kevin Bacon. This trivia game was started by
Albright College students Craig Fass, Brian Turtle, and Mike
Ginelli, who hypothesized that all actors—living or dead—
have a Bacon number of 6 or less. If you could draw a
diagram of the relationships between Kevin Bacon and other
actors, would the result be a tree?
45. Suppose you use the Yahoo search engine to do research for a
term paper. You start on the Yahoo page and follow the links.
You decide to keep a record of the sites you visit. If you keep
the record as a graph, will it form a tree?
46. Use a tree to show the following family tree. You have two
children, Shannon and Melissa. Shannon has three children,
Søren, Thoren, and Floren. Melissa has two children, Hannah
and Banana.
47. Use a tree to show the following management relationships 
for a college. The positions are a college president; an
academic vice president, who reports directly to the president
and who supervises six academic deans, each of whom
supervises three departments; a vice president for business
services, who reports directly to the president and who super-
vises the personnel office, scholarships and grants, as well as
the bookstore and food services; and finally, a vice president
of operations, who is in charge of supervising facilities,
grounds, and certified staff, and who also reports directly to
the president.
48. How many edges are there in a tree with 15 vertices?
49. How many vertices are there in a tree with 48 edges?
50. Suppose you wish to install a drip
sprinkler system and need to run a drip
water line to five areas, as shown in the
given graph. The numbers show the
distances in feet. What is the smallest
number of feet of drip hose necessary
to install?
51. Suppose your college is planning to
install some covered walkways connecting six buildings as
shown in the following
map. The plan is to al-
low a person to walk to
any building under
cover, and the numbers
shown on the map
represent distances
measured in feet. If the
covered walkway costs
, what is the
minimum cost for this
project?
$350/ft
Santa
Rosa
San
Francisco
Yosemite
Village
Sacramento
Red Bluff
Truckee
Redding
Eureka
Monterey
Santa
Barbara
San Luis Obispo
Paso Robles
San Bernardino
Indio
Long Beach
Las
Vegas
Reno
Fallon
Austin
Eureka
Ely
Tonapah
Carson City
Beatty
Death
Valley
Lone
Pine
Sequoia
National
Park
Winnemucca
Battle
Mountain
Elko
Wells
Manteca
Merced
Fresno
1:09
1:00
1:05
1:18
58
46
66
3:10
151
2:36
114
61
30
66
93
0:59
54
:50
56
2:00
82
3:00
95
Williams
Needles
Oakland
51
0:25
13
PACIFIC OCEAN
Los Angeles
San
Jose
Bishop
58
CALIFORNIA
NEVADA
ARIZONA
Lee Vining
FIGURE 8.35 California-Nevada driving distances
A
B
E
C
D
1000
900
1400
860
900
750
700
650
1210
1050
52. A mutual water system obtained estimates for installing water
pipes among its respective properties (labeled A, B, C, D,
and E). These amounts (in dollars) are shown in color in
Figure 8.34. Which lines should the mutual water system
install to minimize the cost?
FIGURE 8.34 Water line cost estimates
53. The map in Figure 8.35 shows driving distances and times be-
tween California and Nevada cities. Use Kruskal’s algorithm to
find the minimum spanning tree for the following cities: Santa
Rosa, San Francisco, Oakland, Manteca, Yosemite Village,
Merced, Fresno, and San Jose.
80
50
15
25
25
60
30
30
10
54. Use the map in Figure 8.35 and Kruskal’s algorithm to
construct the minimum spanning tree for the cities of Reno,
Carson City, Lee Vining, Fallon, Austin, Tonopah, Bishop,
Beatty, Death Valley, and Lone Pine.
50
52
36
35
75
30
30
31
32
Source: Adapted from California–Nevada Driving Distances map © 2002 AAA.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58. Suppose a network is to be built connecting the cities of 
Norfolk (N), Raleigh (R), Charlotte (C), Atlanta (A), and
Savannah (S). The given numbers show the miles between
cities. 
From\To
N
R
C
A
S
N
—
170
333
597
519
R
170
—
175
427
358
C
333
175
—
250
249
A
597
427
250
—
256
S
519
358
249
256
—
a. Represent this information with a weighted graph. 
b. Use Kruskal’s algorithm to find a minimum spanning 
tree. 
c. What is the minimum cost that links together all of the
cities if the cost is $205/mi?
Problem Solving 3   
59. Number-of-Vertices-and-Edges-in-a-Tree Property
a. State the number-of-vertices-and-edges-in-a-tree 
theorem.
b. Consider a tree with one vertex. What is the number of
edges? Does the property hold in this case?
c. Consider a tree with two vertices. How many edges can you
have and still have a tree? Explain why you cannot have
two or more edges.
d. Consider a tree with three vertices. How many edges can
you have and still have a tree? Explain why you cannot
have three or more edges.
60. HISTORICAL QUEST
In 1889, Arthur Cayley proved 
that a complete graph with n vertices has nn2 spanning 
trees. 
a. How many spanning trees are there for a complete graph
with 3 vertices, according to Cayley’s theorem? Verify
this number by drawing a complete graph with 3 vertices
and then finding all the spanning trees.
b. How many spanning trees are there for a complete graph
with 4 vertices, according to Cayley’s theorem? Verify
this number by drawing a complete graph with 4 vertices
and then finding all the spanning trees.
c. How many spanning trees are there for a complete graph
with 5 vertices?
d. How many spanning trees are there for a complete graph
with 6 vertices?
Level 3
55. Suppose XYZ drilling has four oil wells that must be
connected via pipelines to a storage tank. The cost of each
pipeline (in millions of dollars) is shown in the following
table:
From\To
#1
#2
#3
#4
Tank
#1
—
1
4
2
3
#2
1
—
3
1
2
#3
4
3
—
1
4
#4
2
1
1
—
1
Tank
3
2
4
1
—
a. Represent this information with a weighted graph.
b. Use Kruskal’s algorithm to find a minimum spanning 
tree.
c. What is the minimum cost that links together all of the
wells and the tank?
56. Consider the following table showing costs between 
vertices.
From\To
#1
#2
#3
#4
Tank (#5)
#1
—
3
7
3
2
#2
3
—
6
8
5
#3
7
6
—
10
9
#4
3
8
10
—
4
Tank (#5)
2
5
9
4
—
a. Represent this information with a weighted graph.
b. Use Kruskal’s algorithm to find a minimum spanning 
tree.
c. What is the minimum cost that links together all of the
vertices?
57. Suppose a network is to be built connecting the Florida cities
of Tallahassee (T), Jacksonville (J), St. Petersburg (P), Orlando
(O), and Miami (M). The given numbers show the miles
between the cities.
From\To
T
J
P
O
M
T
—
172
249
253
476
J
172
—
219
160
410
P
249
219
—
105
237
O
253
160
105
—
252
M
476
410
237
252
—
a. Represent this information with a weighted graph.
b. Use Kruskal’s algorithm to find a minimum spanning 
tree.
c. What is the minimum cost that links together all of the
cities if the cost is $85/mi?
412
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.3
Topology and Fractals
413
8.3
Topology and Fractals
A brief look at the history of geometry illustrates, in a very graphical way, the historical
evolution of many mathematical ideas and the nature of changes in mathematical thought.
The geometry of the Greeks included very concrete notions of space and geometry. They
considered space to be a locus in which objects could move freely about, and their geom-
etry, known as Euclidean geometry, was a geometry of congruence. In this section we in-
vestigate two very different branches of geometry that question, or alter, the way we think
of space and dimension.
Topology
In the 17th century, space came to be conceptualized as a set of points, and, with the non-
Euclidean geometries of the 19th century, mathematicians gave up the notion that geome-
try had to describe the physical universe. The existence of multiple geometries was
accepted, but space was still thought of as a geometry of congruence. The emphasis shifted
to sets, and geometry was studied as a mathematical system. Space could be conceived as
a set of points together with an abstract set of relations in which these points are involved.
The time was right for geometry to be considered as the theory of such a space, and in
1895 Jules-Henri Poincaré published a book using this notion of space and geometry in a
systematic development. This book was called Vorstudien zur Topologie (Introductory
Studies in Topology). However, topology was not the invention of any one person, and the
names of Cantor, Euler, Fréchet, Hausdorff, Möbius, and Riemann are associated with the
origins of topology. Today it is a broad and fundamental branch of mathematics.
To obtain an idea about the nature of topology, consider a device called a geoboard,
which you may have used in elementary school. Suppose we stretch one rubber band over
the pegs to form a square and another to form a triangle, as shown in Figure 8.36.
Historical
The set theory of Cantor (see the
Historical Note on page 50)
provided a basis for topology,
which was presented for the first
time by Jules-Henri Poincaré
(1854–1912) in Analysis Situs. 
A second branch of topology was
added in 1914 by Felix Hausdorff
(1868–1942) in Basic Features of
Set Theory. Earlier mathematicians,
including Euler, Möbius, and Klein,
had touched on some of the ideas
we study in topology, but the field
was given its major impetus by 
L. E. J. Brouwer (1882–1966). 
Today much research is being done
in topology, which has practical ap-
plications in astronomy, chemistry,
economics, and electrical circuitry.
NOTE
Pegs
Rubber bands
stretched over
pegs
Geoboard
Geoboard with a
square and a triangle
FIGURE 8.36 Creating geometric figures with a geoboard
In high school geometry, the square and the triangle in Figure 8.36 would be seen as
different. However, in topology, these figures are viewed as the same object. Topology is
concerned with discovering and analyzing the essential similarities and differences between
sets and figures. One important idea is called elastic motion, which includes bending,
stretching, shrinking, or distorting the figure in any way that allows the points to remain dis-
tinct. It does not include cutting a figure unless we “sew up” the cut exactly as it was before.
Two geometric figures are said to be topologically equivalent if one figure can
be elastically twisted, stretched, bent, shrunk, or straightened into the same shape
as the other. One can cut the figure, provided at some point the cut edges are
“glued” back together again to be exactly the same as before.
Topologically Equivalent Figures
The golden age of
mathematics—that
was not the age of 
Euclid, it is ours.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

414
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
Rubber bands can be stretched into a wide variety of shapes. All forms in Figure 8.37
are topologically equivalent. We say that a curve is planar if it lies flat in a plane.
FIGURE 8.37 Topologically equivalent curves
All of the curves in Figure 8.37 are planar simple closed curves. A curve is closed if
it divides the plane into three disjoint subsets: the set of points on the curve itself, the set
of points interior to the curve, and the set of points exterior to the curve. It is said to be
simple if it has only one interior. Sometimes a simple closed curve is called a Jordan
curve. Notice that, to pass from a point in the interior to a point in the exterior, it is nec-
essary to cross over the given curve an odd number of times. This property remains the
same for any distortion and is therefore called an invariant property.
Two-dimensional surfaces in a three-dimensional space are classified according to
the number of cuts possible without slicing the object into two pieces. The number of cuts
that can be made without cutting the figure into two pieces is called its genus. The genus
of an object is the number of holes in the object. (See Figure 8.38.)
The children and their distorted
images are topologically
equivalent.
Wrench
Genus 2
Pitcher
Pretzel
Wagon wheel
Genus 3 or more
Dumbbell
Genus 0
Cube
Coffee cup
Genus 1
Doughnut
FIGURE 8.38 Genus of the surfaces of some everyday objects. Look at
the number of holes in the objects.
For example, no cut can be made through a sphere without cutting it into two pieces,
so its genus is 0. In three dimensions, you can generally classify the genus of an object by
looking at the number of holes the object has. A doughnut, for example, has genus 1 since
it has 1 hole. In mathematical terms, we say it has genus 1 since only one closed cut can
be made without dividing it into two pieces. All figures with the same genus are topolog-
ically equivalent. Figure 8.39 shows that a doughnut and a coffee cup are topologically
equivalent, and Figure 8.40 shows objects of genus 0, genus 1, and genus 2.
A sphere has
genus 0.
A doughnut
has genus 1.
Two holes allow
two cuts, so this
form has genus 2.
FIGURE 8.40 Genus of a sphere, a doughnut, and 
a two-holed doughnut
FIGURE 8.39 A doughnut is 
topologically equivalent to a 
coffee cup
Karl J. Smith
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.3
Topology and Fractals
415
Four-Color Problem
One of the earliest and most famous problems in topology is the four-color problem.
It was first stated in 1850 by the English mathematician Francis Guthrie. It states that
any map on a plane or a sphere can be colored with at most four colors so that any two
countries that share a common boundary are colored differently. (See Figure 8.41, for
example.)
FIGURE 8.41 Every map can be colored with four colors.
All attempts to prove this conjecture had failed until Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang
Haken of the University of Illinois announced their proof in 1976. The university hon-
ored their discovery using the illustrated postmark.
Source: University
of Illinois
Since the theorem was first stated, many unsuccessful attempts have been made to
prove it. The first published “incorrect proof” is due to Kempe, who enumerated four
cases and disposed of each. However, in 1990, an error was found in one of those cases,
which it turned out was subcategorized as 1,930 different cases. Appel and Haken re-
duced the map to a graph as Euler did with the Königsberg bridge problem. They re-
duced each country to a point and used computers to check every possible arrangement
of four colors for each case, requiring more than 1,200 hours of computer time to verify
the proof.
Fractal Geometry
One of the newest and most exciting branches of mathematics is called fractal
geometry. Fractals have been used recently to produce realistic computer images in the
movies, and the new supercrisp high-definition television (HDTV) uses fractals to
squeeze the HDTV signal into existing broadcast channels. In February 1989, Iterated
System, Inc., began marketing a $32,500 software package for creating models of bio-
logical systems from fractals. Today you can find hundreds of fractal generators online,
most of them free.
Fractals were created to Benoit B. Mandelbrot over 30 years ago, but have become
important only in the last few years because of computers. Mandelbrot’s first book on
fractals appeared in 1975; in it he used computer graphics to illustrate the fractals. The
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

book inspired Richard Voss, a physicist at IBM, to create stunning landscapes, earthly
and otherworldly (see Figure 8.42). “Without computer graphics, this work could have
been completely disregarded,” Mandelbrot acknowledges.
What exactly is a fractal? We are used to describing the dimension of an object with-
out having a precise definition: A point has 0 dimension; a line, 1 dimension; a plane, 2
dimensions; and the world around us, 3 dimensions. We can even stretch our imagination
to believe that Einstein used a four-dimensional model. However, what about a dimen-
sion of 1.5? Fractals allow us to define objects with noninteger dimension. For example,
a jagged line is given a fractional dimension between 1 and 2, and the exact value is
determined by the line’s “jaggedness.”
We will illustrate this concept by constructing the most famous fractal curve, the 
so-called “snowflake curve.”* Start with a line segment 
:
Divide this segment into thirds, by marking locations C and D:
N  3; 
is the length of each segment.
Now construct an equilateral triangle ^CED on the middle segment and then remove the
middle segment 
. 
Now, repeat the above steps for each segment: 
A
B
C
D
E
A
B
C
D
E
CD
r 5 1
3
A
B
C
D
Here we say the number of segments is N  1; r  1
is the length of this segment.
A
B
AB
416
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
FIGURE 8.42 Fractal images of a mountainscape (generated by Richard Voss) and fern
IBM Research/ Peter Arnold, Inc./Photo Library
Simon Smith 2010/Shutterstock.com
Historical
Benoit Mandelbrot 
(1924–2010)
Professor Mandelbrot first
conceived of fractals over 30 years
ago, and they became widely
appreciated when computers could
be used to apply the procedures of
fractal geometry. He received his
Master’s degree at Cal Tech and his
Ph.D. from the University of Paris.
He was a professor at Yale when he
did his formal work with fractals.
He died on October 14, 2010.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
N  4; 
is the length of each segment.
r 5 1
3
N  16 segments, r 5 1
9
* If you want to investigate the snowflake curve and fractal further, see Group Project G29, p. 423.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.3
Topology and Fractals
417
Again, repeat the process: 
If you repeat this process (until you reach any desired level of complexity), you have a
fractal curve with dimension between 1 and 2.
Mandelbrot defined the dimension as follows:
where N is any integer and r is the length of each segment.* For the illustrations above,
we can calculate the dimension:
Tessellations
The construction of the snowflake curve reminds us of another interesting mathematical
construction, called a tessellation. By skillfully altering a basic polygon (such as a trian-
gle, rectangle, or hexagon), the artist Escher was able to produce artistic tessellations such
as that shown in Figure 8.43.
We can describe a procedure for reproducing a simple tessellation based on the 
Escher print in Figure 8.43.
Step 1
Start with an equilateral triangle 
ABC. Mark off the same curve on sides 
and 
, as shown in Figure 8.44. Mark off another curve on side 
that is sym-
metric about the midpoint P. If you choose the curves carefully, as Escher did,
an interesting figure suitable for tessellating will be formed.
BC
AC
AB
^
N  64,  r  1
27;  D  1.26
N  16,  r  1
9;  D  1.26
N  4,  r  1
3;  D  1.26
N  3,  r  1
3;  D  1
D 5 log N
log 1
r
A
B
C
D
E
The actual description
of the dimension 
is more difficult to 
understand.
FIGURE 8.43 Escher print: Circle
Limit III
M. C. Escher’s “Circle Limit III” © 2003 
Cordon Art - Baarn - Holland. All rights 
reserved.
C
B
A
C
B
A
P
C
B
A
FIGURE 8.44 Tessellation pattern
FIGURE 8.45 Tessellation pattern
Step 2
Six of these figures accurately fit together around a point, forming a hexagonal
array. If you trace and cut one of these basic figures, you can continue the tes-
sellation over as large an area as you wish, as shown in Figure 8.45.
N  64, r 5 1
27
*Mandelbrot defined r as the ratio L/N, where L is the sum of the lengths of the N line segments. We will discuss logarithms in
Chapter 10, but at this point, it is not necessary that you understand this formula.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

418
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by topology? 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the four-color problem? 
3. Group the figures into classes so that all the elements within
each class are topologically equivalent, and 
no elements from different classes are topologically 
equivalent.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
4. Group the figures into classes so that all the elements within
each class are topologically equivalent, and no elements
from different classes are topologically 
equivalent.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Problem Set 8.3
From “Geometrical Forms Known as Fractals Find Sense in Chaos,” by Jeanne
McDermott, Smithsonian, December 1983, p. 116.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.3
Topology and Fractals
419
14. a. Let X be a point obviously outside the figure given in 
Problem 10. Draw 
. How many times does it cross 
the curve? Repeat for 
and 
.
b. Repeat part a for the figure given in Problem 11.
c. Repeat part a for the figure given in Problem 12.
d. Repeat part a for the figure given in Problem 13. 
e. Make a conjecture based on parts a–d. This conjecture 
involves a theorem called the Jordan curve theorem.
15. One of the simplest map-coloring rules of topology involves a
map of “countries” with straight lines as boundaries. How many
colors would be necessary for the four-corner area on a U.S.
map?  Note that a common point is not considered a common
boundary.
CX
BX
AX
5. Which of the figures in Problem 3 are simple closed curves?
6. Which of the figures in Problem 4 are simple closed 
curves?
7. Group the letters of the alphabet into classes so that all the el-
ements within each class are topologically equivalent and no
elements from different classes are topologically equivalent. 
8. Group the objects into classes so that all the elements within
each class are topologically equivalent, and no elements from
different classes are topologically equivalent. 
A. a glass
B. a bowling ball 
C. a sheet of typing paper 
D. a sphere 
E. a ruler 
F. a banana 
G. a sheet of two-ring-binder paper 
9. Group the objects into classes so that all the elements within
each class are topologically equivalent, and no elements from
different classes are topologically equivalent. 
A. a bolt 
B. a straw 
C. a horseshoe 
D. a sewing needle 
E. a brick 
F. a pencil 
G. a funnel with a handle
Level  2
In Problems 10–13, determine whether each of the points A, B, and
C is inside or outside of the simple closed curve. 
10.
11.
12.
13.
A
B
C
A
B
C
C
A B
A
B
C
Salt Lake City
S
an
Jua
n
R
i
v
er
Durango
Grand Canyon
Phoenix
Co
lo
rado
R
iv
er
Farmington
Denver
Albuquerque
Santa Fe
Rio
G
ra
n
d
e
Ri
v
e
r
P
e
c
os R
iver
Flagstaff
A
r
ka
n
sas Ri
v
er
UTAH
COLORADO
NEW
MEXICO
ARIZONA
How many colors are needed for the
4-corners area?
16. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
If a map (on a plane or on the
surface of a sphere) is partitioned into two or more regions
with each vertex of even degree, then the resulting map can
be colored with exactly two colors. Draw a map illustrating
this fact.
17. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
If a map (on a plane or on the surface
of a sphere) is partitioned into regions, each with an even num-
ber of edges, and if each vertex is of degree 3, the resulting
map can be colored with exactly three colors. Draw a map il-
lustrating this fact. 
18. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
If a map (on a plane or on the surface
of a sphere) is partitioned into at least five regions, each shar-
ing its borders with exactly three neighboring regions, the
resulting map can be colored in three colors. Draw a map
illustrating this fact.
19. Color the eight vertices of a cube in two colors (say red and
blue) so that any plane containing three points of one color
contains one point of the other color.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

420
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
Domino
Trominos
Quadominos
Pentominos
Level 3
22. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Construct a tessellation using 
triangles.
FIGURE 8.46 Mosaic tiles
Complete Figure 8.46 by showing the other 
9 pentomino shapes.
Forming a mosaic pattern using polygons, like those shown in 
Figure 8.46, is called tiling. A tiling and a tessellation are really
the same idea, although the word tessellation is usually used when
the pattern is more complicated than a polygon. For example, most
classroom floors are tiled with simple squares, a very simple pat-
tern with dominoes. An early example of a tromino pattern is found
in an 18th century painting. This pattern is shown in Figure 8.47.
FIGURE 8.47 A tiling pattern for
a 
square using trominos
6 3 6
Use pentominos to tile a rectangle of the size requested in
Problems 24–25.
24. 3  20
25. 4  15
26. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Design a mosaic using a pentagon.
27. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Design a mosaic using a hexagon.
28.
Dale Seymour Publications
© Kelly M. Houle 1999
This is an example showing a young girl playing on the 
grass (look at the cylinder). The painting, entitled “Golden
Afternoon” (look at the canvas), shows a distorted image that
becomes complete when viewed as a reflection; this is called
anamorphosis. What topological relation does the picture on
canvas have with the image in the reflecting glass?
Problem Solving 3   
29. Answer the questions after reading the poem in the News Clip. 
20. Construct a fractal curve by forming squares (rather than trian-
gles as shown in the text). The first step is shown here.
B
A
D
C
F
E
1
5
4
2
3
21. Two identical squares joined so that they have a common edge
is called a domino, as shown in Figure 8.46. Three identical
squares can be joined together to form a tromino, and they
come in two different shapes. Pentominos, composed of five
squares, come in 12 different shapes.
23. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Construct a tessellation
using rectangles.
He killed the noble Mudjokivis. 
Of the skin he made him mittens, 
Made them with the fur side inside. 
Made them with the skin side outside. 
He, to get the warm inside, 
Put the skin side outside; 
He, to get the cold side outside, 
Put the warm side fur side inside. 
That's why he put the fur side inside. 
Why he put the skin side outside, 
Why he turned them inside outside.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.4
Chapter Summary
421
a. If a right-handed mitten is turned inside out, as is suggested
in the poem, will it still fit a right hand?
b. Is a right-handed mitten topologically equivalent to a left-
handed mitten?
30. Some mathematicians were reluctant to accept the proof of the
four-color problem because of the necessity of computer verifi-
cation. The proof was not “elegant” in the sense that it required
the computer analysis of a large number of cases. Study the
map in Figure 8.48 and determine for yourself whether it is the
first five-color map, providing a counterexample for the com-
puterized “proof.”
3 (red)
2
(green)
4
(blue)
1 (red)
6 (blue)
7 (yellow)
6 (blue)
5 (yellow)
?
FIGURE 8.48 Is this the world’s first five-color map? 
What is the color of the white region?  Consider the following
table: 
The x’s indicate the colors that share a boundary with the given
region. As you can see, the white region is bounded by all four
colors, so therefore requires a fifth color.
Region
Blue
Yellow
Green
Red
1
x
x
x
2
x
x
x
3
x
x
x
4
x
x
x 
5
x
x
x 
6
x
x
x 
7
x
x
x 
?
x
x
x
x
8.4
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Königsberg bridge problem [8.1]
Euler’s circuit theorem [8.1]
Hamiltonian cycles and the traveling salesperson problem (TSP) [8.1]
Kruskal’s algorithm [8.2]
Topologically equivalent figures, four-color problem, and fractals [8.3]
Mathematics is an aspect
of culture as well as a
collection of algorithms.
CARL BOYER
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online,
you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of
problems that were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by
working the problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test help in studying
for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

422
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
7. In how many ways could Kaval and Null start in
San Francisco and visit the cities of Minneapolis, Mil-
waukee, Chicago, St. Louis, Detroit, Cleveland,
Cincinnati, and Pittsburgh?
8. If we use the brute-force method for solving the TSP of
Kaval and Null, the number of possible routes for the
30 major league cities is the astronomical number 
4.4  1030. Use the brute-force method for the simpli-
fied problem of finding the best way to begin in San
Francisco and visit Los Angeles, San Diego, and
Phoenix. The mileage chart is shown below. What is the
mileage using the brute-force method?
From\To
SF
LA
SD
P
SF
—
369
502
755
LA
369
—
133
372
SD
502
133
—
353
P
755
372
353
—
9. Use the nearest-neighbor method to approximate
the optimal route for the mileage chart shown in
Problem 8. What is the mileage when using this route?
10. Show a complete, weighted graph for these cities. Is
there a minimum spanning tree? If so, what is the
mileage using this method?
Boston
Toronto
Montreal
Tampa Bay
Ft. Lauderdale
Houston
Arlington
Seattle
Los
Angeles
San Diego
New York 
Oakland
San Francisco
Phoenix
Denver
Minneapolis
Milwaukee
Chicago
Kansas
City
St. Louis
Cleveland
Atlanta
Philadelphia
Baltimore
Cincinnati
Pittsburgh
Detroit
FIGURE 8.50 Tour of major league stadiums (TSP)
Chapter
8
Review Questions
In Problems 1–4, tell whether the network is traversable.
If the network is traversable, show how. 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5. Consider the network shown in Figure 8.49. 
FIGURE 8.49 City network map
a. Is there a path that is an Euler circuit?
b. Is there a path that is a Hamiltonian cycle?
6. Draw a map with seven regions such that the indicated
number of colors is required so that no two bordering
regions have the same color.
a. Two colors
b. Three colors
c. Four colors
d. Five colors
11
13
14
15
12
10
9
7
8
6
5
4
3
1
2
The San Francisco Chronicle reported that two Stanford
graduates, Dave Kaval and Brad Null, set a goal to see a
game in every major league baseball stadium. (Note: There
are 16 National League and 14 American League teams.)
They began in San Francisco and selected the route shown
in Figure 8.50. Use this information in Problems 7–10.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11. The Big 10 football conference consists of the
following schools: 
Ohio State, Penn State, Michigan, Michigan State,
Wisconsin, Iowa, Illinois, Northwestern (Ill.), Indiana,
Purdue (Indiana), Minnesota
Is it possible to visit each of these schools by crossing
each common state border exactly once?  If so, find an
Euler path.
12. Is it possible to find an Euler circuit for the Big 10
football conference described in Problem 11? That is,
is it possible to start the trip in any given state and end
the trip in the state in which you started?
In Problems 13–16, consider the graph in Figure 8.51.
FIGURE 8.51 Weighted graph
13. Find the cost of the nearest-neighbor tour, starting 
at A.
14. Find the cost of the nearest-neighbor tour, starting at M.
A
F
G
H
I
J
B
C
D
E
K
L
M
N
O
2
8
1
8
10
4
2
1
3
2
5
9
6
1
4
3
5
4
3
5
3
6
Minn.
Iowa
Wisc.
Ill.
Mich.
Penn.
Ohio
Ind.
Section 8.4
Chapter Summary
423
15. How many tours would be necessary to find the most ef-
ficient solution by using the brute-force method starting
at K?
16. Use Kruskal’s algorithm to find the cost of the minimum
spanning tree.
In Problems 17–19, consider the graph in Figure 8.52.
FIGURE 8.52 Graph with 9 vertices
17. Is there an Euler circuit for the graph in 
Figure 8.52?
18. Find a Hamiltonian circuit for the graph in Figure 8.52.
19. Find a spanning tree for the graph in  Figure 8.52.
20. Take a strip of paper 11 in. by 1 in. and give it four half-
twists; join the edges together. How many edges and
sides does this band have? Cut the band down the center.
What is the result?
A
H
D
I
B
C
G
F
E
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on one of these books:
The Traveling Salesman Problem: A Guided Tour of
Combinatorial Optimization, E. L. Lawler, J. K. Lenstra,
A. H. G. Rinnooy Kan, D. B. Shmoys (New York: John 
Wiley and Sons, 1987).
Graph Theory and Its Applications, Jonathan Gross and
Jay Yellen (Boca Raton: CRC Press, LLC, 1998).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

424
CHAPTER 8
The Nature of Networks and Graph Theory
FIGURE 8.54 What do you see
here?
Dover Publications.
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G29. Fractals To get you started on your paper, we ask the following question that relates
the ideas of series and fractals using the snowflake curve. Draw an equilateral trian-
gle with side length a (Figure 8.53a). Next, three equilateral triangles, each of side ,
are cut out and placed in the middle of each side of the first triangle (Figure 8.53b).
Repeat this process. As part of the work on this paper, find the perimeter and the area
of the snowflake curve formed if you continue this process indefinitely.
a
3
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
a. Step 1, side a
b. Step 2, side 
c. Step 3, side 
d. Step 4, side a
27
a
9
a
3
FIGURE 8.53 Construction of a snowflake curve
a
3
a
a
9
a
27
REFERENCES
Anthony Barcellos, “The Fractal Geometry of Mandelbrot,” 
The College Mathematics Journal, March 1984, pp. 98–114.
“Interview, Benoit B. Mandelbrot,” OMNI, February 1984, pp. 65–66. 
Benoit Mandelbrot, Fractals: Form, Chance, and Dimension (San Francisco: 
W. H. Freeman, 1977).
Benoit Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature (San Francisco: 
W. H. Freeman, 1982).
G30. Anamorphic Art In Problem 28, Section 8.3 we showed an example of a young girl
playing on the grass which was difficult to see on the plane at the bottom, but was
easy to see in the cylinder. For example, can you guess what you will see in a
reflective cylinder placed in the marked spot in Figure 8.54?
Write a paper about anamorphic art, which refers to artwork that is indistinct
when viewed from a normal viewpoint, but becomes recognizable when the image is
viewed as a reflection. Discuss the two main techniques for creating anamorphic art.
REFERENCES
Linda Bolton, Hidden Pictures (New York: Dial Books, 1993). 
“The Secret of Anamorphic Art,” Art Johnson and Joan D. Martin, The Mathematics
Teacher, January 1998.
Ivan Moscovich, The Magical Cylinder (Norfork, England: Tarquin Publications, 1988).
Marion Walter, The Mirror Puzzle Book, (Norfolk, England: Tarquin Publication, 1985).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.4
Chapter Summary
425
Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas in this chapter. You can find references
to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 8.1 Write a report on Ramsey theory. 
PROJECT 8.2 Historical Quest
Write a report on the geometry of the Garden Houses
of the second-century city of Ostia. See the “What in the World” commentary on
page 330. 
PROJECT 8.3 Historical Quest
The German artist Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528) was
not only a Renaissance artist, but also somewhat of a mathematician. Do some
research on the mathematics of Dürer.
PROJECT 8.4 Prepare a classroom demonstration of topology by drawing geometric fig-
ures on a piece of rubber inner tube, and illustrate the ways these figures can be dis-
torted. 
PROJECT 8.5 The problem shown in the News Clip was first published by John Jackson
in 1821. Without the poetry, the puzzle can be stated as follows: Arrange nine trees
so they occur in ten rows of three trees each. Find a solution. 
PROJECT 8.6 Celebrate the Millennium
a. Consider the product 1  2  3  p  1,998  1,999  2,000. What is the last digit? 
b. Consider the product 1  2  3  p  1,998  1,999  2,000. From the product, cross out all
even factors, as well as all multiples of 5. Now, what is the last digit of the resulting
product?
www.mathnature.com 
Your aid I want, 
nine trees to plant 
In rows just half a
score; 
And let there be in
each row three. 
Solve this: I ask no
more.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
9.1 Perimeter
427
Measuring length, perimeter, 
circumference
9.2 Area
435
Rectangles, parallelograms, triangles,
trapezoids, circles
9.3 Surface Area, Volume, 
and Capacity
445
Surface area, volume, capacity
9.4 Miscellaneous 
Measurements
456
Volume of solids, comparisons, 
temperature, converting units
9.5 U.S.–Metric 
Conversions
467
9.6 Chapter Summary
468
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
THE NATURE 
OF MEASUREMENT
9
Outline
What in the World?
“I can’t wait until I move into my new home,” said
Susan. “I’ve been living out of boxes for longer than
I want to remember.”
“Have you picked out your carpet and tile, and
made the other choices about color schemes yet?”
asked Laurie.
“Heavens, no! They are just doing the framing
and I have to build the decks, but I will get around
to those selections soon,” said Susan. “I hope 
I don’t run out of money before I’ve finished. My
contractor gave me allowances for carpet, tile, light
fixtures, and the like, but after looking around a bit
I think those amounts are totally unrealistic. I think
the goal was to come up with the lowest bid, and
the dimensions of the house plan do not seem to
match the amounts allowed. Can you help me
make some estimates this Saturday?”
Overview
Numbers are used to count and to measure. In counting, the
numbers are considered exact unless the result has been rounded.
When used for measurement, the numbers are never exact. In
this chapter, we study measurement in more detail.
Dimension refers to those properties called length, area,
and volume. A figure having length only is said to be one
dimensional. A figure having area is said to be two dimen-
sional, and an object having volume is said to be three
dimensional.
In this chapter, we use both the United States and the
metric measurement systems, not as they relate to each
other, but as independent systems used to measure the size
of objects in our world. The goal of this chapter is to give
you the ability both to measure and to estimate the size,
weight, capacity, and temperature of objects.
David Papazian/Corbis
     Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.1
Perimeter
427
9.1  Perimeter
Neglect of mathematics works injury to all knowledge, since he
who is ignorant of it cannot know the other sciences or the things
of this world.
ROGER BACON
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
B,
E,
I,
N, ?
In this chapter we are concerned with the notion of measurement. To measure an object
is to assign a number to its size. Measurement is never exact, and you therefore need to
decide how precise the measure should be. For example, the measurement might be to
the nearest inch, nearest foot, or nearest mile. The precision of a measurement depends
not only on the instrument used but also on the purpose of your measurement. For exam-
ple, if you are measuring the size of a room to lay carpet, the precision of your measure-
ment might be different than if you are measuring the size of an airport hangar.
The accuracy refers to your answer. Suppose that you measure with an instrument
that measures to the nearest tenth of a unit. You find one measurement to be 4.6 and
another measurement to be 2.1. If, in the process of your work, you need to multiply these
numbers, the result you obtain is
This product is calculated to two decimal places, but it does not seem quite right that you
obtain an answer that is more accurate (two decimal places) than the instrument you are
using to make your measurements (one decimal place). In this book, we will require that
the accuracy of your answers not exceed the precision of the measurement. This means
that after the calculations are completed, the final answer should be rounded. The princi-
ple we will use is stated in the following box.
4.6 3 2.1 5 9.66
All measurements are as precise as given in the text. If you are asked to make a
measurement, the precision will be specified.
Step 1
Carry out all calculations without rounding.
Step 2
After you obtain a final answer, round this answer to be as accurate as the
least precise measurement.
Step 3
If you are working with money, round your final answer to the nearest cent.
Accuracy Procedure Used in This Book
This accuracy procedure specifies that, to avoid round-off error, you should round only
once (at the end). This is particularly important if you are using a calculator, which will
display 8, 10, 12, or even more decimal places.
You will also be asked to estimate the size of many objects in this chapter. As we intro-
duce different units of measurement, you should remember some reference points so that you
can make intelligent estimates. Many comparisons will be mentioned in the text, but you
need to remember only those that are meaningful for you to estimate other sizes or distances.
You will also need to choose appropriate units of measurement. For example, you would not
measure your height in yards or miles, or the distance to New York City in inches.
The answers we give will
conform to this
procedure.
Spend a few moments
thinking about the
ideas of precision and
accuracy.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Measuring Length
What is your height? To answer that question, you must take a measurement.
428
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
FIGURE 9.1 The metric world in 2010
The number representing the linear dimension of 
an object, as measured from end to end, is its length.
Length
The most common system of measurement used in the world is what we call the met-
ric system. There have been numerous attempts to make the metric system mandatory in
the United States. Today, big business is supporting the drive toward metric conversion,
and it appears inevitable that the metric system will eventually come into use in the
United States. In the meantime, it is important that we understand how to use both the
United States and metric systems.
The most difficult problem in changing from the United States system (the custom-
ary system of measurement in the United States) to the metric system is not mathemati-
cal, but psychological. Many people fear that changing to the metric system will require
complex multiplying and dividing and the use of confusing decimal points. For example,
in a recent popular article, James Collier states:
For instance, if someone tells me it’s 250 miles up to Lake George, or 400
out to Cleveland, I can pretty well figure out how long it’s going to take
and plan accordingly. Translating all of this into kilometers is going to be
an awful headache. A kilometer is about 0.62 miles, so to convert miles
into kilometers you divide by six and multiply by ten, and even that isn’t
accurate. Who can do that kind of thing when somebody is asking me are
we almost there, the dog is beginning to drool and somebody else is telling
you you’re driving too fast?
Of course, that won’t matter, because you won’t know how fast you’re
going anyway. I remember once driving in a rented car on a superhighway
in France, and every time I looked down at the speedometer we were go-
ing 120. That kind of thing can give you the creeps. What’s it going to be
like when your wife keeps shouting, “Slow down, you’re going almost 130”? But if you
think kilometers will be hard to calculate. . . .
Tony Freeman/PhotoEdit
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The author of this article has missed the whole point. Why are kilometers hard to cal-
culate? How does he know that it’s 400 miles to Cleveland? He knows because the
odometer on his car or a road sign told him. Won’t it be just as easy to read an odometer
calibrated to kilometers or a metric road sign telling him how far it is to Cleveland?
The real advantage of using the metric system is the ease of conversion from one unit
of measurement to another. How many of you remember the difficulty you had in learn-
ing to change tablespoons to cups? Or pints to gallons?
In this book we will work with both the U.S. and the metric measurement systems.
You should be familiar with both and be able to make estimates in both systems. The fol-
lowing box gives the standard units of length.
Section 9.1
Perimeter
429
U.S. System
Metric System
inch (in.)
meter (m)
foot (ft, 12 in)
yard (yd, 36 in.)
kilometer (km; 1,000 m)
mile (mi, 63,360 in.)
centimeter Acm, 1
100 mB
Standard Length Units
To understand the size of any measurement, you need to see it, have experience with it,
and take measurements using it as a standard unit.
The basic unit of measurement for the U.S. system is the inch; it is shown in Figure
9.2. You can remember that an inch is about the distance from the joint of your thumb to
the tip of your thumb.
0.1 centimeter
0.5 centimeter
1 centimeter
b. In the metric system, a
distance comparable to the
inch is the centimeter.
1
2 inch
1
4 inch
1
8 inch
1
16 inch
1 inch
a. The basic unit of 
length in the U.S.
system is the inch.
c. The basic unit of length in the metric
system is the meter.  In the U.S.
system, a comparable unit is the yard.
1 yd
1 m
FIGURE 9.2 Standard units of measurement for length
The basic unit of measurement for the metric system is the meter; it is also shown in
Figure 9.2. You can remember that a meter is about the distance from your left ear to the
tip of the fingers on the end of your outstretched right arm.
For the larger distances of a mile and a kilometer, you will need to look at maps, or
the odometer of your car. However, you should have some idea of these distances.*
It might help to have a visual image of certain prefixes as you progress through this
chapter. Greek prefixes kilo-, hecto-, and deka- are used for measurements larger than
You should commit the
approximate size of both
the inch and the centime-
ter to memory.
*We could tell you that a mile is 5,280 ft or that a kilometer is 1,000 m, but to do so does not give you any feeling for what
these distances really are. You need to get into a car and watch the odometer to see how far you travel in going 1 mile. Most
cars in the United States do not have odometers set to kilometers, and until they do it is difficult to measure in kilometers. You
might, however, be familiar with a 10-kilometer race. It takes a good runner about 30 minutes to run 10 kilometers and an
average runner about 45 minutes. You can walk a kilometer in about 6 minutes.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Perimeter
One application of both measurement and geometry involves finding the distance around
a polygon. This distance is called the perimeter of the polygon.
the basic metric unit, and Latin prefixes deci-, centi-, and milli- are used for smaller
quantities (see Figure 9.3). As you can see from Figure 9.3, a centimeter is 
of a meter;
this means that 1 meter is equal to 100 centimeters.
1
100
430
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
Larger numbers
base
Smaller numbers
kilo-
hecto-
deka-
base
deci-
centi-
milli-
decimal point
103
1023
1022
1021
100
101
102
kilo means times
103 = 1,000
centi- means times 1022 = 0.01
Greek pr
for larger quantities
Latin pr
for smaller quantities
FIGURE 9.3 Metric prefixes
Now we will measure given line segments with different levels of precision. We will
consider two different rulers, one marked to the nearest centimeter and another marked to
the nearest 
centimeter.
1
10
Example
1 Use a ruler to find a length of a segment
Measure the given segment
a. to the nearest centimeter.
b. to the nearest 
centimeter.
Solution
a.
b. B
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B is 5.3 cm long.
End of B is nearer to 5 than to 6.
B
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
10
B
The perimeter of a polygon is the sum of the lengths of
the sides of that polygon.
Perimeter
Remember this term.
Historical
Definition of one yard
Early measurements were made in
terms of the human body (digit,
palm, cubit, span, and foot).
Eventually, measurements were
standardized in terms of the
physical measurements of certain
monarchs. King Henry I, for exam-
ple, decreed that one yard was the
distance from the tip of his nose
to the end of his thumb. In 1790
the French Academy of Science
was asked by the government to
develop a logical system of meas-
urement, and the original metric
system came into being. By 1900
it had been adopted by more than
35 major countries (see Figure 9.1
for the metric countries in the
world today.). In 1906 there was a
major effort to convert to the met-
ric system in the United States,
but it was opposed by big
business and the attempt failed.
In 1960 the metric system was
revised and simplified to what is
now known as the SI system (an
abbreviation of Système
International d’Unités). The term
metric in this book will refer to
the SI system.
NOTE
One Yard
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.1
Perimeter
431
Following are some formulas for finding the perimeters of the most common polygons.
An equilateral triangle is a triangle with all sides equal in length (see Figure 9.4a.) A
rectangle is a quadrilateral with opposite sides parallel and equal in length (Figure 9.4b.)
A square is a quadrilateral with all sides equal in length (Figure 9.4c).
s
s
s
Equilateral triangle
w
w
,
,
Rectangle
s
s
s
s
Square
FIGURE 9.4 Figures and formulas for an equilateral triangle, rectangle, and square
PERIMETER  3(SIDE)
PERIMETER  2(LENGTH)  2(WIDTH)
PERIMETER  4(SIDE)
P  3s
P  2/  2w
P  4s
Example
2 Find the perimeter
Find the perimeter of each polygon.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Solution
a. Rectangle is 2 cm by 9 cm, so
P  2/  2w
 2192  2122
 18  4
 22 cm
b. Rectangle is 2 ft by 4 ft, so
P  2/  2w
 2142  2122
 8  4
 12 ft
c. Square, so
P  4s
 4152
 20 mi
d. Equilateral triangle, so
P  3s
 31102
 30 dm
e. Triangle (add lengths of sides), so
P  3  4  5
 12 m
5 m
4 m
3 m
10 dm
10 dm
10 dm
5 mi
5 mi
2 ft
4 ft
1 cm
1 cm
1 cm
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

432
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
Example
3 Find the length of a pen
Suppose you have enough material for 70 ft of fence and want to build a rectangular pen
14 ft wide. What is the length of this pen?
Solution
PERIMETER  2(LENGTH)  2(WIDTH)
70  2(LENGTH)  2(14)
70  2/  28
Let /  LENGTH OF PEN
42  2/
21  /
The pen will be 21 ft long.
T
T
This is the formula for perimeter. 
Fill in the given information.
Circumference
A circle is the set of all points in a plane a given distance, called the radius, from a given
point, called the center. Although a circle is not a polygon, sometimes we need to find the
distance around a circle. This distance is called the circumference. For any circle, if you
divide the circumference by the diameter, you will get the same number (see Figure 9.5).
This number is given the name 
(pi). The number 
is an irrational number and is some-
times approximated by 3.14 or . We need this number 
to state a formula for the circum-
ference C:
C  d
where d  DIAMETER
or
C  2 r
where r  RADIUS
For a circle, the diameter is twice the radius. This means that, if you know the radius and
want to find the diameter, you simply multiply by 2. If you know the diameter and want
to find the radius, divide by 2.
p
p
p
22
7
p
p
FIGURE 9.5 Circle
Radius
Point
on
circle
Circle
Center
Diameter
Example
4 Find distance around a figure
Find the distance around each figure.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Solution
a. C  4 ; a decimal approximation is C  413.142  12.56. The circumference is 4
ft,
which is about 13 ft. 
b. C  28 ; this is about 88 cm. 
c. C  2 152  10 ; this is about 31 m. 
d. This is half of a circle (called a semicircle); thus, the curved part is half of the
circumference 1C  2
 6.282, or about 3.14, which is added to the diameter:
The distance around the figure is about 5 dm. 
3.14 1 2 5 5.14
p
p
p
p
p
p
30 cm
of a circle
1
8
2 dm
of a circle
1
2
5 m
28 cm
4 ft
N. A. Norris
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

e. This is one-eighth of a circle. The curved part is one-eighth of the circumference 
3C  2p(30)  188.54, or about 23.6, which is added here to the radius (on both sides): 
23.6 1 30 1 30 < 84 cm
Section 9.1
Perimeter
433
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Contrast precision and accuracy. 
2. What is the agreement about the accuracy of answers in this
book?
3. State the perimeter formulas for a square, rectangle, equilateral
triangle, and regular pentagon.
4. What is the formula for the circumference of a circle? 
5. Define .
From memory, and without using any measuring devices, 
draw a line segment with approximate length as indicated in 
Problems 6–8.
6. a. 1 in.
b.
in.
c. 5 cm 
7. a. 2 in.
b.
in.
c. 1 cm 
8. a. 3 in.
b. 10 cm
c. 3 cm 
Pick the best choices in Problems 9–33 by estimating. Do not
measure. For metric measurements, do not attempt to convert to 
the U.S. system. The hardest part of the transition to the metric 
system is the transition to thinking in metrics. 
9. The length of this math textbook is about 
A. 10 in.
B. 10 cm
C. 1 ft
10. The length of a car is about
A. 1 m
B. 4 m
C. 10 m 
11. The length of a dollar bill is about
A. 3 in.
B. 6 in.
C. 9 in. 
1
4
1
2
p
12. The width of a dollar bill is about
A. 1.9 cm
B. 6.5 cm
C. 0.65 m 
13. The perimeter of a dollar bill is
A. 18 in.
B. 6 in.
C. 46 in. 
14. The perimeter of a five-dollar bill is
A. 18 cm
B. 6 cm
C. 46 cm 
15. The length of a new pencil is
A. 4 in.
B. 18 in.
C. 7 in. 
16. The diameter of a new pencil is
A. 0.25 cm
B. 0.25 in.
C. 0.25 ft 
17. The circumference of an automobile tire is
A. 60 cm
B. 60 in.
C. 1 m
18. The perimeter of this textbook is
A. 36 in.
B. 36 cm
C. 11 in. 
19. The perimeter of a VISA credit card is
A. 30 in.
B. 30 cm
C. 1 m
20. The perimeter of a sheet of notebook paper is
A. 1 cm
B. 10 cm
C. 1 m 
21. The perimeter of the screen of a wall-mount TV set is
A. 30 in.
B. 100 cm
C. 100 in. 
22. The perimeter of a classroom is
A. 100 ft
B. 100 m
C. 100 yd 
23. The distance from your home to the nearest grocery store 
is most likely to be
A. 1 cm
B. 1 m
C. 1 km
24. Your height is closest to
A. 5 ft
B. 10 ft
C. 25 in.
Problem Set 9.1
Many calculators have a single key marked . If you press it, the display shows an
approximation correct to several decimal places (the number of places depends on your
calculator):
Press:
Display:
3.141592654
If your calculator doesn’t have a key marked , you may want to use this approximation
to obtain the accuracy you want. In this book, the answers are found by using the 
key
on a calculator and then rounding the answer.
p
p
p
p
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

25. An adult’s height is most likely to be about
A. 6 m
B. 50 cm
C. 170 cm 
26. The distance around your waist is closest to
A. 10 in.
B. 36 in.
C. 30 cm 
27. The distance from floor to ceiling in a typical home is 
about 
A. 2.5 m
B. 0.5 m
C. 4.5 m 
28. The length of a diagonal on a typical computer monitor is
about
A. 14 cm
B. 14 in.
C. 31 in. 
29. The length of a 100-yard football field is
A. 100 m
B. more than 100 m 
C. less than 100 m 
30. The distance from San Francisco to New York is about 3,000
miles. This distance is
A. less than 3,000 km 
B. more than 3,000 km 
C. about 3,000 km 
31. Suppose someone could run the 100-meter dash in 10 seconds
flat. At the same rate, this person should be able to run the
100-yard dash in
A. less than 10 sec 
B. more than 10 sec 
C. 10 sec 
32. The prefix centi- means
A. one thousand
B. one-thousandth 
C. one-hundredth 
33. The prefix kilo- means
A. one thousand
B. one-thousandth 
C. one-hundredth 
Measure the segments given in Problems 34–36 with the indicated
precision. 
34.
a. to the nearest centimeter
b. to the nearest 
centimeter
c. to the nearest inch
d. to the nearest eighth of an inch
35.
a. to the nearest centimeter
b. to the nearest 
centimeter
c. to the nearest inch
d. to the nearest eighth of an inch
36.
a. to the nearest centimeter
b. to the nearest 
centimeter
c. to the nearest inch
d. to the nearest eighth of an inch
1
10
1
10
1
10
434
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
Level 2
Find the perimeter, circumference, or distance around the figures
given in Problems 37–51 by using the appropriate formula. Round
approximate answers to the least accurate of the given measurements.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
10.0 in.
r = 50 cm
100.00 cm
3.5 cm
1.7 cm
1.0 cm
1.4 cm
0.3 cm
0.3 cm
0.3 cm
1.0
cm
1.0
cm
160 cm
50 cm
40 cm
280 cm
14 ft
14 ft
9 ft
9 ft
4 in.
18 in.
18 in.
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.
120.00 ft
50.00 ft
r
r
50.00 ft
2.40 m
6 yd
6 yd
6 yd
3 dm
3 dm
3 dm
12 ft
3 ft
4 in.
5 in.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50.
51.
52. What is the width of a rectangular lot that has a perimeter of
410 ft and a length of 140 ft?
53. What is the length of a rectangular lot that has a perimeter of
750 m and a width of 75 m?
54. Find the dimensions of a rectangle with a perimeter of 54 cm if
the length is 5 less than three times the width.
Level  3
55. The perimeter of ABC is 117 in. Find the lengths of the sides.
56. The perimeter of this pentagon is 280 cm. Find the lengths 
of the sides. 
57. HISTORICAL QUEST
One of the first recorded units of
measurement is the cubit, shown in Figure 9.6. 
Réunion des Musées Nationaux / Art Resource, NY
FIGURE 9.6 An ancient cubit, from the Louvre, Paris. 
The original measures 52.5 cm 
E
D
2x
A
B
C
2x
4x
3x
3x
A
C
B
3x
4x
2x
3.00 cm
2.00 cm
3.00 cm
2.00 cm
r
Section 9.2
Area
435
If we define a cubit as the distance from your elbow to your
fingertips, then we may find that the cubit defined for your
body is a little different from the Egyptian cubit on display
at the Louvre. How does your cubit compare with this 
Egyptian cubit?
58. Find your own metric measurements. 
Women
Men
a. height
a. height
b. bust
b. chest
c. waist
c. waist
d. hips
d. seat
e. waist to hemline
e. neck
Problem Solving  3 
59. HISTORICAL QUEST
In the sixth chapter of Genesis, 
the dimensions of Noah’s ark are given as 300 cubits long, 
50 cubits wide, and 30 cubits high. Use the Egyptian cubit in 
Figure 9.6 to convert these measurements to the nearest meter.
60. Suppose that we fit a band tightly around the earth at the equa-
tor. We wish to raise the band so that it is uniformly supported
6 ft above the earth at the equator. 
a. Guess how much extra length would have to be added to the
band (not the supports) to do this. 
b. Calculate the amount of extra material that would 
be needed.
Equator
9.2  Area
The measurement of length, discussed in the previous section, is sometimes considered to be
a one-dimensional measurement (back and forth, i.e., end to end). In this section, we consider
a two-dimensional measurement (end to end and top to bottom, i.e., back/forth and up/down).
Rectangles
Suppose that you want to carpet your living room. The price of carpet is quoted as a price
per square yard. A square yard is a measure of area. To measure the area of a plane fig-
ure, you fill it with square units. (See Figure 9.7.)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

436
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
1 cm
1 cm
b. 1 square centimeter (actual
size); abbreviated 1 sq cm or
1 cm2
a. 1 square inch (actual size);
abbreviated 1 sq in. or 1 in.2
1 in.
1 in.
FIGURE 9.7 Common units of measurement for area
Example
1 Find an area
What is the area of the shaded region?
a.
b.
Solution
To find the area, count the number of square units in each region.
a. You can count the number of square centimeters in the shaded region; there are
315 squares. Also notice:
Across
Down
21 cm  15 cm  21  15 cm  cm  315 cm2
b. The shaded region is a square foot. You can count 144 square inches inside the
region. Also notice: 
Across
Down 
12 in.  12 in.  144 in.2
As you can see from Example 1, the area of a rectangular or square region is the
product of the distance across (length) and the distance down (width).
12 in.
12 in.
21 cm
15 cm
The formulas for the area, A, of a rectangle of length  and width w and the
area, A, of a square of side with length s are:
Aw
A 5 s2
Area of Rectangles and Squares
Length, ,
Width, w
Side, s
Side, s
You will need these formu-
las not only for this text,
but also for real-world
problems.
Many believe the push
for a U.S. conversion
to the metric system
has passed. However,
a publication of The
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science carried the
following report: 
"A renewed U.S. Gov-
ernment commitment
to the metric system
of measurement
promises to help
American companies
in international
markets and to provide
the opportunity to
restart our
commitment to the
use of the metric sys-
tem in science and
mathematics
classrooms."
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Parallelograms
A parallelogram is a quadrilateral with two pairs of parallel sides, as shown in Figure 9.9.
To find the area of a parallelogram, we can estimate the area by counting the number of
square units inside the parallelogram (which may require estimation of partial square
units), or we can show that the formula for the area of a parallelogram is the same as the
formula for the area of a rectangle.
FIGURE 9.9 Parallelograms
Section 9.2
Area
437
Example
2 Area of a square yard in square feet
How many square feet (see Figure 9.8) are there in a square yard?
FIGURE 9.8 1 yd2  9 ft2
Solution
Since 1 yd  3 ft, we see from Figure 9.8 that 
1 yd2  13 ft22
Substitute.
 9 ft2
1 yd
1 yd
The area, A, of a parallelogram with base b and height h is
A 5 bh
Area of a Parallelogram
Base, b
Height, h
The justification of
this formula is given in
geometric form.
cut here
Move this triangular piece to form a rectangle.
Cut this off
and move it 
to the other
side.
This is the rectangle that has
been formed from the
parallelogram. This means that
the formula for the area of a
parallelogram is the same as
that for a rectangle.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

438
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
Example
3 Find the area of a parallelogram
Find the area of each shaded region.
a.
b.
Solution
a. b  3 m and h  6 m
b. b  5 in. and h  2 in.
A  bh
A  bh
 3 m  6 m
 2 in.  5 in.
 18 m2
 10 in.2
Triangles
You can find the area of a triangle by filling in and approximating the number of square
units, by rearranging the parts, or by noticing that every triangle has an area that is 
exactly half that of a corresponding parallelogram.
5 in.
2 in.
6m
3m
The area, A, of a triangle with base b and height h is*
A 5 1
2bh
Area of a Triangle
Height, h
Base, b
The justification of
this formula is given in
geometric form.
These triangles
have the same area.
b
h
b
h
These triangles
have the same area.
b
h
These triangles
have the same area.
*The height of a triangle is the perpendicular distance from the vertex to the base.
Example
4 Find the area of a triangle
Find the area of each shaded region.
a.
b.
5 km
3 km
4 mm
3 mm
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.2
Area
439
FIGURE 9.10 Trapezoid
b
B
h
II
I
h
Area of triangle I:    bh
Area of triangle II:    Bh
Total area:    bh 1
Bh
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
If we use the distributive property, we obtain the area formula for a trapezoid, as
shown in the following box.
The area, A. of a trapezoid with bases b and B and height h is
A 5 1
2h1b 1 B2
Area of a Trapezoid
b
B
h
Solution
a. b  3 mm, h  4 mm
b. b  5 km, h  3 km
Trapezoids
A trapezoid is a quadrilateral with two sides parallel. These sides are called the bases, and
the perpendicular distance between the bases is the height. We can find the area of a trape-
zoid by finding the sum of the areas of two triangles, as shown in Figure 9.10.
 5 15
2
  km2  or   71
2
  km2
 5 6 mm2
 5 1
2 3 5 km 3 3 km
 5 1
2 3 3 mm 3 4 mm
 A 5 1
2
 bh
 A 5 1
2
 bh
Example
5 Find the area of a trapezoid
Find the area of each shaded region.
a.
b.
3 ft
5 ft
19 ft
8 in.
15 in.
4 in.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

440
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
The area, A, of a circle with radius r is
A 5 pr 2
Area of a circle
Radius,
r
Circles
The last of our area formulas is for the area of a circle. Historically, we know from the
Rhind papyrus that the Egyptians knew of the formula for the area of a circle. We state
this formula using modern notation.
Consider a circle with radius r 
Cut the circle in half:
Fit these two pieces together:
Therefore, it looks as if the area of a circle of
radius r is about the same as the area of a rectangle
of length r and width r— that is, 
r2.
C 5 2 r
r
r 3
r
r
r 3
Half of the circumference is
r.
r
r
r
r
r 3
r
r
r 3
Solution
a. h  4; b  8; B  15
b. h  3; b  19; B  5
The area is 46 in.2.
The area is 36 ft2.
 5 36
 5 46
 5 3
2
 1242  
 5 21232
 5 1
2
 132 119 1 52
 5 1
2
 142 18 1 152
 A 5 1
2
 h1b 1 B2
 A 5 1
2
 h1b 1 B2
Even though it is beyond the scope of this course to derive a formula for the area of a cir-
cle, we can give a geometric justification that may appeal to your intuition.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.2
Area
441
Example
6 Area of a circle or semicircle
Find the area (to the nearest tenth unit) of each shaded region.
a.
b.
Solution
a. Using a calculator: 
. To the nearest tenth, the area is 
. 
b. Notice that the shaded portion is only half the area of the circle. Using a calculator:
. To the nearest tenth, the area is 39.3 m2.
Applications
Sometimes we measure area using one unit of measurement and then we want to convert
the result to another.
52p/2 < 39.26990817
254.5 yd 2
92p < 254.4690049
d 10,0 m
r  9.0 yd 
Example
7 Carpet purchase
Suppose your living room is 12 ft by 15 ft and you want to know how many square
yards of carpet you need to cover this area.
Solution
Method I.
 5 20 yd2
 5 180 3 a1
9
  yd2b
 5 180 3 1 ft2
 5 180 ft2
 A 5 12 ft 3 15 ft
Since 1 yd  3 ft
1 yd2  (1 yd)  (1 yd)
1 yd2  (3 ft)  (3 ft)
1 yd2  9 ft2
yd2  1 ft2
Divide both sides by 9.
1
9
Method II.
Change feet to yards to begin the problem:
12 ft  4 yd
and
15 ft  5 yd 
A  4 yd  5 yd
 20 yd2
If the area is large, as with property, a larger unit is needed. This unit is called an acre.
An acre is 
.
43,560 ft2
Acre
This definition leads us to a procedure for changing square feet to acres.
To convert square feet to acres, divide by 43,560.
To Change to Acres
ESTIMATION HINT: Real
estate brokers estimate an
acre as 200 ft by 200 ft
or 40,000 ft2.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When working with acres, you usually need a calculator to convert square feet into acres,
as shown in Example 8.
442
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
Example
8 Find the number of acres
How many acres are there in a rectangular property measuring 363 ft by 180 ft?
Solution
Begin with an estimate: Estimate: 
and 
, so area is
about 
. Thus, the number is acres is under (since our estimate num-
bers are over) 
. Now, we carry out the actual computation:
By calculator
 5 1.5 acres
 5 65,340 4 43,560 acres
 5 65,340 ft2
 A 5 363 3 180 ft
80,000 4 40,000 5 2 acres
400 3 200 5 80,000
180 < 200
363 < 400
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by area? 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
How do you find the area of a circle?
Contrast with the procedure for finding the circumference of
a circle.
Estimate the area of each figure in Problems 3–8 to the nearest
square centimeter. 
3. a.
b.
4. a.
b.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Pick the best choices in Problems 9–18 by estimating. Do not
measure. For metric measurements, do not attempt to convert to 
the U.S. system. 
9. The area of a dollar bill is
A. 18 in.
B. 6 in.2
C. 18 in.2
10. The area of a five-dollar bill is
A. 100 cm
B. 10 cm2
C. 100 cm2
Problem Set 9.2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11. The area of the front cover of this textbook is
A. 80 in.2
B. 80 cm2
C. 70 in.
12. The area of a VISA credit card is
A. 8 in.
B. 8 in.2
C. 8 cm2
13. The area of a sheet of notebook paper is
A. 90 cm2
B. 10 in.2
C. 600 cm2
14. The area of a sheet of notebook paper is
A. 90 in.2
B. 10 cm2
C. 600 in.2
15. The area of the screen of a plasma TV set is
A. 10 ft2
B. 48 in.2
C. 100 in.2
16. The area of a classroom is
A. 100 ft2
B. 1,000 ft2
C. 0.5 acre 
17. The area of the bottom of your feet is
A. 1 m2
B. 400 in.2
C. 400 cm2
18. It is known that the area of the skin covering your entire body
is about 100 times the area that you will find if you trace your
hand on a sheet of paper. Using this estimate, the area of your
skin is
A. 300 in.2
B. 3,000 in.2
C. 3,000 cm2
Level  2
Find the area of each shaded region in Problems 19–40. (Assume
that given measurements are exact, and round approximate
answers to the nearest tenth of a square unit.)
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
9 m
3 m
120 ft
63 ft
25 in.
10 in.
10 mm
10 mm
6 mi
6 mi
23 m
52 m
6 ft
2 ft
5 in.
3 in.
Section 9.2
Area
443
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
3 cm
2 cm
3 cm
2 cm
r 5 2 cm
d 5 28 in.
r 5 2 dm
10 in.
30 in.
20 in.
14 mm
15 mm
11 mm
10 mm
9 in.
4 in.
5 in.
14 ft
5 ft
7 ft
8 ft
210 cm
160 cm
50 cm
30 cm
10 ft
8 ft
21 dm
13 dm
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

41. Which property costs less per square foot?
42. Which property costs less per square foot?
43. If a rectangular piece of property is 750 ft by 1,290 ft, what is
the acreage (to the nearest tenth of an acre)?
44. How many square feet are there in 
acres?
45. What is the area of a television screen that measures 12 in. 
by 18 in.?
46. What is the area of a rectangular lot that measures 185 ft
by 75 ft?
47. What is the area of a piece of 
-in. by 11-in. typing paper?
48. If a certain type of fabric comes in a bolt 3 feet wide, how long
a piece must be purchased to have 24 square feet?
49. What is the cost of seeding a rectangular lawn 100 ft by 30 ft if
1 pound of seed costs $5.85 and covers 150 square feet? Use
estimation to decide whether your answer is reasonable.
50. a. If a mini pizza has a 6-in. diameter, what is the number of
square inches (to the nearest square inch)?
b. If a small pizza has a 10-in. diameter, what is the number of
square inches (to the nearest square inch)?
c. If a medium pizza has a 12-in. diameter, what is the number
of square inches (to the nearest square inch)?
d. If a large pizza has a 14-in. diameter, what is the number 
of square inches (to the nearest square inch)?
Level 3
If the lengths of three sides of a triangle are known, then the
following formula, known as Hero’s (or Heron’s) formula, is 
sometimes used:
where a, b, and c are the given lengths of the sides, and 
. Use this formula to find the areas (correct 
to the nearest square foot) in Problems 51–53.
51. a  5 ft, b  8 ft, c  10 ft
52. a  180 ft, b  200 ft, c  350 ft
s 5 0.51a 1 b 1 c2
A 5 "s1s 2 a2 1s 2 b2 1s 2 c2
81
2
41
2
110 ft
80 ft
Lot D:  $54,000
70 ft
150 ft
Lot C:  $45,000
80 ft
160 ft
50 ft
Lot B:  $25,500
70 ft
135 ft
Lot A:  $13,500
444
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
53.
54. What is the area of a square whose diagonal is equal 
to 7 in.? 
55. What is the area of the regular pentagon with a side equal 
to 10 in.? 
56. What is the area (to the nearest square inch) of the regular
hexagon with a side equal to 10 in.? 
57. What is the area (to the nearest square inch) of a regular
octagon with a side equal to 10 in.? 
s = 10
12.07
s = 10
8.66
s = 10
6.88
150'
130'
240'
180'
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.3
Surface Area, Volume, and Capacity
445
9.3  Surface Area, Volume, and Capacity
In this section we complete our trilogy of dimensions by looking at a three-dimensional
measurement. We have considered length (a one-dimensional measurement, say back and
forth), area (a two-dimensional measurement, say back/forth and up/down). Now, the
measurement of volume has a third direction of measurement: back/forth; up/down; in/out.
Before we consider volume, we begin by measuring the surface area of three
dimensional objects, and after considering volume, we measure the contents of a three-
dimensional object.
Surface Area
Suppose you wish to paint a box whose edges are each 3 ft, and you need to know how
much paint to buy. To determine this you need to find the sum of the areas of all the
faces—this is called the surface area.
Example
1 Find the surface area of a box
Find the amount of paint needed for a box with edges 3 ft.
Solution
A box (cube) has 6 faces of equal area.
Number of faces of cube
↓
6  9 ft2  54 ft2
Area of each face
You need enough paint to cover 54 ft2.

3 ft
3 ft
3 ft
Problem Solving  3 
Find the area (to the nearest square inch) of the shaded region
contained in the 10-in. squares in Problems 58–59. Assume that
the arcs intersect the midpoints of the sides. 
58.
59.
60. Figure 9.11 illustrates a strange and interesting relationship.
The square in part a has an area of 64 cm2 (8 cm by 8 cm).
When this same figure is cut and rearranged as shown in
part b, it appears to have an area of 65 cm2. Where did this
“extra” square centimeter come from? 
FIGURE 9.11 Extra square centimeter?
[Hint: Construct your own square 8 cm on a side, and then cut
it into the four pieces as shown. Place the four pieces together
as illustrated. Be sure to do your measuring and cutting very
carefully. Satisfy yourself that this “extra” square centimeter
has appeared. Can you explain this relationship?]
b.  13 cm 3 5 cm = 65 cm2
5
I
5
3
3
IV
III
3
8
8
3
5
II
5
a.  8 cm 3 8 cm = 64 cm2
5
I
5
5
II
5
8
3
IV
3
3
III
8
3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Some boxes have tops and others are open the top. Note that the box in Example 1 has
a top. In the next example, we consider a box without a top and a can with a bottom but
not a top.
446
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
Example
2 Find the outside surface area
Find the outside surface area.
a.
b.
Solution
a. We find the sum of the areas of all the faces: 
Front:
30  50  1,500 
Back: 
1,500
Same as front
Side:
80  30  2,400 
Side:
2,400
Sides are the same size.
Bottom:
80  50  4,000 
Total:
11,800 cm2
b. To find the surface area, find the area of a circle (the bottom) and think of the sides
of the can as being “rolled out.” The length of the resulting rectangle is the circum-
ference of the can and the width of the rectangle is the height of the can. 
Side:
A  /w  1pd2w  p162162  36p
Bottom:
A  pr2  p(322  9p
Surface area:
36p  9p  45p  141.37167 
The surface area is about 141 cm2.
3 cm
Bottom
6 cm
C 5 d
Side of can
p
3 cm
6 cm
50 cm
80 cm
30 cm
Example
3 Amount of paint needed
You want to paint 200 ft of a three-rail fence, and you need to know how
much paint to purchase.
Pólya’s 
Method
Courtesy Ranch Life Plastics, Inc., www.
ranchlifeplastics.com
Historical
Sofia Kovalevsky
(1850–1891)
“Many who have never had the occa-
sion to discover more about
mathematics consider it a dry and arid
science. In reality, however, it is a sci-
ence which demands the greatest
imagination.”
Sofia Kovalevsky was a gifted
mathematician. She was born in
Moscow to Russian nobility. She
left Russia in 1868 because
universities were closed to
women. She went to Germany be-
cause she wished to study with
Karl Weierstraö in Berlin. The uni-
versity in Berlin would not accept
women, so she studied privately
with Weierstraö and was awarded
a doctoral degree in absentia from
Göttingen in 1874, which excused
her from oral examination due to
the quality of her thesis. When she
won the Prix Bordin from the In-
stitut de France in 1888, the prize
was raised from 3,000 to 5,000
francs because of the exceptional
merit of her paper. It was said that
her early interest in mathematics
was due in part to an odd wallpa-
per that covered her room in a
summer house. Fascinated, she
spent hours trying to make sense
of it. The paper turned out to be
lecture notes on higher mathemat-
ics purchased by her father during
his student days.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.3
Surface Area, Volume, and Capacity
447
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. There is some additional
information you need to gather before you can answer
this question. You want to paint 200 ft of a three-rail fence
that is made up of three boards, each 6 inches wide.
You want to know:
a. the number of square feet on one side of the fence. 
b. the number of square feet to be painted if the posts
and edges of the boards comprise 100 ft2.
c. the number of gallons of paint to purchase if each gallon covers 325 ft2.
Devise a Plan. The paint coverage is found on the paint can (325 ft2 for this problem). The
next thing we need to know is the number of square feet to be painted. We estimate the num-
ber of square feet to be painted on the posts and the edges to be 100 ft2. Now, calculate the
number of square feet to be painted and divide by 325 (the number of square feet per gallon).
Carry Out the Plan. 
a. We first calculate A, the number of square feet to be painted on one side of the fence.
b. AMOUNT TO BE PAINTED  21AMOUNT ON ONE SIDE2  EDGES AND POSTS
 21300 ft22  100 ft2
 700 ft2
c. aNUMBER OF SQUAREb  a
NUMBER OF SQUAREb a
NUMBER OFb
FEET PAINTED
FEET PER GALLON
GALLONS
700  325 a
NUMBER OFb
GALLONS
2.15  a
NUMBER OFb
GALLONS
Divide both sides by 325.
Look Back. If paint must be purchased by the gallon (as implied by the question), the
amount to purchase is 3 gallons.
 5 300 ft2
 5 1200 ft2 3 a1
2
 ftb 3 3
 A 5 1200 ft2 3 16 in.2 3 3
3 boards
60
2009
Volume
To measure area, we covered a region with square units and then found the area by using
a mathematical formula. A similar procedure is used to find the amount of space inside a
solid object, which is called its volume. We can imagine filling the space with cubes. A
cubic inch and a cubic centimeter are shown in Figure 9.12.
If the solid is not a cube but is a box (called a rectangular parallelepiped) with edges of
different lengths, the volume can be found similarly.
1 in.
1 in.
1 in.
1 cm
1 cm
1 cm
a. 1 cubic inch
(1 cu in. or 1 in.3)
b. 1 cubic centimeter
(1 cu cm, cc, or 1 cm3)
FIGURE 9.12 Common units of measuring volume
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

448
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
This example leads us to the following formula for the volume of a box.
The volume, V, of a cube with edge s is 
.
V 5 s3
Volume of a Cube
s
s
s
Example
4 Find the volume of a box
Find the volume of a box that measures 4 ft by 6 ft by 4 ft.
Solution
There are 24 cubic feet on the bottom layer of cubes. Do you see how many lay-
ers of cubes will fill the solid? Since there are four layers with 24 cubes in each, the total is
The volume is 
.
96 ft3
4 3 24 5 96
Historical
Johann Bernoulli
(1667–1748)
The remarkable Bernoulli family 
of Switzerland produced at least
eight noted mathematicians over
three generations. Two brothers,
Jakob (1654–1705) and Johann,
were bitter rivals. In spite of their
disagreements, they maintained
continuous communication with
each other and with the great
mathematician Leibniz (see
Historical Note on page 85). The
brothers were extremely influential
advocates of the newly born
calculus. Johann was the most
prolific of the clan, but was
jealous and cantankerous; he
tossed a son (Daniel) out of the
house for winning an award he
had expected to win himself. He
was, however, the premier teacher
of his time. Euler (see Historical
Note on page 762) was his most
famous student. Curiously, Johann
and Jakob’s father opposed his
sons’ study of mathematics and
tried to force Jakob into theology.
Jacob chose the motto Invito patre
sidera verso, which means “I study
the stars against my father’s will.”
NOTE
Karl Smith library
The volume V of a box (parallelepiped) with edges , w, and h is
V  wh
Volume of a Box
h
w
Example
5 Find the volume of a solid
Find the volume of each solid.
a.
b.
4 cm
25 cm
10 cm
10 cm
10 cm
10 cm
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

c.
3 in.
11 in.
7 in.
a.
b. V  /wh
  1,000 cm3
 5 125 3 10 3 42 cm3
 5 125 cm2 110 cm2 14 cm2
  1,000 cm3
 5 110 3 10 3 102 cm3
 5 110 cm2 3
 V  s3
Sometimes the dimensions for the volume we are finding are not all given in the
same units. In such cases, you must convert all units to a common unit. The common
conversions are as follows:
1 ft  12 in.
To convert feet to inches, multiply by 12.
To convert inches to feet, divide by 12.
1 yd  3 ft
To convert yards to feet, multiply by 3.
To convert feet to yards, divide by 3.
1 yd  36 in.
To convert yards to inches, multiply by 36.
To convert inches to yards, divide by 36.
Example
6 Find the amount of concrete to order
Suppose you are pouring a rectangular driveway with dimensions 24 ft by 65 ft. The
depth of the driveway is 3 in. and concrete is ordered by the yard. By a “yard” of con-
crete, we mean a cubic yard. You cannot order part of a yard of concrete. How much
concrete should you order?
Solution
There are three different measurements in this problem: inches, feet, and
yards. Since we want the answer in cubic yards, we will convert all of these measure-
ments to yards:
This is the length, .
This is the width, w.
This is the height (depth), h.
V  /wh
You must order 15 cubic yards of concrete.
 5 14 4
9
 5 130
9
 5 65 3 8 3 1
3 3 12
 3 in. 5 13 4 362 yd 5 3
36 yd 5 1
12 yd
 24 ft 5 124 4 32  yd 5 8 yd
 65 ft 5 165 4 32 yd 5 65
3  yd
c. V  /wh
 5 111 in.2 17 in.2 13 in.2
 111  7  32 in.3
Do you know where the
expression "the whole
9 yards" comes from?
It's related to
concrete. A standard-
size "cement mixer"
has a capacity of 9
cubic yards of
concrete. Thus, a job
requiring the mixer's
full capacity demands
"the whole 9 yards."
Solution
Section 9.3
Surface Area, Volume, and Capacity
449
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

450
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
Since it is common practice to label capacities in both U.S. and metric measuring
units, it will generally not be necessary for you to make conversions from one system
to another. But if you do, it is easy to remember that a liter is just a little larger than a
quart, just as a meter is a little larger than a yard. To measure capacity, you use a meas-
uring cup.
Capacity
One of the most common applications of volume involves measuring the amount of liq-
uid a container holds, which we refer to as its capacity. For example, if a container is 2 ft
by 2 ft by 12 ft, it is fairly easy to calculate the volume:
But this still doesn’t tell us how much water the container holds. The capacities of a can
of cola, a bottle of milk, an aquarium tank, the gas tank in your car, and a swimming pool
can all be measured by the amount of fluid they can hold.
2 3 2 3 12 5 48 ft3
U.S. System
Metric System
gallon (gal.)
liter (L)
ounce oz, 
gal.
kiloliter (kl, 1,000 L)
cup 1c, 8 oz2
milliliter ml, 
L
quart qt, 
gal, 32 ozb
1
4
a
b
1
1,000
a
b
1
128
a
Standard Capacity Units
Most containers of liquid that you buy have capacities stated in both milliliters and
ounces, or quarts and liters (see Figure 9.13).
Some capacity statements from purchased products are listed in Table 9.1. The
U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms has made metric bottle sizes for
liquor mandatory, so the half-pint, fifth, and quart have been replaced by 
200-mL, 750-mL, and 1-L sizes. A typical dose of cough medicine is 5 mL, and 1 kL
is 1,000 L, or about the amount of water one person would use for all purposes in two
or three days.
FIGURE 9.13 Standard capacities
1
liter
1
quart
1.06 qt
0.95 L
TABLE 9.1
Capacities of Common Grocery Items, as Shown on Labels
Item
U. S. Capacity
Metric Capacity
Milk
gal
1
2
1.89L
Milk
1.06 qt
1 L
Budweiser
12 oz
355 mL
Coke
67.6 oz
2 L
Hawaiian Punch
1 qt
0.95 L
Del Monte pickles
1 pt 6 oz
651 mL
You should remember
some of these references
for purposes of estima-
tion. For example, remem-
ber that a can of Coke is
355 ml, and the size of a
liter of milk is about the
same as a quart of milk.
A cup of coffee is about
300 ml and a spoonful of
medicine is about 5 ml.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.3
Surface Area, Volume, and Capacity
451
Example
7 Measure the quantity of a liquid
Measure the amount of liquid in
the measuring cup in Figure 9.14,
both in the U.S. system and in the
metric system.
Solution
Metric:
240 mL
U.S.:
About 1 c 
or 8 oz
Some common relationships among volume and capacity measurements in the U.S.
system are shown in Figure 9.15.
FIGURE 9.15 U.S. measurement relationship between volume and capacity
1 yd
1 yd
1 yd
1 ft
1 ft
1 ft
1 in.
1 in.
1 in.
Volume:
Capacity:
1 yd3 = 27 ft3
about 200 gallons
1 ft3 = 1,728 in.3
7.48 gallons
1 in.3
1 gallon = 231 in.3
FIGURE 9.14 Standard measuring cup with both
metric and U.S. measurements
16 oz
14 oz
12 oz
10 oz
8 oz
6 oz
4 oz
2 oz
2
1
3_
4
1_
2
1_
4
3_
4
1_
2
cups
500
400
300
200
100
ml
5 marks = 100 ml,
so each mark is 
20 ml.
{
1_
4
In the U.S. system of measurement, the relationship between volume and capacity is
not particularly convenient. One gallon of capacity occupies 231 in.3. This means that,
since the box in part c of Example 5 has a volume of 231 in.3, we know that it will hold
exactly 1 gallon of water.
To find the capacity of the 2-ft by 2-ft by 12-ft box mentioned earlier, we must
change 48 ft3 to cubic inches:
A calculator would help here.
Since 1 gallon is 231 in.3, the final step is to divide 82,944 by 231 to obtain approxi-
mately 359 gallons.
The relationship between volume and capacity in the metric system is easier to
remember. One cubic centimeter is one-thousandth of a liter. Notice that this is the same
as a milliliter. For this reason, you will sometimes see cc used to mean cm3 or mL. These
relationships are shown in Figure 9.16.
 5 82,944 in.3
 5 48 3 12 in. 3 12 in. 3 12 in.
 48 ft3 5 48 3 11 ft2 3 11 ft2 3 11 ft2
ESTIMATE: Since 1 ft3  7.5 gal,
48 ft3  50 ft3
 (50  7.5) gal
 375 gal
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
a.
b. V  7 in.  22 in.  6 in.
Since each 1,000 cm3 is 1 liter, 
Since each 231 in.3 is 1 gallon,
This container would hold 288 liters.
This container would hold 
4 gallons.
Note that there is no need to estimate part a since the arithmetic is fairly easy. However,
for part b, the estimate might be ft  2 ft 
ft 
ft3
 7.5 gal  3.75 gal.
B
1
2A
<
1
2
1
2
1
2
924
231 5 4
288,000
1,000
5 288
 5 924 in.3
 5 288,000 cm3
 V 5 90 cm 3 80 cm 3 40 cm
452
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
FIGURE 9.16 Metric measurement relationship between volume and capacity
1 m
1 dm
1 dm
1 m
1 m
1 dm
1 cm1 cm
1 cm
Volume:
Capacity:
1 m3 = 1,000 dm3
1,000 L = 1 kL
1 dm3 = 1,000 cm3
1 L = 1,000 mL
1 cm3 = 1 cc
1 ml = 1 cc
1 ft. < 7.48 gal
1gallon 5 231 in3
1liter 5 1,000 cm3
Relationship Between Volume and Capacity
Example
8 Capacity of a container
How much water would each of the following containers hold?
a.
b.
7 in.
22 in.
6 in.
90 cm
80 cm
40 cm
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.3
Surface Area, Volume, and Capacity
453
Example
9 Swimming pool capacity
An ecology swimming pool is advertised as being 
. How many gal-
lons will it hold?
Solution
Since 
, the swimming pool contains
2,500 3 7.48 5 18,700 gallons
1 ft3 < 7.48 gal
V 5 20 ft 3 25 ft 3 5 ft 5 2,500 ft3
20 ft 3 25 ft 3 5 ft
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Contrast length, area, and volume.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by surface area?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Contrast volume and capacity.
4. Compare the sizes of a cubic inch and a cubic 
centimeter.
5. Compare the sizes of a quart and a liter.
6. Compare a meter and a yard.
In Problems 7–8, find the volume of each solid by counting the
number of cubic centimeters in each box.
7.
8.
Find the volume of each solid in Problems 9–16.
9.
10.
11.
12.
1 yd
1 yd
1 yd
20 cm
20 cm
20 cm
12 in.
12 in.
12 in.
5 ft
5 ft
5 ft
13.
14.
15.
16.
Measure each amount given in Problems 17–21. 
17. a. Container A in cups
b. Container A in ounces
2
1
16 oz
14 oz
12 oz
10 oz
8 oz
6 oz
4 oz
2 oz
cups
500
400
300
200
100
Container B
ml
3_
4
1_
2
1_
4
3_
4
1_
2
1_
4
oz 20
18
16
2
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
    2   cups    
1_
2
    1              
    1              
1_
2
1_
2
Container A
10 in.
15 in.
24 in.
30 cm
80 cm
40 cm
10 mm
20 mm
2 mm
3 ft
4 ft
2 ft
Problem Set 9.3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

29. 50 kL of water would be about enough for
A. taking a bath
B. taking a swim 
C. supplying the drinking water for a large city 
30. The prefix centi- means
A. one thousand
B. one-thousandth
C. one-hundredth 
31. The prefix milli- means
A. one thousand
B. one-thousandth
C. one-hundredth 
32. The prefix kilo- means
A. one thousand
B. one-thousandth
C. one-hundredth 
33. How much water will a 7-m by 8-m by 2-m swimming pool
contain (in kiloliters)?
34. How much water will a 21-ft by 24-ft by 4-ft swimming pool
contain (rounded to the nearest gallon)?
Find the outside surface area in Problems 35–46. Note that some
boxes have tops and others do not.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
5 in.
5 in.
6 in.
125 m
125 m
55 m
15 cm
10 cm
6 cm
7.8 cm
11.7 cm
4 in.
2 in.
8 cm
2 cm
7 in.
11 in.
3 in.
50 cm
50 cm
200 cm
1 m
1 m
3 m
10 cm
4 cm
25 cm
10 cm
10 cm
10 cm
25 cm
25 cm
25 cm
18. a. Container B in ounces
b. Container B in milliliters
19. a. Container C in ounces
b. Container C in milliliters
20. a. Container D in cups
b. Container D in ounces
c. Container D in milliliters
21. a. Container E in milliliters
b. Container F in milliliters
c. Container G in milliliters
Level 2
The ability to estimate capacities is an important skill to develop.
Without measuring, pick the best answer in Problems 22–32.
22. An average cup of coffee is about
A. 250 mL
B. 750 mL
C. 1 L 
23. If you want to paint a small bookshelf, how much paint would
you probably need?
A. 5 mL
B. 500 mL
C. 5 L 
24. A six-pack of beer would contain about
A. 2 mL
B. 200 mL
C. 2 L
25. The dose of a strong cough medicine might be
A. 5 mL
B. 500 mL
C. 5 L 
26. A glass of water served at a restaurant is about
A. 200 mL
B. 2 mL
C. 2 L 
27. Enough gas to fill your car’s empty tank would be about
A. 15 L
B. 200 mL
C. 70 L 
28. You order some champagne for yourself and one companion.
You would most likely order
A. 2 mL
B. 700 mL
C. 20 L 
250
200
150
100
50
75
25
Container G
ml
Container F
90
100
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
ml
Container E
30    
25    
20    
15    
10    
  5    
ml
ml
ml
ml
ml
ml
2
1
16 oz
14 oz
12 oz
10 oz
8 oz
6 oz
4 oz
2 oz
cups
500
400
300
200
100
Container D
ml
3_
4
1_
2
1_
4
3_
4
1_
2
1_
4
2
1
16 oz
14 oz
12 oz
10 oz
8 oz
6 oz
4 oz
2 oz
cups
500
400
300
200
100
Container C
ml
3_
4
1_
2
1_
4
3_
4
1_
2
1_
4
454
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
2.0 in.
1.1 in.
1.25 in.
1.35 in.
1.95 in.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.3
Surface Area, Volume, and Capacity
455
What is the capacity for each of the containers in Problems 47–54?
(Give answers in the U.S. system to the nearest tenth of a gallon or
in metric to the nearest tenth of a liter.)
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
Level 3
55. The exterior dimensions of a refrigerator/freezer are shown in
Figure 9.17.
1 ft
1 ft
6 in.
50 cm
50 cm
200 cm
1 ft
1 ft
ft
1–2
20 cm
15 cm
30 cm
8 cm
5 cm
25 cm
16 cm
10 cm
25 cm
25 cm
25 cm
25 cm
10 in.
10 in.
10 in.
56. The exterior dimensions of a freezer are 48 inches by 
36 inches by 24 inches, and it is advertised as being 27.0 cu ft.
Is the advertised volume correctly stated?
57. Suppose that you must order concrete for a sidewalk 50 ft by 
4 ft to a depth of 4 in. How much concrete is required? 
Answer to the nearest cubic yard.
58. Use the plot plan shown in Figure 9.18 and give your answers
to the nearest cubic yard.
FIGURE 9.18 Plot plan
a. How many cubic yards of sawdust are needed for prepara-
tion of the lawn area if it is to be spread to a depth of six
inches?*
b. How many cubic yards of gravel are necessary if it is to be
placed to a depth of three inches?
c. How much compost is available if the pit is six inches
deep?
d. Suppose that you wish to pave the driveway. How much
concrete is needed if it is to be poured to a depth of four
inches?
Problem Solving  3 
59. The total human population of the earth is about 
.
a. If each person has the room of a prison cell (50 sq ft), and if
there are about 
sq ft in a square mile, how many
people could fit into a square mile?
b. How many square miles would be required to accommodate
the entire human population of the earth?
c. If the total land area of the earth is about 
,
and if all the land area were divided equally, how many
acres of land would each person be allocated
?
60. a. Guess what percentage of the world’s population could be
packed into a cubical box measuring 
on each side.
[Hint: The volume of a typical person is about 2 cu ft.]
b. Now calculate the answer to part a, using the earth’s popu-
lation as given in Problem 59.
1
2 mi
11sq mi 5 640 acres2
5.2 3 107 sq mi
2.8 3 107
6.2 3 109
Lawn
Driveway
Deck
Residence
Gazebo
Existing Pool
Walkway
Compost
35'
15'
30'
20'
70'
15'
60'
10'
B
1
2
A
FIGURE 9.17 Refrigerator/freezer
66 in.
36 in.
33 in.
a. How many cubic feet are contained within the
refrigerator/freezer?
b. If it is advertised as a 19-cu-ft refrigerator, how much space
is taken up by the motor, insulation, and so on?
*In practice, you would not round to the nearest cubic yard, but rather would round up
to ensure that you had enough material. However, for consistency in this book, we
will round according to the rules developed in the first chapter. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

456
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
9.4  Miscellaneous Measurements
In this chapter we have been discussing measurement.
Length
If you are measuring length, you will use linear measures:
in.; ft; yd; mi
cm; m; km
Area
For area, you will use square measures:
in.2; ft2; yd2; mi2
cm2; m2; km2
Volume
For volumes, you will use cubic measures:
in.3; ft3
cm3 (or cc); m3; km3
TRAPEZOIDS & TRIANGLES
Marvin’s Windows and Doors
h
h
w
r
h
h
r
,
Right rectangular
prism
V 5 Bh
Right circular
cylinder
V 5 Bh
Sphere
V 5 4
3
Pyramid
V 5
Bh
1
3
Right circular
cone
V 5
Bh
1
3
S = 2,w + 2wh + 2,h
S = 2 r2 + 2 rh
S = s2 + s s2 + 4h2
√
√
S = r r2 + h2 + r2
S = 4 r2 
r3 
FIGURE 9.19 Common solids, with accompanying volume and surface area formulas
Volume of Solids
In the previous section we found the volume and the capacity of boxes; now we can
extend this to other solids. In Figure 9.19, we show some of the more common solids,
along with the volume formulas. We will use B in each case to signify the area of the base
and h for the height.
Conway Marvin/Marvin Windows & Doors
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Example
1
Find the volume of a cylinder
Find the volume of the solid shown in Figure 9.20 to the nearest cubic unit.
FIGURE 9.20 Volume of cylinder
6.2 cm
15 cm
Example
2
Find the volume of a prism
Find the volume of the solid shown in Figure 9.21 to the nearest cubic unit.
6 m
10 m
15 m
FIGURE 9.21 Volume of a triangular prism
Solution
This is a right circular cylinder. Hence,
V  Bh
For this example, B  pr2, where r is the radius of the circular base.
 p16.2221152
Note that r  6.2, h  15.
 1,811.4423
Use a calculator.
The volume is 
.
1,811 cm3
Section 9.4
Miscellaneous Measurements
457
Solution
Figure 9.19 shows a right rectangular prism, and Figure 9.21 shows a right
triangular prism. The procedure shown here works for all prisms.
For this example, 
Note a  6, b  15, and h  10.
The volume is 
.
450 m3
 5 450
 5 1
2 1152 162 1102
B 5 1
2 ba.
 V 5 Bh
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

458
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
Example
3
Find the volume of a pyramid
Find the volume of the solid shown in Figure 9.22 to the nearest cubic unit.
FIGURE 9.22 Volume of a pyramid
Solution
This is a pyramid. Hence,
V 
Bh
For this example, B  s2.
Note s  5, and h  3.
 25
The volume is 25 m3.
5 1
3 152 2132
1
3
3 m
5 m
5 m
Example
4
Find the surface area and volume of a sphere
Find the surface area and volume of the sphere shown in Figure 9.23. Give your answers
to the nearest whole unit, paying attention to the unit.
FIGURE 9.23 Surface area and volume of a sphere
Solution
For the suface area,
Note that r  8.2.
By calculator
For the volume,
The surface area is 845 cm2 and the volume is 2,310 cm3.
 < 2,309.564878
 5 4
3
 p18.22 3
 V 5 4
3 pr3
< 844.96276
5 4p18.22 2
S 5 4pr 2
8.2 cm
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.4
Miscellaneous Measurements
459
Example
5
Volume of a cone
Find the surface area (to the nearest square unit), and also find the volume (to the
nearest cubic unit) of the solid shown in Figure 9.24.
Comparisons
The following example compares the areas and volumes of similarly shaped figures.
Example
6
Compare areas
a. Compare the area of a square whose side is tripled with the area of the original
square.
b. Compare the area of a circle after its radius is doubled.
c. Compare the volume of a sphere after its radius is doubled.
d. Compare the volume of a cube when the length of its side is multiplied by 5.
Solution
a. Let s be the length of the side of the square; then the area is 
. If the side is
tripled to 3s, then the area is 
. We see that the new area is nine times
as large as the original area.
b. Let r be the radius of the original circle; then the area is 
. If the radius is dou-
bled to 2r, then the area is 
. We see that the new area is increased
fourfold.
c. Let r be the radius of the original sphere; then the area is 
. If the radius is
doubled to 2r, then the area is 
. We see that the vol-
ume is eight times as large.
d. Use patterns based on parts a–c to guess the result without calculation. Since the for-
mula cubes the variable that is multiplied by 5, we guess the volume is 
times as large as the original volume.
53 5 125
A 5 4
3p12r2 3 5 4
3p18r32 5 32
3 pr3
A 5 4
3pr3
A 5 p12r2 2 5 4pr2
A 5 pr2
A 5 13s2 2 5 9s2
A 5 s2
FIGURE 9.24 Surface area and volume of a right circular cone
5 ft
9 ft
Solution
We calculate the requested values.
Notice that r  5 and h  9.
For this example, B  pr 2, where r  5.
The surface area is 
and the volume is 
.
236 ft3
240 ft2
 < 235.62
 5 75p
 5 1
3
 p152 29
 V 5 1
3 Bh
 < 240.26
 5 5p"106 1 25p
 5 p152"52 1 92 1 52p
 S 5 pr"r2 1 h2 1 pr2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Standard units of weight are shown in Figure 9.26.
FIGURE 9.26 Standard weight units
1 mm thick
1 cm wide
Mass of paper clip
is 1 g.
1 pound
About 0.45 kg
1 kilogram
About
2.2 lb
The measurements of length, area, volume, and capacity were discussed in the previ-
ous section. Two additional measurements we need to consider are mass and temperature.
460
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
1 cm3
of water
1 g
FIGURE 9.25 Mass of 1 g
Graffiti: © United Feature Syndicate, Inc.
*Technically, weight is the force of gravity acting on a body. The mass of an object is the same on the moon as on Earth,
whereas the weight of that same object would be different on the moon and on Earth, since they have different forces of gravity.
For our purposes, you can use either word, mass or weight, because we are weighing things only on Earth.
A paper clip weighs about 
, a cube of sugar about 
, and a nickel about 
. This
book weighs about 
, and an average-size person weighs from 50 to 
. The
weights of some common grocery items are shown in Table 9.2.
100 kg
1 kg
5 g
3 g
1 g
U.S. System
Metric System
ounce (oz)
gram (g)
pound (lb, 16 oz)
kilogram (kg, 1,000 g)
ton (2,000 lb, 32,000 oz)
milligram mg,
1
1,000 gb
a
Standard Weight Units
Mass
The mass of an item is the amount of matter it comprises. The weight of an item is the
heaviness of the matter.* The U.S. and metric units of measurement for mass or weight
are given in the following box. Notice that, in the U.S. measurement system, an ounce is
used as a weight measurement; this is not the same use of an ounce as a capacity meas-
urement that we used earlier. The basic unit of measurement for mass in the metric sys-
tem is the gram, which is defined as the mass of 
of water, as shown in Figure 9.25.
1 cm3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.4
Miscellaneous Measurements
461
TABLE 9.2
Weights of Common Grocery Items, as Shown on Labels
Item
U.S. Weight
Metric Weight
Kraft cheese spread
5 oz
142 g
Del Monte tomato sauce
8 oz
227 g
Campbell’s cream of chicken soup
103
4 oz
305 g
Kraft marshmallow cream
11 oz
312 g
Bag of sugar
5 lb
2.3 kg
Bag of sugar
22 lb
10 kg
We use a scale to measure weight. To weigh items, or ourselves, in metric units, we need
only replace our U.S. weight scales with metric weight scales. As with other measures, we
need to begin to think in terms of metric units, and to estimate the weight of various items.
The multiple-choice questions in the problem set are designed to help you do this.
U.S. System
Metric System
Fahrenheit 
Celsius 1°C2
1°F2
Standard Temperature
To work with temperatures, it is necessary to have some reference points.
U.S. System
Metric System
Water freezes
Water boils
100°C
212°F
0°C
32°F
Temperature Properties
Temperature
The final quantity of measure that we’ll consider in this chapter is temperature, which is
the degree of hotness or coldness.
Cengage Learning
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We are usually interested in measuring temperature in three areas: atmospheric tem-
perature (usually given in weather reports), body temperature (used to determine illness),
and oven temperature (used in cooking). The same scales are used, of course, for measur-
ing all of these temperatures. But notice the difference in the ranges of temperatures we’re
considering. The comparisons for Fahrenheit and Celsius (formerly called centigrade) are
shown in Figure 9.27.
462
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
FIGURE 9.27 Temperature comparisons between Celsius and Fahrenheit
Atmospheric
temperatures
Fahrenheit
60°
Celsius
Room
temperature
Water
freezes
50°
40°
30°
20°
10°
0°
210°
220°
140°
122°
104°
86°
68°
50°
32°
14°
24°
Fahrenheit
Celsius
41°
105.8°
Normal
body
temperature
Body
temperatures
40°
104°
39°
102.2°
38°
100.4°
37°
98.6°
36°
96.8°
35°
95°
37.5°
99.5°
Fahrenheit
288°
Celsius
Water
boils
Oven
temperatures
550°
500°
450°
400°
350°
300°
250°
200°
212°
260°
232°
204°
177°
149°
121°
100°
150°
100°
93°
66°
38°
Converting Units
As we have mentioned, one of the advantages (if not the chief advantage) of the metric
system is the ease with which you can remember and convert units of measurement. The
three basic metric units are related as shown in Figure 9.28.
Length:
meter
Capacity:
liter
Weight:
gram
FIGURE 9.28 Relationship among meter, liter, and gram
These units are combined with certain prefixes:
milli- means 
centi- means 
kilo- means 1,000
Other metric units are used less frequently, but they should be mentioned:
deci- means 
deka- means 10
hecto- means 100
1
10
1
100
1
1,000
1 L of water
1 kg
1 kg 5 1,000 g
0.1 m 5 1 dm
Go Metric—
           Be a liter bug!
There once was a
teacher named
Streeter 
Who taught stuff like
meter and liter. 
The kids moaned and
groaned, 
Until they were shown,
That meter and liter
were neater!
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A listing of metric units (in order of size) is given in Table 9.3.
TABLE 9.3
Metric Measurements
Length
Capacity
Weight
Meaning
Memory Aid
kilometer (km)
kiloliter (kL)
kilogram (kg)
1,000 units
Karl
hectometer (hm)
hectoliter (hL)
hectogram (hg)
100 units
Has
dekameter (dkm)
dekaliter (dkL)
dekagram (dkg)
10 units
Developed
meter (m)
liter (L)
gram (g)
1 unit
My
decimeter (dm)
deciliter (dL)
decigram (dg)
0.1 unit
Decimal
centimeter (cm)
centiliter (cL)
centigram (cg)
0.01 unit
Craving for
millimeter (mm)
milliliter (mL)
milligram (mg)
0.001 unit
Metrics
Section 9.4
Miscellaneous Measurements
463
To convert from one metric unit to another, you simply move the decimal point. For ex-
ample, if the height of a book is 0.235 m, then it is also
0.000235 km
d Three decimal places
Larger prefixes 
0.00235 hm
d Two decimal places
0.0235 dkm
d One decimal place
2.35 dm
d One decimal places
Smaller prefixes 
23.5 cm
d Two decimal places
235 mm
d Three decimal place
•
•
Example
7
Converting metric units
Write each metric measurement using each of the other prefixes.
a. 43 km
b. 60 L
c. 14.1 cg
Solution
a. All prefixes are smaller, so the numbers of units become larger:
43 km
Given
430 hm
One place
4,300 dkm
Two places
43,000 m
Three places
430,000 dm
Four places
4,300,000 cm
Five places
43,000,000 mm
Six places
b. Larger prefixes, smaller numbers:
60 L
Given
6 dkL
One place
0.6 hL
Two places
0.06 kL
Three places
Smaller prefixes, larger numbers:
60 L
Given
600 dL
One place
6,000 cL
Two places
60,000 mL
Three places
Basic Unit:
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

c. Larger prefixes:
14.1 cg
Given
1.41 dg
One place
0.141 g
Two places
0.0141 dkg
Three places
0.00141 hg
Four places
0.000141 kg
Five places
Smaller prefix:
14.1 cg
Given
141 mg
One place
464
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
Example
8
Find metric conversions
Make the indicated conversions.
a. 287 cm to km
b. 1.5 kL to L
c. 4.8 kg to g
Solution
a. From cm to km is five places; a larger prefix implies a smaller number, so move the
decimal point to the left:
287 cm  0.00287 km
b. From kL to L is three places; a smaller prefix implies a larger number, so move the
decimal point to the right:
1.5 kL  1,500 L
c. From kg to g is three places; a smaller prefix implies a larger number, so move the
decimal point to the right:
4.8 kg  4,800 g
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the merits of the metric
system as opposed to the U.S. measurement system. Why do
you think the metric system has not yet been adopted in the
United States?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the relationships among
measuring length, capacity, and weight.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain how we change units within
the metric system.
Name the metric unit you would use to measure each of the
quantities in Problems 4–9.
4. a. The distance from New York to Chicago
b. The distance around your waist
5. a. Your height
b. The height of a building
6. a. The capacity of a wine bottle
b. The amount of gin in a martini
7. a. The capacity of a car’s gas tank
b. The amount of water in a swimming pool
8. a. The weight of a pencil
b. The weight of an automobile
9. a. The outside temperature
b. The temperature needed to bake a cake
Without measuring, pick the best choice in Problems 10–18 
by estimating.
10. A hamburger patty would weigh about
A. 170 g
B. 240 mg
C. 2 kg
Problem Set 9.4
To make a single conversion, use the pattern illustrated by Example 7 and simply
count the number of decimal places.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11. A can of carrots at the grocery store most likely weighs 
about
A. 40 kg
B. 4 kg
C. 0.4 kg
12. A newborn baby would weigh about
A. 490 mg
B. 4 kg
C. 140 kg
13. You have invited 15 people for Thanksgiving dinner. You
should buy a turkey that weighs about
A. 795 mg
B. 4 kg
C. 12 kg
14. Water boils at
A. 0°C
B. 100°C
C. 212°C
15. If it is 32°C outside, you would most likely find people
A. ice skating
B. water skiing
16. If the doctor says that your child’s temperature is 37°C, your
child’s temperature is
A. low
B. normal
C. high
17. You would most likely broil steaks at
A. 120°C
B. 500°C
C. 290°C
18. John tells you he weighs 150 kg. If John is an adult, 
he is
A. underweight
B. about average
C. overweight
Without measuring, pick the best choice in Problems 19–29.
19. A kilogram is      ?      a pound.
A. more than
B. about the same as
C. less than
20. The prefix used to mean 1,000 is
A. centi-
B. milli-
C. kilo-
21. The prefix used to mean 
is
A. centi-
B. milli-
C. kilo-
22. The prefix used to mean 
is
A. centi-
B. milli-
C. kilo-
23. 15 kg is a measure of
A. length
B. capacity
C. weight
D. temperature
24. 28.5 m is a measure of
A. length
B. capacity
C. weight
D. temperature
25. 6 L is a measure of
A. length
B. capacity
C. weight
D. temperature
26. 38°C is a measure of
A. length
B. capacity
C. weight
D. temperature
27. 7 mL is a measure of
A. length
B. capacity
C. weight
D. temperature
28. 68 km is a measure of
A. length
B. capacity
C. weight
D. temperature
29. 14.3 cm is a measure of
A. length
B. capacity
C. weight
D. temperature 
1
100
1
1,000
Section 9.4
Miscellaneous Measurements
465
Write each measurement given in Problems 30–37 using all of the
metric prefixes.
0
kilometer (km)
9
4
6
1 5
hectometer (hm)
dekameter (dkm)
meter (m)
decimeter (dm)
centimeter (cm)
millimeter (mm)
kiloliter (kl)
3
8
3
3
1
5
hectoliter (hl)
dekaliter (dkl)
liter (L)
deciliter (dl)
centiliter (cl)
milliliter (ml)
6
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
Level  2
In Problems 38–42 make the indicated conversions.
38. a. 1 cm 
mm
b. 1 cm 
m
c. 1 cm 
km
d. 1 mm 
cm
39. a. 1 mm 
m
b. 1 mm 
km
c. 1 m 
mm
d. 1 m 
cm
40. a. 1 m  
km
b. 1 mL 
dL
c. 1 mL  
L
d. 1 mL 
kL
41. a. 1 L  
mL
b. 1 L 
dL
c. 1 L 
kL
d. 1 kL 
mL
42. a. 1 kL 
dL
b. 1 kL 
L
c. 1 g 
mg
d. 1 g 
cg
Find the surface areas of the solids in Problems 43–46 correct to
the nearest square unit. Note that some of the containers do not
have tops.
43.
44.
45.
46.
5 in.
3 in.
15 cm
2.4 cm
1.6 cm
3.5 cm
3.5 cm
4.2 cm
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Find the volumes of the solids in Problems 47–50 correct to 
the nearest unit.
47.
48.
49.
50.
Find the surface areas and volumes of the solids in 
Problems 51–52 correct to the nearest unit.
51.
52.
53. If the length of a rectangle is doubled, and the width is tripled,
what effect does that have on the area?
54. If the length of a box is doubled, the width is tripled, and 
the height is doubled, what effect does that have on the
volume?
55. If the radius of a sphere is multiplied by three, what effect does
that have on the surface area?
56. If the height of a square pyramid is doubled, what effect does
that have on the volume?
4 in.
3 in.
6 in.
6 cm
8 cm
4 cm
10 cm
6 cm
20 cm
12 in.
13 in.
5 in.
3 in.
5 ft
3 ft
2 ft
466
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
Problem Solving  3 
59. Show how a spreadsheet could be used to print a table of
temperature conversions between the Fahrenheit and Celsius
scales. Your table should consist of a column showing 
Celsius temperatures from 0 to 40 in steps of 5 degrees, and 
a column to the right, with corresponding Fahrenheit
temperatures.
60. A polyhedron is a simple closed surface in space whose
boundary is composed of polygonal regions (see Fig-
ure 9.29). A rather surprising relationship exists among the
number of vertices, edges, and faces of polyhedra. See if 
you can discover it by looking for patterns in the figures 
and filling in the blanks.
Triangular
pyramid
Quadrilateral
pyramid
Pentagonal
pyramid
Regular
tetrahedron
Regular hexahedron
(cube)
Regular
octahedron
Regular
dodecahedron
Regular
icosahedron
Figure
# of faces
# of vertices
# of edges
a. Triangular
4
4
6
pyramid
b. Quadrilateral
5
8
pyramid
c. Pentagonal
6
10
pyramid
d. Regular
4
4
tetrahedron
e. Cube
12
f. Regular
6
octahedron
g. Regular
30
dodecahedron
h. Regular
30
icosahedron
FIGURE 9.29 Some common polyhedra
Level  3
57. If the diameter of a circle is doubled, what effect does that
have on the area?
58. Suppose it takes 10 hours to fill a rectangular swimming
pool of uniform depth. How long will it take to fill a
similarly shaped swimming pool if all of the dimensions are
doubled?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.5
U.S.–Metric Conversions
467
9.5  U.S.–Metric Conversions
This section may be for reference. The emphasis in this chapter is on everyday use of the
metric system. However, certain specialized applications require more precise conver-
sions than we’ve considered. On the other hand, you don’t want to become bogged down
with arithmetic to the point where you say “nuts to the metric system.”
The most difficult obstacle involving the change from the U.S. system to
the metric system is not mathematical but psychological. However, if you un-
derstood the presentation in this chapter, you now realize that working within
the metric system is much easier than working within the U.S. system.
With these ideas firmly in mind, and realizing that your everyday work
with the metric system is discussed in Sections 9.1–9.4, we present a list of
conversion factors between these measurement systems. Many calculators will
perform these conversions for you; check your owner’s manual.
Length Conversions
U.S. to Metric
Metric to U.S.
When you know…
multiply by…
to find:
When you know…
multiply by…
to find:
in.
2.54
cm
cm
0.39370
in.
ft
30.48
cm
m
39.37
in.
ft
0.3048
m
m
3.28084
ft
yd
0.9144
m
m
1.09361
yd
mi
1.60934
km
km
0.62137
mi
Weight Conversions
U.S. to Metric
Metric to U.S.
When you know…
multiply by…
to find:
When you know…
multiply by…
to find:
oz
28.3495
g
g
0.0352739
oz
lb
453.59237
g
g
0.0022046
lb
lb
0.453592
kg
kg
2.2046226
lb
T
907.18474
kg
Capacity Conversions
U.S. to Metric
Metric to U.S.
When you know…
multiply by…
to find:
When you know…
multiply by…
to find:
tsp
4.9289
mL
mL
0.20288
tsp
tbsp
14.7868
mL
mL
0.06763
tbsp
oz
29.5735
mL
mL
0.03381
oz
c
236.5882
mL
mL
0.00423
c
pt
473.1765
mL
mL
0.00211
pt
qt
946.353
mL
mL
0.00106
qt
qt
0.9464
L
L
1.05672
qt
gal
3.7854
L
L
0.26418
gal
Temperature Conversions
U.S. to Metric
Metric to U.S.
When you know…
multiply by…
to find:
When you know…
multiply by…
to find:
°F
, after subtracting 32°
°C
°C
, then add 32°
°F
9
5
5
9
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Image not available due to 
copyright restrictions

Chapter
9
Review Questions
1. a. Without any measuring device, draw a segment
approximately 10 cm long.
b. Measure this segment to the nearest tenth cm.
2. a. What are the units of measurement in both the U.S. and
metric measurement systems that you would use to
measure the height of a building?
b. Estimate the temperature on a hot summer day in both the
U.S. and metric measurement systems.
c. What is the width of your index finger in both the metric
and U.S. systems?
3. a. What does the prefix milli- mean?
b. What does the measurement 8.6 mL measure?
c. How many centimeters are equivalent to 10 km?
Use the region shown in Figure 9.30 for Problems 4–7.
468
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
9.6
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Metric system; length (meter), capacity (liter), and mass (gram) [9.2–9.4]
Accuracy of measurements [9.1]
Perimeter and circumference [9.1]
Formulas for rectangles, squares, parallelograms, triangles, trapezoids, 
and circles [9.2]
Acre [9.2]
Volume formulas for boxes (parallelepipeds), right rectangular prisms, 
right circular cylinders, pyramids, right circular cones, and spheres [9.3]
Capacity measurements [9.3]
Relationship between volume and capacity [9.3]
Fahrenheit and Celsius temperatures for both water freezing and water boiling [9.4]
Many arts there are
which beautify the mind
of people; of all other
none do more garnish
and beautify it than those
arts which are called
mathematical.
H. BILLINGSLEY
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online,
you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of
problems that were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by
working the problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test help in studying
for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
10 in.
7 in.
8 in.
6 in.
FIGURE 9.30 Region with triangular and semicircular ends
4. What is the distance around (to the nearest inch)?
5. What is the area (to the nearest square inch)?
6. Use estimation: if the figure is the top of a prism of height
1 ft, will the volume (in square feet) be greater than or less
than 1 ft3?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.6
Chapter Summary
469
Cylinder
8 cm
1.3 cm
5 dm
2 dm
3 dm
Empty box
FIGURE 9.31
Cheeses, pepperoni, sausage,
salami, beef, linguica, mushrooms,
green peppers, onions and black olives.
Round T
Shrimp and anchovies available upon request.
the choicest meats and the freshest
vegetables, plus our own spicy sauce.
Lavish toppings on a thin, crisp crust.
Mini
Serves
1
Small
Serves
1–2
Medium
Serves
2–3
Large
Serves
3–4
3.71
7.95
11.18
13.88
b. Suppose you were the owner of a pizza restaurant and were
going to offer a 16-in.-diameter pizza. What would you
charge for the pizza if you wanted the price to be compara-
ble with the prices of the other sizes?
A rectangular pool is 80 ft by 30 ft with a depth of 3 ft. Use this
information to answer the questions in Problems 15–17.
15. What is the surface area of the top of the pool?
16. What is the volume of the pool?
17. What is the capacity of the pool (to the nearest 
gallon)?
18. How many square yards of carpet are necessary to carpet an
11-ft by 16-ft room? (Assume that you cannot purchase part of
a square yard.)
19. The Pythagorean theorem (Chapter 7) states that, for a right
triangle with sides a and b and hypotenuse c,
a2  b2  c2
In this chapter, we saw that 
is the area of a square of side
length a. We can, therefore, illustrate the Pythagorean theorem
for a triangle with sides 3, 4, and 5, as shown in Figure 9.32.
a2
7. If this is the top of a prism of height 1 ft, what is the volume
of the prism?
8. For a sphere with radius 1 ft,
a. What is the exact surface area?
b. What is the surface area (to the nearest tenth)?
9. For a sphere with radius 1 ft,
a. What is the exact volume?
b. What is the volume (to the nearest tenth)?
Use the figures shown in Figure 9.31 for Problems 10–13.
10. a. What is the volume?
b. What is the capacity of the box?
11. What is the outside surface area of the box?
12. a. What are the dimensions of this box in centimeters?
b. If the measurements of this box were 50 in. by 20 in. 
by 30 in., what is the capacity of the box?
13. What is the outside surface area (to the nearest unit) of the
cylinder in Figure 9.31?
14. Consider the following advertisement from Round 
Table Pizza.
a. Illustrate the Pythagorean theorem for a right triangle with
sides 5, 12, and 13.
b. On the other hand, if you draw a triangle with sides
measuring 2, 3, and 4 units, you would find that
and 
so 
.
Also notice that such triangles are not right triangles. Is it
possible to form a right triangle with sides of 25, 312, 
and 313?
20. The distributive law states that
ab  ac  a 1b  c2
In this chapter, we say ab and ac represent the areas of two
rectangles, one with sides a and b, and the other with sides
a and c. Give a geometric justification for the distributive
property.
22 1 32 2 42
42 5 16
22 1 32 5 4 1 9 5 13
FIGURE 9.32 Geometric interpretation 
of the Pythagorean theorem
3
4
5
Courtesy of Round Table Pizza
a. If you order a pizza, what size should you order if you
want the best price per square inch? (That is, compare the
price per square inch for the various pizza sizes; assume
the diameters for the four sizes are 6 in., 10 in., 12 in.,
and 14 in.)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

470
CHAPTER 9
The Nature of Measurement
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G31. Suppose a house has an 8-ft ceiling in all rooms except the living room, which has a
10-ft cathedral ceiling. Approximately how many marbles would fit into this house?
G32. Suppose you wish to build a spa on a wood deck. The deck is to be built 4 ft above
level ground. It is to be 50 ft by 30 ft and is to contain a spa that is circular with a 
14-ft diameter. The spa is 4 ft deep.
a. How much water will the spa contain, and how much will it weigh? Assume that
the spa itself weighs 550 lb.
b. Draw plans for the wood deck.
c. Draw up a materials list.
d. Estimate the cost for this installation.
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
FIGURE 9.33 Pieces arranged to find an extra square inch
a. 16 regions
b. 17 regions
*Problem invented by Martin Gardner, printed in The College Mathematics Journal, Vol. 40, No. 3, May 2009, p. 158.
Martin Gardner was the author of the Mathematical Games Department in the Scientific American for over 25 years.
G33. This investigation is an extension of Problem 60, Section 9.2. Consider the square
shown in Figure 9.33a.
Notice there are four green regions, four pink regions, four yellow regions and four
white regions. Rearrange these same pieces as shown in Figure 9.33b, and notice that
now there is an extra square inch in the center. Now arrange these pieces back to
their original position. . . . what happened to the extra square inch?*
G34. HISTORICAL QUEST
Here is a simple formula for finding Pythagorean triples
(numbers a, b, and c that satisfy the Pythagorean theorem). It was given to me in an
elevator by my friend Bert Liberi (who is also a great mathematician). If m is any
natural number greater than 1, then
The reduced fraction will have the property that the set {a, b, c} is a Pythagorean
triple. For example, if m  2, then
Thus, the first two numbers of the triple are 3 and 4. For the third number in the
triple, we find
so the set is {3, 4, 5}. Find ten sets of Pythagorean triples.
c 5 "32 1 42 5 "9 1 16 5 "25 5 5
1
2 1
1
2 1 2 5 1
2 1 1
4 5 3
4
a
b
1
m 1
1
m 1 2 5 a
b
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.6
Chapter Summary
471
Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas in this chapter. You can find references
to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 9.1 Historical Quest
In Chapter 1, we introduced Pascal’s triangle. The repro-
duction in Figure 9.34 is from a 14th-century Chinese manuscript, and in this form is
sometimes called Yang Hui’s triangle.
www.mathnature.com 
FIGURE 9.34 Yang Hui’s triangle
Even though we have not discussed these ancient Chinese numerals, see if you can
reconstruct the basics of their numeration system. Use your imagination.
PROJECT 9.2 Historical Quest
The Ionic Greek numeration system (approximately
3000 B.C.) counts as follows:
Other numbers are 
(for 30), 
(for 40), (for 50), (for 60), (for 70), 
(for 80), 
(for 90), 
(for 100), 
(for 200), (for 300), (for 400), 
(for 500), 
(for 600),
(for 700), 
(for 800), and II (for 900). Try to reconstruct the basics of the Ionic
Greek numeration system. Use your imagination.
PROJECT 9.3 Write a paper on Pythagorean triples (numbers a, b, and c that satisfy the
Pythagorean theorem).
PROJECT 9.4 Construct models for the regular polyhedra.
PROJECT 9.5 What solids occur in nature? Find examples of each of the five regular solids.
v
c
x
f
n
t
s
r
c
p
r
j
y
m
l
a, b, g, d, P, F, z, h, u, i, ia, ib, ig, id, iP, iF, iz, ih, iu, k, ka, c
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on one of these books:
Flatland, a Romance of Many Dimensions, by a Square,
Edwin A. Abbott (New York: Dover Publications, original
edition printed in 1880). It can also be found on the Web at:
http://www.alcyone.com/max/lit/flatland/
Flatterland: Like Flatland, Only More So, Ian Stewart
(Cambridge, MA: Perseus Publishing, 2002).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
10.1 Exponential Equations
473
Definition of logarithm, evaluating
logarithms, exponential equations
10.2 Logarithmic Equations
482
Fundamental properties, logarithmic
equations
10.3 Applications of Growth 
and Decay
490
Population growth, radioactive decay,
logarithmic scales
10
Outline
What in the World?
“Phoenix’s smart growth funds create home
ownership and rental opportunities for middle-
income families,” proclaimed Jay. “I’ve made some
real bucks, not only for myself but for those whom
I’ve helped with their portfolios.”
“I don’t know, I really like having my money in an
insured account,” said Cecily. “Slow and steady,
that’s my motto.”
“The funds I’m talking about bring together
institutional investors and developers to meet the
needs of critical workforce employees, including
firefighters, police officers, teachers, nurses, and
office workers facing few housing choices and long
commutes,” said Jay. “The growth has been
exponential for the investors so far!”
“I know what you are talking about!” added
Cecily. “We’ve just finished studying that topic in an
evening class I’m taking. The long-term differences
between linear and exponential growth are
unbelievable. Our teacher said understanding this
difference could be the key to our financial
success.”
Overview
One of the most important ideas in understanding the nature
of the world around us is to understand applications of
growth and decay. Ross Honsberger, a contemporary math-
ematics professor, said in his book Mathematical Morsels
(Washington, D.C.: Mathematical Association of America,
p. vii), “Mathematics abounds in bright ideas. No matter
how long and hard one pursues her, mathematics never
seems to run out of exciting surprises.” Nothing illustrates
that concept more than the study of growth and decay,
which involves the understanding of both exponential and
logarithmic equations. In this chapter we investigate both of
these important mathematical ideas.
THE NATURE OF GROWTH
© Craig Tuttle/CORBIS
10.4 Chapter Summary
500
Important terms, types of
problems, review problems, book
reports, group research projects,
individual research projects
     Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 10.1
Exponential Equations
473
10.1
Exponential Equations
Little can be understood of even the simplest phenomena of
nature without some knowledge of mathematics, and the attempt
to penetrate deeper into the mysteries of nature compels
simultaneous development of the mathematical processes.
J. W. A. YOUNG
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
The measurement of growth and decay often involves the study of relatively large or rela-
tively small quantities. Difficulty with scaling measurements is often one of our primary
concerns when describing and measuring figures and data. Recall from Section 1.3 that
large and small numbers are often represented in exponential form and scientific nota-
tion. In this section, we investigate solving equations known as exponential equations.
19z15
xx ww
27 y ?
11
7
xx
ww
x
19 y15 y
y 7
w
11
An equation of the form 
in which an unknown
value is included as part of the exponent is called an
exponential equation.
bx 5 N
Exponential Equation
An exponential is an expression of the form ; we begin by using a calculator to evaluate
some exponentials. The number b is called the base. In Chapter 1, we defined 
for integer
values of x. In more advanced courses, 
is defined for all real numbers. We will use a calcu-
lator to approximate these values. We will also frequently approximate two irrational numbers
p < 3.1416  and  e < 2.7183
bx
bx
bx
Example
1
Evaluate exponentials
Evaluate the given exponentials (correct to two decimal places). Show the calculator steps.
a. 28
b. 32.5
c.
d. p3
e. e2
f. ep
g. pe
Solution
Given
Keys Pressed
Evaluation
Approximation
a. 28
2
8 
256 (exact)
256.00
b. 32.5
3
2.5 
15.58845727
15.59
c.
4
2 
7.102993301
7.10
d.
p
3 
31.00627668
31.01
e. e2
e
2 
7.389056099
7.39
k
k
p3
!
k
4"2
k
k
4"2
Don’t skip this example!
Press each of these on
your calculator because
these evaluations set
the groundwork for the
rest of this chapter. In
other words, actually
press keys on your own
calculator to verify that
you obtain what is
shown here.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Given
Keys Pressed
Evaluation
Approximation
Note: If you want to evaluate e, find e1:
e
1 
2.718281828
2.72
f. ep
e
p 
23.14069263
23.14
g. pe
p
e 
22.45915772
22.46
Let’s solve the exponential equation 2x  14. To solve an equation means to find the replace-
ment(s) for the variable that make the equation true. You might try certain values:
x  1:
2x  21  2
Too small
x  2:
2x  22  4
Too small
x  3:
2x  23  8
Still too small
x  4:
2x  24  16
Too big
It seems as if the number you are looking for is between 3 and 4. Our task in this section
is to find both an approximate as well as an exact value for x. To answer this problem, we
need some preliminary information.
Definition of Logarithm
The solution of the equation 
seeks an x-value. What is this x-value? We express
the idea in words:
x is the exponent on a base 2 that gives the answer 14
This can be abbreviated as
x
exp on base 2 to give 14
We further shorten this notation to
This statement is read, “x is the exponent on a base 2 that gives the answer 14.” It appears
that the equation is now solved for x, but this is simply a notational change. The expres-
sion “exponent of 14 to the base 2” is called, for historical reasons, “the log of 14 to the
base 2.” That is,
mean exactly the same thing. This leads us to the following definition of logarithm.
x 5 exp214 and x 5 log214
x 5 exp214
5
2x 5 14
k
k
k
474
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
Understanding this
development is essential
to understanding the
meaning of logarithm.
Spend some time with
this definition.
For positive b and A, 
x is called the logarithm and A is called the argument.
x 5 logb A  means  bx 5 A
b 2 1
Logarithms
The statement x  logb A should be read as “x is the log (exponent) on a base b that gives
the value A.” Do not forget that a logarithm is an exponent.
Example
2
Write exponentials in logarithmic form
Write in logarithmic form:
a. 52  25
b.
c. "64 5 8
1
8 5 223
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
a. In 52  25, 5 is the base and 2 is the exponent, so we write
2  log5 25
Remember, the logarithmic expression “solves” for the exponent. 
b. With 
the base is 2 and the exponent is 3: 
c. With 
the base is 64 and the exponent is 1since 
2: 
1
2 5 log64 8
"64 5 641/2
1
2
"64 5 8,
23 5 log2 1
8
1
8 5 223,
Section 10.1
Exponential Equations
475
Historical
In his history book, F. Cajori
wrote, “The miraculous powers 
of modern calculation are due 
to three inventions: the Arabic
notation, decimal fractions, and
logarithms.” Today, we would no
doubt add a fourth invention to
this list—namely, the handheld
calculator. Nevertheless, the idea
of a logarithm was a revolutionary
idea that forever changed the face
of mathematics. Simply stated,
a logarithm is an exponent, and
even though logarithms are no
longer important as an aid in
calculation, the ideas of logarithm
and exponent are extremely
important in advanced mathemat-
ics, particularly in growth and
decay applications.
NOTE
Example
3
Write logarithmic forms in exponential form
Tell what each expression means, and then rewrite in exponential form.
a. log10 100
b.
c. log3 1
Solution
a. log10100 is the exponent on a base 10 that gives 100. We see that the exponent is 2,
so we write log10100  2; the base is 10 and the exponent is 2, so  102  100. 
b. log10
is the exponent on a base 10 that gives 
; this exponent is 3. The base 
1
1,000
1
1,000
log10 
1
1,000
Example
4
Solve simple exponential equations
Solve for x:
a. 3x  5
b. 10x  2
c. ex  0.56
Solution
a. x  log3 5
b. x  log10 2
c. x  loge 0.56
Common logarithm:
log x means log10 x
Natural logarithm:
ln x means loge x
Logarithmic Notations
The solution for the equation 10x  2 is x  log 2, and the solution for the equation 
e x  0.56 is x  ln 0.56.
In elementary work, the most commonly used base is 10, so we call a logarithm to the
base 10 a common logarithm, and we agree to write it without using a subscript 10. That
is, log x is a common logarithm. A logarithm to the base e is called a natural logarithm
and is denoted by ln x. The expression ln x is often pronounced “ell en x” or “lon x.”
is 10 and the exponent is 3, so we write
c. log3 1 is the exponent on a base 3 that gives 1; this exponent is 0. The base is 3 and
the exponent is 0, so we write 
30  1
103 
1
1,000
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Evaluating Logarithms
To evaluate a logarithm means to find a numerical value for the given logarithm. Calcu-
lators have, to a large extent, eliminated the need for logarithm tables. You should find
two logarithm keys on your calculator. One is labeled 
for common logarithms, and
the other is labeled 
for natural logarithms.
LN
LOG
476
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
Example
5
Use a calculator to evaluate a logarithm
Use a calculator to evaluate:
a. log 5.03
b. ln 3.49
c. log 0.00728 
Solution
Calculator answers are more accurate than were the old table answers, but
it is important to realize that any answer (whether from a table or a calculator) is only as
accurate as the input numbers. However, in this book we will not be concerned with sig-
nificant digits, but instead will use all the accuracy our calculator gives us, rounding
only once (if requested) at the end of the problem.
a.
b.
c. log 0.00728 < 22.137868621
ln 3.49 < 1.249901736
log 5.03 < 0.7015679851
Use your own calculator
to verify these answers
because the number of
digits shown may vary.
Example
6
Evaluate logarithmic expressions
Evaluate the given expressions.
a.
b.
Solution
a. From the definition of logarithm, log2 8
x means 2x
8 or x
3. Thus, 
log2 8
3. By calculator,
Also, 
b. log3 9  x means 3x  32, so that x  log3 9  2. By calculator,
and
ln 9
ln 3 < 2.197224577
1.098612289 < 2
log 9
log 3 < 0.9542425094
0.4771212547 < 2
ln 8
ln 2 < 2.079441542
0.6931471806 < 3
log 8
log 2 < 0.903089987
0.3010299957 < 3
5
5
5
5
log3 9, log  9
log 3 , and ln  9
ln 3
log2 8, log 8
log 2, and ln 8
ln 2
You no doubt noticed that the answers to each part of Example 6 are the same. This result
is summarized with the following theorem, which is proved on page 487 (in Section 10.2).
Example 5 shows fairly straightforward evaluations, since the problems involve com-
mon or natural logarithms and because your calculator has both 
and 
keys.
However, suppose we wish to evaluate a logarithm to some base other than base 10 or
base e. The first method uses the definition of logarithm (as in Example 3), and the
second method uses what is called the change of base theorem. Before we state this the-
orem, we consider its plausibility with the following example.
LN
LOG
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 10.1
Exponential Equations
477
loga x 5 logb x
logb a
Change of Base
Remember this formula 
so you can evaluate
logarithms to bases other
than 10 or e.
Example
7
Evaluate logarithms with a change of base
Evaluate (round to the nearest hundredth):
a. log7 3
b. log3 3.84
Solution
a.
144444444444424444444444443
This is all done by calculator and not on paper.
b.
144444444444424444444444443
Calculator work
log3 3.84 5 log 3.84
log 3
< 0.5843312244
0.4771212547 < 1.224701726 < 1.22
log7 3 5 log 3
log 7 < 0.4771212547
0.84509804
< 0.5645750341 < 0.56
Example
8
Solve an exponential equation
Solve 
(correct to the nearest hundredth).
Solution
We use the definition of logarithm and the change of base theorem to write
1444444
44244444443
Calculator work
x 5 log2 14 5 log 14
log 2 < 3.807354922 < 3.81
2x 5 14
Example
9
Solve exponential equations with 
common and natural logs
Solve the following exponential equations:
a. 10x  5
b. e0.06x  3.456
c. 8x  156.8
Solution
Regardless of the base, we use the definition of logarithm to solve an expo-
nential equation.
We now return to the problem of solving 
2x  14
Given equation
x  log214
Solution
We call log214 the exact solution for the equation, and Example 8 finds an approximate
solution.
Exponential Equations
We now turn to solving exponential equations. Exponential equations will fall into one of
three types:
Common log
Natural log
Arbitrary
base 10
base e
base b
Example: 10x  5
Example: e0.06x  3.456
Example: 8x  156.8
The following example illustrates the procedure for solving each type of exponential
equation.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a.
Given equation
Definition of logarithm; this is the exact answer.
Approximate calculator answer
b.
Given equation
Definition of logarithm
Exact answer; this can be simplified to 
ln 3.456.
Approximate calculator answer
c.
Given equation
Definition of logarithm; this is the exact answer.
Approximate calculator answer. Use the change of base theorem:
Note: Many people will solve this by “taking the log of both sides”: 
Given equation
Take the “log of both sides.”
This property of logarithms will be developed in the next section.
Divide both sides by log 8.
This answer agrees with the first solution.
Did you notice that the results of these two calculations in part c are the same? It sim-
ply involves several extra steps and some additional properties of logarithms. It is
rather like solving quadratic equations by completing the square each time instead of
using the quadratic formula. You can see that, before calculators, there were good rea-
sons to avoid representations such as 
156.8. Whenever you see an expression such
as 
156.8, you know how to calculate it: 
.
log 156.8/log 8
log8
log8
 < 2.43092725
 x 5 log 156.8
log 8
 x log 8 5 log 156.8
 log 8x 5 log 156.8
 8x 5 156.8
log8 156.8 5
log 156.8
log 8
.
 < 2.43092725
 x 5 log8 156.8
 8x 5 156.8
 < 220.66853085
x 5 250
3
 x 5 ln 3.456
20.06
 20.06x 5 ln 3.456
 e20.06x 5 3.456
 < 0.6989700043
 x 5 log 5
 10x 5 5
478
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
Example 10 Solve logarithmic equations
Solve:
a.
b. 1  2e0.000425x
c.
Solution
Note that, in each case, we use the definition of logarithm.
a.
Given equation
Multiply both sides by 5. (Solve for exponential.)
Definition of logarithm
Solve linear equation for x. This is the exact answer.
Approximate calculator answer
b.
Given equation
Divide both sides by 5. (Solve for exponential.)
Definition of logarithm
Solve linear equation for x. This is the exact answer.
Approximate calculator answer
 < 1,630.934542
 x 5
ln 0.5
20.000425
 20.000425x 5 ln 1
2
 1
2 5 e20.000425x
 1 5 2e20.000425x
 < 20.1419930777
 x 5 log 195 2 3
5
 5x 1 3 5 log 195
 105x13 5 195
 105x13
5
5 39
8 # 63x12 5 1,600
105x13
5
5 39
We now consider some more general exponential equations. We will follow the gen-
eral procedure illustrated in Example 9. Some algebraic steps will be required to put the
equations into the correct form. That is, before we use the definition of logarithm, we first
solve for the exponential form.
Historical
The history of logarithms is inter-
esting reading. Jhone Neper
(1550–1617) is more commonly
known using the modern spelling
of John Napier in the context of
Napier’s bones discussed in
Chapter 4. He is usually credited
with the discovery of logarithms
because he was the first to publish
a work on logarithms, called
Descriptio, in 1614. However, sim-
ilar ideas were developed
independently by Jobst Burgi
around 1588. Some of the sources
on the history of logarithms are
“Logarithms” by J. W. L. Glaisher
in the Encyclopaedia Britannica,
11th ed. Vol. 16, pp. 868–877,
and Florian Cajori, “History of the
Exponential and Logarithmic
Concepts,” American Mathemati-
cal Monthly, Vol. 20 (1913). In
Glaisher’s article he says, “The
invention of logarithms and the
calculation of the earlier tables
form a very striking episode in the
history of exact science, and, with
the exception of the Principia of
Newton, there is no mathematical
work published in the country
which has produced such impor-
tant consequences, or to which so
much interest attaches as to
Napier’s Descriptio.”
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Jhone Neper
(1550–1617)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

c.
Given equation
Divide both sides by 8. (Solve for exponential.)
Definition of logarithm
Solve linear equation for x. This is the exact answer.
Approximate calculator answer. You will need the change of base
theorem.
 < 0.3190157417
 x 5 log6 200 2 2
3
 3x 1 2 5 log6 200
 63x12 5 200
 8 # 63x12 5 1,600
Section 10.1
Exponential Equations
479
Example 11 Large number puzzle
The earth will fit into a cube that is 12,740 km on a side. How many
generations of an organism that doubles each generation and takes up one 
of space
would it take to fill up this earth-sized cube? Note that the symbol 
stands for the
length of a micrometer, which is defined to be one-millionth of a meter.
mm
mm3
Pólya’s 
Method
Pellicle
Food vacuole
Contractile vacuole
Macronucleus
Micronucleus
Cilia
Cytostome
Cytostome
1
m
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Do you know what a 
is? It is one-millionth of a meter, so
equals the size of a cube whose dimensions are:
Devise a Plan. The plan we will use is first to find the number of organisms of size
that are contained in this earth-sized cube, and then to find the number of genera-
tions by solving an exponential equation.
Carry Out the Plan. First, solve 
, where s is the length of a side of a cube.
This is the earth-sized cube.
 5 2.07 3 1039 mm3
 5 2.07 3 1021 3 1018 mm3
 5 2.07 3 1021 3 11062 3 mm3
 5 12.07 3 10212 11,000,000 mm2 3
 5 2.07 3 1021 m3
 5 2.07 3 1012 3 109 m3
 5 2.07 3 1012 3 11032 3 m3
 5 12.07 3 10122 11,000 m2 3
 5 12.07 3 10122 km3
 5 112,740 km2 3
 V 5 s3
V 5 s3
1 mm3
1 mm 3 1 mm 3 1 mm
11 mm2 3
mm
© 2002–2006 Shasta Visions. All Rights Reserved. 
www.marbles-gifts.com.
Example 10b illustrates exponential decay. Growth and decay problems are common
examples of exponential equations. We will consider growth and decay applications in
Section 10.3.
In Chapter 1 we considered large numbers. The following example involves large
numbers, volumes, and exponential equations.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solve each exponential equation in Problems 19–22. Give the exact
value for x. 
19. a. 4x 
b. 5x  8
c. 6x  4.5
d. 4x  5
20. a. 125x  25
b.
c. ex  9
d.
21. a. 216x  36
b. 10x  2.5
c. 10x  45
d. 10x  15
22. a. 27x 
b. ex  1.8
c. ex  34.2
d. ex  6
Evaluate the given expressions in Problems 23–28 
(to two decimal places).
23. a. log 4.27
b. logb b2
c. logt t3
d. In 10
24. a. log 1.08
b. loge e4
c.
d. In 100
25. a. log 71,600
b. log3 9
c. log19 1
d. In 1,000
26. a. log 18.9
b. log2 32
c. log7 1
d. log 0.042
27. a. ln 2.27
b. ln 16.77
c. ln 7.3
d. ln 0.321
28. a. log e
b. log e2
c. log e3
d. log 0.0532
logp !p
1
81
px 5 10
1 !22 x 5 5
1
16
Since the organism doubles each generation, we want to find n so that 
2n  2.07  1039
Using the definition of logarithm, we find 
n  log212.07  10392  130.6
It would take about 131 generations. 
Look Back. Since n is the number of doublings, we find
2131  2.72  1039
which is the appropriate magnitude.
480
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the definition of logarithm? 
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a common logarithm? What
is the notation used for a common logarithm? 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a natural logarithm? What is
the notation used for natural logarithm? 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Outline a procedure for solving
exponential equations. 
5. a. What does log N mean?
b. What does ln N mean?
c. What does logb N mean?
6. How do you use your calculator to evaluate the following? 
a. a common logarithm
b. a natural logarithm
c. a logarithm to a base b
7. What is an exponential equation?
8. What are the three types of exponential equations?  
Write the equations in Problems 9–12 in logarithmic form. 
9. a. 64  26
b. 100  102
c. m  np
10. a. 1,000  103
b. 81  92
c.
11. a.
b. 36  62
c. s  t n
12. a. 125  53
b.
c. a  bc
In Problems 13–18 use the definition of logarithm to simplify each
expression.
13. a. log10 10
b. log10 1,000
c. log10 105
14. a. log 100
b. log5 5
c. log5 25
9 5 A1
3B22
1
10 5 1021
1
e 5 e21
Problem Set 10.1
15. a. log5 53
b. log 0.1
c. loge e
16. a. loge e2
b. loge e4
c. log 103
17. a. logb b
b. logb b3
c. logb b6
18. a. log2 128
b. log 10n
c. In en
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 10.1
Exponential Equations
481
41. a. ex  8
b. 10x  125
42. a. 102x  50
b. e2x  450
43. a. 10 53x  0.041
b. 102x1  515
44. a. e12x  3
b. e15x  25
Scientific research has shown that the risk of having an automobile
accident increases exponentially as the concentration of alcohol in
the blood increases. The blood alcohol concentration is modeled
by the formula
where x is the percent of risk. In Problems 45–48, find the alcohol
concentration (correct to the nearest hundredth) for the given
percent of risk.
45. The risk of an accident is 25%.
46. The risk of an accident is 15%.
47. The risk of an accident is 10%.
48. The risk of an accident is 2%.
49. In 2009, the minimum wage in Arizona was $7.25. If we
assume the growth of this minimum wage is exponential and is
growing at the rate of 2%, then the length of time until the
minimum wage reaches d dollars is modeled by the formula
t 5 50 ln a d
7.25b
a 5 ln x 2 0.14
Level  2
Solve the exponential equations in Problems 37–44. Show the
approximation you obtain with your calculator without rounding. 
37. a. 8x  3
b. 64x  5
38. a. ex  4
b. ex  25
39. a. 10 x  42
b. 10x  0.0234
40. a. 105x  5
b. 103x  0.45
Write each expression in Problems 29–32 in terms of common
logarithms, and then give a calculator approximation (correct 
to four decimal places). 
29. a. log3 45
b. log5 91
30. a. log6 10
b. log5 304
31. log7 13
b. log2 556
32. log4 3.05
b. log2 1,513
Write each expression in Problems 33–36 in terms of natural
logarithms, and then give a calculator approximation (correct to
four decimal places). 
33. a. log2 0.0056
b. log8.3 105
34. a. log8 10
b. logp e2
35. a. log7 56
b. log2 10.85
36. a. log8 e
b. log1.08 5,450
50. In 2009, the minimum wage in California was $8.00. If we
assume the growth of this minimum wage is exponential and
is growing at the rate of 2%, then the length of time until the
minimum wage reaches d dollars is modeled by the formula
In what year would you expect the minimum wage to be
$10.00?
51. In 2010, the minimum wage in Washington state was $8.55. If
we assume the growth of this minimum wage is exponential
and is growing at the rate of 2%, then the length of time until
the minimum wage reaches d dollars is modeled by the
formula
In what year would you expect the minimum wage to be $10.00?
52. In 2009, the minimum wage in Florida was $7.21. If we
assume the growth of this minimum wage is exponential and is
growing at the rate of 2%, then the length of time until the
minimum wage reaches d dollars is modeled by the formula
In what year would you expect the minimum wage to be $9.00?
t 5 50 ln a d
7.21b
t 5 50 ln a d
8.55b
t 5 50 ln ad
8b
Level  3
Solve the exponential equations in Problems 53–58. Show 
the approximation you obtain with your calculator without 
rounding.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57. Solve P  P0ert for t
58. Solve I  I0ert for r
59. If the earth’s radius is approximately 3,963 mi, and if a
hypothetical perpetual water-making machine pours out 
1 gallon in the first minute and then doubles its output each
minute, in which minute would this hypothetical machine pour
out a single quantity of water that would be enough to fill the
earth with water?
60. If the weight of the earth is 5.9  1021 metric tons, and if its
weight were cut in half each minute, how long would it take
for the earth to weigh less than one g? Note: A metric ton is 
1 million grams.
A1 1 0.055
12 B12x 5 2
A1 1 0.08
360 B360x 5 2
3 # 5x 1 30 5 105
2 # 3x 1 7 5 61
In what year would you expect the minimum wage to 
be $8.25?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

482
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
10.2   Logarithmic Equations
In 2005, an earthquake measuring 7.6 on the Richter scale struck Pakistan, India, and the
Kashmir region. The intensity of this quake was similar to the one that devastated San
Francisco in 1906, but the death toll for this earthquake was measured in the tens of thou-
sands, and the number of homeless was measured in the millions. What is the amount of
energy released (in ergs) by this earthquake? How would you answer this question?
Where would you begin?
Fundamental Properties
With a little earthquake research, you could find information on the Richter scale, which
was developed by Gütenberg and Richter. The formula relating the energy E (in ergs) to
the magnitude of the earthquake M is given by
This equation is called a logarithmic equation, and the topic of this section is to solve
such equations. To answer the question, we first solve for log E, and then we use the defi-
nition of logarithm to write this as an exponential equation.
Given equation
Multiply both sides by 1.5.
Add 11.8 to both sides.
Definition of logarithm
We can now answer the question. Since M  7.6,
However, to solve certain logarithmic equations, we must first develop some properties
of logarithms.
We begin with two fundamental properties of logarithms. If you understand the defi-
nition of logarithm, you can see that these two properties are self-evident, so we call these
the Grant’s tomb properties of logarithms.
E 5 101.517.62111.8 < 1.58 3 1023
101.5M111.8 5 E
1.5M 1 11.8 5 log E
1.5M 5 log E 2 11.8
M 5 log E 2 11.8
1.5
M 5 log E 2 11.8
1.5
1. logb bx  x
In words, x is the exponent on a base b that gives bx.
That is, bx  bx.
2. b
 x
x  0
In words, logb x is the exponent on a base b that gives x,
which is the definition of logarithm. 
logb x
Fundamental Properties of Logarithms
Spend some time making
sure you understand
these properties. Do you
see why we called them
Grant’s tomb properties?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 10.2
Logarithmic Equations
483
Example
1
Evaluate a logarithmic expression
Evaluate the given expressions.
a. log 103
b. ln e2
c. 10log 8.3
d. eln 4.5
e. log8 84.2
Solution
a. log 103  3
log 103 is the exponent on 10 that gives 103; obviously it is 3.
b. ln e2  2
ln e 2 is the exponent on e that gives e 2; obviously it is 2.
c. 10log 8.3  8.3
Consider log 8.3; what is this? It is the exponent on a base 10 that gives 
the answer 8.3.
d. eln 4.5  4.5
Consider ln 4.5; what is this? It is the exponent on a base e that gives the 
answer 4.5.
e. log8 84.2  4.2
What is the exponent on 8 that gives 84.2? Obviously, it is 4.2.
If A, B, and b are positive real numbers with 
, then 
is equivalent to A 5 B
logb A 5 logb B
b 2 1
Log of Both Sides Theorem
Basically, all logarithmic equations in this book fall into one of four types:
Example:
Type I:
The unknown is the logarithm.
Type II: The unknown is the base.
Type III: The logarithm of an unknown is equal to a number.
Type IV: The logarithm of an unknown is equal to the log 
of a number.
The following example illustrates the procedure for solving each type of logarithmic
equation.
log5 x 5 log5 72
ln x 5 5
logx 6 5 2
log2"3 5 x
The proof of this theorem
is not difficult, and it
depends on the two
fundamental properties of
logarithms given in the
previous subsection.
Example
2
Solve four types of logarithmic equations
Solve the following logarithmic equations:
a. Type I: 
b. Type II: 
c. Type III: 
d. Type IV: log5 x 5 log5 72
ln x 5 5
logx 6 5 2
log2!3 5 x
Logarithmic Equations
A logarithmic equation is an equation for which there is a logarithm on one or both
sides. The key to solving logarithmic equations is the following theorem, which we will
call the log of both sides theorem.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
a. Type I:
. If the logarithmic expression does not contain a variable, you
can use your calculator to evaluate. Remember, this type was evaluated in Section 10.1.
If it is a common logarithm (base 10), use the 
key; if it is a natural logarithm
(base e), use the 
key; if it has another base, use the change of base theorem:
For this example, we see
b. Type II:
log 6  2. If the unknown is the base, then use the definition of logarithm
to write an equation that is not a logarithmic equation. 
Given
Definition of logarithm
Solve quadratic equation.
When solving logarithmic equations, make sure your answers are in the domain of
the variable. Remember that, by definition, the base must be positive. For this exam-
ple, 
is not in the domain, so the solution is 
c. Type III:
The third and fourth types of logarithmic equations are the most common,
and both involve the logarithm of an unknown quantity on one side of an equation.
For the third type, use the definition of logarithm (and a calculator for an approxi-
mate solution, if necessary). 
ln x  5
Given
e5  x
5 is the exponent on e that gives x.
This is the exact solution. An approximate solution is x
. 
d. Type IV:
When a logarithm occurs on both sides, use the log of both sides theorem.
Make sure the log on both sides has the same base:
Example 2 illustrates the procedures for solving logarithmic equations, but most
logarithmic equations are not as easy as those in Example 2. Usually, you must do some
algebraic simplification to put the problem into the form of one of the four types of loga-
rithmic equations. You might also have realized that Type IV is a special case of Type III.
For example, to solve 
which looks like Example 2d, we see that we cannot use the log of both sides theorem be-
cause the bases are not the same. We can, however, treat this as a Type III equation by us-
ing the definition of logarithm to write 
This can be evaluated using a calculator. However, you may find it easier to visualize if
we write 
so that 3.892789261 is the exponent on a base 5 that gives x. In other words, 
x < 53.892789261 < 525.9481435 
log5 x 5 log3 72 < 3.892789261
x 5 5log3 72
log5 x 5 log3 72
x 5 72
log5 x 5 log5 72
< 148.4131591
x 5 !6.
x 5 2!6
x 5 6!6
x2 5 6
logx 6 5 2
x
x 5 log2 !3 5  log !3
log 2
 <  0.7924812504
loga N   log N
log a
  or  loga N   ln N
ln a
LN
LOG
log2!3 5 x
484
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
Historical
For years, logarithms were used
as a computational aid, but today
they are more important in solving
problems. Perhaps we have come
full circle: The Babylonians first
used logarithms to solve problems
and not to do calculations.
The modern basis of
logarithms was developed by
Tycho Brahe (1546–1601) to dis-
prove the Copernican theory of
planetary motion. The name he
used for the method was
prostaphaeresis. In 1590, a storm
brought together Brahe and John
Craig, who in turn told Napier
about Brahe’s method. It was John
Napier (1550–1617) who was the
first to use the word logarithm.
Napier was the Isaac Asimov of his
day, having envisioned the tank,
the machine gun, and the subma-
rine. He also predicted that the end
of the world would occur between
1688 and 1700. He is best known
today as the inventor of logarithms,
which, until the advent of the calcu-
lator, were used extensively with
complicated calculations. Today,
the use of logarithms goes far be-
yond numerical calculations.
NOTE
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Laws of Logarithms
To simplify logarithmic expressions, we remember that a logarithm is an exponent and
the laws of exponents correspond to the laws of logarithms.
Section 10.2
Logarithmic Equations
485
If A, B, and b are positive numbers, p is any real number, and 
:
First Law (Additive)
logb(AB)  logb A  logb B
The log of the product of two numbers is the sum of
the logs of those numbers. 
Second Law (Subtractive)
logb( )  logb A  logb B
The log of the quotient of two numbers is the 
log of the numerator minus the log of the
denominator. 
Third Law (Multiplicative)
logb Ap  p logb A
The log of the pth power of a number is p times the
log of that number.
A
B
b 2 1
Laws of Logarithms
The proofs of these laws of logarithms are easy. The additive law of logarithms
comes from the additive law of exponents:
bxby  bxy
Let A  bx and B  by, so that AB  bxy. Then, from the definition of logarithm, these
three equations are equivalent to
Therefore, by putting these pieces together, we have 
Similarly, for the subtractive law of logarithms, 
Subtractive law of exponents
Definition of logarithm
Since x  logb A and y  logb B
The proof of the multiplicative law of logarithms follows from the multiplicative law of
exponents and you are asked to do this in the problem set. We can also prove this multiplica-
tive law by using the additive law of logarithms for p a positive integer: 
Definition of Ap
14444444244444443
p factors
Additive law of logarithms
14444444444444444444244444444444444444443
p terms
When logarithms were used for calculations, the laws of logarithms were used to ex-
pand an expression such as 
. Calculators have made such problems obsolete.
Today, logarithms are important in solving equations, and the procedure for solving loga-
rithmic equations requires that we take an algebraic expression involving logarithms and
write it as a single logarithm. We might call this contracting a logarithmic expression.
log A6.45 # 622
84.2
B
 5 logb A 1 logb A 1 logb A 1 c1 logb A
logb  Ap 5 logb1A # A # A #  c # A2
logb  A 2 logb B 5 logbaA
Bb
x 2 y 5 logbaA
Bb
 5 bx2y
 A
B 5 bx
by
logb1AB2 5 x 1 y 5 logb A 1 logb B
x 5 logb  A, y 5 logb B, and x 1 y 5 logb1AB2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

486
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
Be sure the bases are
the same before you use
the laws of logarithms.
Example
3
Use logarithmic properties to contract
Write each statement as a single logarithm.
a. log x  5 log y  log z
b. log2 3x  2 log2 x  log21x  32
Solution
a. log x  5 log y  log z  log x  log y5  log z
Third law
 log xy5  log z
First law
 log 
Second law
b. log2 3x  2 log2 x  log21x  32  log2 3x  log2 x2  log21x  32
 log2 
3x1x 1 32
x2
xy5
z
Example
4
Solve a logarithmic equation
Solve:
log8 3 
log8 25  log8 x
Solution
The goal here is to make this look like a Type IV logarithmic equation so
that there is a single log expression on both sides. 
Given equation
Third law of logarithms
2512  (52)12  5
First law of logarithms
Log of both sides theorem
The solution is 15. (Check to be sure 15 is in the domain of the variable.)
15 5 x
log8 13 # 52 5 log8 x
log8 3 1 log8 5 5 log8 x
log8 3 1 log8 251/2 5  log8 x
log8 3 1 1
2
  log8 25 5  log8 x
1
2
When solving logarithmic
equations, you must be
mindful of extraneous
solutions.
Example
5
Solve logarithmic equations
Solve:
a. log 15  2  log1x  2502
b. log 5  log12x22  log x  log 15 
Solution
Use the laws of logarithms to combine the log statements. We have chosen two
examples that are quite similar but whose solutions require slightly different procedures.
For part a, rewrite the expression so that all parts involving logarithms are on one side. In
part b, rewrite the expression so that all logarithms involving the variable are on one side.
a. This is a Type III logarithmic equation. Use the definition of logarithm.
Given equation
Subtract log 15 from both sides.
Second law of logarithms
2 5 log x 1 250
15
2 5 log1x 1 2502 2 log 15
log 15 1 2 5 log1x 1 2502
When solving logarithmic equations, you must look for extraneous solutions because the
logarithm requires that the arguments be positive, but when solving an equation, we may
not know the signs of the arguments. For example, if you solve an equation involving log x
and obtain two answers 1for example, 
and 
2, then the value 
must be
extraneous because 
is not defined.
log1242
x 5 24
x 5 24
x 5 3
 log2 
31x 1 32
x
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Definition of logarithm
Multiply both sides by 15.
Subtract 250 from both sides.
The solution is 
1,250.
b. This is a Type IV logarithmic equation. Use the log of both sides theorem. 
Given equation
Subtract log x and log 5 from both sides.
Second law of logarithms
Log of both sides theorem
The solution is 
.
x 5 3
2
x 5 3
2
2x 5 3
log12x2 5 log 3
log 2x 2
x
5 log 15
5
log12x22 2 log x 5 log 15 2 log 5
log 5 1 log12x22 5 log x 1 log 15
x 5
1,250 5 x
1,500 5 x 1 250
102 5 x 1 250
15
Section 10.2
Logarithmic Equations
487
Example
6
Prove change of base theorem
Prove: 
Solution
Let 
.
Definition of logarithm
Log of both sides theorem
Third law of logarithms
Divide both sides by logb a (logb a
0).
Thus, by substitution, 
.
loga  x 5 logb  x
logb  a
2
y 5 logb x
logb a
y logb a 5 logb x
logb ay 5 logb x
ay 5 x
y 5 loga x
loga x 5 logb x
logb a
In Chapter 1, we asked you to name the largest number that can be written with
three digits. The next example considers the size of this huge number.
Example
7
Largest number puzzle
The largest number that you can write with three digits is 
. Write this 
number as a power of 10.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Do you know what 
means? Try using your calculator to
find this number.
First try:
9^9^9
What the calculator is giving is (99)9. Is this the largest possible number with three
digits?
1.966270505 3 1077
<
999
999
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Second try:
9^(9^9) produces an overflow, so we know this number is larger than
(9^9)^9.
Devise a Plan. Find the number 9^(9^9) as a power of 10, which we write as 
, and
the plan is to use logarithms to find n.
Carry Out the Plan.
For some number n
Use a calculator for 99.
Definition of logarithm
Property of logarithms
Calculator approximation
Look Back. This means 
.
999 < 10369,693,099.6
 < 369,693,099.6
 5 387,420,489 log 9
n 5 log 9387,420,489
9387,420,489 5 10n
9^19^92 5 10n
10n
488
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a logarithmic equation?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What are the four types of
logarithmic equations?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Outline a procedure for solving
logarithmic equations.
Classify each of the statements in Problems 4–20 as true or false.
If a statement is false, explain why you think it is false.
4.
is the exponent on 10 that gives 500.
5. A common logarithm is a logarithm in which the base is 2.
6. A natural logarithm is a logarithm in which the base is 10.
7. In 
, the exponent is N.
8. To evaluate 
, divide log 5 by log N.
9. If 
, then 
10. If 
, then 
.
11. If 
, then 
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
is negative when N is negative.
20.
is negative when N . 1.
log N
logb N
logb A
logb B 5 logb A 2 logb B
logb A
logb B 5 logb1A 2 B2
log A
log B 5 ln A
ln B
logb A
logb B 5 logb A
B
logb AB 5 1logb A2 1logb B2
logb1A 1 B2 5 logb A 1 logb B
ln x
2 5 ln x
2
x1.5 5 8.
log1.5 8 5 x
log3 81 5 4
2 log3 81 5 8
log3 6,561 5 8.
2 log3 81 5 8
log5 N
logb N
log 500
Find a simplified value for x in Problems 21–26 by inspection. Do
not use a calculator.
21. a.
b.
c.
d.
22. a.
b.
c.
d.
23. a.
b.
c.
d.
24. a.
b.
c.
d.
25. a.
b.
c.
d.
26. a.
b.
c.
d.
Contract the expressions given in Problems 27–30. That is, use the
properties of logarithms to write each expression as a single
logarithm with a coefficient of 1.
27. a.
b.
c.
28. a. 3 ln 4  5 ln 2  ln 3
b. 3 ln 4  2 ln(2  2)
c. 3 ln 4  5(ln 2  ln 3)
29. a. ln 3  2 ln 4  ln 8
b. ln 3  2 ln(4  8)
c. ln 3  2(ln 4  ln 8)
30. a. log(x2  9)  log(x  3)
b. log(x2  x  6)  log(x  2)
c. ln(x2  4)  ln(x  2)
2ln x 1 3ln y 2 4ln z
log 40 2 log 10 2 log 2
log 2 1 log 3 1 log 4
ln 109 5 ln x
ln 9.3 5 ln x
ln x 5 ln 14
ln x 5 4
ln x 5 3
ln x 5 2
logx e 5 1
log x 5 5
log 
1
1,000 5 x
log 1,000 5 x
log 10,000 5 x
log 1
10 5 x
log4 64 5 x
log3 81 5 x
log2 128 5 x
log5 25 5 x
blogb x
log6 6x
ln e3
log 104.2
logb bx
4log4 x
10log 3.4
eln 23
Problem Set 10.2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The pH of a substance measures its acidity or alkalinity. It is found
by the formula
where [H+] is the concentration of hydrogen ions in an aqueous
solution given in moles per liter. Find the pH (to the nearest tenth)
for the solutions in Problems 31–34.
31. lemon with 
32. vinegar with 
33. rainwater with 
34. toothpaste with 
35. An advertising agency conducted a survey and found that the
number of units sold, N, is related to the amount a spent on
advertising (in dollars) by the following formula:
How many units are sold after spending $1,000?
36. An advertising agency conducted a survey and found that the
number of units sold, N, is related to the amount a spent on
advertising (in dollars) by the following formula:
How many units are sold after spending $50,000?
Level  2
Solve the equations in Problems 37–55 by finding the exact solution.
37. a.
b.
38. a.
b.
39. a.
b.
40. a.
b.
41. a.
b.
42. a.
b.
43. a.
b.
44. a.
b.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51. ln x 2 ln 8 5 12
ln x 5 1.8 2 ln 4.8
log x 5 1.8 1 log 4.8
x23x 5 913x2
x25x 5 5x
ln3log1ln x2 4 5 0
log1log x2 5 1
ln 1 1 ln ex 5 2
0 1 x 5 2
ln e3 2 ln x 5 1
3 2 x 5 1
log 10 5 log "1,000 2 log x
1 5 3
2 2 x
ln e 5 ln !2
x 2 ln e
1 5 x 2 1
log 10x 2 2 5 log 100
x 2 2 5 2
1
2 logb x 5 3 logb 5 2 logb x
1
2 x 5 3 2 x
ln e3 1 2 log x 5 11
3 1 2x 5 11
1
2 log x 2 log 100 5 2
1
2x 2 2 5 2
N 5 1,500 1 300 ln a 1a $ 12
N 5 1,500 1 300 ln a 1a $ 12
3H 1 4 5 1.26 3 10210
3H 1 4 5 6.31 3 1027
3H 1 4 5 3.98 3 1023
3H 1 4 5 2.86 3 1024
pH 5 2log3H1 4
Section 10.2
Logarithmic Equations
489
52.
53.
54.
55.
Level 3
56. An advertising agency conducted a survey and found that the
number of units sold, N, is related to the amount a spent on
advertising (in dollars) by the following formula:
How much needs to be spent (to the nearest hundred dollars) to
sell 4,000 units?
57. The “forgetting curve” for memorizing nonsense syllables is
given by
where R is the percentage who remember the syllables after t
seconds.
a. In how many seconds would only 
of the
students remember?
b. Solve for t.
58. The “learning curve” describes the rate at which a person
learns certain tasks. If a person sets a goal of typing N words
per minute (wpm), the length of time t (in days) to achieve this
goal is given by
a. According to this formula, what is the maximum number of
words per minute?
b. Solve for N.
Problem Solving  3
59. HISTORICAL QUEST
In 1935 Charles Richter and Beno
Gütenberg of Cal Tech used a new scale for measuring earth-
quakes in California. This scale is now universally used to
measure the strength of earthquakes. It relates the energy E (in
ergs) to the magnitude of the earthquake M by the formula
a. A small earthquake is one that releases 
ergs of energy.
What is the magnitude (to the nearest hundredth) of such an
earthquake on the Richter scale?
b. A large earthquake is one that releases 
ergs of energy.
What is the magnitude (to the nearest hundredth) of such an
earthquake on the Richter scale?
c. How much energy is released in an 8.0 earthquake?
d. Solve for E.
60. Prove the multiplicative law of logarithms using the
multiplicative law of exponents. That is, prove
logb Ap 5 p logb A
1025
1515
M 5 log E 2 11.8
1.5
t 5 262.5 ln a1 2 N
80b
10% 1R 5 102
R 5 80 2 27 ln t1t $ 12
N 5 1,500 1 300 ln a1a $ 12
log x 1 log1x 2 32 5 2
log8 5 1 1
2 log8 9 5 log8 x
log 2 5 1
4 log 16 2 x
log x 1 log 8 5 12
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

490
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
10.3  Applications of Growth and Decay
In populations, bank accounts, and radioactive decay, where the rate of change is held
constant, the average growth rate is a constant percent of the current value. In calculus,
a growth formula is derived, and this formula is presented in the following box.
Exponential growth or decay can be described by the
equation
where r is the annual growth/decay rate, t is the time (in
years), 
is the amount present initially (present value),
and A is the target (future) value. If r is positive, this for-
mula models growth, and if r is negative, the formula
models decay.
A0
A 5 A0ert
Growth/Decay Formula
Note: You can use this formula as long as the units of time are the same. That is, if the
time is measured in years, then the growth/decay rate is in years, but if the time is meas-
ured in days, then the growth/decay rate is a daily growth/decay rate.
This is one of the 
most useful formulas 
in mathematics.
Example
1
Find date of 7 billion people on earth
In 2009, the world population reached 7 billion. If we assume a growth rate of 1.5%,
when will the population reach 8 billion?
Solution
We are given the growth rate 
, the initial population 
(in
billions), and the target population 
(in billions).
Growth formula
Substitute known values.
Solve for the exponential.
Definition of logarithm
Divide both sides by 0.015.
Approximate answer by calculator
This means that we should pass the 8 billion mark in 2018.
 < 8.9020928
 t 5 ln 8/7
0.015
 0.015t 5 ln 8
7
 8
7 5 e0.015t
 8 5 7e0.015t
 A 5 A0ert
A0 5 8
A0 5 7
r 5 0.015
Suppose we do not know the growth rate but have some population data. Consider
the following example, assuming an exponential growth model.
Population Growth
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 10.3
Applications of Growth and Decay
491
Example
2
Compare actual with predicted population
Phoenix, Arizona, had a population of 983,403 in 1990 and 1,321,045 in 2000. Predict
the population in Phoenix in 2003. Compare this calculated number with the actual
2003 population of 1,388,416.
Solution
We use the growth/decay formula, where 
and 
for 
(years).
Growth formula
Substitute known values.
Solve for the exponential.
Definition of logarithm
Solve for the unknown, r.
Calculator approximation
For 2003, we use the population in 2000 and calculate A using the above value for r:
Round to the nearest unit.
Thus, the predicted 2003 population is 1,443,356. Since the actual population,
1,388,416, is less than the predicted number, we conclude that the growth rate between
2000 and 2003 has decreased a bit from the growth rate in 1990–2000.
 < 1,443,356
 5 1,321,045er132
 A 5 A0ert
 < 0.029515936343
 r 5 1
10lna1,321,045
983,403 b
 10r 5 lna1,321,045
983,403 b
 1,321,045
983,403 5 e10r
 1,321,045 5 983,403e10r
 A 5 A0ert
t 5 10
A 5 1,321,045
A0 5 983,403
Example
3
Estimate AIDS fatalities
According to the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, Georgia, at the end of January
1992, the total number of AIDS-related U.S. deaths for all ages was 209,693. At that
time, it was predicted that by January 1996 there would be from 400,000 to 450,000
cumulative deaths from the disease. Assuming these numbers are correct, estimate the
cumulative number of AIDS-related deaths at the end of January 2002.
Solution
We assume that the growth rate will remain constant over the years
of our study and also that the growth takes place continuously. From the end of Janu-
ary 1992 to January 1996 is 4 years, so 
. Furthermore, we will work with the
more conservative estimate of cumulative deaths; that is, we let 
and
.
Growth formula
Substitute known values.
Solve for the exponential.
Definition of logarithm
Solve for the unknown.
Approximate answer by calculator
Thus, at the end of January 2002, we have 
A graph is shown in Figure 10.1.
1for t 5 102,  A 5 209,693e10r < 1,053,839.
 < 0.1614549977
 r 5 1
4lna400,000
209,693b
 4r 5 lna400,000
209,693b
 400,000
209,693 5 e4r
 400,000 5 209,693er142
 A 5 A0ert
A 5 400,000
A0 5 209,693
t 5 4
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
375,000
750,000
1,125,000
1,500,000
Year
(Base year 1990 = 0)
Cumulative number of U.S.
AIDS-related deaths
t
A
FIGURE 10.1 Cumulative deaths
from AIDS, 1992–2002
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We often specify radioactive decay in terms of what is called the half-life. This is the
time that it takes for a particular radioactive substance to decay to half of its original amount.
492
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
Radioactive Decay
We now consider another application involving decay. Radioactive materials decay over
time (see Figure 10.2). Each substance has a different decay rate. In the following
example, when we say the decay rate of neptunium-239 is 
, we imply that the rate is
negative—that is, growth implies positive rate and decay implies negative rate; or, saying
it another way, positive rate is growth and negative rate is decay.
31%
Example
4
Find a decay rate
If 100.0 mg of neptunium-239 
decays to 73.36 mg after 24 hours, find the value
of r in the growth/decay formula for t expressed in days.
Solution
Since 
and 
(day), we have
Growth/decay formula
Substitute known values.
Solve for the exponential.
Definition of logarithm
Approximate answer by calculator
Thus, the daily decay rate is approximately 31%.
 < 20.309791358
 r 5 ln 0.7336
 0.7336 5 er
 73.36 5 100er112
 A 5 A0ert
t 5 1
A 5 73.36, A0 5 100.0,
1 239Np2
Example
5
Find the decay rate for carbon-14
Carbon-14, used for archeological dating, has a half-life of 5,730 years. Find the decay
rate for carbon-14.
Solution
If 100 mg of carbon-14 
is present, we are given that in 5,730 years
there will be 50 mg present 
We use the growth/decay formula:
Growth/decay formula
Substitute known values.
Solve for the exponential.
Definition of logarithm
Solve for the unknown.
Approximate answer by calculator
Use this value of r for carbon-14 calculations.
 < 21.209680943E 2 4
 r 5 ln 0.5
5,730
 5,730r 5 ln 0.5
 0.5 5 e5,730r
 50 5 100er15,7302
 A 5 A0ert
1A 5 502.
1t 5 5,7302
1A0 5 1002
We can use the decay rate for carbon-14 to date an artifact, as illustrated by the fol-
lowing example.
Example
6
Estimate the age of a fossil
An archaeologist has found a fossil in which the ratio of 
to 
is 
of the ratio
found in the atmosphere. Approximately how old is the fossil?
20%
12C
14C
We will use the decay
rate we find in this
example in other
examples and in the
problem set.
FIGURE 10.2 Radioactive decay
Energy
Radiation
Particle
Radioactive
atom
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 10.3
Applications of Growth and Decay
493
Solution
As the radioactive isotope carbon-14 denoted by 
decays, it changes to
a stable form of carbon, called carbon-12. Once again, we use the growth/decay formula
with the ratio of 
to 
to be 
as follows:
Growth/decay formula
Divide both sides by 
The given ratio is 20%.
Definition of logarithm
Solve for the unknown; use the value of r from Example 5.
Approximate answer by calculator
The fossil is approximately 13,000 yr old.
 < 13,304.64798
 t 5 ln 0.20
r
 rt 5 ln 0.20
 0.20 5 ert
A0.
 A
A0
5 ert
 A 5 A0ert
20%
12C
14C
B
14C
A
Logarithmic Scales
Growth and decay examples are exponential models, but as we have seen, a logarithm is
an exponent and is therefore directly related to growth and decay. A logarithmic scale is
a scale in which logarithms are used to make data more manageable by expanding small
variations and compressing large ones.
For example, prior to 1935, seismographs were used to record the amount of earth
movement generated by an earthquake’s seismic wave; this movement was recorded on
a seismogram. The amplitude of a seismogram is the vertical distance between the peak
or valley of the recording of the seismic wave and a horizontal line formed if there is no
earth movement. This amplitude is measured using a very small unit, micrometer (de-
noted by m), which is one-millionth of a meter. This small movement on a seismograph
is used to measure a very large amount of energy released by an earthquake, and it must
be done in such a way that the location of the seismograph relative to the earthquake’s lo-
cation (called the epicenter) is not relevant. You have, no doubt, heard of the well-known
Richter scale used today as a means of measuring the magnitude, M, of an earthquake.
In 1935, Charles F. Richter, a seismologist at the California Institute of Technology,
declared that the magnitude M of an earthquake with amplitude A on a seismograph was
where 
is the amplitude of a “standard earthquake.” This number M is called the
Richter number or Richter scale to denote the size of an earthquake. Richter measured
a large number of extremely small southern California earthquakes, and defined log 
to
be 
for a seismograph located 20 km from the epicenter. Using the properties of log-
arithms, we know
If the seismograph is located 300 km from the epicenter, then log 
is defined to be
so
Since the calculation of the magnitude depends on the distance of the seismograph from
the epicenter, and since for a particular earthquake the distance of the seismograph from
the epicenter is not known, an actual earthquake is usually measured at three different
 5 log A 1 4.0
 M 5 log A 2 log A0
24.0,
A0
 5 log A 1 1.7
 5 log A 2 1 2 1.72
 M 5 log A 2 log A0
21.7
A0
A0
M 5 log A
A0
m
Note: It is customary 
to give Richter scale
readings rounded to 
the nearest tenth.
TABLE 10.1
Magnitudes of Major
World Earthquakes
Date
Location
Magnitude
1906
San Francisco
8.3
1906
Valparaiso
8.6
1915
Avezzano
7.5
1920
Gansu, China
8.6
1933
Japan
8.9
1946
Honshu
8.4
1960
Chile
9.5
1971
San Fernando
6.6
1985
Mexico
8.1
1989
Loma Prieta
7.1
1994
Northridge
6.6
1998
Balleny Islands
8.3
1999
Turkey
7.4
2003
Colima, Mexico
7.8
2005
Indonesia
8.6
2007
Chile
7.7
2007
Indonesia
8.6
2010
Chile
8.8
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

494
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
Example
7
Find a Richter scale reading
A seismograph 300 km from the epicenter of an earthquake recorded a maximum am-
plitude of 
Find the earthquake’s magnitude. What would be the Richter
scale reading for a seismograph 20 km from the epicenter of the same earthquake?
Solution
For a seismograph 20 km from the epicenter,
M 5 log14.9 3 1032 1 1.7 < 5.4
 < 7.7
 5 log14.9 3 1032 1 4.0
 M 5 log A 1 4.0
4.9 3 103mm.
Example
8
Compare the strength of two earthquakes
Compare the strengths of earthquakes with magnitudes 4 and 8.
Solution
Let 
and 
be the two given magnitudes. Then
For this problem, in particular, we have
A doubling of the magnitude from 4 to 8 means that the stronger earthquake’s ampli-
tude is 
times greater.
104 5 10,000
 A1 5 10,000A2
 104 5 A1
A2
 4 5 log A1
A2
 8 2 4 5 log A1
A2
 5 log A1
A2
 5 log A1 2 log A2
 M1 2 M2 5 1log A1 2 log A02 2 1log A2 2 log A02
M2
M1
The amount of earth movement from an earthquake is measured by the amount of
energy released by the earthquake. Consider the following example and compare with
Example 8.
Why is the Richter scale called logarithmic? The reason is that if you increase the mag-
nitude by 1, then the quake is 10 times stronger; if you increase the magnitude by 2, then the
quake is 
times stronger; if you increase the magnitude by 3, then the quake is 
times stronger. We illustrate an increase of magnitude by 4 with the following example.
103
102 5 100
locations in order to determine the epicenter. The Richter scale ratings for some well-
known quakes are shown in Table 10.1, but it should be noted that if you search the Web
you will find that earthquakes are common. In 1998 there were more than 10 quakes
recorded with a magnitude of over 7.0.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 10.3
Applications of Growth and Decay
495
Example
9
Find the energy released from an earthquake
Compare the amount of earth movement (the energy released) by earthquakes of magni-
tudes of 4 and 8.
Solution
Use the formula
from Section 10.2. We solve for E: 
Multiply both sides by 1.5.
Add 11.8 to both sides.
Definition of logarithm
Let 
and 
with corresponding energies 
and 
, respectively. We now
compare these energies: 
Same bases, subtract exponents.
Multiply both sides by E2.
Multiply both sides by 106.
The earthquake with magnitude 8 releases a million times more energy than an earth-
quake with magnitude 4.
 106E1 5 E2
 E1 5 1026E2
 E1
E2
5 101.5142111.8
101.5182111.8
E2
E1
M2 5 8
M1 5 4
 E 5 101.5M111.8
 1.5M 1 11.8 5 log E
 1.5M 5 log E 2 11.8
M 5  log E 2  11.8
1.5
A second example of a logarithmic scale is the decibel rating used for measuring the
intensity of sounds. To measure the intensity of sound, we need to understand that a sound
is a vibration received by the ear and processed by the brain. We can place a listening
device in the path of the sound and measure the amount of energy on that device per unit
of area per second. This listening device acts like an eardrum, but the problem is that ex-
periments have shown that humans perceive loudness on the basis of the ratio of intensi-
ties of two different sounds. For this reason, the unit of measurement for measuring
sounds, called the decibel, in honor of Alexander Graham Bell, the inventor of the tele-
phone, is defined as a ratio of the intensity of one sound, I, and another sound,
which is the intensity of a barely audible sound for a person with
normal hearing.
The issue is further complicated by the fact that a human ear can hear an incredible
range of sounds. A painful sound is 
(100 trillion) times more intense than a barely au-
dible sound. This leads us to define the number of decibels, D, by
for a sound of intensity I. This is called the decibel formula. The decibel rating,
abbreviated dB, for various sounds is shown in Table 10.2.
D 5 10 log I
I0
104
I0 < 10216 watt/cm2,
TABLE 10.2
Decibel Ratings
Sound
dB Rating
threshold of hearing
0
recording studio
20
whisper
25
quiet room
30
conversation
60
traffic
70
train
100
orchestra
110
rock music
115
pain threshold
120
rocket
125
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Substitute given values.
Definition of logarithm
Calculate approximation of 101.2
The louder room is about 16 times noisier than the quiet room.
 I2 < 16I1
 15.85 < I2
I1
 101.2 5 I2
I1
 1.2 5 log I2
I1
 62 2 50 5 10 log I2
I1
496
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
A link for a sound test of
decibel changes can be
found at the following site:
www.mathnature.com 
Example 10 Find a decibel rating
The background sound of a study room was measured to be 
Find the
decibel rating for the room.
Solution
We are given 
and 
so
Decibel formula
Substitute known values.
For division, subtract exponents.
Grant’s tomb property: log 106  6
 5 60
 5 10 log 106
 5 10 log 10210
10216
 D 5 10 log I
I0
I0 5 10216,
I 5 10210
10210 watt/cm2.
A scale for loudness of sounds begins at 0 dB (threshold of hearing) and extends to the
threshold of pain, 120 dB. Each increase of 10 decibels is perceived as a doubling of
loudness. A sound of 70 dB is twice as loud as a 60 dB sound.
Example 11 Compare sound intensities
The noise in a classroom varies from 50 dB to 62 dB. Find the corresponding variation
in intensities.
Solution
We are given 
and 
and we wish to compare 
and :
 5 10 log I2
I1
 5 101log I2 2 log I12
 5 10 log I2 2 10 log I0 2 10 log I1 1 10 log I0
 D2 2 D1 5 10 log I2
I0
2 10 log I1
I0
I2
I1
D2 5 62,
D1 5 50
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 10.3
Applications of Growth and Decay
497
Level  1
1. What is the growth/decay formula?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by half-life? 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a logarithmic scale? 
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a micrometer?
Find the number of decibels for the power of the sound given in
Problems 5–10. Round to the nearest decibel. 
5. A whisper, 
watts/cm2
6. A traffic jam, 
watts/cm2
7. A rock concert, 
watts cm2
8. A conversation, 
watts cm2
9. A rocket engine, 
watts cm2
10. According to the Guinness Book of World Records, the 
world’s loudest shout, by Skipper Kenny Leader, was 
watts cm2.
Level  2
11. Example 3 calculates the growth rate of AIDS-related U.S.
deaths and uses this information to predict the cumulative num-
ber of AIDS-related deaths at the end of January 2002. Repeat
this example for the number of deaths at the turn of the century, 
January 2001.
12. Example 3 calculates the growth rate of AIDS-related 
U.S. deaths and uses this information to predict the 
cumulative number of AIDS-related deaths at the end of 
January 2002 by using the conservative estimate of 400,000 
in 1996. Repeat this example using the less conservative
estimate of 450,000.
13. If the half-life of cesium-137 is 30 years, find the decay
constant, r.
14. If the half-life of plutonium-238 is 86 years, find the decay
constant, r.
/
1025
/
2.53 3 1025
/
3.16 3 10210
/
5.23 3 1026
1028
10213
15. Find the half-life (to the nearest year) of strontium-90 if
16. Find the half-life (to the nearest year) of krypton if
17. A seismograph 300 km from the epicenter of an earthquake
recorded a maximum amplitude of 
. Find this
earthquake’s magnitude.
18. A seismograph 20 km from the epicenter of an earthquake
recorded a maximum amplitude of 
Find this
earthquake’s magnitude.
19. Compare the strengths of earthquakes with magnitudes 4 and 6.
20. Compare the strengths of earthquakes with magnitudes 7 and 8.
8.2 3 105 mm.
5.1 3 102 mm
r 5 20.0641.
r 5 20.0246.
Problem Set 10.3
21. The energy released by an earthquake is approximated by 
What is the energy released by the 1906 San Francisco quake,
which measured 8.3 on the Richter scale? This energy, it is
estimated, would be sufficient to provide the entire world’s
food requirements for a day.
22. The Dead Sea Scrolls were written on parchment in about 100 BC.
What percentage of 
originally contained in the parchment
remained when the scrolls were discovered in 1947?
23. Tests of an artifact discovered at the Debert site in Nova Scotia
show that 28% of the original 
is still present. What is the
probable age of the artifact?
24. The half-life of 
uranium-234, is 
If 
of the uranium in the original sample is present, what length of
time (to the nearest thousand years) has elapsed?
25. The half-life of 
sodium-22, is 2.6 yr. If 15.5 g of an
original 100-g specimen remains, how much time has elapsed
(to the nearest year)?
26. How much more energy was released by the Loma Prieta
quake (Richter scale 7.1) than by the Northridge quake
(Richter scale 6.6)?
22Na,
97.3%
2.52 3 105 yr.
234U,
14C
14C
log E 5 11.8 1 1.5M
28. An artifact was found and tested for its carbon-14 content. If
of the original carbon-14 was still present, what is its
probable age (to the nearest 100 years)?
29. An artifact was found and tested for its carbon-14 content. If
of the original carbon-14 was still present, what is its
probable age (to the nearest 100 years)?
30. The radioactive substance neptunium-139 decays to 
of its original amount after 24 hours. How long (to the nearest
hour) would it take for 
of the original neptunium to be
present? What is the half-life of neptunium-139?
43%
73.36%
85%
12%
FIGURE 10.3 Archeological dig
27. How much more energy was released by the 1960 Chile quake
(Richter scale 9.5) than the 1906 San Francisco quake (Richter
scale 8.3)?
Jonathan Blair/CORBIS
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

51. Between 1980 and 1990, the population of Los Angeles grew
from 2,968,528 to 3,485,557, but by 1994 had dropped to
3,448,613. Predict the population of Los Angeles in 2004
using the given assumptions. 
a. Using the 1980 to 1990 growth rate
b. Using the 1990 to 1994 growth rate
c. Using the 1980 to 1994 growth rate 
52. A bacteria culture had a population of 10 million at 10:00 A.M.,
and by 2:00 P.M. had grown to 18 million. 
a. Predict the population at 6:00 P.M. that same day.
b. When will the population double in size?
53. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
In July 1990, the world population
was about 5.3 billion.
a. If we assume a growth rate of 0.98%, when did the
population reach 6 billion? Answer to the nearest month.
b. Compare this with the actual time 6 billion was reached
(October 1999).
c. Formulate a better growth rate and a prediction about when
the world will reach 7 billion. Answer to the nearest month.
54. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
According to the World POPClock, the
world population on 7/1/99 was 5,996,215,340 and on 7/1/06 it
was 6,525,486,603. Use these numbers to find the annual growth
rate for this period. Use this growth rate to project the world pop-
ulation on the day you work this problem. Check the World POP-
Clock for the day’s population and compare with your answer.
Comment on the difference. Here is the Web address:
http://www.census.gov/cgi-bin/ipc/popclockw
498
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
42. A satellite has an initial radioisotope power supply of 50 watts.
The power output in watts is given by the equation
where t is the time in days. If the satellite will operate if there
is at least 10 watts of power, how long would we expect the
satellite to operate?
Level  3
Find the following information for each of the cities described in
Problems 43–50.
a. What is the growth rate from 1990 to 2000?
b. Predict the population for 1994, using the growth rate for the
period 1990–2000.
c. Compare the prediction with the 1994 actual, and comment on
possible reasons for discrepancies, if any.
d. Predict the population for the year 2006.
City
1990
2000
1994
43. Jacksonville
636,070
735,616
665,070 
44. Sacramento
369,365
1,223,449
373,964 
45. Nashville
488,374
545,524
504,505 
46. El Paso
515,342
679,622
579,307 
47. Honolulu
365,272
876,593
385,881 
48. Boston
574,283
589,141
547,725 
49. St. Paul
198,518
287,151
262,071 
50. Shreveport
272,235
200,145
196,982 
P 5 50e2t/250
31. The 1989 World Series San Francisco quake was initially reported
to have magnitude 7.0, but later this was revised to 7.1. How
much energy released corresponds to this increase in magnitude?
32. Compare the amount of earth movement (energy released) by
earthquakes of magnitudes of 3 and 6.
33. Compare the amount of earth movement (energy released) by
earthquakes of magnitudes 7 and 8.
If an object at temperature B is surrounded by air at temperature
A, it will gradually cool so that the temperature T, t minutes later,
is given by Newton’s law of cooling:
The constant k depends on the particular object and can be 
found by solving for k
Use this information for Problems 34–37.
34. You draw a tub of hot water 
for a bath. The water
is 
when drawn and the room is 
If you are called
away to the phone, what is the temperature of the water 
20 minutes later when you get in?
35.You take a batch of chocolate-chip cookies from the oven 
when the room temperature is 
If the cookies cool for 10
minutes and 
what is the temperature of the cookies?
36. It is known that the temperature of a newly baked brick falls
from 
to 
in an hour when placed in 
air. What
is the temperature of the brick after 30 minutes?
37. The temperature of a piece of cooked chicken is initially
In air of 
it cools to 
in 30 minutes. What is the
temperature in 40 minutes?
38. The atmospheric pressure P in pounds per square inch (psi) is
given by 
where a is the altitude above sea level (in miles). If a city has
an atmospheric pressure of 13.23 psi, what is its altitude?
(Recall that 1 mi  5,280 ft.)
39. The atmospheric pressure P in pounds per square inch (psi) is
approximated by
where a is the altitude above sea level in miles. If the
atmospheric pressure of Denver is 11.9 psi, estimate Denver’s
altitude. 1Recall that 1 mi  5,280 ft.2
40. The atmospheric pressure P in pounds per square inch (psi) is
approximated by
where a is the altitude above sea level in miles. If the pressure
gauge in a small plane shows 10.2 psi, estimate the plane’s alti-
tude in feet. 1Recall that 1 mi  5,280 ft.2
41. A satellite has an initial radioisotope power supply of 50 watts
(W). The power output in watts is given by
where t is the time in days. Solve for t to find the time when
the power supply is 30 W.
P 5 50e2t/250
P 5 14.7e20.21a
P 5 14.7e20.21a
P 5 14.7e20.21a
45°
22°C
100°C.
20°C
70°C
120°C
k 5 0.075,
74°F.
1375°F2
72°F.
100°F
1k 5 0.012
k 5 1
t  log B 2 A
T 2 A
T 5 A 1 1B 2 A2102kt
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 10.3
Applications of Growth and Decay
499
It was determined that 
of the Shroud’s original 
still
remained. According to this information, how old was the
Shroud in 1988?
14C
92.3%
© David Lees CORBIS
FIGURE 10.4 Shroud of Turin
58. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Construct a logarithmic scale. On a
sheet of paper, draw a line 10 in. long and mark it in tenths and
hundredths. Place the edge of a second sheet along this line
and use the first as a ruler to mark off logs on the second. At 0,
mark 1, since 
Mark 2 at 0.301 because
Mark 3 at 0.477, and so on until you have
something similar to Figure 10.5.
Fill in the scale between 1 and 2 for every tenth, and the other
units at least at the halves. Using two of these log scales, you
can make a simple slide rule that you can use to multiply and
divide. Explain how to do this and illustrate it to at least one
other person.
59. In 1986, it was determined that the Challenger disaster was
caused by failure of the primary O-rings. Linda Tappin gives a
formula in “Analyzing Data Relating to the Challenger Disas-
ter” (The Mathematics Teacher, Vol. 87, No. 6, Sept. 1994, 
pp. 423–426) that relates the temperature x (in degrees Fahren-
heit) around the O-rings and the expected number y of eroded
or leaky primary O-rings:
a. What is the predicted number of eroded or leaky O-rings at
a temperature of 
?
b. What is the predicted number of eroded or leaky O-rings at
a temperature of 
?
60. The Arrhenius equation is used to relate the viscosity 
of
a fluid (the fluid’s internal friction, which is what makes it
resist a tendency to flow) to its absolute temperature T:
where A is a constant specific to that fluid and R is the ideal
gas constant. Solve this equation for T. The resulting formula
is one you could use to investigate the viscosity of different
grades of motor oil at different temperatures.
1
h 5 Ae2E/1RT2
h
32°F
75°F
y 5
6e5.08520.1156x
1 1 e5.08520.1156x
FIGURE 10.5 Logarithmic scale
0       0.1    0.2     0.3     0.4     0.5     0.6     0.7     0.8     0.9     1.0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 9 10
logarithmic
linear
log 2 < 0.301.
log 1 5 0.
As usual, you can access this Web address through the address
for this text: www.mathnature.com
55. A certain artifact is tested by carbon dating and found to
contain 73% of its original carbon-14. As a cross-check, it is
also dated using radium, and was found to contain 32% of
the original amount. Assuming the dating procedures were
accurate, what is the half-life of radium?
56. The radioactive isotope gallium-67 (symbol 67Ga) used in the
diagnosis of malignant tumors has a half-life of 46.5 hours. If
we start with 100 mg of 67Ga, what percentage is lost between
the 30th and 35th hours? Is this the same as the percentage lost
in any other 5-hour period?
Problem Solving  3
57. HISTORICAL QUEST
The Shroud of Turin (see Figure 10.4)
is a rectangular linen cloth kept in the Chapel of the Holy Shroud
in the cathedral of St. John the Baptist in Turin, Italy. It shows the
image of a man whose wounds correspond with the biblical
accounts of the crucifixion.
In 1389, Pierre d’Arcis, the Bishop of Troyes, wrote a
memo to the Pope, accusing a colleague of passing off “a cer-
tain cloth, cunningly painted” as the burial shroud of Jesus
Christ. Despite this early testimony of forgery, the so-called
Shroud of Turin has survived as a famous relic. In 1988, a
small sample of the Shroud of Turin was taken, and scientists
from Oxford University, the University of Arizona, and the
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology were permitted to test it.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 10
Review Questions
Simplify each expression in Problems 1–5 without using a
calculator or computer.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Evaluate each expression in Problems 6–8 rounded to two
decimal places.
6. a.
b.
7. a.
b.
8. a.
b. logp
1
p
log210
ln 0.125
ln 2
log 9,760
log 8.43
ln elog 1,000
10log 0.5
log8 4 1 log8 16 1 log8 82.3
ln e 1 ln 1 1 ln e542
log 100 1 log "10
Solve each equation in Problems 9–12 rounded to calculator
accuracy.
9.
10.
11.
12.
Give the exact solution for each equation in Problems 13–18.
13.
14.
15. 102x 5 5
23x21 5 6
log6 x 5 4
e3x11 5 45
435x 5 890
ex 5 500
10x 5 85
Important Ideas
A logarithm is an exponent. That is, logbA is the exponent on a base b that gives
the result A. [10.1]
Change of base theorem [10.1]
Fundamental properties of logarithms [10.2]
Log of both sides theorem [10.2]
Laws of logarithms—additive, subtractive, and multiplicative laws [10.2]
Mathematics abounds in
bright ideas. No matter
how long and hard one
pursues her, mathematics
never seems to run out of
exciting surprises.
ROSS ONSBERGER
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online,
you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of
problems that were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by
working the problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test help in studying
for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on one of these books:
The Mathematical Experience, Philip J. Davis and
Reuben Hersh (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981). 
Ethnomathematics: A Multicultural View of
Mathematical Ideas, Marcia Ascher (Pacific Grove, CA:
Brooks/Cole, 1991).
500
CHAPTER 10
The Nature of Growth
10.4
CHAPTER SUMMARY
16.
17.
18. Solve 
for x.
19. A healing law for skin wounds states that 
where
A is the number of square centimeters of unhealed skin after 
t days when the original area of the wound was 
. How many
days does it take for half the wound to heal?
20. In 1992, it was reported that the number of teenagers with
AIDS doubles every 14 months. Find an equation to model
the number of teenagers that may be infected over the next
10 years.
A0
A 5 A0e20.1t,
A 5 P11 1 i2 x
5 3 2 ln x
3 ln e
"5
3
log1x 1 12 5 2 1 log1x 2 12
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 10.4
Chapter Summary
501
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G35. Before Hurricane Katrina in 2005, the entrance of the Aquarium of Americas in 
New Orleans had a gigantic building-size curve called a logarithmic spiral.
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
Find out how to construct a logarithmic spiral, and write a paper about what you
learned. Why do you suppose it would appear on the front of an aquarium?
G36. If we assume that the world population grows exponentially, then it is also
reasonable to assume that the use of some nonrenewable resource (such as
petroleum) will also grow exponentially. In calculus it is shown that for some
constant k, under these assumptions, the formula for the amount of the resource, A,
consumed from time 
to 
is given by the formula
where r is the relative growth rate of annual consumption.
a. Solve this equation for T to find a formula for the life expectancy of a particular
resource.
b. According to the Energy Information Administration, the annual world production
(in billions of barrels per day) of petroleum is shown in the following table:
A 5 A0
k 1erT 2 12
t 5 T
t 5 0
Year
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2003
Quantity
52.42
62.39
52.97
60.90
61.85
66.03
67.00
Find an exponential equation for these data.
c. If in 1998, the world petroleum reserves were 2.8 trillion barrels, estimate the life
expectancy for petroleum.
Karl J. Smith library
Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas in this chapter. You can find references
to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 10.1 HISTORICAL QUEST
Write an essay on John Napier. Include what he
is famous for today and what he considered to be his crowning achievement. Also
include a discussion of “Napier’s bones.”
PROJECT 10.2 Write an essay on earthquakes. In particular, discuss the Richter scale for
measuring earthquakes. What is its relationship to logarithms?
PROJECT 10.3 Write a paper using population analysis. See the Web pages mentioned in
Section 10.3 for this individual project.
PROJECT 10.4 From your local chamber of commerce, obtain the population figures for
your city for the years 1980, 1990, and 2000. Find the rate of growth for each period.
Forecast the population of your city for the year 2010. Include charts and graphs. List
some factors, such as new zoning laws, that could change the growth rate of your city.
PROJECT 10.5 Write an essay on carbon-14 dating. What is its relationship to logarithms?
www.mathnature.com 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
11.1 Interest
503
Amount of simple interest, future value,
interest for part of a year, compound-
ing interest, continuous compounding,
inflation, present value
11.2 Installment Buying
517
Add-on interest, annual percentage
rate (APR), open-end credit, credit
card interest
11.3 Sequences
526
Sequences or progressions, arithmetic
sequences, geometric sequences, 
Fibonacci-type sequences
11.4 Series
538
Summation notation, arithmetic series,
geometric series, infinite geometric
series, summary of sequence and
series formulas
11.5 Annuities
548
Ordinary annuities, sinking funds
11.6 Amortization
555
Present value of an annuity, monthly
payments
11.7 Summary of Financial
Formulas
562
11.8 Chapter Summary
567
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
THE NATURE OF FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT
11
Outline
What in the World?
“I think we should pay off our home loan,”
proclaimed Lorraine. “We have had this loan for
almost 20 years and we only owe 
. What do
you think?”
“I agree. I’d really like to save the 
per month
payment that we are making. Even though it is
smaller than most house payments, it would be
wonderful to be debt free,” said Ron.
“I checked with our bank, and they told me that
to pay off the loan, we must pay 
plus a
‘prepayment penalty’ of %!”
“Oh, don’t worry about that,” chimed Ron. “Most
lenders will waive this penalty. I’ll call and request
them to do this. But I still don’t know if it is a wise
financial move. Let’s think about it . . . ” added 
Lorraine.
3
$20,000
$195
$20,000
Overview
The stated goal of this book is to strengthen your ability to
solve problems—not the classroom type of problems, but
those problems that you may encounter as an employee,
a manager, or in everyday living. You can apply your
problem-solving ability to your financial life. A goal of this
chapter might well be to put some money into your bank ac-
count that you would not have had if you had not read this
chapter. As a preview to this chapter, consider the question
asked in Example 2 of Section 11.5 (page 551):
Suppose you are 21 years old and will make monthly de-
posits to a bank account paying 10% annual interest com-
pounded monthly. Which is the better option?
Option I: Pay yourself $200 per month for 5 years and
then leave the balance in the bank until age 65. (Total
amount of deposits is 
Option II: Wait until you are 40 years old (the age most of
us start thinking seriously about retirement) and then
deposit $200 per month until age 65. (Total amount of
deposits is 
Warning!! The wrong answer to this question could
cost you 
for the rest of your life!
$4,000/mo
12 5 $60,0002
$200 3 25 3
$200 3 5 3 12 5 $12,000.2
Austin MacRae
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.1
Interest
503
?
3
8
9
7
6
2
4
11
6
3
4
7
5
2
8
11.1  Interest
Finance is the art of passing money from hand to hand until it
finally disappears.
ROBERT W. SARNOFF
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
It seems that everyone has money problems . . . . Either we have too much (you’ve read
stories of people who don’t know what to do with all their money) or we have too little.
Very few people believe that they have “just the right amount of money.”
Certain arithmetic skills enable us to make intelligent decisions about how we spend the
money we earn.
Amount of Simple Interest
One of the most fundamental mathematical concepts that consumers, as well as business-
people, must understand is interest. Simply stated, interest is money paid for the use of
money. We receive interest when we let others use our money (when we deposit money
in a savings account, for example), and we pay interest when we use the money of others
(for example, when we borrow from a bank).
The amount of the deposit or loan is called the principal or present value, and the
interest is stated as a percent of the principal, called the interest rate. The time is the
length of time for which the money is borrowed or lent. The interest rate is usually an an-
nual interest rate, and the time is stated in years unless otherwise given. These variables
are related in what is known as the simple interest formula.
© Michael Keller/CORBIS
© Ray Kachatorian/Getty Images
Money . . . too much or too little?
INTEREST  PRESENT VALUE  RATE  TIME
I  Prt
I  AMOUNT OF INTEREST
P  PRESENT VALUE (or PRINCIPAL)
r  ANNUAL INTEREST RATE
t  TIME (in years)
Simple Interest Formula
Remember this 
fundamental formula.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Suppose you save 20¢ per day, but only for a year. At the end of a year you will have
saved $73. If you then put the money into a savings account paying 3.5% interest, how
much interest will the bank pay you after one year? The present value (P) is $73, the rate
(r) is 3.5%  0.035, and the time (t, in years) is 1. Therefore,
I  Prt
 7310.0352112
 2.555
You can do this computation on a calculator:
Round money answers to the nearest cent: After one year, the interest is $2.56.

.035

73
504
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Example
1
Find the amount of interest
How much interest will you earn in three years with an initial deposit of $73?
Solution
I  Prt  7310.0352132  7.665. After three years, the interest is $7.67.
Example
2
Find an amount of interest
Suppose you see a car with a price of $12,436 that is advertised at $290 per month for 5
years. What is the amount of interest paid?
Solution
The present value is $12,436. The future value is the total amount of all the
payments: 
Monthly payment
Number of years
678
T
$290
 12
 5
 $17,400
Number of payments per year
Therefore, the amount of interest is
I  A  P
 17,400  12,436
 4,964
The amount of interest is $4,964.
}
Future Value
There is a difference between asking for the amount of interest, as illustrated in Example 1,
and asking for the future value. The future value is the amount you will have after the inter-
est is added to the principal, or present value. Let A  FUTURE VALUE. Then
A  P  I
Interest for Part of a Year
The numbers in Example 2 were constructed to give a “nice” answer, but the length of
time for an investment is not always a whole number of years. There are two ways to con-
vert a number of days into a year:
Exact interest:
365 days per year
Ordinary interest:
360 days per year
These terms will be 
used throughout this
chapter.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Calculating the time using ordinary interest often requires a calculator, as illustrated by
Example 3.
Section 11.1
Interest
505
Example
3
Time necessary to achieve a financial goal
Suppose you want to save $3,650, and you put $3,000 in the bank at 8% simple interest.
How long must you wait?
Solution
Begin by identifying the variables: P  3,000; r  0.08; 
I  3, 650  3,000  650.
This is 2 years plus some part of a year. To change the fractional part to days, do not
clear your calculator, but subtract 2 (the number of years); then multiply the fractional
part by 360:
The time you must wait is 2 years, 255 days.
 650
240  t
 650  240t
 650  3,000(0.08)t
 I  Prt
Example
4
Find the amount to repay a loan
Suppose that you borrow $1,200 on March 25 at 21% simple interest. How much 
interest accrues by September 15 (174 days later)? What is the total amount that must
be repaid?
Solution
We are given 
, and 
Simple interest formula
Substitute known values.
Use a calculator to do the arithmetic.
The amount of interest is $121.80. To find the amount that must be repaid, find the
future value:
The amount that must be repaid is $1,321.80.
A  P  I  1,200  121.80  1,321.80
  121.8
  1,200(0.21)a174
360b
 I  Prt
t  174
360
P  1,200, r  0.21
650

240

2
 
360

Display:
255
Note this agreement for
time in this book. Unless
otherwise noted, use 
ordinary interest.
d Actual number of days
d Assume ordinary interest.
Most applications and businesses use ordinary interest. So in this book, unless it is other-
wise stated, assume ordinary interest; that is, use 360 for the number of days in a year:
t  ACTUAL NUMBER OF DAYS
360
Time (Ordinary Interest)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Compounding Interest
Most banks do not pay interest according to the simple interest formula; instead, after
some period of time, they add the interest to the principal and then pay interest on this
new, larger amount. When this is done, it is called compound interest.
FUTURE VALUE  PRESENT VALUE  INTEREST
A  P  I
 P  Prt
Substitute I  Prt.
 P11  rt2
Distributive property
506
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Example
5
Find a future value
If $10,000 is deposited in an account earning 
% simple interest, what is the future
value in 5 years?
Solution
We identify 
, and 
.
The future value in 5 years is $12,875.
 5 12,875
 5 10,00011.28752
 5 10,00011 1 0.28752
 5 10,00011 1 0.0575 3 52
 A 5 P11 1 rt2
t  5
P  10,000, r  0.0575
53
4
Example
6
Find the amount necessary to retire
Suppose you have decided that you will need $4,000 per month on which to live in re-
tirement. If the rate of interest is 8%, how much must you have in the bank when you
retire so that you can live on interest only?
Solution
We are given 
, and 
1
:
Simple interest formula
Substitute known values.
Multiply both sides by 12.
Divide both sides by 0.08.
You must have $600,000 on deposit to earn $4,000 per month at 8%.
 600,000  P
 48,000  0.08P
 4,000  P(0.08)a 1
12b
 I  Prt
one month 5 1
12 year2
t  1
12
I  4,000, r  0.08
This is also known as the
present value formula for
simple interest when
solved for the variable P.
It is worthwhile to derive a formula for future value because sometimes we will not
calculate the interest separately as we did in Example 4.
A 5 P11 1 rt2
Future Value Formula (Simple Interest)
The boy that by
addition grows
And suffers no 
subtraction
Who multiplies the 
thing he knows
And carries every 
fraction
Who well divides 
the precious time
The due proportion 
given
To sure success 
aloft will climb
Interest compound 
receiving.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.1
Interest
507
Example
7
Compare simple and compound interest
Compare simple and compound interest for a $1,000 deposit at 8% interest for 3 years.
Solution
Identify the known values: P  1,000, r  0.08, and t  3. Next, calculate
the future value using simple interest:
With simple interest, the future value in 3 years is $1,240.
Next, assume that the interest is compounded annually. This means that the inter-
est is added to the principal after 1 year has passed. This new amount then becomes the
principal for the following year. Since the time period for each calculation is 1 year, we
let 
for each calculation.
First year
:
T
Second year
:
One year’s principal is previous year’s total.
T
Third year
:
With interest compounded annually, the future value in 3 years is $1,259.71. The
earnings from compounding are $19.71 more than from simple interest.
  1,259.71
  1,166.40(1  0.08)
 A 5 P11 1 r2
1t 5 12
  1,166.40
  1,080(1  0.08)
 A 5 P11 1 r2
1t 5 12
  1,080
  1,000(1  0.08)
 A  P(1  r)
1t 5 12
t  1
  1,240
  1,000(1.24)
  1,000(1  0.08  3)
 A  P(1  rt)
The problem with compound interest relates to the difficulty of calculating it. Notice
that, to simplify the calculations in Example 7, the variable representing time t was given the
value 1, and the process was repeated three times. Also notice that, after the future value was
found, it was used as the principal in the next step. What if we wanted to compound annually
for 20 years instead of for 3 years? Look at Example 7 to discover the following pattern:
Simple interest (20 years):
Annual compounding (20 years):
First year
 A 5 P11 1 r # 12
 5 2,600
 5 1,00012.62
 5 1,00011 1 1.62
 5 1,00011 1 0.08 3 202
 A 5 P11 1 rt2
123
T
Second year; for P use end
value from first year.
Second year simplified.
 5 P11 1 r2 2
 5 P11 1 r2 11 1 r2
123
T
Third year
Twentieth year
 5 P11 1 r2 20
o
 5 P11 1 r2 3
 5 P11 1 r2 211 1 r2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

508
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
For a period of 20 years, starting with $1,000 at 8% compounded annually, we have
The difficulty lies in calculating this number. For years we relied on extensive tables for
obtaining numbers such as this, but the availability of calculators has made such calcula-
tions accessible to all. You will need an exponent key. These are labeled in different ways,
depending on the brand of calculator. It might be 
or 
or 
. In this book we will show
exponents by using 
, but you should press the appropriate key on your own brand of
calculator.
1000  1.08 ^ 20 
Display:
4660.957144
Round money answers to the nearest cent: $4,660.96 is the future value of $1,000
compounded annually at 8% for 20 years. This compounding yields $2,060.96 more than
simple interest.
Most banks compound interest more frequently than once a year. For instance, a bank
may pay interest as follows:
Semiannually: twice a year or every 180 days
Quarterly: 4 times a year or every 90 days
Monthly: 12 times a year or every 30 days
Daily: 360 times a year
If we repeat the same steps for more frequent intervals than annual compounding, we
again begin with the simple interest formula 
.
Semiannually, then 
:
Quarterly, then 
Monthly, then 
:
Daily, then 
:
We now compound for t years and introduce a new variable, n, as follows:
Annual compounding,
:
Semiannual compounding,
:
Quarterly compounding,
:
Monthly compounding,
:
Daily compounding,
:
We are now ready to state the future value formula for compound interest, which is some-
times called the compound interest formula. For these calculations you will need access
to a calculator with an exponent key.
A 5 P11 1 r #
1
3602 360t
n 5 360
A 5 P11 1 r # 1
122 12t
n 5 12
A 5 P11 1 r # 1
42 4t
n 5 4
A 5 P11 1 r # 1
22 2t
n 5 2
A 5 P11 1 r2 t
n 5 1
A 5 PA1 1 r #
1
360B
t 5
1
360
A 5 PA1 1 r # 1
12B
t 5 1
12
A 5 PA1 1 r # 1
4B
t 5 1
4:
A 5 PA1 1 r # 1
2B
t 5 1
2
A 5 P11 1  rt2
^
^
xy
yx
A  1,000(1.08)20
To complete this chapter
successfully, you will need
to know how to do this on
your calculator. Use this
as a test problem.
Money makes money,
and the money that
money makes makes
more money.
Benjamin Franklin
A 5 Pa1 1 r
nb
nt
Future Value Formula (Compound Interest)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The variables we use in this formula are presented in a separate box because these vari-
ables will be used throughout this chapter. We contrast simple and compound interest in
the same summary box.
Section 11.1
Interest
509
Spend some time here;
you will need to remember
what these variables rep-
resent. These are the vari-
ables used in this chapter.
If interest is withdrawn from the amount in the account, use the simple interest
formula. If the interest is deposited into the account to accrue future interest, then use
the compound interest formula.
Contrast Simple and Compound Interest
You will need to know the variables used with the interest formulas in this chapter, so we
summarize those in the following definition box.
Example
8
Compare compounding methods
Find the future value of $1,000 invested for 10 years at 8% interest
a. compounded annually.
b. compounded semiannually.
c. compounded quarterly.
d. compounded daily.
Solution
Identify the variables: 
a.
:
b.
:
c.
:
d.
:
A 5 $1,000A1 1 0.08
360 B 360# 10 5 $2,225.34
n 5 360
A 5 $1,000A1 1 0.08
4 B 4 #10 5 $2,208.04
n 5 4
A 5 $1,000A1 1 0.08
2 B 2#10 5 $2,191.12
n 5 2
A 5 $1,00011 1 0.082 10 5 $2,158.92
n 5 1
P  1,000, r  0.08, t  10.
Continuous Compounding
A reasonable extension of the current discussion is to ask the effect of more frequent
compounding. To model this situation, consider the following contrived example. Sup-
pose 
is invested at 
interest for 1 year compounded at different intervals. The
compound interest formula for this example is
A  a1  1
nb
n
100%
$1
A  FUTURE VALUE
This is the principal plus interest.
P  PRESENT VALUE
This is the same as the principal.
r  INTEREST RATE
This is the annual interest rate.
t  TIME
This is the time in years.
n  NUMBER OF COMPOUNDING PERIODS EACH YEAR
m  PERIODIC PAYMENT
This is usually monthly.
Interest Variables
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where n is the number of times of compounding in 1 year. The calculations of this for-
mula for different values of n are shown in the following table.
Number of Periods
Formula
Amount
Annual, 
$2.00
Semiannual, 
$2.25
Quarterly, 
$2.44
Monthly, 
$2.61
Daily, 
$2.71
Looking only at this table, you might (incorrectly) conclude that as the number of times
the investment is compounded increases, the amount of the investment increases with-
out bound. Let us continue these calculations for even larger n:
Number of Periods
Amount
(compounding every hour)
2.718124536
(every minute)
2.718279142
2.718280469
2.718281693
2.718281815
The spreadsheet we are using for these calculations can no longer distinguish 
the values of 
for larger n. These values are approaching a particular num-
ber. This number, it turns out, is an irrational number, and it does not have a convenient
decimal representation. (That is, its decimal representation does not terminate and does
not repeat.) Mathematicians, therefore, have agreed to denote this number by using the
symbol e. This number is called the natural base or Euler’s number. 
11 1 1/n2 n
n  100,000,000
n  10,000,000
n  1,000,000
n  518,400
n  8,640
A1 1
1
360B360
n 5 360
A1 1 1
12B12
n 5 12
A1 1 1
4B4
n 5 4
A1 1 1
2B2
n 5 2
A1 1 1
1B1
n 5 1
510
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
In Section 5.5 we noted that the number e is irrational and consequently does not have a
terminating or repeating decimal representation. This same irrational number was used
extensively in Chapter 10 as the base number in growth/decay applications as well as in
evaluating natural logarithms. Although you must wait until you study the concept of
limit in calculus for a formal definition of e, the preceding discussion should be enough
to convince you that
e  2.7183
Even though you will not find a bank that compounds interest every minute, you will find
banks that use this limiting value to compound continuously. When using this model, we
assume the year has 365 days.
Remember this
approximate value.
As n increases without bound, the number e is the irrational number that is the
limiting value of the formula
a1 1 1
nb
n
The Number e
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

It is easy to see how this formula follows from the compound interest formula if we let
, so that 
.
As m gets large, 
approaches e, so we have
A  Pert
a1  1
mb
m
  P c a1  1
mb
m
d
rt
  Pa1  1
mb
mrt
 A  Pa1  r
nb
nt
n  mr
1m  rn
Section 11.1
Interest
511
The future value, A, of an investment of P, compounded continuously at a rate of r 
for t years, is found by
A  Pert
Future Value Formula (Continuous Compounding)
Example
9
Find future value using continuous compounding
Find the future value of $890 invested at 21.3% for 3 years, 240 days, compounded
continuously.
Solution
We use the formula 
where 
. For continuous
compounding, use a 365-day year, so 
3 years, 240 days  3 
 3.657534247 years
Remember that t is in years, and also remember to use this calculator value and not a
rounded value.
The future value is $1,939.68.
A  890e0.213t  1,939.676057
240
365
P  890, r  0.213
A  Pert
Example
10
Compare daily and continuous compounding
Let P dollars be invested at an annual rate of r for t years. Then the future value A
depends on the number of times the money is compounded each year. How long will it
take for $1,250 to grow to $2,000 if it is invested at 
a. 8% compounded daily? Use exact interest.
b. 8% compounded continuously? Give your answer to the nearest day (assume that one
year is 365 days).
Solution
a. Use the formula
, and let
(exact interest); 
;
; t is the unknown.
Given formula
Substitute known values.
Divide both sides by 1,250.
 1.6  a1  0.08
365 b
365t
 2,000  1,250 a1  0.08
365 b
365t
 A  P a1 
r
365b
365t
A 5 $2,000; and r 5 0.08
P  $1,250
n  365
A 5 PA1 1
r
365B365t
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

512
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Example
11
Find future value due to inflation
If your salary today is $55,000 per year, what would you expect your salary to be in
20 years (rounded to the nearest thousand dollars) if you assume that inflation will con-
tinue at a constant rate of 6% over that time period?
Solution
Inflation is an example of continuous compounding. The problem with esti-
mating inflation is that you must “guess” the value of future inflation, which in reality does
not remain constant. However, if you look back 20 years and use an average inflation rate
for the past 20 years—say, 6%—you may use this as a reasonable estimate for the next
20 years. Thus, you may use
, and
to find
Note: Be sure to use parentheses for the exponent:
The answer means that, if inflation continues at a constant 6% rate, an annual salary of
$183,000 (rounded to the nearest thousand dollars) will have about the same purchasing
power in 20 years as a salary of $55,000 today.
A  Pert   55,000e0.06(20)
t  20
P  55,000, r  0.06
Definition of logarithm
Approximate solution
We see that it is almost 6 years, but we need the answer to the nearest day. The time
is 5 years  0.875689182 year. Multiply 0.875689182 by 365 to find 319.6265516.
This means that on the 319th day of the 6th year, we are still a bit short of $2,000, so
the time necessary is 5 years, 320 days.
b. For continuous compounding, use the formula 
.
Given formula
Substitute known values.
Divide both sides by 1,250.
Definition of logarithm
Divide both sides by 0.08. This is the exact solution.
Approximate solution
To find the number of days, we once again subtract 5 and multiply by 365 to find
that the time necessary is 5 years, 320 days. (Note: 319.39 means that on the 319th day,
you do not quite have the $2,000. The necessary time is 5 years, 320 days.) Notice that
for this example, it does not matter whether we compound daily or continuously.
  5.875045366
 t  ln 1.6
0.08
 0.08t  ln 1.6
 1.6  e0.08t
 2,000  1,250e0.08t
 A  Pert
A  Pert
  5.875689182
 t 
log(10.08365)1.6
365
 365t  log(10.08365)1.6
Divide both sides by 365. Evaluate as
.
log 1.6
log(1  0.08365)  365
Inflation
Any discussion of compound interest is incomplete without a discussion of inflation.
The same procedure we used to calculate compound interest can be used to calculate the
effects of inflation. The government releases reports of monthly and annual inflation
rates. In 1980 the inflation rate was over 14%, but in 2010 it was less than 1.25%. Keep
in mind that inflation rates can vary tremendously and that the best we can do in this sec-
tion is to assume different constant inflation rates. For our purposes in this book, we will
assume continuous compounding when working inflation problems.
Don Mason/CORBIS
55000

(
.06  20
)

Display:
182606.430751
eˆ
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.1
Interest
513
Example
13
Find the value of an insurance policy
An insurance agent wishes to sell you a policy that will pay you $100,000 in 30 years.
What is the value of this policy in today’s dollars if we assume a 9% inflation rate, com-
pounded annually?
Solution
This is a present value problem for which 
and 
.
To find the present value, calculate:
This means that the agent is offering you an amount comparable to $7,537.11 in terms
of today’s dollars.
  $7,537.11
 P  100,000(1  0.09)30
t  30
A  100,000, r  0.09, n  1,
Example
12
Find a present value for a Tahiti trip
Suppose that you want to take a trip to Tahiti in 5 years and you decide that you will
need $5,000. To have that much money set aside in 5 years, how much money should
you deposit now into a bank account paying 6% compounded quarterly?
Solution
In this problem, P is unknown and A is given: 
. We also have
, and 
.
Calculate:
  $3,712.35
  5,000a1  0.06
4 b
20
 P  Aa1  r
nb
nt
n  4
r  0.06, t  5
A  5,000
Present Value
Sometimes we know the future value of an investment and we wish to know its present
value. Such a problem is called a present value problem. The formula follows directly
from the future value formula (by division).
Example
14
Make your child a millionaire
Your first child has just been born. You want to give her 1 million 
dollars when she retires at age 65. If you invest your money on the day of her birth,
how much do you need to invest so that she will have $1,000,000 on her 65th birthday?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. You want to make a single deposit and let it be compounded
for 65 years, so that at the end of that time there will be 1 million dollars. Neither the
Pólya’s 
Method
Monday, March 1, 1982
6-mo.
adjustable
rate
17.5%
Tuesday, March 1, 1983
6-mo.
adjustable
rate
12.5%
Friday, March 1, 1985
3-mo.
adjustable
rate
10.5%
Monday, March 1, 1993
3 mo.
adjustable
rate
4.5%
Tuesday, March 1, 1994
3-mo.
adjustable
rate
3.0%
Friday, March 1, 1996
3-mo.
adjustable
rate
4.9%
Wednesday, March 1, 2000
3-mo.
adjustable
rate
5.2%
Saturday, March 1, 2003
6-mo.
adjustable
rate
1.6%
Monday, March 1, 2010
3-mo.
adjustable
rate
0.9%
5 Aa1 1 r
nb
2nt
 P 5 A 4 a1 1 r
nb
nt
Present Value Formula
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

514
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
rate of return nor the compounding period is specified. We assume daily compounding,
a constant rate of return over the time period, and we need to determine whether we can
find an investment to meet our goals. 
Devise a Plan. With daily compounding, 
. We will use the present value
formula, and experiment with different interest rates:
Carry Out the Plan. We determine the present values based on the different interest
rates using a calculator and display the results in tabular form.
Interest Rate
Formula
Value of P
2%
272,541.63
5%
38,782.96
8%
5,519.75
12%
410.27
20%
2.27
Look Back. Look down the list of interest rates and compare the rates with the amount
of deposit necessary. Generally, the greater the risk of an investment, the higher the rate.
Insured savings accounts may pay lower rates, bonds may pay higher rates for long-term
investments, and other investments in stamps, coins, or real estate may pay the highest
rates. The amount of the investment necessary to build an estate of 1 million dollars is
dramatic!
1,000,000 11 1 0.20
360 2 21360 # 652
1,000,000 11 1 0.12
360 2 21360 # 652
1,000,000 11 1 0.08
360 2 21360 # 652
1,000,000 11 1 0.05
360 2 21360 # 652
1,000,000 11 1 0.02
360 2 21360 # 652
P 5 1,000,000a1 1
r
360b
21360 # 652
n  360
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is interest?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Contrast amount of interest and
interest rate.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Compare and contrast simple and
compound interest.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Compare and contrast present value
and future value.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the subject of Example 14?
Discuss the real life application of this example in your 
own life.
Use estimation to select the best response in Problems 6–15. Do
not calculate.
6. If you deposit $100 in a bank account for a year, then the
amount of interest is likely to be
A. $2
B. $5
C. $102
D. impossible to estimate
7. If you deposit $100 in a bank account for a year, then the
future value is likely to be
A. $2
B. $5
C. $102
D. impossible to estimate
8. If you purchase a new automobile and finance it for four years,
the amount of interest you might pay is
A. $400
B. $100
C. $4,000
D. impossible to estimate
9. What is a reasonable monthly income when you retire?
A. $300
B. $10,000
C. $500,000
D. impossible to estimate
10. In order to retire and live on the interest only, what is 
a reasonable amount to have in the bank?
A. $300
B. $10,000
C. $500,000
D. impossible to estimate
11. If 
and 
%, and 
years, estimate I.
A. $10,000
B. $600
C. $50,000
D. $120,000
t  2
P  $49,236.45, r  10.5
I  Prt
Problem Set 11.1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.1
Interest
515
12. If 
and 
%, and 
year,
estimate P.
A. $400
B. $40
C. $40,000
D. $4,000
13. If 
, then the time is about 3 years and how many
days?
A. 30
B. 300
C. 52
D. 200
14. If a loan is held for 450 days, then t is about
A. 450
B. 3
C.
D. 5
15. If a loan is held for 180 days, then t is about
A. 180
B.
C.
D. 3
In Problems 16–19, calculate the amount of simple interest earned.
16. $1,000 at 8% for 5 years
17. $5,000 at 10% for 3 years
18. $2,000 at 12% for 5 years
19. $1,000 at 14% for 30 years
In Problems 20–25, find the future value, using the future value
formula and a calculator.
20. $350 at 
% simple interest for 2 years
21. $835 at 3.5% compounded semiannually for 6 years
22. $575 at 5.5% compounded quarterly for 5 years
23. $9,730.50 at 7.6% compounded monthly for 7 years
24. $45.67 at 3.5% compounded daily for 3 years
25. $119,400 at 7.5% compounded continuously for 
30 years
In Problems 26–30, find the present value, using the present value
formula and a calculator.
26. Achieve $5,000 in three years at 3.5% simple 
interest.
27. Achieve $2,500 in five years at 8.2% interest compounded
monthly.
28. Achieve $420,000 in 30 years at 6% interest compounded
monthly.
29. Achieve a million dollars in 30 years at 6% interest
compounded continuously.
30. Achieve $225,500 at 8.65% compounded continuously for 
8 years, 135 days.
31. If $12,000 is invested at 4.5% for 20 years, find the future
value if the interest is compounded:
a. annually
b. semiannually
c. quarterly
d. monthly
e. daily
f. every minute 1
2
g. continuously
h. simple (not compounded)
N  525,600
43
4
1
4
1
2
11
4
t  3.52895
t  1
I  $398.90, r  9.85
I  Prt
32. If $34,500 is invested at 6.9% for 30 years, find the future
value if the interest is compounded:
a. annually
b. semiannually
c. quarterly
d. monthly
e. daily
f. every minute 1
2
g. continuously
h. simple (not compounded)
Level 2
Find the total amount that must be repaid on the notes described 
in Problems 33–34.
33. $1,500 borrowed at 21% simple interest. What is the total
amount to be repaid 55 days later?
34. $8,553 borrowed at 16.5% simple interest. What is 
the total amount to be repaid 3 years, 125 days 
later?
35. Find the cost of each item in 5 years, assuming an inflation
rate of 9%.
a. cup of coffee, $1.75
b. Sunday paper, $1.25
c. Big Mac, $1.95
d. gallon of gas, $2.95
e. HDTV set, $1,600
f. small car, $19,000
g. car, $28,000
h. tuition, $16,000
36. Find the cost of each item in 10 years, assuming an inflation
rate of 5%.
a. movie admission, $7.00
b. CD, $14.95
c. textbook, $90.00
d. electric bill, $105
e. phone bill, $45
f. pair of shoes, $85
g. new suit, $570
h. monthly rent, $800
37. How much would you have in 5 years if you purchased a
$1,000 5-year savings certificate that paid 4% compounded
quarterly?
38. What is the interest on $2,400 for 5 years at 12% compounded
continuously?
39. What is the future value after 15 years if you deposit
$1,000 for your child’s education and the interest is
guaranteed at 16% compounded continuously?
40. Suppose you see a car with an advertised price of $18,490 at
$480 per month for 5 years. What is the amount of interest
paid?
41. Suppose you see a car with an advertised price of $14,500 
at $410.83 per month for 4 years. What is the amount of
interest paid?
N  525,600
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

56. $5,000 at 4.5% compounded continuously; deposit $3,500
57. Suppose that $1,000 is invested at 7% interest compounded
monthly. Use the formula 
a. How long (to the nearest month) before the value is $1,250?
b. How long (to the nearest month) before the money
doubles?
c. What is the interest rate (compounded monthly and
rounded to the nearest percent) if the money doubles 
in 5 years?
58. Suppose that $1,000 is invested at 5% interest compounded
continuously. Use the formula 
a. How long (to the nearest day) before the value is $1,250?
b. How long (to the nearest day) before the money doubles?
c. What is the interest rate (compounded continuously and
rounded to the nearest tenth of a percent) if the money
doubles in 5 years?
Problem Solving 3
59. The News Clip below is typical of what you will see in a
newspaper. 
The Clip gives two rates, the annual yield or effective rate
(8.33%) and a nominal rate (8%). Since banks pay interest
compounded for different periods (quarterly, monthly, daily,
for example), they calculate a rate for which annual
compounding would yield the same amount at the end of
1 year. That is, for an 8% rate:
Nominal Rate
Effective Rate
8%, annual compounding
8%
8%, semiannual compounding
8.16%
8%, quarterly compounding
8.24%
8%, monthly compounding
8.30%
8%, daily compounding
8.33%
To find a formula for effective rate, we recall that the compound
interest formula is
and the future value formula for simple interest is
A  P(1  Yt)
A  P a1  r
nb
nt
NEW, HIGHEST INTEREST RATE
EVER ON INSURED SAVINGS
8.33% annual yield on
8% interest compounded daily
Annual yield based on daily compounding when 
funds and interest remain on deposit a year.  Note:  
Federal regulations require a substantial interest 
penalty for early withdrawal of principal from 
Certificate Accounts. 
A  Pert
A  P a1  r
nb
nt
42. Suppose you buy a home and finance $285,000 at 
$2,293.17 per month for 30 years. What is the amount of
interest paid?
43. Suppose you buy a home and finance $170,000 at 
$1,247.40 per month for 30 years. What is the amount of
interest paid?
44. Find the cost of a home in 30 years, assuming an annual
inflation rate of 10%, if the present value of the house is
$125,000.
45. Find the cost of the monthly rent for a two-bedroom apartment
in 30 years, assuming an annual inflation rate of 10%, if the
current rent is $850.
46. Suppose that an insurance agent offers you a policy that will
provide you with a yearly income of $50,000 in 30 years.
What is the comparable salary today, assuming an inflation
rate of 6% compounded annually?
47. If a friend tells you she earned $5,075 interest for the year on a
5-year certificate of deposit paying 5% simple interest, what is
the amount of the deposit?
48. If Rita receives $45.33 interest for a deposit earning 3% 
simple interest for 240 days, what is the amount of her
deposit?
49. If John wants to retire with $10,000 per month, how much
principal is necessary to generate this amount of monthly
income if the interest rate is 15%?*
50. If Melissa wants to retire with $50,000 per month, how much
principal is necessary to generate this amount of monthly
income if the interest rate is 12%?*
51. If Jack wants to retire with $1,000 per month, how much
principal is necessary to generate this amount of monthly
income if the interest rate is 6%?
Level 3
52. In 2009, the U.S. national soared to 11.0 trillion dollars. 
a. If this debt is shared equally by the 300 million U.S.
citizens, how much would it cost each of us (rounded 
to the nearest thousand dollars)?
b. If the interest rate is 6%, what is the interest on the national
debt each second? Assume a 365-day year.
516
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
*You might think these are exorbitant monthly incomes, but if you assume 10%
average inflation for 40 years, a monthly income of $220 today will be equivalent
to about $10,000 per month in 40 years.
†Problems 53–58 require Chapter 10 (on solving exponential equations)
You can check on the current national debt at
www.brillig.com/debt_clock/ This link, 
as usual, can be accessed through www
.mathnature.com
In Problems 53–56, calculate the time necessary to achieve an
investment goal. Give your answer to the nearest day. Use a 
365-day year.†
53. $1,000 at 8% simple interest; deposit $750
54. $3,500 at 6% simple interest; deposit $3,000
55. $5,000 at 5% daily interest; deposit $3,500
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.2
Installment Buying
517
11.2  Installment Buying
Two types of consumer credit allow you to make installment purchases. The first, called
closed-end, is the traditional installment loan. An installment loan is an agreement to pay
off a loan or a purchase by making equal payments at regular intervals for some specific
period of time. In this book, it is assumed that all installment payments are made monthly.
There are two common ways of calculating installment interest. The first uses simple
interest and is called add-on interest, and the second uses compound interest and is called
amortization. We discuss the simple interest application in this section, and the com-
pound interest application in Section 11.6.
In addition to closed-end credit, it is common to obtain a type of consumer credit
called open-end, revolving credit, or, more commonly, a credit card loan. MasterCard,
VISA, and Discover cards, as well as those from department stores and oil companies,
are examples of open-end loans. This type of loan allows for purchases or cash advances
up to a specified maximum line of credit and has a flexible repayment schedule.
Add-On Interest
The most common method for calculating interest on installment loans is by a method
known as add-on interest. It is nothing more than an application of the simple interest
formula. It is called add-on interest because the interest is added to the amount borrowed
so that both interest and the amount borrowed are paid for over the length of the loan. You
should be familiar with the following variables:
P  AMOUNT TO BE FINANCED (present value)
r  ADD-ON INTEREST RATE
t  TIME (in years) TO REPAY THE LOAN
I  AMOUNT OF INTEREST
A  AMOUNT TO BE REPAID (future value)
m  AMOUNT OF THE MONTHLY PAYMENT
N  NUMBER OF PAYMENTS
EXPIRATION DATE
5412
MasterCard is a registered 
trademark of MasterCard 
International, Inc.
AMOUNT OF INTEREST:
AMOUNT REPAID:
or
NUMBER OF PAYMENTS:
AMOUNT OF EACH PAYMENT:
m 5 A
N
N 5 12t
A 2 P11 1 rt2
A 5 P 1 I
I 5 Prt
Installment Loan Formulas
Do you see why this is
called add-on interest? Do
these formulas make
sense to you?
The effective rate, Y, is a rate such that, at the end of one year
, the future value for the simple interest is equal to the
future value for the compound interest rate r with n compound-
ing periods. That is,
Find a formula for effective (annual) rate, Y, for which
the future value for compound interest is equal to the
future value for simple interest at the end of 1 year.
Pa1 1 r
nb
n
5 P11 1 Y2
(t  1)
60. Find the effective yield for the following investments 
(see Problem 59). Round to the nearest hundredth of a
percent.
a. 6%, compounded quarterly
b. 6%, compounded monthly
c. 4%, compounded semiannually
d. 4%, compounded daily
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

518
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
One-step solution
 5 2,028.55
 5 1,39911 1 0.15 # 32
 A 5 P11 1 rt2
 < 56.35
 m 5 2,028.55
36
Example
1
Find a monthly payment
You want to purchase a computer that has a price of 
and you decide to pay for it
with installments over 3 years. The store tells you that the interest rate is 
. What is
the amount of each monthly payment?
Solution
You ask the clerk how the interest is calculated, and you are told that the
store uses add-on interest. Thus, 
and 
Two-step solution 
 5 2,028.55
 5 1,399 1 629.55
 A 5 P 1 I
 5 629.55
 5 1,39910.152 132
 I 5 Prt
N 5 36.
P 5 1,399, r 5 0.15, t 5 3,
15%
$1,399,
The amount of each monthly payment is $56.35.
Example
2
Find a monthly payment
Suppose that you have decided to purchase a Toyota Prius and want to 
determine the monthly payment if you pay for the car in 4 years. The value of your
trade-in is 
Solution
We use Póylya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Not enough information is given, so you need to ask some
questions of the car dealer:
Sticker price of the car (as posted on the window):
Dealer’s preparation charges (as posted on the window):
Total asking (sticker) price:
Tax rate (determined by the state):
Add-on interest rate:
You need to make an offer.
Devise a Plan. The plan is to offer the dealer 
over dealer’s cost. Assuming that the
dealer accepts that offer, then we will calculate the monthly payment.
Carry Out the Plan. If you are serious about getting the best price, find out the dealer’s
cost—the price the dealer paid for the car you want to buy. In this book, we will tell you
the dealer’s cost, but in the real world you will need to do some homework to find it (con-
sult an April issue of Consumer Reports). Assume that the dealer’s cost for this car is
. You decide to offer the dealer 
over this cost. We will call this a 
offer:
$19,993.4511 1 0.022 5 $20,393.32
2%
2%
$19,993.45
2%
6%
8%
$23,070
$350.00
$22,720
$4,100.
Pólya’s 
Method
The most common applications of installment loans are for the purchase of a car or
a home. Interest for purchasing a car is determined by the add-on method, but interest
for purchasing a home is not. We will, therefore, delay our discussion of home loans un-
til after we have discussed periodic payments with compound interest. The next exam-
ple shows a calculation for a car loan.
Visual Mining / Alamy
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

You will notice that we ignored the sticker price and the dealer’s preparation charges.
Our offer is based only on the dealer’s cost. Most car dealers will accept an offer that is
between 
and 
over what they actually paid for the car. For this example, we will
assume that the dealer accepted a price of 
We also assume that we have a
trade-in with a value of 
Here is a list of calculations shown on the sales contract:
Sale price of Prius:
$20,394.00
Destination charges:
200.00
Subtotal:
20,594.00
Tax (8% rate)
1,647.52
Less trade-in
4,100.00
Amount to be financed:
18,141.52
We now calculate several key amounts:
Interest:
Amount to be repaid:
Monthly payment:
Look Back. The monthly payment for the car is 
.
Annual Percentage Rate (APR)
An important aspect of add-on interest is that the actual rate you pay exceeds the quoted
add-on interest rate. The reason for this is that you do not keep the entire amount bor-
rowed for the entire time. For the car payments calculated in Example 2, the principal
used was 
but you do not owe this entire amount for 4 years. After the first pay-
ment, you will owe less than this amount. In fact, after you make 47 payments, you owe
only 
but the calculation shown in Example 2 assumes that the principal remains
constant for 4 years. To see this a little more clearly, consider a simpler example.
Suppose you borrow 
for 2 years with 
add on-interest. The amount of
interest is
Now if you pay back 
at the end of two years, the annual interest rate
is 
. However, if you make a partial payment of 
at the end of the first year
and 
at the end of the second year, your total paid back is still the same
but you have now paid a higher annual interest rate. Why? Take a look at
Figure 11.1.
On the left we see that the interest on 
is 
But if you make a partial pay-
ment (figure on the right), we see that 
for the first year is the correct interest, but the
remaining 
interest piled on the remaining balance of 
is 
interest (not the
stated 
). Note that since you did not owe 
for 2 years, the interest rate, r, nec-
essary to give 
interest can be calculated using 
This number, 
, is called the annual percentage rate. This number is too difficult to
calculate, as we have just done here, if the number of months is very large. We will,
instead, give an approximation formula.
13.3%
 < 0.13333 or 13.3%
 r 5 400
3,000
 3,000r 5 400
 12,0002r112 1 11,0002r112 5 400
I 5 Prt:
$400
$2,000
10%
20%
$1,000
$200
$200
$400.
$2,000
1$2,4002,
$1,200
$1,200
10%
$2,000 1 $400
$2,000 3 0.10 3 2 5 $400
10%
$2,000
$293.32;
$14,090,
$468.66
m 5 22,495.48
48
< 468.66
A 5 P 1 I 5 18,141.52 1 4,353.96 5 22,495.48
I 5 Prt 5 18,141.5210.062 142 5 4,353.96
$4,100.
$20,400.
10%
5%
Section 11.2
Installment Buying
519
FIGURE 11.1 Interest on a $2,000
two-year loan
$400
10% interest
Amount
borrowed
$2,000
for 2 years
$200
10%
Amt.
borrowed
for 1 yr
$2,000
Amt.
borrowed
for 1 yr
$1,000
$200
20%
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We can verify this formula for the example illustrated in Figure 11.1:
In 1968, a Truth-in-Lending Act was passed by Congress; it requires all lenders to
state the true annual interest rate, which is called the annual percentage rate (APR) and
is based on the actual amount owed. Regardless of the rate quoted, when you ask a sales-
person what the APR is, the law requires that you be told this rate. This regulation en-
ables you to compare interest rates before you sign a contract, which must state the APR
even if you haven’t asked for it.
APR < 2122 10.102
2 1 1
< 0.1333
520
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
The annual percentage rate, or APR, is the rate paid on a loan when that rate is
based on the actual amount owed for the length of time that it is owed. It can be
approximated for an add-on interest rate, r, with N payments by using the formula
APR <
2Nr
N 1 1
APR Formula
Example
3
Find an APR for a installment purchase
In Example 1, we considered the purchase of a computer with a price of 
, paid
for in installments over 3 years at an add-on rate of 
. Use the given APR formula
(rounded to the nearest tenth of a percent) to approximate the APR.
Solution
Knowing the amount of the purchase is not necessary when finding the
APR. We need to know only N and r. Since N is the number of payments, we have
, and r is given as 0.15:
The APR is approximately 29.2%.
APR < 21362 10.152
36 1 1
< 0.292
N 5 12132 5 36
15%
$1,399
Example
4
Find an APR for a car
Consider a Blazer with a price of 
that is advertised at a monthly payment of
for 60 months. What is the APR (to the nearest tenth of a percent)?
Solution
We are given 
and 
. The APR formula
requires that we know the rate r. The future value is the total amount to be repaid
and the amount of interest is 
. Now, 
so
Since 
, we see that 
when
Simple interest formula
Substitute known values.
Divide both sides by 5.
Divide both sides by 18,436.
Finally, from the APR formula, 
APR < 21602 10.04994575832
61
< 0.098
APR <
2Nr
N 1 1,
 0.0499457583 < r
 920.8 5 18,436r
 4,604 5 18,4361r2 152
I 5 Prt
N 5 60.
t 5 5
N 5 12t
I 5 A 2 P 5 23,040 2 18,436 5 4,604.
A 5 3841602 5 23,040,
I 5 Prt
1A 5 P 1 I2
N 5 60
P 5 18,436, m 5 384,
$384.00
$18,436
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Don’t round until the last step. You will really need a calculator for a problem like this
one, so we will show you the appropriate steps:
Section 11.2
Installment Buying
521
384 
60  18436   5
 18436
 
2

60 
61 
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
Find A.
Find I.
Find r.
Find APR.
Display:
.0982539508
The APR is approximately 9.8%.
Many automobiles are being offered at 
interest! Good deal? It seems so, but
buyer beware! Consider the following example.
0%
Example
5
Compare APR and add-on rate
A local car dealer offered a 2002 Dodge 
ton 
pick-up truck with a manufac-
turer’s suggested retail price (MSRP) of 
less factory and dealer rebates of
for an “out-the-door no-haggle price of 
.” The advertisement also
offered “
APR for 60 months” and in smaller print “In lieu of rebate.” Suppose you
can get a 
add-on rate from the credit union. Should you choose the 
APR or the
add-on rate? What is the credit union’s APR rate?
Solution
The 
APR would finance 
for 60 months; the monthly payment
would be
The credit union rate is 
for 60 months, so
The monthly payment would be
If we convert the 
credit union add-on rate to an APR, we find
Note that the 
APR financing is more costly than the credit union’s 
APR.
4.9%
0%
APR < 210.0252 1602
61
< 4.9%
2.5%
$31,276.13
60
5 $521.27
 A 5 P 1 I 5 $31,276.13
 I 5 Prt 5 $27,80110.0252 152 5 $3,475.13
2.5%
$33,290
60
5 $554.83/mo
$33,290
0%
2.5%
0%
2.5%
0%
$27,801
$5,489,
$33,29,
4 3 4
3/4
Historical
At the start of the 20th century, a
few hotels began to issue credit
cards; as early as 1914, large
department stores and gasoline
chains were issuing credit cards.
In those days credit cards had
three basic functions:
1. They were often prestige items
offered only to valued
customers.
2. They were more convenient to
use than cash.
3. They provided some degree of
safety.
During World War II, the use of
credit cards virtually ceased, due
to government restraint on
consumer spending and credit.
After wartime restrictions were
lifted, however, many credit cards
were reinstated, and railroads and
airlines began to issue their own
travel cards. In 1949 the Diners
Club was established, and it was
followed a short time later by
American Express and Carte
Blanche.
NOTE
Open-End Credit
The most common type of open-end credit used today involves credit cards issued by
VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, department stores, and oil companies.
Because you don’t have to apply for credit each time you want to charge an item, this type
of credit is very convenient.
When comparing the interest rates on loans, you should use the APR. Earlier, we in-
troduced a formula for add-on interest; but for credit cards, the stated interest rate is the
APR. However, the APR on credit cards is often stated as a daily or a monthly rate. For
credit cards, we use a 365-day year rather than a 360-day year.
Don’t forget: credit
cards use a 
365-day year 
(exact interest).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Many credit cards charge an annual fee; some charge 
every billing period the
card is used, whereas others are free. These charges affect the APR differently, depend-
ing on how much the credit card is used during the year and on the monthly balance. If
you always pay your credit card bill in full as soon as you receive it, the card with no
yearly fee would obviously be the best for you. On the other hand, if you use your
credit card to stretch out your payments, the APR is more important than the flat fee.
For our purposes, we won’t use the yearly fee in our calculations of APR on credit
cards. Like annual fees, the interest rates or APRs for credit cards vary greatly. Because
VISA and MasterCard are issued by many different banks, the terms can vary greatly
even in one locality.
Credit Card Interest
An interest charge added to a consumer account is often called a finance charge. The
finance charges can vary greatly even on credit cards that show the same APR, depending
on the way the interest is calculated. There are three generally accepted methods for cal-
culating these charges: previous balance, adjusted balance, and average daily balance.
$1
522
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Example
6
Find APR from a given rate
Convert the given credit card rate to APR (rounded to the nearest tenth of a percent).
a.
per month
b. Daily rate of 
Solution
a. Since there are 12 months per year, multiply a monthly rate by 12 to get the APR:
b. Multiply the daily rate by 365 to obtain the APR:
Rounded to the nearest tenth, this is equivalent to 
APR.
21.0%
0.05753% 3 365 5 20.99845%
11
2% 3 12 5 18% APR
0.05753%
11
2%
For credit card interest, use the simple interest formula, 
.
Previous balance method
Interest is calculated on the previous month’s
balance. With this method, 
Adjusted balance method
Interest is calculated on the previous 
month’s balance less credits and payments. With this method,
Average daily balance method
Add the outstanding balances for each day
in the billing period, and then divide by the number of days in the billing 
period to find what is called the average daily balance. With this method,
in the billing period divided by 365.
and t 5 number of days
P 5 average daily balance, r 5 annual rate,
P 5 adjusted balance, r 5 annual rate, and t 5 1
12.
P 5 previous balance, r 5 annual rate, and t 5 1
12.
I 5 Prt
Procedures for Calculating Credit Card Interest
In Example 7 we compare the finance charges on a 
credit card purchase,
using these three different methods.
$1,000
WARNING
Credit Card Trap
Suppose you "max out" 
your credit charges at 
$1,500 and decide that you 
will not use it again until it 
is paid off.  How long do 
you think it will take you to 
pay it off if you make the 
minimum required payment 
(which would be $30 for 
the beginning balance of 
$1,500 and would decrease 
as the remaining balance 
decreases)?
A.     5 months
B.     2 years
C.     8 years
D.     12 years
E.     20 years
Even though we cannot 
mathematically derive this 
result, it does seem 
appropriate to consider this 
real-life question.  Go 
ahead, make a guess!
     If you keep the payment 
at a constant $30, the 
length of time for 
repayment is 8 years.  
However, if you make only 
the required minimum 
payment, this "maxed" 
credit card will take 20 
years to pay off!  The 
correct answer is E.
Consumer Reports magazine 
states that, according to one 
accounting study, the interest 
costs for average daily balance 
and previous balance methods 
are about 16% higher than 
those for the adjusted balance 
method.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Example
7
Contrast methods for calculating credit card interest
Calculate the interest on a 
credit card bill that shows an 
APR, assuming that
is sent on January 3 and is recorded on January 10. Contrast the three methods for
calculating the interest.
Solution
The three methods are the previous balance method, adjusted balance
method, and average daily balance method. All three methods use the formula 
Previous Balance
Adjusted Balance
Average Daily Balance
P:
Balance is 
for 10
days of the 31-day month;
balance is 
for 21 days
of the 31-day month:
r:
0.18
0.18
0.18
t:
$966.1310.182 a 31
365b
$95010.182 a 1
12b
$1,00010.182 a 1
12b
I 5 Prt
31
365
1
12
1
12
5 $966.13
10 3 $1,000 1 21 3 $950
31
$950
$1,000
$1,000 2 $50 5 $950
$1,000
I 5 Prt.
$50
18%
$1,000
Section 11.2
Installment Buying
523
 
5 $14.77
5 $14.25
$15.00
You can sometimes make good use of credit cards by taking advantage of the period
during which no finance charges are levied. Many credit cards charge no interest if you
pay in full within a certain period of time (usually 20 or 30 days). This is called the grace
period. On the other hand, if you borrow cash on your credit card, you should know that
many credit cards have an additional charge for cash advances—and these can be as high
as 
. This 
is in addition to the normal finance charges.
4%
4%
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is add-on interest?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is APR?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Compare and contrast open-end and
closed-end credit.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the methods of calculating
credit card interest.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
If you have a credit card, describe
the method of calculating interest on your card. Name the bank
issuing the credit card. If you do not have a credit card, contact
a bank and obtain an application to answer this question. Name
the bank.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe a good procedure for
saving money with the purchase of an automobile.
Use estimation to select the best response in Problems 7–24. 
Do not calculate.
7. If you purchase a 
item and pay for it with monthly
installments for 2 years, the monthly payment is
A.
per month
B. more than 
per month
C. less than 
per month
8. If you purchase a 
item and pay for it with monthly
installments for 1 year, the monthly payment is
A. about 
B. more than 
C. less than 
9. If I do not pay off my credit card each month, the most
important cost factor is
A. the annual fee
B. the APR
C. the grace period
$50
$50
$50
$595.95
$100
$100
$100
$2,400
Problem Set 11.2
BANKAMERICARD
VALID
THRU
5412
VISA is a registered trademark
of the Bank of America, N.T.
and S.A.
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10. If I pay off my credit card balance each month, the most
important cost factor is
A. the annual fee
B. the APR
C. the grace period
11. The method of calculation most advantageous to the
consumer is the
A. previous balance method
B. adjusted balance method
C. average daily balance method
12. If you purchase an item for 
at an interest rate of 
,
and you finance it for 1 year, then the amount of add-on
interest is about
A.
B.
C.
13. If you purchase an item for 
at an interest rate of 
,
and you finance it for 4 years, then the amount of add-on
interest is about
A.
B.
C.
14. If you purchase a new car for 
and finance it for 
4 years, the amount of interest you would expect to pay is
about
A.
B.
C.
15. A reasonable APR to pay for a 3-year installment loan is
A.
B.
C.
16. A reasonable APR to pay for a 3-year automobile loan is
A.
B.
C.
17. If you wish to purchase a car with a sticker price of 
, 
a reasonable offer to make to the dealer is:
A.
B.
C.
18. A reasonable APR for a credit card is
A.
B.
C.
19. In an application of the average daily balance method for the
month of August, t is
A.
B.
C.
20. When using the average daily balance method for the month
of September, t is
A.
B.
C.
21. If your credit card balance is 
and the interest rate is 
APR, then the credit card interest charge is
A.
B.
C.
22. If your credit card balance is $952, you make a $50 payment,
the APR is 12%, and the interest is calculated according 
to the previous balance method, then the finance 
charge is
A. $9.52
B. $9.02
C. $9.06
23. If your credit card balance is $952, you make a $50
payment, the APR is 12%, and the interest is calculated
according to the adjusted balance method, then the finance
charge is
A. $9.52
B. $9.02
C. $9.06
24. If your credit card balance is $952, you make a $50
payment, the APR is 12%, and the interest is calculated
according to the average daily balance method, then the
finance charge is
A. $9.52
B. $9.02
C. $9.06
$8.25
$65
$6.50
12%
$650
31
365
30
365
1
12
31
365
30
365
1
12
12%
30%
1%
$11,000
$9,000
$10,000
$10,000
$2,000
40%
6%
32%
12%
1%
$24,000
$400
$4,000
$10,000
$130
$500
$13.00
9.8%
$1,295
$130
$500
$13.00
9.8%
$1,295
524
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Convert each credit card rate in Problems 25–30 to the APR*.
25. Oregon, 
per month
26. Arizona, 
per month
27. New York, 
per month
28. Tennessee, 
daily rate
29. Ohio, 
daily rate
30. Nebraska, 
daily rate
Calculate the monthly finance charge for each credit card
transaction in Problems 31–34. Assume that it takes 10 days for
a payment to be received and recorded, and that the month is 
30 days long.
31. $300 balance, 18%, $50 payment
a. previous balance method
b. adjusted balance method
c. average daily balance method
32. $300 balance, 18%, $250 payment
a. previous balance method
b. adjusted balance method
c. average daily balance method
33. $3,000 balance, 15%, $50 payment
a. previous balance method
b. adjusted balance method
c. average daily balance method
34. $3,000 balance, 15%, $2,500 payment
a. previous balance method
b. adjusted balance method
c. average daily balance method
Round your answers in Problems 35–38 to the nearest dollar.
35. Make a 
offer on a Chevrolet Corsica that has a sticker price
of 
and a dealer cost of 
36. Make a 
offer on a Ford Escort that has a sticker price of
and a dealer cost of 
37. Make a 
offer on a Saturn that has a sticker price of
and a dealer cost of 
38. Make a 
offer on a Nissan Pathfinder that has a sticker
price of 
and a dealer cost of 
Level 2
Find the APR (rounded to the nearest tenth of a percent) for each
of the loans described in Problems 39–42.
39. Purchase a living room set for 
at 
add-on interest for
3 years.
40. Purchase a stereo for 
at 
add-on interest for 2 years.
41. Purchase an oven for 
at 
add-on interest for 
2 years.
42. Purchase a refrigerator for 
at 
add-on interest 
for 3 years.
14%
$2,100
11%
$650
13%
$2,500
12%
3,600
$28,916.
$32,129
10%
$17,250.
$19,895
10%
$12,412.70.
$13,205
5%
$13,378.
$14,385
6%
0.03014%
0.02192%
0.02740%
11
2%
11
3%
11
4%
*These rates were the listed finance charges on purchases of less than $500 on a
Citibank VISA statement.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Assume the cars in Problems 43–46 can be purchased for 
down
for 60 months (in lieu of rebate).
a. Find the monthly payment if financed for 60 months at 0% APR.
b. Find the monthly payment if financed at 2.5% add-on interest
for 60 months.
c. Use the APR approximation formula for part b.
d. State whether the 0% APR or the 2.5% add-on rate should be
preferred.
43. A Dodge Ram that has a sticker price of $20,650 with factory
and dealer rebates of $2,000
44. A BMW that has a sticker price of $62,490 with factory and
dealer rebates of $6,000
45. A car with a sticker price of $42,700 with factory and dealer
rebates of $5,100
46. A car with a sticker price of $36,500 with factory and dealer
rebates of $4,200
Level  3
For each of the car loans described in Problems 47–52, give the
following information.
a. Amount to be paid
b. Amount of interest
c. Interest rate
d. APR (rounded to the nearest tenth percent)
47. A newspaper advertisement offers a $9,000 car for
nothing down and 36 easy monthly payments of $317.50.
48. A newspaper advertisement offers a $4,000 used car for
nothing down and 36 easy monthly payments of 
$141.62.
49. A newspaper advertisement offers a $14,350 car for
nothing down and 48 easy monthly payments of 
$488.40.
50. A car dealer will sell you the $16,450 car of your dreams for
$3,290 down and payments of $339.97 per month for
48 months.
51. A car dealer will sell you a used car for $6,798 with
$798 down and payments of $168.51 per month for 
48 months.
52. A car dealer will sell you the $30,450 car of your dreams for
$6,000 down and payments of $662.06 per month for
60 months.
53. A car dealer carries out the following 
calculations:
List price
$5,368.00
Options
$1,625.00
Destination charges
$ 200.00
Subtotal
$7,193.00
Tax
$ 431.58
Less trade-in
$2,932.00
Amount to be financed
$4,692.58
8% interest for 48 months
$1,501.63
Total
$6,194.21
MONTHLY PAYMENT
$ 129.05
What is the annual percentage rate?
0%
Section 11.2
Installment Buying
525
54. A car dealer carries out the following 
calculations:
List price
$15,428.00
Options
$  3,625.00
Destination charges
$
350.00
Subtotal
$19,403.00
Tax
$  1,164.18
Less trade-in
$  7,950.00
Amount to be financed
$12,617.18
5% interest for 48 months
$  2,523.44
Total
$15,140.62
MONTHLY PAYMENT
$
315.43
What is the annual percentage rate?
55. A car dealer carries out the following 
calculations:
List price
$  9,450.00
Options
$  1,125.00
Destination charges
$
300.00
Subtotal
$10,875.00
Tax
$
652.50
Less trade-in
$
.00
Amount to be financed
$11,527.50
11% interest for 48 months
$  5,072.10
Total
$16,599.60
MONTHLY PAYMENT
$
345.83
What is the annual percentage rate?
Problem Solving  3
56. The finance charge statement on a Sears Revolving Charge
Card statement is shown here. Why do you suppose that the
limitation on the 
finance charge is for amounts less than
?
$28.50
50¢
FINANCE CHARGE.  If I do not pay the entire New 
Balance within 30 days (28 days for February 
statements) of the monthly billing date, a FINANCE 
CHARGE will be added to the account for the 
current monthly billing period.  THE FINANCE 
CHARGE will be either a minimum of $0.50 if the 
Average Daily Balance is $28.50 or less, or a 
periodic rate of 1.75% per month (ANNUAL 
PERCENTAGE RATE of 21%) on the Average 
Daily Balance.
SEARS ROEBUCK AND CO.
SEARSCHARGE SECURITY AGREEMENT
4.
57. Marsha needs to have a surgical procedure done and does
not have the 
cash necessary for the operation. Upon
talking to an administrator at the hospital, she finds that it
will accept MasterCard, VISA, and Discover credit cards.
All of these credit cards have an APR of 
, so she figures
that it does not matter which card she uses, even though she
plans to take a year to pay off the loan. Assume that Marsha
makes a payment of 
and then receives a bill. Show the
interest from credit cards of 
APR according to the pre-
vious balance, adjusted balance, and average daily balance
methods. Assume that the month has 31 days and that it
takes 14 days for Marsha’s payment to be mailed and
recorded.
18%
$300
18%
$3,000
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58. Karen and Wayne need to buy a refrigerator because theirs
just broke. Unfortunately, their savings account is depleted,
and they will need to borrow money in order to buy a new
one. The bank offers them a personal loan at 
(APR), and
Sears offers them an installment loan at 
(add-on rate).
Suppose that the refrigerator at Sears costs 
plus 
sales tax, and Karen and Wayne plan to pay for the refrigera-
tor for 3 years. Should they finance it with the bank or with
Sears?
59. Karen and Wayne need to buy a refrigerator because theirs
just broke. Unfortunately, their savings account is depleted,
and they will need to borrow money in order to buy a new
one. Sears offers them an installment loan at 
(add-on
rate). If the refrigerator at Sears costs 
plus 
sales
tax, and Karen and Wayne plan to pay for the refrigerator for
3 years, what is the monthly payment?
60. Rule of 78 With a typical installment loan, you are asked
to sign a contract stating the terms of repayment. If you
pay off the loan early, you are entitled to an interest rebate.
For example, if you finance 
and are charged 
interest (APR 
), the total to be repaid is 
with 
$590
8.46%
$90
$500
5%
$1,598
15%
5%
$1,598
15%
21%
526
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
24 monthly payments of 
. After 1 year, you decide to
pay off the loan, so you figure that the rebate should be 
(half of the interest for 2 years), but instead you are told the
interest rebate is only 
What happened? Look at the
fine print on the contract. It says interest will be refunded
according to the Rule of 78. The formula for the rebate is as
follows:
where k is the number of payments remaining and n is the 
total number of payments. Determine the interest rebate on the
following:
a.
interest on an 18-month loan; pay off loan after 
12 months.
b.
interest on a 2-year loan with 10 payments 
remaining.
c.
borrowed at 
on a 4-year loan with 36 months
remaining.
d.
borrowed at 
on a 5-year loan with 
18 payments remaining.
10%
$51,000
11%
$10,200
$350
$1,026
INTEREST REBATE 5
k1k112
n1n112 3 FINANCE CHARGE
$23.40.
$45
$24.59
11.3
Sequences
In the previous sections we considered financial applications dealing with a lump sum, or
with applications based on simple or compound interest. However, many financial prob-
lems in real life deal with periodic payments in which the interest is calculated on a
month-by-month basis. In order to consider such financial applications, it is necessary to
understand two important mathematical concepts. The first, sequences, is considered in
this section, and the second, series, is considered in the next.
Sequences or Progressions
Patterns are sometimes used as part of an IQ test. It used to be thought that an IQ test
measured “innate intelligence” and that a person’s IQ score was fairly constant. Today, it
is known that this is not the case. IQ test scores can be significantly changed by studying
the types of questions asked. Even if you have never taken an IQ test, you have taken (or
will take) tests that ask pattern-type questions.
An example of an IQ test is shown below. It is a so-called “quickie” test, but it illus-
trates a few mathematical patterns (see Problems 1–6 on this IQ test). The purpose of this
section is to look at some simple patterns to become more proficient in recognizing them,
and then to apply them to develop some important financial formulas.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Arithmetic Sequences
Perhaps the simplest pattern is the counting numbers themselves: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, . . . . A
list of numbers having a first number, a second number, a third number, and so on is
called a sequence. 
The numbers in a sequence are called the terms of the sequence. The sequence
of counting numbers is formed by adding 1 to each term to obtain the next term. Your
math assignments may well have been identified by some sequence: “Do the multiples
of 3 from 3 to 30,” that is, 3, 6, 9, . . . , 27, 30. This sequence is formed by adding 3 to
each term. Sequences obtained by adding the same number to each term to obtain the
next term are called arithmetic sequences or arithmetic progressions.
1
2
3
Arithmetic growth is linear.
4
5
Section 11.3
Sequences
527
Are You A Genius?
Each problem is a series of some sort—that is, a succession of either letters, numbers
or drawings—with the last item in the series missing. Each series is arranged according
to a different rule and, in order to identify the missing item, you must figure out what
that rule is.
Now, it’s your turn to play. Give yourself a maximum of 20 minutes to answer the
15 questions. If you haven’t finished in that time, stop anyway. In the test problems done
with drawings, it is always the top row or group that needs to be completed by choosing
one drawing from the bottom row.
PROBLEM 1
A
D
G
J
PROBLEM 2
1
3
6
10
PROBLEM 3
1
1
2
3
5
PROBLEM 4
21
20
18
15
11
PROBLEM 5
8
6
7
5
6
4
PROBLEM 6
PROBLEM 7
40 35 34 29 28 23
PROBLEM 8
PROBLEM 9
PROBLEM 10
1
2
3
4
PROBLEM 11
PROBLEM 12
1
2
3
4
PROBLEM 13
PROBLEM 14
PROBLEM 15
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
An arithmetic sequence is a sequence whose consecu-
tive terms differ by the same real number, called the
common difference.
Arithmetic Sequence
This test was distributed by 
MENSA, the high-IQ society.  
Here is the scoring for this test:
Give yourself 1 point for each 
correct answer.  If you 
completed the test in 15 
minutes or less, give yourself
an additional 4 points.
1. M   2. 15   3. 8   4. 6   5. 5   6. 22   
7. 2   8. 3   9. 2   10. 4   11. 4
12. 4   13. 2   14. 3   15. 3
Carly Bergey/
PreMediaGlobal
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Example 1c leads us to a formula for arithmetic sequences:
a1 is the first term of an arithmetic sequence.
a2 is the second term of an arithmetic sequence, and
a2  a1  d
a3 is the third term of an arithmetic sequence, and
a3  a2  d  1a1  d2  d  a1  2d
a4 is the fourth term of an arithmetic sequence, and
a4  a3  d  1a1  2d2  d  a1  3d
a43 is the 43rd term of an arithmetic sequence, and
a43  a1  42d
123
One less than the term number
This pattern leads to the following formula.
o
528
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Example
1 Find the missing term of an arithmetic sequence
Show that each sequence is arithmetic, and find the missing term.
a. 1, 4, 7, 10, 13, 
, . . .
b. 20, 14, 8, 2, 4, 10, 
, . . .
c.
, 
 d, 
 2d, 
 3d, 
 4d, 
, . . .
Solution
a. Look for a common difference by subtracting each term from the succeeding term:
4  1  3,
7  4  3,
10  7  3,
13  10  3
If the difference between each pair of consecutive terms of the sequence is
the same number, then that number is the common difference; in this case it is 3.
To find the missing term, simply add the common difference. The next term is
13  3  16
b. The common difference is 6. The next term is found by adding the common
difference:
10  162  16
c. The common difference is d, so the next term is 
1a1  4d2  d  a1  5d
a1
a1
a1
a1
a1
Example
2 Find a sequence given a general term
If 
, list the sequence.
Solution
a1 means evaluate 26  6n for n  1.
a2 5 26 2 6122 5 14
a1 5 26 2 6112 5 20
an 5 26 2 6n
Do not check only the
first difference. All the
differences must be the
same.
The general term of an arithmetic sequence a1, a2, a3, . . . , an, with common
difference d is
an 5 a1 1 1n 2 12d
General Term of an Arithmetic Sequence
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Geometric Sequences
A second type of sequence is the geometric sequence or geometric progression. If each
term is multiplied by the same number (instead of added to the same number) to obtain
successive terms, a geometric sequence is formed.
Section 11.3
Sequences
529
1
2
4
Geometric growth is exponential.
8
16
The sequence is 20, 14, 8, 2, . . . .
a4 5 26 2 6142 5 2
a3 5 26 2 6132 5 8
Example
3 Find the common ratio of a geometric sequence
Show that each sequence is geometric, and find the common ratio.
a. 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 
, . . .
b. 10, 5, , , , 
, . . .
c. g1, g1r, g1r2, g1r3, g1r4, 
, . . .
Solution
a. First, verify that there is a common ratio:
The common ratio is 2, so to find the next term, multiply the common ratio by the
preceding term. The next term is
b. The common ratio is (be sure to check each ratio). The next term is found by multi-
plication:
c. The common ratio is r, and the next term is
g1r41r2 5 g1r5
5
8
 a1
2b  5
16
1
2
32122 5 64
4
2  2,8
4  2,16
8  2,32
16  2
5
8
5
4
5
2
A geometric sequence is a sequence whose consecutive
terms have the same quotient, called the common ratio.
Geometric Sequence
If the sequence is geometric, the number obtained by dividing any term into the follow-
ing term of that sequence will be the same nonzero number. No term of a geometric
sequence may be zero.
Carly Bergey/PreMediaGlobal
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Fibonacci-Type Sequences
Even though our attention is focused on arithmetic and geometric sequences, it is impor-
tant to realize that there can be other types of sequences.
530
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Example
4 Find the terms of a geometric sequence 
List the sequence generated by 
.
Solution
The sequence is 50, 100, 200, 400, . . . .
g4 5 50122 421 5 400
g3 5 50122 321 5 200
g2 5 50122 221 5 100
g1 5 50122 121 5 50
gn 5 50122 n21
As with arithmetic sequences, we denote the terms of a geometric sequence by using
a special notation. Let g1, g2, g3, . . . , gn, . . . be the terms of a geometric sequence. Ex-
ample 3c leads us to a formula for geometric sequences.
one less than the term number
Look for patterns to find the following formula.
g92  r91g1
o
 g5 5 rg4 5 r1r3g12 5 r4g1
 g4 5 rg3 5 r1rg22 5 r1r2g12 5 r3g1
 g3 5 rg2 5 r1rg12 5 r2g1
 g2 5 rg1
{
For a geometric sequence g1, g2, g3, . . . , gn, . . . , with common ratio r, the general
term is 
gn 5 g1r n 2 1
General Term Geometric Sequence
© Mary Steinbacher / 
PhotoEdit
The next type of sequence came about, oddly enough, by looking at the birth patterns
of rabbits. In the 13th century, Leonardo Fibonacci wrote a book, Liber Abaci, in which
he discussed the advantages of the Hindu-Arabic numerals over Roman numerals. In this
Historical
Leonardo Fibonacci 
(ca. 1175–1250)
Fibonacci, also known as Leonardo
da Pisa, visited a number of
Eastern and Arabic cities, where he
became interested in the Hindu-
Arabic numeration system we use
today. He wrote Liber Abaci, in
which he strongly advocated the
use of the Hindu-Arabic numera-
tion system. Howard Eves, in his
book In Mathematical Circles,
states: “Fibonacci sometimes
signed his work with the name
Leonardo Bigollo. Now bigollo has
more than one meaning; it means
both ‘traveler’ and ‘blockhead.’ In
signing his work as he did,
Fibonacci may have meant that he
was a great traveler, for so he was.
But a story has circulated that he
took pleasure in using this signa-
ture because many of his contem-
poraries considered him a
blockhead (for his interest in the
new numbers), and it pleased him
to show these critics what a block-
head could accomplish.”
NOTE
© Mary Steinbacher / PhotoEdit
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.3
Sequences
531
Number
of
Months
Number
of
Pairs
Pairs of Rabbits (the pairs shown in color are ready to
reproduce in the next month)
Start
1
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
5
5
8
…
Same pair
(rabbits never die)
…
Example
5 Find the number of rabbits
Suppose a pair of rabbits will produce a new pair of rabbits in their 
second month, and thereafter will produce a new pair every month. The new rabbits will
do exactly the same. Start with one pair. How many pairs will there be in 10 months?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. We can begin to understand the problem by looking at the fol-
lowing chart:
Pólya’s 
Method
Kerstin Jönsson/epa/Corbis 
Devise a Plan. We look for a pattern with the sequence 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, . . . ; it is not
arithmetic and it is not geometric. It looks as if (after the first two months) each new
number can be found by adding the two previous terms.
Carry Out the Plan.
Do you see the pattern? The sequence is 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, c
5   8
3   5   8
2   3   5
1   2   3
1   1   2
book, one problem was to find the number of rabbits alive after a given number of gener-
ations. Let us consider what he did with this problem.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If we state this definition symbolically with first term , second term , and general term
, we have a formula for the general term.
sn
s2
s1
532
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
For a Fibonacci sequence s1, s2, s3, . . . , sn, . . . , the general term is given by
for n $ 3.
sn  sn1  sn2
General Term of a Fibonacci Sequence
Example
6 Find the terms of a Fibonacci-type sequence
a. If 
 5 and 
 2, list the first five terms of this Fibonacci-type sequence.
b. If 
and 
represent any first numbers, list the first eight terms of this Fibonacci-type
sequence.
Solution
27
a. 5, 2, 7, 9, 16
52
79
b. s1 and s2 are given.
s3  s2  s1
s4  s3  s2  1s1  s22  s2  s1  2s2
s5  s4  s3  1s1  2s22  1s1  s22  2s1  3s2
s6  s5  s4  12s1  3s22  1s1  2s22  3s1  5s2
s7  s6  s5  13s1  5s22  12s1  3s22  5s1  8s2
s8  s7  s6  15s1  8s22  13s1  5s22  8s1  13s2
Look at the coefficients in the algebraic simplification and notice that the Fibonacci
sequence 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, . . . is part of the construction of any Fibonacci-type sequence
regardless of the terms s1 and s2.
s2
s1
s2
s1
}
}
}
Historically, there has been much interest in the Fibonacci sequence. It is 
used in botany, zoology, business, economics, statistics, operations research, archeol-
ogy, architecture, education, and sociology. There is even an official Fibonacci
Association.
Look Back. Using this pattern, Fibonacci was able to compute the number of pairs of
rabbits alive after 10 months (it is the tenth term after the first 1): 89. He could also
compute the number of pairs of rabbits after the first year or any other interval. Without
a pattern, the problem would indeed be a difficult one.
A Fibonacci-type sequence is a sequence in which any two numbers form the first
and second terms, and subsequent terms are found by adding the previous two terms.
The Fibonacci sequence is that sequence for which the first two terms are both 1.
Fibonacci Sequence
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

An example of Fibonacci numbers occurring in nature is illustrated by a sunflower.
The seeds are arranged in spiral curves as shown in Figure 11.2.
Section 11.3
Sequences
533
Example
7
Classify sequences
Classify the given sequences as arithmetic, geometric, Fibonacci-type, or none of the
above. Find the next term for each sequence and give its general term if it is arithmetic,
geometric, or Fibonacci-type.
a. 15, 30, 60, 120, . . .
b. 15, 30, 45, 60, . . .
c. 15, 30, 45, 75, . . .
d. 15, 20, 26, 33, . . .
e. 3, 3, 3, 3, . . .
f. 15, 30, 90, 360, . . .
Solution
a. 15, 30, 60, 120, . . . does not have a common difference, but a common ratio of 2, so
this is a geometric sequence. The next term is 120(2)  240. The general term is
.
b. 15, 30, 45, 60, . . . has a common difference of 15, so this is an arithmetic 
sequence. The next term of the sequence is 60  15  75. The general term 
is an  15  (n  1)15  15  15n  15  15n.
c. 15, 30, 45, 75, . . . does not have a common difference or a common ratio. Next, we
check for a Fibonacci-type sequence by adding successive terms: 15  30  45; 
30  45  75, so this is a Fibonacci-type sequence. The next term is 45  75  120.
The general term is sn  sn1  sn2 where s1  15 and s2  30.
d. 15, 20, 26, 33, . . . does not have a common difference or a common ratio. Since
15  20  26, we see it is not a Fibonacci-type sequence. We do see a pattern, how-
ever, when looking at the differences:
20  15  5;
26  20  6;
33  26  7
The next difference is 8. Thus, the next term is 33  8  41.
gn 5 15122 n21
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Dale Seymour Publications 
© Steve Terrill/CORBIS
FIGURE 11.2 The arrangement of the pods (phyllotaxy) of a sunflower 
illustrates a Fibonacci sequence.
If we count the number of counterclockwise spirals (13 and 21 in this example), they are
successive terms in the Fibonacci sequence. This is true of all sunflowers and, indeed, of
the seed head of any composite flower such as the daisy or aster.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

e. 3, 3, 3, 3,
has a common difference of 0 and the common ratio is 1, so it is both
arithmetic and geometric. The next term is 3. The general term is an  3  (n  1)
0  3 or 
.
f. 15, 30, 90, 360, . . . does not have a common difference or a common ratio. We see a
pattern when looking at the ratios:
30
15 5 2; 90
30 5 3; 360
90 5 4
gn  3(1)n1  3
c
534
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
General terms can be given for sequences that are not arithmetic, geometric, or 
Fibonacci-type. Consider the following example.
Example
8
Find the terms of a given sequence
Find the first four terms for the sequences with the given general terms. If the general
term defines an arithmetic, geometric, or Fibonacci-type sequence, so state.
a.
b.
c.
, where s1  4 and s2  6
d.
e.
Solution
a. Since sn  n2, we find s1  1122  1; s2  1222  4, s3  1322, 
The sequence is 1, 4, 9, 16, 
b. Since sn  112n  5n, we find
s1  1121  5112  6
s2  1122  5122  9
s3  1123  5132  16
s4  1124  5142  19
The sequence is 6, 9, 16, 19, 
c. sn  sn1  sn2 is the form of a Fibonacci-type sequence. Using the two given
terms, we find:
s1  4
Given
s2  6
Given
s3  s2  s1  6  142  2
s4  s3  s2  2  6  8
The sequence is 4, 6, 2, 8, c .
c .
c .
c .
sn 5 2n 1 1n 2 12 1n 2 22 1n 2 32 1n 2 42
sn 5 2n
sn 5 sn21 1 sn22
sn 5 1212 n 2 5n
sn 5 n2
d. sn  2n; s1  2112  2; s2  2122  4; s3  2132  6; . . . .
The sequence is 2, 4, 6, 8, 
; this is an arithmetic sequence.
e. sn  2n  1n  121n  221n  321n  42
s1  2112  11  1211  2211  3211  42  2
s2  2122  12  1212  2212  3212  42  4
s3  2132  13  1213  2213  3213  42  6
s4  2142  14  1214  2214  3214  42  8
The sequence is 2, 4, 6, 8, c .
c
The next ratio is 5. Thus, the next term is 360(5)  1,800.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Examples 8d and 8e show that if only a finite number of successive terms is known
and no general term is given, then a unique general term cannot be given. That is, if we
are given the sequence
2, 4, 6, 8, 
the next term is probably 10 (if we are thinking of the general term of Example 8d), but it
may be something different. In Example 8e,
This gives the unlikely sequence 2, 4, 6, 8, 34, 
In general, you are looking for the
simplest general term; nevertheless, you must remember that answers are not unique un-
less the general term is given.
c .
s5 5 2 152 1 15 2 12  15 2 22  15 2 32  15 2 42 5 34
c
Section 11.3
Sequences
535
If you have access to a spreadsheet program, it is easy to generate the terms of a
sequence. The spreadsheet below shows the first 19 terms for the sequences given
in Example 8.
The formulas for the cells correspond to the formulas in Example 8.
Term:
1; A21; replicate
a: A2^2; A3^2; replicate
b: (1)^A2  5*A2; (1)^A3  5*A3; replicate
c: 4; 6; D2D3; replicate
d: 2*A2; 2*A3; replicate
e: 2*A2(A2  1)*(A2  2)*(A2  3)*(A2  4); replicate
COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
Spreadsheet Application
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Term
a
b
c
d
e
1
1
-6
-4
2
2
2
4
-9
6
4
4
3
9
-16
2
6
6
4
16
-19
8
8
8
5
25
-26
10
10
34
6
36
-29
18
12
132
7
49
-36
28
14
374
8
64
-39
46
16
856
9
81
-46
74
18
1698
10
100
-49
120
20
3044
11
121
-56
194
22
5062
12
144
-59
314
24
7944
13
169
-66
508
26
11906
14
196
-69
822
28
17188
15
225
-76
1330
30
24054
16
256
-79
2152
32
32792
17
289
-86
3482
34
43714
18
324
-89
5634
36
57156
19
361
-96
9116
38
73478
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

536
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
To classify the sequence s1, s2, s3, . . . , sn:
Step 1
Check to see if it is arithmetic. Find the successive differences:
s2  s1  d1
s3  s2  d2
s4  s3  d3
If all these differences
d1  d2  d3  . . .
are the same, then it is an arithmetic sequence.
Step 2
Check to see if it is geometric. Find successive ratios
If all these ratios
r1  r2  r3 . . .
are the same, then it is a geometric sequence.
Step 3
Check to see if it is Fibonacci-type. Check to see if
s3  s2  s1
s4  s3  s2
If these sums check, then it is a Fibonacci-type sequence.
Step 4
If the sequence is not arithmetic, geometric, Fibonacci, or Fibonacci-type,
then we classify it by saying it is none of the above. 
o
s2
s1
 r1; s3
s2
 r2; s4
s3
 r3, . . . 
o
Procedure for Classifying Sequences
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a sequence?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by a general term?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is an arithmetic sequence?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a geometric sequence?
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a Fibonacci sequence?
In Problems 6–31,
a. Classify the sequences as arithmetic, geometric, Fibonacci, or
none of these.
b. If arithmetic, give d; if geometric, give r; if Fibonacci, give the
first two terms; and if none of these, state a pattern using your
own words.
c. Supply the next term.
6. 2, 4, 6, 8, 
, . . .
7. 2, 4, 8, 16, 
, . . .
8. 2, 4, 6, 10, 
, . . .
9. 5, 15, 25, 
, . . .
10. 5, 15, 45, 
, . . .
11. 5, 15, 20, 
, . . .
12. 1, 5, 25, 
, . . .
13. 25, 5, 1, 
, . . .
14. 9, 3, 1, 
, . . .
15. 1, 3, 9, 
, . . .
16. 21, 20, 18, 15, 11, 
, . . .
17. 8, 6, 7, 5, 6, 4, 
, . . .
18. 2, 5, 8, 11, 14, 
, . . .
19. 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 
, . . .
20. 5, 15, 45, 135, 405, 
, . . .
21. 10, 10, 10, 
, . . .
22. 2, 5, 7, 12, 
, . . .
Problem Set 11.3
We conclude this section by summarizing the procedure for classifying sequences.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23. 3, 6, 9, 15, 
, . . .
24. 1, 8, 27, 64, 125, 
, . . .
25. 8, 12, 18, 27, 
, . . .
26. 32, 35, 38, 311, 
, . . .
27. 45, 44, 43, 42, 
, . . .
28.
, . . .
29.
, . . .
30. , 2, 3, 4
, …
31.
, . . .
7
12, 2
3, 3
4, 5
6,
1
2,
4
3
1
10, 1
5, 3
10, 2
5, 1
2,
1
2, 1
3, 2
3, 1
4, 3
4, 1
5, 2
5, 3
5, 4
5, 1
6,
Section 11.3
Sequences
537
Problem Solving  3 
56. Is the following sequence a Fibonacci sequence? 
an is one more than the nth term of the Fibonacci 
sequence.
57. Is the following sequence a Fibonacci sequence?
1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, . . . , an, where an is the integer nearest to
58. Apartment blocks of n floors are to be painted blue and yellow,
with the rule that no two adjacent floors can be blue. (They
can, however, be yellow.) Let an be the number of ways to
paint a block with n floors.*
Does the sequence a1, a2, a3, . . . form a Fibonacci sequence?
59. Consider the following magic trick. The magician asks the
audience for any two numbers (you can limit it to the counting
numbers between 1 and 10 to keep the arithmetic manageable).
Add these two numbers to obtain a third number. Add the sec-
ond and third numbers to obtain a fourth. Continue until ten
numbers are obtained. Then ask the audience to add the ten
numbers, while the magician instantly gives the sum.
Consider the example shown here: 
First number:
5
Second number:
9
(3) Add:
14
(4)
23
(5)
37
(6)
60
(7)
97
(8)
157
(9)
254
(10)
411
Add column:
1,067
Two-story
houses (3)
One-story
houses (2)
Four-story houses (8)
Three-story
houses (5)
1
15 
 c 1  15
2
d
n
Level  2
In Problems 32–47,
a. Find the first three terms of the sequences whose nth terms are
given.
b. Classify the sequence as arithmetic (give d), geometric 
(give r), both, or neither.
32. sn  4n  3
33. sn  3  3n
34. sn  10n
35. sn  2  n
36. sn  7  3n
37. sn  10  10n
38. sn 
39. sn 
40. sn 
41. sn 
42. sn 
43. sn  112n
44. sn  5
45. sn 
46. sn  112n1
47. sn  112n1n  12
Find the requested terms in Problems 48–55.
48. Find the 15th term of the sequence sn  4n  3
49. Find the 69th term of the sequence sn  7  3n
50. Find the 20th term of the sequence sn  112n1n  12
51. Find the 3rd term of the sequence sn  112n15n1
52. Find the first five terms of the sequence where 
s1  2 and sn  3sn1, n  2
53. Find the first five terms of the sequence where 
s1  3 and sn  sn1, n  2
54. Find the first five terms of the sequence where 
s1  1, s2  1, and sn  sn1  sn2, n  3
55. Find the first five terms of the sequence where 
s1  1, s2  2, and sn  sn1  sn2, n  3
1
3
2
3
1
4 n21n 1 12 2
1
2 n1n 1 12
n 2 1
n 1 1
1 2 1
n
2
n
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Text not available due to copyright restrictions

538
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
11.4  Series
In the last section we looked at a list of numbers having a first number, a second number,
a third number, and so on. We called it a sequence, and in this section we look at the sum
of terms of a sequence. If the terms of a sequence are added, the expression is called 
a series. We first consider a finite sequence along with its associated sum. Note that 
a capital letter is used to indicate the sum.
The indicated sum of the terms of a finite sequence
is called a finite series and is denoted by
Sn 5 s1 1 s2 1 s3 1 ### 1 sn
s1, s2, s3, . . ., sn
Finite Series
Example
1
Find the sum of terms of a sequence
a. Find S4, where sn  26  6n.
b. Find S3, where sn  112nn2.
s1
644474448
s2
644474448
s3
644474448
s4
644474448
Write a lowercase s on
your paper; now write a
capital S. Do they look
different? You need to
distinguish between the
lowercase s and capital
S in your own written
work.
The trick depends on the magician’s ability to multiply quickly
and mentally by 11. Consider the following pattern of multipli-
cation by 11:
11  10  110
11  11  121
11  12  132
Sum of the two digits 
11  13  143
Original two digits
11  52  572
Sum of the two digits may be a two-digit number. 
11  74  7 11 4
 814
Do the usual carry.
T
c
c
T
Consider 11 times the 7th number in the example in the
pattern:
11  97  9 16 7  1,067
Note that this is the sum of the ten numbers. Explain why this
magician’s trick works, and why it is called Fibonacci’s magic
trick.
60. Fill in the blanks so that 
___, 8, ___, ___, 27, ___, . . .
is
a. an arithmetic sequence.
b. a geometric sequence.
c. a sequence that is neither arithmetic nor geometric, for
which you are able to write a general term.
Solution
a. S4  s1  s2  s3  s4
 326  61124  326  61224  326  61324  326  61424
 20  14  8  2
 44
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.4
Series
539
s1
644474448
s2
644474448
s3
644474448
The terms of the sequence in Example 1b alternate in sign: 1, 4, 9, 16, . . . .
A factor of 112n or 112n1 in the general term will cause the sign of the terms to al-
ternate, creating a series called an alternating series.
Summation Notation
Before we continue to discuss finding the sum of the terms of a sequence, we need
a handy notation, called summation notation. In Example 1a we wrote
Using summation notation (or, as it is sometimes called, sigma notation), we could
write this sum using the Greek letter 
The sigma notation evaluates the expression 
immediately following the sigma
sign, first for 
then for 
then for 
and finally for 
and then
adds these numbers. That is, the expression is evaluated for consecutive counting num-
bers starting with the value of k listed at the bottom of the sigma 
and ending with
the value of k listed at the top of the sigma 
For example, consider 
with
. Then
This is the last natural number in the domain. It is called the upper limit. 
↓
}
←This is the function being evaluated. It is called the general term.
↑
This is the first natural number in the domain. It is called the lower limit.
Thus, 
 2112  2122  2132  2142  2152  2162  2172  2182  2192  21102
 110.
The words evaluate and expand are both used to mean “write out an expression in
summation notation, and then sum the resulting terms, if possible.”
a
10
k 5 1
2k
a
10
k 5 1
2k
k 5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
sk 5 2k
1k 5 42.
1k 5 12
k 5 4,
k 5 3,
k 5 2,
k 5 1,
1S2
1sk2
S4 5 a
4
k51
sk 5 s1 1 s2 1 s3 1 s4
S:
S4 5 s1 1 s2 1 s3 1 s4
b. S3  s1  s2  s3
 3112111224  3112212224  3112313224
 1  4  192
 6
Historical
Once when walking past a lounge
in the University of Chicago that
was filled with a loud crowd
watching TV, [Antoni Zygmund]
asked one of his students what
was going on. The student told
him that the crowd was watching
the World Series and explained to
him some of the features of this
baseball phenomenon. Zygmund
thought about it all for a few
minutes and commented, “I think
it should be called the World
Sequence.”
NOTE
Example
2
Evaluate a summation
a. Evaluate: 
b. Expand: a
n
k 5 3
 1
2k
a
6
k53
12k 1 12
Ronald Coifman and Peter Duren,
A Century of Mathematics in 
America, Part III
Providence, RI: American 
Mathematical Society, 1980, p. 348.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

540
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
We notice that the number of blocks (counting from the top) in each row forms an
arithmetic series:
Look for a pattern:
Denote one row by 
block.
Two rows: 
Three rows: 
Four rows: 
(shown in Figure 11.3)
What about 10 rows?
Instead of adding all these numbers directly, let us try an easier way. Write down A10
twice, once counting from the top and once counting from the bottom:
A10  1  6   11  16  21  26  31  36  41  46
A10  46  41  36  31  26  21  16  11  6  1
Add these equations:
2A10  47  47  47  47  47  47  47  47  47  47
Number of terms
2A10  10 1472  470
Repeated term
A10  10
 235
Divide both sides by 2.
Average of 1st and last terms
A47
2 B
A10 5 1 1 6 1 11 1 16 1 21 1 26 1 31 1 36 1 41 1 46
o
A4 5 1 1 6 1 11 1 16 5 34
A3 5 1 1 6 1 11 5 18
A2 5 1 1 6 5 7
A1 5 1
1 1 6 1 11 1 16 1 c
Arithmetic Series
An arithmetic series is the sum of the terms of an arithmetic sequence. Let us consider a
rather simple-minded example. How many blocks are shown in the stack in Figure 11.3?
We can answer this question by simply counting the blocks: There are 34 blocks. Somehow
it does not seem like this is what we have in mind with this question. Suppose we ask a
better question: How many blocks are in a similar building with n rows?
FIGURE 11.3 How many blocks?
Row 1:    
Row 2:    
Row 3:   
Row 4: 
↔
↔
↔
↔
↔
↔
↔
↔
↔
↔
2
123
{
1 3
Solution
a.
Evaluate the expression 2k  1 for k  3
k  5
k  6
 7  9  11  13
 40
b. a
n
k 5 3
 1
2k 5 1
23 1 1
24 1 1
25 1 1
26 1 c1
1
2n21 1 1
2n
a
6
k 5 3
12k 1 12 5 12 # 3 1 12 1 12 # 4 1 12 1 12 # 5 1 12 1 12 # 6 1 12
k  4
6447448
1442443
1442443
1442443
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.4
Series
541
144
444424444443
↓
↓
This pattern leads us to a formula for n terms. We note that the number of blocks is an
arithmetic sequence with a1  1, d  5; thus since an  a1  1n  12d, we have for the
blocks in Figure 11.3 a stack starting with 1 and ending (in the nth row) with 
an  1  1n  125  1  5n  5  5n  4
Thus, Number of blocks in n rows
number of rows
An 
Average of 1st and last terms
This formula can be used for the number of blocks for any number of rows. Looking
back, we see
n  1:
A1 
351122  31124  1
n  4:
A4 
351422  31424  34 (Figure 11.3)
n  10:
A10 
3511022  311024  235 
If we carry out these same steps for An where an  a1  1n  12d, we derive the fol-
lowing formula for the sum of the terms of an arithmetic sequence.
1
2
1
2
1
2
 5 1
2 15n2 2 3n2
 5 n c 5n 2 3
2
d
n c
1 1 15n 2 42
2
d
The sum of the terms of an arithmetic sequence 
with common
difference d is
An 5 a
n
k51
ak 5 n aa1 1 an
2
b or An 5 n
2 32a1 1 1n 2 12d4
a1, a2, a3, c , an
Arithmetic Series Formula
These formulas are not
as difficult as they look.
The first formula tells
us that the sum of 
n terms of an arithmetic
sequence is n times the
average of the first and
last terms.
The last part of the formula for An is used when the last term is not explicitly stated or
known. To derive this formula, we know 
so
 5 n
2
 32a1 1 1n 2 12d 4
 5 n
2
 3a1 1 a1 1 1n 2 12d 4
 5 n a
a1 1 3a1 1 1n 2 12d4
2
b
 An 5 n aa1 1 an
2
b
an 5 a1 1 1n 2 12d
Example
3
Find the sum of the numbers of a sequence
In a classroom of 35 students, each student “counts off” by threes (i.e., 3, 6, 9, 12, 
2.
What is the sum of the students’ numbers?
Solution
We recognize the sequence 3, 6, 9, 12, 
as an arithmetic sequence with
the first term 
and the common difference 
The sum of these numbers is
denoted by 
since there are 35 students “counting off”:
A35 5 35
2 32 132 1 135 – 12  34 5 1,890
A35
d 5 3.
a1 5 3
c
c
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The number of letters in each successive mailing is a number in the geometric sequence
6, 36, 216, 1296, 
or
How many people receive letters with 11 mailings, assuming that no person receives a
letter more than once? To answer this question, consider the series associated with a geo-
metric sequence. We begin with a pattern:
Denote one mailing by
Two mailings:
Three mailings:
Eleven mailings:
We could probably use a calculator to find this sum, but we are looking for a formula, so
we try something different. In fact, this time we will work out the general formula. Let
Multiply both sides of the latter equation by r:
Notice that, except for the first and last terms, all the terms in the expansions for 
and
are the same, so that if we subtract one equation from the other, we have
We solve for Gn.
if 
For Charlie Brown’s chain letter problem, 
and 
so we find
G11 5 6 11 2 6112
1 2 6
5 6
5 1611 2 12 5 435,356,466
r 5 6,
g1 5 6, n 5 11,
r 2 1
 Gn 5 g111 2 rn2
1 2 r
 11 2 r2  Gn 5 g1 11 2 rn2
 Gn 2 rGn 5 g1 2 g1rn
rGn
Gn
rGn 5 g1r 1 g1r2 1 g1r3 1 c1 g1rn
Gn 5 g1 1 g1r 1 g1r2 1 c1 g1rn21
Gn 5 g1 1 g2 1 g3 1 c1 gn
G11 5 6 1 62 1 c1  611
(
G3 5 6 1 62 1 63
G2 5 6 1 62
G1 5 6
6, 62, 63, 64, c
c
542
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Geometric Series
A geometric series is the sum of the terms of a geometric sequence. To motivate a for-
mula for a geometric series, we once again consider an example. Suppose Charlie Brown
receives a chain letter, and he is to copy this letter and send it to six of his friends.
You may have heard that chain letters “do not work.” Why not? Consider the number
of people who could become involved with this chain letter if we assume that everyone
carries out their task and does not break the chain. The first mailing would consist of six
letters. The second mailing involves 42 letters since the second mailing of 36 letters is
added to the total: 6 1 36 5 42.
1st mailing:
2nd mailing:
Peanuts: © 2010 Peanuts Worldwide LLC., dist by UFS, Inc.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.4
Series
543
The sum of the terms of a geometric sequence 
with common ratio 
r (where
) is
Gn 5 g111 2 rn2
1 2 r
r 2 1
g1, g2, g3, c , gn
Geometric Series Formula
Example
4
Make a financial decision
Suppose some eccentric millionaire offered to hire you for a month (say, 31 days) and
offered you the following salary choice. She will pay you 
per day or else will
pay you ¢ for the first day, ¢ for the second day, ¢ for the third day, and so on for the
31 days. Which salary should you accept?
Solution
If you are paid 
per day, your salary for the 31 days is
Now, if you are paid using the doubling scheme, your salary is (in cents)
1  2  4  8      last day
or
20  21  22  23      230
We see that this is the sum of the geometric sequence where g1  1 and r  2. We are
looking for G31:
Using a calculator, we find this to be 2,147,483,647 cents or 
You should
certainly accept the doubling scheme (starting with ¢, but do not ask for any days off).
1
$21,474,836.47.
G31 5 111 2 2312
1 2 2
5 211 2 2312 5 231 2 1
$500,0001312 5 $15,500,000
$500,000
4
2
1
$500,000
This is more than the number of people in the United States! The number of letters in
only two more mailings would exceed the number of men, women, and children in the
whole world.
31st day
644744
8
Example
5
Find the number of games
The NCAA men’s basketball tournament has 64 teams. How many
games are necessary to determine a champion?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guide-
lines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Most tournaments are formed
by drawing an elimination schedule similar to the one
shown in Figure 11.4. This is sometimes called a two-
team elimination tournament.
Devise a Plan. We could obtain the answer to the ques-
tion by direct counting, but instead we will find a general
solution, working backward. We know there will be 1
championship game and 2 semifinal games; continuing
to work backward, there are 4 quarter-final games, . . . :
1 1 2 1 22 1 23 1 c
Pólya’s 
Method
FIGURE 11.4 NCAA playoffs
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

544
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
We recognize this as a geometric series. We note that since there are 64 teams, the first
round has 
games. Also, we know that 
so we must find
Carry Out the Plan. We note that 
, and 
Thus, the NCAA playoffs will require 63 games.
Look Back. We see not only that the NCAA tournament has 63 games for a playoff
tournament, but, in general, that if there are 
teams in a tournament, there will be
games. However, do not forget to check by estimation or by using common
sense. Each game eliminates one team, and so 63 teams must be eliminated to crown a
champion.
2n 2 1
2n
G6 5 111 2 262
1 2 2
5 26 2 1 5 63
n 5 6:
g1 5 1, r 5 2
1 1 2 1 22 1 23 1 24 1 25
25 5 32,
64/2 5 32
1
8
1
2
1
4
1
8
1
2
1
4
0
1
FIGURE 11.5 Series 1
2 1 1
4 1 1
8 1 c
It appears that the partial sums are getting closer to 1 as n becomes larger. We can find
the sum of an infinite geometric sequence.
Infinite Geometric Series
We have just found a formula for the sum of the first n terms of a geometric sequence.
Sometimes it is also possible to find the sum of an entire infinite geometric series. Sup-
pose an infinite geometric series
is denoted by G. This is an infinite series.
The partial sums are defined by
Consider the partial sums for an infinite geometric series with 
and 
The geo-
metric sequence is 
The first few partial sums can be found as follows:
Does this series have a sum if you add all its terms? It does seem that as you take more
terms of the series, the sum is closer and closer to 1. Analytically, we can check the par-
tial sums on a calculator or spreadsheet (see below). Geometrically, you can see (Fig-
ure 11.5) that if the terms are laid end-to-end as lengths on a number line, each term is
half the remaining distance to 1.
G1 5 1
2; G2 5 1
2 1 1
4 5 3
4; G3 5 1
2 1 1
4 1 1
8 5 7
8
1
2, 1
4, 1
8, 1
16, c .
r 5 1
2.
g1 5 1
2
G1 5 g1; G2 5 g1 1 g2; G3 5 g1 1 g2 1 g3;c
g1 1 g2 1 g3 1 g4 1 c
The infinite! No other
question has ever
moved so profoundly
the spirit of man (or
woman); no other
idea has so fruitfully
stimulated his (her)
intellect; yet no
other concept
stands in greater
need of clarification
than that of the
infinite . . . .
David Hilbert
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.4
Series
545
It is easy to use a spreadsheet (review Section 6.3) to look at the partial sums of 
a sequence. For the sequence , , , . . . , define the cells as shown:
Replicate subsequent rows. The output is:
n
Term
Partial sum
1
.5
.5
2
.25
.75
3
.125
.875
4
.0625
.9375
5
.03125
.96875
6
.015625
.984375
7
.0078125
.9921875
8
.00390625
.99609375
9
.00195313
.99804688
10
.00097656
.99902344
20
.00000095
.99999905
o
o
o
1
8
1
4
1
2
COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
Spreadsheet
Application
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
n
term
partial sum
1
0.5
+B2
+A2+1
+B2*.5
+C2+B3
+A3+1
+B3*.5
+C3+B4
Consider
Now, 
r, and 
are fixed numbers. If 
, then 
approaches 0 as n grows, and
thus 
approaches 
g1
1 2 r.
Gn
rn
0r0 , 1
1 2 r
g1,
Gn 5 g111 2 rn2
1 2 r
5 g1 2 g1rn
1 2 r
5
g1
1 2 r 2
g1
1 2 rrn
If 
is an infinite geometric sequence with a common ratio r such
that 
, then its sum is denoted by G and is found by
If 
, the infinite geometric series has no sum.
0 r 0 $ 1
G 5
g1
1 2 r
0r0 , 1
g1, g2, g3,c, gn, c
Infinite Geometric Series Formula
Example
6
Find the distance a pendulum travels
The path of each swing of a pendulum is 0.85 as long as the path of the previous swing
(after the first). If the path of the tip of the first swing is 36 in. long, how far does the tip
of the pendulum travel before it eventually comes to rest?
Solution
The tip of the pendulum travels 240 in.
 5 240
 5
36
1 – 0.85
 
5 36 1 36 10.852 1 36 10.852 2 1 c
36" arc
Infinite geometric series; 
g1  36; r  0.85
TOTAL DISTANCE
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

546
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Summary of Sequence and Series Formulas
We conclude this section by repeating the important formulas related to sequences and
series. Given a sequence of numbers, a series arises by considering the sum of the terms
of the sequence. The formulas for the general term of a sequence and for the sum (of
terms of the sequence; that is, a series) are given in Table 11.1.
Distinguishing a Series from a Sequence 
Type
Definition
Notation
Formula
Sequences
A list of numbers having a first term, a second term, . . .
sn
Arithmetic
A sequence with a common difference, d
an
an  a1  1n  12d
Geometric
A sequence with a common ratio, r
gn
gn  g1r n1
Fibonacci
A sequence with first two terms given, and subsequent 
terms the sum of the two previous terms
sn  sn1  sn2, n  3 
Series
The indicated sum of terms of a sequence
Sn
Arithmetic
Sum of the terms of an arithmetic sequence:
An
An 5 a
n
k 5 1
ak 5 a1 1 a2 1 a3 1 ### 1 an
An 5 n
2 32a1 1 1n 2 12d4
Geometric
Sum of the terms of a geometric sequence:
Gn
Gn 
gk  g1  g2  g3  . . .  gn
a
n
k 5 1
Sum of the terms of an infinite geometric sequence:
G
G  g1  g2  g3  # # #
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Distinguish a sequence from a series.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain summation notation.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a partial sum?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Distinguish a geometric series 
and an infinite geometric series.
Find the requested values in Problems 5–10.
5. S5 when sn  15  3n
6. S8 when sn  5n
7. S4 when sn  5  2n
8. S6 when sn  112n
9. S7 when sn  112n
10. S3 when sn  8  5n
Evaluate the expressions in Problems 11–18.
11.
12.
13.
14. a
5
k52
1100 2 5k2
a
6
k52
k2
a
4
k51
k2
a
5
k53
k
Problem Set 11.4
or
An 5 n aa1 1 an
2
b
, r  1
Gn 5
g111 2 r n2
1 2 r
G 
, 0 r 0 , 1
g1
1 2 r
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.4
Series
547
15.
16.
17.
18. a
3
k51
1212 k1k2 1 12
a
4
k50
31222 k
a
5
k51
1222 k21
a
10
k51
31k 1 1212 k4
41. How many points would a player who “runs the table” receive?
(To “run the table” means to sink all the balls.)
42. Suppose Missy sinks balls 1 through 8, and Shannon 
sinks balls 9 through 15. What are their respective 
scores?
43. Suppose Missy sinks the even-numbered balls and Shannon
sinks the odd-numbered balls. What are their respective
scores?
44. Suppose we consider a game of “super pool,” which has
30 consecutively numbered balls on the table. How many
points would a player receive to “run the table”?
45. The Peanuts cartoon (p. 549) expresses a common feeling 
regarding chain letters. Consider the total number of letters
sent after a particular mailing:
1st mailing:
6
2nd mailing:
6  36  42
3rd mailing:
6  36  216  258
Determine the total number of letters sent in five mailings of
the chain letter.
46. How many blocks would be needed to build a stack like 
the one shown in Figure 11.7 if the bottom row has 
28 blocks?
FIGURE 11.7 How many blocks?
47. Repeat Problem 46 if the bottom row has 87 blocks.
48. Repeat Problem 46 if the bottom row has 100 blocks.
49. A pendulum is swung 20 cm and allowed to swing freely 
until it eventually comes to rest. Each subsequent swing 
of the bob of the pendulum is 90% as far as the
preceding swing. How far will the bob travel before 
coming to rest?
50. The initial swing of the tip of a pendulum is 25 cm. 
If each swing of the tip is 75% of the preceding swing, 
how far does the tip travel before eventually coming to 
rest?   
51. A flywheel is brought to a speed of 375 revolutions per 
minute (rpm) and allowed to slow and eventually come to 
rest. If, in slowing, it rotates three-fourths as fast each
subsequent minute, how many revolutions will the wheel 
make before returning to rest?
Level  2
If possible, find the sum of the infinite geometric series in 
Problems 19–24.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25. Find the sum of the first 5 odd positive integers.
26. Find the sum of the first 5 even positive integers.
27. Find the sum of the first 5 positive integers.
28. Find the sum of the first 10 odd positive integers.
29. Find the sum of the first 10 even positive integers.
30. Find the sum of the first 10 positive integers.
31. Find the sum of the first 100 odd positive integers.
32. Find the sum of the first 100 even positive integers.
33. Find the sum of the first 100 positive integers.
34. Find the sum of the first n odd positive integers.
35. Find the sum of the first n even positive integers.
36. Find the sum of the first n positive integers.
37. Find the sum of the first 20 terms of the arithmetic 
sequence whose first term is 100 and whose common
difference is 50.
38. Find the sum of the first 50 terms of the arithmetic sequence
whose first term is 15 and whose common difference is 5.
39. Find the sum of the even integers between 41 and 99.  
40. Find the sum of the odd integers between 48 and 136.
The game of pool uses 15 balls numbered from 1 to 15 (see Fig-
ure 11.6). In the game of rotation, a player attempts to “sink” a ball
in a pocket of the table and receives the number of points on the
ball. Answer the questions in Problems 41–44.
FIGURE 11.6 Pool balls
13
3
15
14
10
12
1
8
2
11
7
4
5
6
9
2100 1 50 2 25 1 c
220 1 10 2 5 1 c
100 1 50 1 25 1 c
1 1 1
3 1 1
9 1 c
1 1 3
2 1 9
4 1 c
1 1 1
2 1 1
4 1 c
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

548
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
53. Advertisements say that a new type of superball will rebound
to 910 of its original height. If it is dropped from a height of
10 ft, how far, based on the advertisements, will the ball travel
before coming to rest?
54. A tennis ball is dropped from a height of 10 ft. If the ball
rebounds 23 of its height on each bounce, how far will the
ball travel before coming to rest?
Level 3
55. A culture of bacteria increases by 100% every 24 hours. 
If the original culture contains 1 million bacteria 
1a0  1 million), find the number of bacteria present 
after 10 days.
56. Use Problem 55 to find a formula for the number of bacteria
present after d days.
57. How many games are necessary for a two-team elimination
tournament with 32 teams?
58. Games like “Wheel of Fortune” and “Jeopardy” have one win-
ner and two losers. A three-team game tournament is
illustrated by Figure 11.8. If “Jeopardy” has a Tournament of
Champions consisting of 27 players, what is the necessary
number of games?
59. How many games are necessary for a three-team elimination
tournament with 729 teams?
Problem Solving  3
60. a. How many blocks are there in the solid figure shown in
Figure 11.9?
FIGURE 11.8 A three-team tournament 
FIGURE 11.9 How many blocks? 
b. How many blocks are there in a similar figure with 50 layers? 
11.5  Annuities
Sir Isaac Newton, one of the greatest mathematicians of all time, worked at the mint, but
apparently did not like to apply mathematics to money. In a book by Rev. J. Spence pub-
lished 1858, Spence writes, “Sir Isaac Newton, though so deep in algebra and fluxions,
could not readily make up a common account: and, when he was Master of the Mint, used
to get somebody else to make up his accounts for him.” There is an important lesson here. 
52. A rotating flywheel is allowed to slow to a stop from a 
speed of 500 rpm. While slowing, each minute it rotates 
two-thirds as many times as in the preceding minute. 
How many revolutions will the wheel make before coming 
to rest?
David S. Baker/Shutterstock.com
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.5
Annuities
549
If you do not like to work with money, hire someone to help you. When Albert Einstein
was asked what was the most amazing formula he knew, you might think he would have
given his famous formula 
, but he did not. He thought the most amazing formula
was the compound interest formula.
Ordinary Annuities
One of the most fundamental mathematical concepts for businesspeople and consumers
is the idea of interest. We have considered present- and future-value problems involving a
fixed amount, so we refer to such problems as lump-sum problems. On the other hand,
it is far more common to encounter financial problems based on monthly or other peri-
odic payments, so we refer to such problems as periodic-payment problems. Consider
the situation in which the monthly payment is known and the future value is to be deter-
mined. A sequence of payments into or out of an interest-bearing account is called an
annuity. If the payments are made into an interest-bearing account at the end of each time
period, and if the frequency of payments is the same as the frequency of compounding,
the annuity is called an ordinary annuity. The amount of an annuity is the sum of all pay-
ments made plus all accumulated interest. In this book we will assume that all annuities
are ordinary annuities.
The best way to understand what we mean by an annuity is to consider an example.
Suppose you decide to give up smoking and save the 
per day you spend on cigarettes.
How much will you save in 5 years? (Assume that each year has 360 days.) If you save
the money without earning any interest, you will have
However, let us assume that you save 
per day, and at the end of each month you de-
posit the $60 (assume that all months are 30 days; that is, assume ordinary interest)
into an account earning 
interest compounded monthly. Now, how much will you
have in 5 years? This is an example of an annuity. We could solve the problem using a
spreadsheet to simulate our bank statement. Part of such a spreadsheet is shown in the
margin.
Notice that even though the interest on 
for one month is 
, the total monthly
increase in interest is not linear, because the interest is compounded.
To derive a formula for annuities, let us consider this problem for a period of
6 months, and calculate the amounts plus interest for each deposit separately. We need a
new variable to represent the amount of periodic deposit. Since this is usually a monthly
payment, we let 
. The monthly payment is a periodic payment
that is made monthly.
We are given 
, and 
(“monthly deposit” means “monthly
compounding” for an ordinary annuity). Let 
. For this example, 
.
The time, t, varies for each deposit. Remember that the deposit comes at the end of
the month.
First deposit will earn 5 months’ interest:
6011  0.0125  63.06
Second deposit will earn 4 months’ interest:
6011  0.0124  62.44
Third deposit will earn 3 months’ interest:
6011  0.0123  61.82
Fourth deposit will earn 2 months’ interest:
6011  0.0122  61.21
Fifth deposit will earn 1 month’s interest:
6011  0.0121  60.60
Sixth deposit will earn no interest:
60.00
TOTAL IN THE ACCOUNT
369.13
i 5 0.12/12 5 0.01
i 5 r/n
n 5 12
m 5 60, r 5 0.12
m 5 periodic payment
$0.60
$60
12%
$2
$2 3 360 3 5 5 $3,600
$2
E 5 mc2
Spreadsheet Application
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
A
B
C
D
Time
Amt
Interest
Total
saved
in acct
start
$0
$0
$0
1 mo
$60
$0
$60
2 mo
$60
$0.60
$120.60
3 mo
$60
$1.21
$181.81
4 mo
$60
$1.82
$243.63
5 mo
$60
$2.44
$306.07
6 mo
$60
$3.06
$369.13
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Historical
Isaac Newton
(1642–1727)
Newton was one of the greatest
mathematicians of all time. He was
a genius of the highest order but
was often absent-minded. One
story about Newton is that, when he
was a boy, he was sent to cut a hole
in the bottom of the barn door for
the cats to go in and out. He cut two
holes—a large one for the cat and
a small one for the kittens.
Newton’s influence on mathematics
was so great that the field is some-
times divided into pre-Newtonian
mathematics and post-Newtonian
mathematics. Post-Newtonian
mathematics is characterized by the
changing and the infinite rather than
by the static and the finite. As an
example of his tremendous ability,
when Newton was 74 years old 
the mathematician Leibniz (see the
Historical Note on p. 85) posed a
challenge problem to all the mathe-
maticians in Europe. Newton
received the problem after a day’s
work at the mint (remember he was
74!) and solved the problem that
evening. His intellect was
monumental.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
550
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
This leads us to the following pattern (using variables). The total after 6 months is:
We are using the following formula for the sum of the terms of a geometric sequence:
That is, it is the sum of the terms of a geometric sequence with 
and common ratio
. The sum, 
, is the future value A. Thus (from the formula for the sum of a geo-
metric sequence), we have
 5 m3 11 1 i2 nt 2 14
2i
 5 m31 2 11 1 i2 nt4
2i
 A 5 m31 2 11 1 i2 nt4
1 2 11 1 i2
Gn
11 1 i2
g1 5 m
 5 a
6
k51
m11 1 i2 k21
 A 5 m 1 m11 1 i2 1 1 m11 1 i2 2 1 m11 1 i2 3 1 m11 1 i2 4 1 m11 1 i2 5
t
A
1
1,000
2
3
4
5
$5,000
Time (years)
2,000
3,000
4,000
The future value, A, of an annuity is found with the formula
where r is the annual rate, m the periodic payment, t the time (in years), and n is the
number of payments per year.
A 5 m c
A1 1 r
nBnt 2 1
r
n
d
Ordinary Annuity Formula
Example
1 Find the value of an ordinary annuity
How much do you save in 5 years if you deposit 
at the end of each month into an
account paying 
compounded monthly?
Solution
Begin by identifying the problem type as well as the variables: annuity; t  5,
m  $60, r  0.12, and n  12. Next, evaluate the formula:
The future value is 
. A graph is shown in Figure 11.10.
$4,900.18
 < 4,900.180191
 5 60 c
11 1 0.012 60 2 1
0.01
d
 A 5 m c
A1 1 r
nBnt 2 1
r
n
d
12%
$60
This is one of the most
useful formulas for you
to use in your personal
financial planning.
FIGURE 11.10 Growth of an account with a 
monthly
deposit. The graph shows both deposits and interest
compounded monthly at 
% annual rate.
12
$60
For the total after nt periods, we recognize this as a geometric
series with first term m and common ratio 1  i.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.5
Annuities
551
750,000
t
A
10
250,000
Age
20 30 40 50 60
500,000
Value
Contribution
period
Option I
Option
II
G
r
o
w
t
h
 
o
nl
y
© Images.com/CORBIS
Financial Independence
Example
2 Retirement calculation
Suppose you are 21 years old and will make monthly deposits to a bank 
account paying 
annual interest compounded monthly.
Option I: Pay yourself $200 per month for 5 years and then leave the balance in the bank
until age 65. (Total amount of deposits is $200  5  12  $12,000.)
Option II: Wait until you are 40 years old (the age most of us start thinking seriously
about retirement) and then deposit $200 per month until age 65. (Total amount of
deposits is $200  25  12  $60,000.)
Compare the amounts you would have from each of these options.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. When most of us are 21 years old, we do not think about
retirement. However, if we do, the results can be dramatic. With this example, we
investigate the differences if we save early (for 5 years) or later (for 25 years).
Devise a Plan. We calculate the value of the annuity for the 5 years of the first option,
and then calculate the effect of leaving the value at the end of 5 years (the annuity) in a
savings account until retirement. This part of the problem is a future value problem be-
cause it becomes a lump sum problem when deposits are no longer made (after 5 years).
For the second option, we calculate the value of the annuity for 25 years.
Carry Out the Plan. Option I: $200 per month for 5 years at 10% annual interest is an
annuity with m  200, r  0.10, t  5, and n  12; this is an annuity.
At the end of 5 years the amount in the account is $15,487.41. This money is left in the ac-
count, so it is now a future value problem for 39 years (ages 26 to 65); this part of the prob-
lem is a future value problem with P  15,487.41, r  0.1, t  39, and n  12, so that 
(It is 752,851.08 if you use the calculator value for A from the first part of the problem.)
The amount you would have at age 65 from 5 years of payments to yourself starting at
age 21 is $752,850.86.
Option II: If you wait until you are 40 years old, this is an annuity problem with 
m  200, r  0.10, t  25, and n  12:
The amount you would have at age 65 from 25 years
of payments to yourself starting at age 40 is 
$265,366.68.
Look Back. Retirement Options I and II
are compared graphically in Figure 11.11.
  265,366.6806
 A  200c 11  0.1
12212(25)  1
0.1
12
d
 752,850.86
 15,487.41a1  0.1
12 b
12(39)
 A  Pa1  r
nb
nt
A  200 c 11  0.1
12 212(5)  1
0.1
12
d  15,487.41443
10%
Pólya’s 
Method
FIGURE 11.11 Comparison of 
Options I and II
The following example is called the Financial Independence Example. It answers the
question, “Why should I take math?”
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

your retirement monthly income, assuming you decide to live on the interest only and
that the interest rate is 10%?
Solution
Option I gives you a retirement fund of $752,850.86. This will provide a
monthly income as determined by the simple interest formula (because the interest is
not left to accumulate):
Simple interest formula
Substitute values.
Simplify.
Option II gives you a retirement fund of $265,366.68. This will provide a monthly
income found as follows:
Repeat the steps from Option I. 
Substitute values.
Simplify.
The better choice (Option I) would mean that you would have about $4,000 more  each
and every month that you live beyond age 65. Did you ever ask the question “Why
should I take math?”
  2,211.39
 5 265,366.6810.102 a 1
12b
 I  Prt
  6,273.76
 5 752,850.8610.102 a 1
12b
 I  Prt
552
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Sinking Funds
We now consider the situation in which we need (or want) to have a lump sum of money
(a future value) in a certain period of time. The present value formula will tell us how
much we need to have today, but we frequently do not have that amount available. Sup-
pose your goal is 
in 5 years. You can obtain 
compounded monthly, so the
present value formula yields
However, this is more than you can afford to put into the bank now. The next choice is to
make a series of small equal investments to accumulate at 
compounded monthly, so
that the end result is the same—namely, 
in 5 years. The account you set up to re-
ceive those investments is called a sinking fund.
To find a formula for a sinking fund, we begin with the formula for an ordinary annu-
ity, and solve for m (which is the unknown for a sinking fund). Once again, we let 
Annuity formula
Multiply both sides by i.
Divide both sides by [(1  i2nt  1].
 
Ai
(1  i)nt  1  m
 Ai 5 m3 11 1 i2 nt 2 14
 A 5 m c
11 1 i2 nt 2 1
i
d
i 5 r/n :
$10,000
8%
P 5 Aa1 1 r
nb
2nt
5 $10,000a1 1 0.08
12 b
251122
< $6,712.10
8%
$10,000
Wallace Garrison/Index Stock Imagery/Photo Library
Would you rather 
have $6,274/mo or
$2,211/mo, or
“How would you like to
have $4,000/mo—free
money from your math
class!”
Example
3
Why study math? For real!
The previous example gave you a choice:
Option I: Pay yourself $200 per month for 5 years beginning when you are 21 years old
(this is comparable to the car payments you might make).
Option II: Wait until age 40, then make payments of $200 per month to yourself for the
next 25 years. If you were to select one of these options, what effect would it have on
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.5
Annuities
553
If the future value (A) is known, and you wish to find the amount of the periodic pay-
ment (m), use the sinking fund formula
where r is the annual rate, t is the time (in years), and n is the number of times per
year the payments are made. 
m 5
AAr
nB
A1 1 r
nBnt 2 1
Sinking Fund Formula
Spend a few minutes
with this idea; in your
own words, can you ex-
plain when you would use
this formula?
Example
4
Find the monthly payment to save a given amount
Suppose you want to have 
in 5 years and decide to make monthly payments into an
account paying 
compounded monthly. What is the amount of each monthly payment?
Solution
You might begin by estimation. If you are paid no interest, then since you
are making 60 equal deposits, the amount of each deposit would be
Therefore, since you are paid interest, you would expect the amount of each deposit to
be somewhat less than this estimation. This is a sinking fund problem. We identify the
known values: 
(future value), 
, and 
. Finally, use the
appropriate formula:
The necessary monthly payment to the account is $136.10.
m 5
AAr
nB
A1 1 r
nBnt 2 1 5
10,000A0.08
12 B
A1 1 0.08
12 B12A52 2 1
< 136.0972762
n 5 12
r 5 0.08, t 5 5
A 5 $10,000
10,000
60
< $166.67
8%
$10,000
Most graphing calculators have the ability to accept programs. Modern
calculators require no special ability to write a program. We input the values of
the variables into the memory locations as shown in the margin:
When using a calculator, generally the only difficulty is the proper use of paren-
theses:
Type
Formula
Calculator Notation
Future value
P*11RN2^1N*T2
Present value
A*11RN2^1N*T2
Annuity
M*1111RN2^1N*T2121RN22
Sinking fund
1A*RN2111RN2^1N*T212
To write a program, press the 
key and then input the formula. Most cal-
culator programs also require some statement that forces the output of an answer.
Check with your owner’s manual, but this is usually a one-step process. To use
your calculator for one of these formulas, you simply need to identify the type of
financial problem, input the values for the appropriate variables, and then run the
program containing the formula you wish to evaluate. 
PRGM
m 
A1 rn2
11  rn2nt  1
A  m c 11  rn2nt  1
rn
d
P  Aa1  r
 nb
nt
A  Pa1  r
 nb
nt
COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
Variable
Input to Storage
P
A
m
r
n
N
STO
R
STO
M
STO
A
STO
P
STO
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Image not available due to 
copyright restrictions

554
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by a lump-sum
problem?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Why should we call an annuity a
periodic payment problem?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is an annuity?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a sinking fund?
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Distinguish an annuity from a sinking
fund.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe Example 3 and comment on
its possible relevance.
Use a calculator to evaluate an ordinary annuity formula 
for m, r, and t (respectively) given in Problems 7–22. Assume
monthly payments.
7. $50; 5%; 3 yr
8. $50; 6%; 3 yr
9. $50; 8%; 3 yr
10. $50; 12%; 3 yr
11. $50; 5%; 30 yr
12. $50; 6%; 30 yr
13. $50; 8%; 30 yr
14. $50; 12%; 30 yr
15. $100; 5%; 10 yr
16. $100; 6%; 10 yr
17. $100; 8%; 10 yr
18. $100; 12%; 10 yr
19. $150; 5%; 35 yr
20. $150; 6%; 35 yr
21. $650; 5%; 30 yr
22. $650; 6%; 30 yr
In Problems 23–34, find the value of each annuity at the end 
of the indicated number of years. Assume that the interest is
compounded with the same frequency as the deposits. 
Amount of Deposit
Frequency
Rate
Time
m
n
r
t
23. $500
annually
8%
30 yr
24. $500
annually
6%
30 yr
25. $250
semiannually
8%
30 yr
26. $600
semiannually
2%
10 yr
27. $300
quarterly
6%
30 yr
28. $100
monthly
4%
5 yr
29. $200
quarterly
8%
20 yr
30. $400
quarterly
11%
20 yr
A  mc 11  rn2nt  1
rn
d
31. $30
monthly
8%
5 yr
32. $5,000
annually
4%
10 yr
33. $2,500
semiannually
8.5%
20 yr 
34. $1,250
quarterly
3%
20 yr
Find the amount of periodic payment necessary for each deposit to
a sinking fund in Problems 35–46.
Amount Needed
Frequency
Rate
Time
A
n
r
t
35. $7,000
annually
8%
5 yr
36. $25,000
annually
11%
5 yr
37. $25,000
semiannually
12%
5 yr 
38. $50,000
semiannually
14%
10 yr
39. $165,000
semiannually
2%
10 yr
40. $3,000,000
semiannually
3%
20 yr 
41. $500,000
quarterly
8%
10 yr 
42. $55,000
quarterly
10%
5 yr 
43. $100,000
quarterly
8%
8 yr 
44. $35,000
quarterly
8%
12 yr 
45. $45,000
monthly
7%
30 yr 
46. $120,000
quarterly
7%
30 yr
Level  2
47. Self-employed persons can make contributions for their 
retirement into a special tax-deferred account called a 
Keogh account. Suppose you are able to contribute $20,000
into this account at the end of each year. How much will you
have at the end of 20 years if the account pays 8% annual
interest?
48. The owner of Sebastopol Tree Farm deposits $650 at the
end of each quarter into an account paying 8% compounded
quarterly. What is the value of the account at the end of 
5 years?
49. The owner of Oak Hill Squirrel Farm deposits $1,000 at
the end of each quarter into an account paying 8%
compounded quarterly. What is the value at the end of 5 years,
6 months?
50. Clearlake Optical has a $50,000 note that comes due in
4 years. The owners wish to create a sinking fund to pay this
note. If the fund earns 8% compounded semiannually, how
much must each semiannual deposit be?
51. A business must raise $70,000 in 5 years. What should be the
size of the owners’ quarterly payment to a sinking fund paying
8% compounded quarterly?
Problem Set 11.5
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52. A lottery offers a $1,000,000 prize to be paid in 20 equal
installments of $50,000 at the end of each year. What is
the future value of this annuity if the current annual rate is 5%?
Section 11.6
Amortization
555
© AP/Wide World Photos
amount into an account at the end of each year. How much
would you have (to the nearest dollar) when you retire if 
the account pays 5% compounded annually and you retire at
age 65?
56. You want to retire at age 65. You decide to make a deposit to
yourself at the end of each year into an account paying 13%,
compounded annually. Assuming you are now 25 and can
spare $1,200 per year, how much will you have when you
retire at age 65?
57. Repeat Problem 56 using your own age.
58. Repeat Problem 55 using your own age.
Problem Solving  3 
59. Clearlake Optical has developed a new lens. The owners plan to
issue a $4,000,000 30-year bond with a contract rate of 5.5%
paid annually to raise capital to market this new lens. This
means that Clearlake will be required to pay 5.5% interest each
year for 30 years. To pay off the debt, Clearlake will also set up
a sinking fund paying 8% interest compounded annually. What
size annual payment is necessary for interest and sinking fund
combined?
60. The owners of Bardoza Greeting Cards wish to introduce a
new line of cards but need to raise $200,000 to do it. They 
decide to issue 10-year bonds with a contract rate of 6% paid
semiannually. This means Bardoza must make interest
payments to the bondholders each 6 months for 10 years. They
also set up a sinking fund paying 8% interest compounded
semiannually. How much money will they need to make the
semiannual interest payments as well as payments to the sink-
ing fund?
11.6  Amortization
In the previous sections we considered the lump-sum formulas for present value and 
for future value. We also considered the periodic payment formula, which provided the
future value of periodic payments into an interest-bearing account. With the annuity for-
mula, we assumed that we knew the amount of the periodic payment.
Present Value of an Annuity
In the real world, if you need or want to purchase an item and you do not have the entire
amount necessary, you can generally save for the item, or purchase the item and pay for it
with monthly payments. Let us consider an example. Suppose you can afford 
per
month for an automobile. One possibility is to put the 
per month into a bank account
until you have enough money to buy a car. To find the future value of this monthly pay-
ment, you would need to know the interest rate (say, 
) and the length of time you
will make these deposits (say, 48 months or monthly payments for 4 years). The future
value in the account is found using the annuity formula:
A  m c 11  rn2nt  1
rn
d  275 c 11  0.052
12 248  1
0.052
12
d  14,638.04004
5.2%
$275
$275
Level 3
53. A lottery offers a $1,000,000 prize to be paid in 29 equal annual
installments of $20,000 with a 30th final payment of $420,000.
What is the total value of this annuity if the current annual rate is
5%?
54. John and Rosamond want to retire in 5 years and can save $150
every three months. They plan to deposit the money at the end of
each quarter into an account paying 6.72% compounded quarterly.
How much will they have at the end of 5 years?
55. In 2005 the maximum Social Security deposit by an individual
was $6,885. Suppose you are 25 and make a deposit of this
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

556
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
This means that if you make these payments to yourself, in 4 years you will have saved
, but because of the interest paid on this account, the total amount
in the account is 
.
However, it is more common to purchase a car and agree to make monthly payments
to pay for it. Given the annuity calculation above, can we conclude that we can look for a
car that costs 
? No, because if we borrow to purchase the car we need to pay in-
terest charges rather than receive the interest as we did with the annuity. Well, then, how
much can we borrow when we assume that we know the monthly payment, the interest
rate, and the length of time we will pay? This type of financial problem is called the pres-
ent value of an annuity.
Continuing with this car payment example, we need to ask, “What is the present
value of 14,638.04004?” This is found using the formula 
:
This means we could finance a loan in the amount of $11,894.46 and pay it off in
48 months with payments of $275, provided the interest rate is 5.2% compounded
monthly.
We will now derive a formula for the present value of an annuity. For convenience,
we let i  rn. Since A  P11  i2nt and A  m
, we see
Both the left and right sides are equal to A.
Divide both sides by 11  i2nt.
 5 m
i 31 2 11 1 i2 2nt4
 5 m
i c1 2
1
11 1 i2 ntd
P 5 m
i c
11 1 i2 nt 2 1
11 1 i2 nt
d
P11 1 i2 nt 5 m c
11 1 i2 nt 2 1
i
d
S 11 1 i2 nt 2 1
i
T
P  14,638.04004 a1  0.052
12 b
48
 11,894.46293
P  A11  rn2nt
$14,638
$14,638.04
$275 3 48 5 $13,200
The financial problem
called the present value
of an annuity is not 
the same as a present
value financial problem,
and it is also not the
same as an annuity.
If the periodic payment is known (m) and you wish to find the present value of those
periodic payments, use the present value of an annuity formula:
where P is the present value of the annuity, r is the annual interest rate, and n is the
number of payments per year.
P 5 m c
1 2 A1 1 r
nB2nt
r
n
d
Present Value of an Annuity
A formula for the present
value of an annuity would
be input into a calculator 
program as follows:
12N*T2 2/1R/N2 2
M*1 11 2 11 1 R/N2^
COMPUTATIONAL 
WINDOW
Example
1
Find the amount you can afford for a car
You look at your budget and decide that you can afford 
per month for a car. What
is the maximum loan you can afford if the interest rate is 
and you want to repay the
loan in 4 years?
Solution
This requires the present value of an annuity formula. First, determine the
given variables: m  250, r  0.13, t  4, n  12; thus,
This means that you can afford to finance about $9,319. To keep the payments at $250
(or less), a down payment should be made, if necessary, to lower the price of the car to
the finance amount.
P  m c
1  11  rn2nt
rn
d  250 c
1  11  0.13
12 212(4)
0.13
12
d  9,318.797438
13%
$250
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.6
Amortization
557
Example
2
Find the home you can afford
Suppose your budget (or your banker) tells you that you can afford
per month for a house payment. If the current interest rate for a home loan is
and you will finance the home for 30 years, what is the expected price of the
home you can afford? Assume that you have saved the money to make the required 
down payment.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Most textbook problems give you a price for a home and ask
for the monthly payment. This problem takes the real-life situation in which you know
the monthly payment and wish to know the price of the house you can afford.
Devise a Plan. We first find the amount of the loan, and then find the down payment by
subtracting the amount of the loan from the price of the home we wish to purchase.
Carry Out the Plan. We first find the amount of the loan; this is the present value of an
annuity. We know m  1,575, r  0.105, t  30, n  12; thus,
The loan that you can afford is about $172,180.
What about the down payment? If there is a 20% down payment, then the amount
of the loan is 80% of the price of the home. We know the amount of the loan, so the
problem is now to determine the home price such that 80% of the price is equal to the
amount of the loan. In symbols,
0.80x  172,180.2058
which means that you simply divide the calculator output for the amount of the loan by
0.8 to find 215,225.2573. 
Look Back. Given the conditions of the problem, we can look back to check our work
(rounded to the nearest dollar for the check):
Purchase price of home:
$215,225
Less 20% down payment:
$ 43,045
Amount of loan:
$172,180
P  m c
1  11  rn2nt
i
d  1,575 c
1  11  0.105
12 212(30)
0.105
12
d  172,180.2058
20%
10.5%
$1,575
Pólya’s 
Method
Example
3
Theresa’s Social Security benefit is 
per month if she retires at age 62 instead
of age 65. What is the present value of an annuity that would pay 
per month for
3 years if the current interest rate is 
compounded monthly?
Solution
Here, m  450, r  0.10, t  3, and n  12; then,
The present value of this decision is $13,946.06. This represents the value of the
additional 3 years of Social Security payments.
P 5 m c
1 2 11 1 i2 2N
i
d 5 450 c
1 2 Q1 1 0.10
12 R236
0.10
12
d < 13,946.05601
10%
$450
$450
Monthly Payments
The process of paying off a debt by systematically making partial payments until
the debt (principal) and the interest are repaid is called amortization. If the loan is
paid off in regular equal installments, then we use the formula for the present value
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

of an annuity to find the monthly payments by algebraically solving for m, where
we let i  rn:
Present value of an annuity formula
Multiply both sides by i.
Divide both sides by 1  11  i2nt.
Pi
1 2 11 1 i2 2nt 5 m
Pi 5 m31 2 11 1 i2 2nt4
P 5 m c
1 2 11 1 i2 2nt
i
d
558
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Example
4
Find the monthly payment for a house
In 2010, the average price of a new home was 
and the interest rate was 
.
If this amount is financed for 30 years at 
interest, what is the monthly payment?
Solution
This is an amortization problem with 
, and
; then
The monthly payment is $1,744.69. This is the payment for interest and principal to pay
off a 30-year 6% loan of $291,000.
m 
P1 rn2
1  11  rn2nt 
291,00010.06
12 2
1  11  0.06
12 212(30)  1,744.69202819
n 5 12
P 5 291,000, r 5 0.06, t 5 30
6%
6%
$291,000
If the amount of the loan is known (P), and you wish to find the amount of the
periodic payment 1m), use the formula
where r is the annual rate, t is the time (in years), and n is the number of 
payments per year.
m 
P1 rn2
1  11  rn2nt
Amortization Formula
It is noteworthy to see how much interest is paid for the home loan of Example 4.
There are 360 payments of $1,744.69, so the total amount repaid is
36011,744.692  628,088.40
Since the loan was for $291,000, the interest is
$628,088.40  $291,000  $337,088.40
The interest is more than the amount of the loan! 
The amount of interest paid can be reduced by making a larger down payment. For
Example 4, if a 20% down payment (which is fairly standard) was made, then
$291,00010.80)  $232,800 is the amount to be financed. If this amount is amortized
over 20 years (instead of 30), the monthly payments are $1,667.85. The total amount paid
on this loan is
Amount of each payment
24011,667.852  58,200  458,484
↑
Number of payments
Down payment
6447448
424
1
3
To program the
amortization formula into 
a calculator input it as
1P*RN211  11RN)^
1N*T22
COMPUTATIONAL 
WINDOW
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.6
Amortization
559
Example
5
Make the better home loan choice
Suppose you are considering a 
30-year home loan and are considering two
possibilities:
Loan A: 7.25%  0 pts
Loan B: 6.875%  2.375 pts
Which is the better loan if the home is sold in 10 years?
Solution
You might think that the lower rate is always the better choice, but you need
to take into consideration the loan fees. One point on a loan is 1% of the amount of the
loan. This means that 2.375 points represents a loan charge of
0.023751$400,0002  $9,500
First, use the amortization formula for each loan:
The difference in payments is $100.99/mo. Now, find the present value of an annuity
with m  $100.99 using the 6.875% rate for 10 years:
Since the fees 1$9,500) are greater than the present value of this annuity, the better
choice is Loan A, even though it has the higher rate.
 < $8,746.35
 A  $100.99 c
1  11  0.06875
12 212(10)
0.06875
12
d
Loan B:m 
$400,00010.06875
12 2
1  11  0.06875
12 212(30)  $2,627.72
Loan A:m 
$400,00010.0725
12 2
1  11  0.0725
12 212(30)  $2,728.71
$400,000
The savings yielded over the term of the loan by making a 20% down payment for
20 years rather than financing the entire amount for 30 years is $628,088.40  $458,484
 $169,604.40.
It is interesting to see how much a difference in rates will affect the costs in Example 4.
Suppose the interest rate rises by %. If P  $291,000, r  0.065, t  30, and n  12,
then (using the amortization formula)
The interest on the 30-year 6% loan in Example 4 was $337,088.40; now at 6.5% interest
for 30 years the total interest is
3601$1,839.322  $291,000  $371,155.20
an additional cost of almost $34,100 1$371,155.20  $337,088.40  $34,066.802.
Most of the time when you obtain a home loan, you will need to make a choice about
which loan offer is best for your particular situation, and a difference of % between dif-
ferent choices is common.
1
2
m 
P1 rn2
1  11  rn2nt 
291,00010.065
12 2
1  11  0.065
12 212(30)  1,839.32
1
2
We should note that even though both amortization and add-on interest calculate the
monthly (or periodic) payment, you should pay attention to which procedure or formula
to use.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

560
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
To calculate the monthly (or periodic) payment, consider one of the following methods:
Simple interest
Use this with installment loans or loans that use the words
“add-on interest.” To calculate the payment:
Step 1 Calculate the interest using 
.
Step 2 Add the interest to the amount of the loan using 
Step 3 Divide this result by the number of payments (N):
The interest rate, r, used for the add-on rate is not the same as the annual 
interest rate (APR).
Compound interest
Use this with long-term loans, such as when purchasing real
estate. Those loans are amortized, which means the interest rate, r, is the same as the
annual interest rate, and the payments pay off both the principal and the interest.
Step 1 Identify the variables P, r, n, and t.
Step 2 Use the amortization formula:
m 
P1 rn2
1  11  rn2nt
m  A
N
A  P  I.
I  Prt
Distinguish Add-On Simple Interest and Amortization
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does amortization mean?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe when you would use the
present value of an annuity formula.
3. The variables m, n, r, t, A, and P are used in the various financial
formulas. Tell what each of these variables represents.
Use a calculator to evaluate the present value of an annuity
formula 
for the values of the variables m, r, and t (respectively) given in
Problems 4–11. Assume n  12.
4. $50; 5%; 5 yr
5. $50; 6%; 5 yr
6. $50; 8%; 5 yr
7. $150; 5%; 30 yr
8. $150; 6%; 30 yr
9. $150; 8%; 30 yr
10. $1,050; 5%; 30 yr
11. $1,050; 6%; 30 yr
P 5 mc
1 2 A1 1 r
nB2nt
r
n
d
Use a calculator to evaluate the amortization formula
for the values of the variables P, r, and t (respectively) given in
Problems 12–19. Assume n  12.
12. $14,000; 5%; 5 yr
13. $14,000; 10%; 5 yr
14. $14,000; 19%; 5 yr
15. $150,000; 8%; 30 yr
16. $150,000; 9%; 30 yr
17. $150,000; 10%; 30 yr
18. $260,000; 12%; 30 yr
19. $260,000; 9%; 30 yr
Find the present value of the ordinary annuities in Problems 20–31.
Amount of Deposit
Frequency
Rate
Time
m
n
r
t
20.
$500
annually
8%
30 yr
21.
$500
annually
6%
30 yr
22.
$250
semiannually
8%
30 yr
m 5
PAr
nB
1 2 A1 1 r
nB2nt
Problem Set 11.6
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.6
Amortization
561
Level  3
49. Suppose you have an annuity from an insurance policy and you
have the option of being paid $250 per month for 20 years or
having a lump-sum payment of $25,000. Which has more
value if the current rate of return is 10%, compounded
monthly?
50. An insurance policy offers you the option of being paid $750
per month for 20 years or a lump sum of $50,000. Which has
more value if the current rate of return is 9%, compounded
monthly, and you expect to live for 20 years?
51. I recently found a real-life advertisement in the newspaper: 
(Only the phone number has been changed.) Suppose that 
you have won a $20,000,000 lottery, paid in 20 annual 
installments. How much would be a fair price to be paid 
today for the assignment of this prize? Assume the interest 
rate is 5%.
52. The bottom notice (not circled) states that $6,000 is needed for
90 days, and that the advertiser is willing to pay 20% interest.
How much would you expect to receive in 90 days if you lent
this party the $6,000?
53. Suppose your gross monthly income is $5,500 and your
current monthly payments are $625. If the bank will allow you
to pay up to 36% of your gross monthly income (less current
monthly payments) for a monthly house payment, what is the
maximum loan you can obtain if the rate for a 30-year
mortgage is 9.65%?
Problem Solving  3
54. As the interest rate increases, determine whether each of the
given amounts increases or decreases. Assume that all other
variables remain constant.
a. future value
b. present value
c. annuity
55. As the interest rate increases, determine whether each of the
given amounts increases or decreases. Assume that all other
variables remain constant.
a. monthly value for a sinking fund
b. monthly value for amortization
c. present value of an annuity
Amount of Deposit
Frequency
Rate
Time
m
n
r
t
23.
$600
semiannually
2%
10 yr
24.
$300
quarterly
6%
30 yr
25.
$100
monthly
4%
5 yr
26.
$200
quarterly
8%
20 yr
27.
$400
quarterly
11%
20 yr
28.
$ 30
monthly
8%
5 yr
29.
$ 75
monthly
4%
10 yr
30.
$ 50
monthly
8.5%
20 yr
31.
$100
quarterly
3%
20 yr
Level  2
Find the monthly payment for the loans in Problems 32–45.
32. $500 loan for 12 months at 12% 
33. $100 loan for 18 months at 18%
34. $4,560 loan for 20 months at 21%
35. $3,520 loan for 30 months at 19%
36. Used-car financing of $2,300 for 24 months at 15%
37. New-car financing of 2.9% on a 30-month $12,450 loan
38. Furniture financed at $3,456 for 36 months at 23%
39. A refrigerator financed for $985 at 17% for 15 months
40. A $112,000 home bought with a 20% down payment and the
balance financed for 30 years at 11.5%
41. A $108,000 condominium bought with a 30% down 
payment and the balance financed for 30 years at 
12.05%
42. Finance $450,000 for a warehouse with a 12.5% 30-year 
loan
43. Finance $859,000 for an apartment complex with a 13.2% 
20-year loan
44. How much interest (to the nearest dollar) would be saved 
in Problem 40 if the home were financed for 15 rather than 
30 years?
45. How much interest (to the nearest dollar) would be saved in
Problem 41 if the condominium were financed for 15 rather
than 30 years?
46. Melissa agrees to contribute $500 to the alumni fund at the end of
each year for the next 5 years. Shannon wants to match Melissa’s
gift, but he wants to make a lump-sum contribution. If the current
interest rate is 12.5% compounded annually, how much should
Shannon contribute to equal Melissa’s gift?
47. A $1,000,000 lottery prize pays $50,000 per year for the next
20 years. If the current rate of return is 12.25%, what is the
present value of this prize?
48. You look at your budget and decide that you can afford $250
per month for a car. What is the maximum loan you can afford
if the interest rate is 13% and you want to repay the loan in 
4 years?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

562
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
56. Suppose your gross monthly income is $4,550 and your
spouse’s gross monthly salary is $3,980. Your monthly bills
are $1,235. The home you wish to purchase costs $355,000
and the loan is an 11.85% 30-year loan. How much down
payment (rounded to the nearest hundred dollars) is
necessary to be able to afford this home? This down 
payment is what percent of the cost of the home? Assume 
the bank will allow you to pay up to 36% of your gross
monthly income (less current monthly payments) for house
payments.
57. Suppose you want to purchase a home for $225,000 with a 
30-year mortgage at 10.24% interest. Suppose also that you
can put down 25%. What are the monthly payments? What is
the total amount paid for principal and interest? What is the
amount saved if this home is financed for 15 years instead of for
30 years?
58. The McBertys have $30,000 in savings to use as a down pay-
ment on a new home. They also have determined that they can
afford between $1,500 and $1,800 per month for mortgage pay-
ments. If the mortgage rates are 11% per year compounded
monthly, what is the price range for houses they should
consider for a 30-year loan?
59. Rework Problem 58 for a 20-year loan instead of 
a 30-year loan.
60. Rework Problem 58 if interest rates go down 
to 10.2%.
11.7 Summary of Financial Formulas
For many students, the most difficult part of working with finances (other than the prob-
lem of lack of funds) is in determining which formula to use. If we wish to free ourselves
from the problem of lack of funds, we must use our knowledge in a variety of situations
that occur outside the classroom.
We will now outline a procedure for using the financial formulas we have introduced
in this chapter that you can use to unlock your financial security. First, review the mean-
ing of the variables, as shown in the margin. Next, study the following procedure for
working financial problems.
Definitions of 
variables:
P  present value 
(principal)
A  future value
I  amount of 
interest
r  annual interest
rate
t  number of years
n  periods; number of
times compounded
each year
When classifying financial formulas:
Step 1
Is the interest compounded?
If the interest is removed, use the simple interest formula.
If the interest is added to the account, use the compound interest formula.
Step 2
Is it a lump sum problem? What is the unknown?
If the future value is unknown, then it is a future value problem.
If the present value is unknown, then it is a present value problem.
Step 3
Is it a periodic payment problem with the periodic payment known? 
If the future value is desired, then it is an ordinary annuity.
If the present value is desired, then it is a present value of an annuity. 
Step 4
Is it a periodic payment problem with the periodic payment unknown?
If the future value is known, then it is a sinking fund.
If the present value is known, then it is an amortization problem.
Classification of Financial Problems
The rest of this section discusses this procedure box with a bit more detail.
Is the interest compounded?
If the interest is removed from the account, then use the simple interest formula.
I  Prt
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.7
Summary of Financial Formulas
563
Use this for amount of interest; any one of the variables I, P, r, or t, may be
unknown.
Examples: amount of interest; add-on interest; car payments; using the r from the
simple interest formula when calculating the APR; finding the APR when given the
purchase price and the monthly payment; credit card interest
If the interest is added to the account, then use a compound interest formula. In such a
case there are two remaining questions to ask when classifying a compound interest
problem.
Is it a lump-sum problem?
If it is, then what is the unknown?
If FUTURE VALUE is the unknown, then it is a future value problem.
Examples: future value; inflation; retirement planning
If PRESENT VALUE is the unknown, then it is a present value problem.
Examples: present value; retirement planning
Is it a periodic payment problem? If it is, then is the periodic payment
known?
PERIODIC PAYMENT KNOWN and you want to find the future value, then it is an 
ordinary annuity problem.
Examples: future value of periodic payments made to an interest-bearing
account; retirement planning
PERIODIC PAYMENT KNOWN and you want to find the present value, then it is a
present value of an annuity problem.
Examples: if the monthly payment, time, and rate are known, how much loan is
possible? the current value of a known annuity (as in selling off the proceeds
from an insurance policy or winning the lottery)
PERIODIC PAYMENT UNKNOWN and you know the future value, then it is a sinking
fund problem.
Example: the periodic payment necessary to make to an interest-bearing
account in order to reach some known financial goal
PERIODIC PAYMENT UNKNOWN and you know the present value, then it is an amor-
tization problem.
m 
P1 r
n2
111  r
n2nt
m 
A1 r
n2
11  r
n2nt  1
P  m s
1  11  r
n2nt
r
n
t
A  m  s11  r
n2  
nt  1
r
n
t
P  Aa1  r
nb
nt
A  Pa1  r
nb
ntorA  Pert
Bob Jacobson/Corbis
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

564
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
Assume a 
annual mortgage rate. Find the monthly payment for both the old mort-
gage and for the new loan.
Solution
The present value is known, and we see the monthly payment, so this is an
amortization problem. Here are the variable values:
Mortgage
P
r
n
t
Old
0.065
12
30
New
0.065
12
30
Wait a minute! The advertisement shows a new monthly payment of 
. The new
loan is at a new “teaser” rate. These loans were particularly responsible for the financial
melt-down of 2009. The person who did not read the fine print and do some math calcu-
lations became trapped when the teaser rate increased to an unaffordable rate.
$1,397
m 5 $2,744.43
$434,200
m 5 $2,389.21
$378,000
m 5
PAr
nB
1 2 A1 1 r
nB2nt
6.5%
FIGURE 11.12 Super duper brand new mortgage program
Example
1
Monthly payment for an amortized loan
Figure 11.12 reproduces part of an advertisement to refinance a loan.
Example
2
Classifying financial problems
Classify each formula as a financial problem type, and give one possible example which
would use the given formula.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
a. Future value problem; specifically the future value of 
invested at 
interest
for 20 years.
b. Present value problem; how much would need to be invested today to yield 
in 15 years if the money is invested at 4%?
c. Simple interest formula; what is the future value of 
invested at 
for 20 years?
d. Ordinary annuity; what is the future value of 
monthly payment invested at 
for 10 years?
4%
$480
5%
$80
$280,000
7%
$500
y 5 480 c
A1 1 0.04
12 B120 2 1
0.04
12
d
y 5 8010.052 1202
y 5 280,000A1 1 0.04
4 B260
y 5 50011.072 20
Here is an example of how some of my clients are using this new program:
Bills
Current Debt
Current Pmt.
New Loan
Mortgage
$378,000
$2,389
Home Equity Loan
$36,000
$345
$434,200
Visa
$8,000
$190
Master Card
$5,000
$150
New Payment
Sears
$3,500
$105
Department Store
$3,700
$145
$1,397
Total
$434,200
$3,324
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.7
Summary of Financial Formulas
565
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What are a reasonable down
payment and monthly payment for a home in your area?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What are a reasonable down
payment and monthly payment for a new automobile?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Outline a procedure for identifying
the type of financial formula for a given applied problem.
4. What is the formula for the present value of an annuity? What
is the unknown?
5. What is the amortization formula? What is the 
unknown?
Classify the type of financial formula for the information given in
Problems 6–11.
Lump-sum Problems
P
A
6. known
unknown
7. unknown
known
Periodic Payment Problems
P
A
m
8. unknown
known
9.
unknown
known
10.
known
unknown
11. known
unknown
In Problems 12–15, match each formula in Column A with the type
of financial problem in Column B.
Column A
Column B
12.
Annuity
13.
Amortization
14.
Present value of an annuity
15.
Sinking fund
Classify the financial problems in Problems 16–19, and then answer
each question by assuming a 12% interest rate compounded annually.
16. Find the value of a $1,000 certificate in 3 years.
17. Deposit $300 at the end of each year. What is the total in the
account in 10 years?
18. An insurance policy pays $10,000 in 5 years. What 
lump-sum deposit today will yield $10,000 in 5 years? 
19. What annual deposit is necessary to give $10,000 in 5 years?
m 5
PAr
nB
1 2 A1 1 r
nB2nt
m 5
AAr
nB
A1 1 r
nBnt 2 1
P 5 mc
1 2 A1 1 r
nB2nt
r
n
d
A 5 mc
A1 1 r
nBnt 2 1
r
n
d
Problem Set 11.7
Level  2
In Problems 20–52: a. State the type; and b. Answer the question.
20. Find the value of a $1,000 certificate in 
years if the interest
rate is 12% compounded monthly.
21. You deposit $300 at the end of each year into an account pay-
ing 12% compounded annually. How much is in the account in
10 years?
22. A 5-year term insurance policy has an annual premium of
$300, and at the end of 5 years, all payments and interest are
refunded. What lump-sum deposit is necessary to equal 
this amount if you assume an interest rate of 10% compounded
annually?
23. What annual deposit is necessary to have $10,000 in 5 years if
all the money is deposited at 9% interest compounded
annually?
24. A $5,000,000 apartment complex loan is to be paid off in
10 years by making 10 equal annual payments. How much is
each payment if the interest rate is 14% compounded
annually?
25. The price of automobiles has increased at 6.25% per year. How
much would you expect a $20,000 automobile to cost in 5
years if you assume annual compounding?
26. The amount to be financed on a new car is $9,500. The terms
are 7% for 4 years. What is the monthly payment?
27. What deposit today is equal to 33 annual deposits of $500 into
an account paying 8% compounded annually?
28. If you can afford $875 for your house payments, what is
the loan you can afford if the interest rate is 6.5% and the
monthly payments are made for 30 years?
29. What is the monthly payment for a home costing $125,000
with a 20% down payment and the balance financed for
30 years at 12%?
30. Ricon Bowling Alley will need $80,000 in 4 years to resurface
the lanes. What lump sum would be necessary today if the
owner of the business can deposit it in an account that pays 9%
compounded semiannually?
31. Rita wants to save for a trip to Tahiti, so she puts $2.00 per day
into a jar. After 1 year she has saved $730 and puts the money
into a bank account paying 10% compounded annually. She
continues to save in this manner and makes her annual $730
deposit for 15 years. How much does she have at the end of
that time period?
32. Karen receives a $12,500 inheritance that she wants to save un-
til she retires in 20 years. If she deposits the money in a fixed
11% account, compounded daily (n  365), how much will she
have when she retires?
33. You want to give your child a million dollars when he retires at
age 65. How much money do you need to deposit into an
account paying 9% compounded monthly if your child is now
10 years old?
21
2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

49. The Fair View Market must be remodeled in 3 years. It is 
estimated that remodeling will cost $200,000. How much
should be deposited now (to the nearest dollar) to pay for 
this remodeling if the account pays 10% compounded
monthly?
50. A laundromat will need seven new washing machines 
in 
years for a total cost of $2,900. How much money (to 
the nearest dollar) should be deposited now to pay for 
these machines? The interest rate is 11% compounded 
semiannually.
51. A computerized checkout system is planned for Able’s
Grocery Store. The system will be delivered in 18 months at a
cost of $560,000. How much should be deposited today (to the
nearest dollar) into an account paying 7.5% compounded
daily?
52. A lottery offers you a choice of $1,000,000 per year for 5 years
or a lump-sum payment. What lump-sum payment (rounded to
the nearest dollar) would equal the annual payments if the cur-
rent interest rate is 14% compounded annually?
Level  3
Problems 53–55 are based on a 30-year fixed-rate home loan of
$185,500 with an interest rate of 7.75%.
53. What is the monthly payment?
54. What is the total amount of interest paid?
55. Suppose you reduce the term to 20 years. What is the total
amount of interest paid, and what is the savings over the 
30-year loan?
Problems 56–58 are based on a 30-year fixed-rate home loan of
$418,500 with an interest rate of 8.375%.
56. What is the monthly payment?
57. What is the total amount of interest paid?
58. Suppose you reduce the term to 22 years. What is the total
amount of interest paid, and what is the savings over the 
30-year loan?
Problem Solving  3
59. A contest offers the winner $50,000 now or $10,000 now and
$45,000 in one year. Which is the better choice if the current
interest rate is 10% compounded monthly and the winner does
not intend to use any of the money for one year?
60. In 1982 the inflation rate hit 16%. Suppose that the average
cost of a textbook in 1982 was $15. What is the expected cost
in the year 2012 if we project this rate of inflation on the cost?
(Assume continuous compounding.) If the average cost of a
textbook in 2010 was $120, what is the actual inflation rate
(rounded to the nearest tenth percent)?*
21
2
34. An accounting firm agrees to purchase a computer for
$150,000 (cash on delivery) and the delivery date is in
270 days. How much do the owners need to deposit in an
account paying 18% compounded quarterly so that they will
have $150,000 in 270 days?
35. For 5 years, Thompson Cleaners deposits $900 at the 
end of each quarter into an account paying 8% compounded
quarterly. What is the value of the account at the end of
5 years?
36. What is the necessary amount of monthly payments to an
account paying 18% compounded monthly in order to
have $100,000 in 
years if the deposits are made at the
end of each month?
37. Mark’s Grocery Store is going to be remodeled in 5 years, and
the remodeling will cost $300,000. How much should be
deposited now in order to pay for this remodeling if the account
pays 12% compounded monthly?
38. If an apartment complex will need painting in 
years and 
the job will cost $45,000, what amount needs to be 
deposited into an account now in order to have the necessary
funds? The account pays 12% interest compounded 
semiannually.
39. Teal and Associates needs to borrow $45,000. The best loan
they can find is one at 12% that must be repaid in monthly in-
stallments over the next 
years. How much are the monthly
payments?
40. Certain Concrete Company deposits $4,000 at the end of 
each quarter into an account paying 10% interest compounded
quarterly. What is the value of the account at the end of 
years?
41. Major Magic Corporation deposits $1,000 at the end of each
month into an account paying 18% interest compounded
monthly. What is the value of the account at the end of 
years?
42. What is the future value of $112,000 invested for 5 years at
14% compounded monthly?
43. What is the future value of $800 invested for 1 year at 
10% compounded daily?
44. What is the future value of $9,000 invested for 4 years at 
20% compounded monthly?
45. If $5,000 is compounded annually at 5.5% for 12 years, what
is the future value?
46. If $10,000 is compounded annually at 8% for 18 years, what is
the future value?
47. You owe $5,000 due in 3 years, but you would like to pay the
debt today. If the present interest rate is compounded annually
at 11%, how much should you pay today so that the present
value is equivalent to the $5,000 payment in 3 years?
48. Sebastopol Movie Theater will need $20,000 in 5 years to
replace the seats. What deposit should be made today in an
account that pays 9% compounded semiannually?
81
3
71
2
31
2
31
2
81
3
566
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
*This problem requires Chapter 10 (solving exponential equations).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.8
Chapter Summary
567
11.8
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Simple interest formula and the future value formula for compound interest [11.1]
Ordinary and exact interest [11.1]
Interest formula variables [11.1]
Credit card interest [11.2]
Arithmetic, geometric, and Fibonacci sequences [11.3]
Distinguish between sequences and series [11.3, 11.4]
Retirement decisions [11.5]
Add-on interest vs. amortization [11.2; 11.6]
Distinguish financial problems [11.7]
To get money is difficult,
to keep it is more
difficult, but to spend it
wisely is most difficult 
of all.
ANONYMOUS
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online,
you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of
problems that were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by
working the problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test help in study-
ing for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
Chapter 11
Review Questions
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the difference between 
a sequence and a series. Include in your discussion how to
distinguish arithmetic, geometric, and Fibonacci-type
sequences, and give the formulas for their general terms.
What are the relevant formulas for arithmetic and geometric
series?
2.
IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Outline a procedure for identifying
financial formulas. Include in your discussion future value,
present value, ordinary annuity, present value of an annuity,
amortization, and sinking fund classifications.
3. Classify each sequence as arithmetic, geometric, 
Fibonacci-type, or none of these. Find an expression for 
the general term if it is one of these types; otherwise, 
give the next two terms.
a. 5, 10, 15, 20, . . .
b. 5, 10, 20, 40, . . .
c. 5, 10, 15, 25, . . .
d. 5, 10, 20, 35, . . .
e. 5, 50, 500, 5,000, . . .
f. 5, 50, 5, 50, . . .
4. a. Evaluate: 
b. Expand: a
4
k 5 1
k 2 1
k 1 1
a
3
k 5 1
1k2 2 2k 1 12
5. Suppose someone tells you she has traced her family tree back
10 generations. What is the minimum number of people on
her family tree if there were no intermarriages?
6. A certain bacterium divides into two bacteria every 
20 minutes. If there are 1,024 bacteria in the culture now,
how many will there be in 24 hours, assuming that no bacte-
ria die? Leave your answer in exponential form.
7. Suppose that the car you wish to purchase has a sticker price
of $22,730 with a dealer cost of $18,579. Make a 5% offer for
this car (rounded to the nearest hundred dollars).
8. Suppose that the amount to be financed for a car purchase is
$13,500 at an add-on interest rate of 2.9% for 2 years.
a. What are the monthly installment and the amount of
interest that you will pay?
b. Use the APR formula for this loan.
9. If a car with a cash price of $11,450 is offered for nothing
down with 48 monthly payments of $353.04, what is
the APR?
10. From the consumer’s point of view, which method of
calculating interest on a credit card is most advantageous?
Illustrate the three types of calculating interest for a
purchase of $525 with 9% APR for a 31-day month in
which it takes 7 days for your $100 payment to be
received and recorded.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

568
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
11. Suppose that you want to have $1,000,000 in 50 years. To
achieve this goal, how much do you need to deposit today if
you can earn 9% interest compounded monthly?
12. a. What is the monthly payment for a home loan of $154,000
if the rate is 8% and the time is 20 years?
b. If you paid a 20% down payment, what is the price of the
home?
c. What would you expect this home to be worth in 30 years
if you assume an inflation rate of 4%?
13. Suppose that you expect to receive a $100,000 inheritance
when you reach 21 in three years and four months. What is
the present value of your inheritance if the current interest
rate is 6.4% compounded monthly?
Use the advertisement shown in Figure 11.13 as a basis for
answering Problems 14–20. Assume the current interest rate is 5%.
FIGURE 11.13 Contest prize notice
Win a $1,000,000 annuity paid as 29 annual 
installments of $20,000 each plus a one-time 
payment of $420,000 in the 30th year, or a 
lump sum payment of $300,000 cash.  You'll 
also get lifetime subscriptions to Time, 
Money and Fortune to help you manage your 
newfound wealth.
$1,000,000
GRAND Prize
14. What is the present value of the $420,000 payment to be
received in 30 years?
15. What is the actual value of the annuity portion of the 
prize?
16. What is the present value of the annuity?
17. Suppose you take the $300,000 cash payment and still 
want to have $420,000 in 30 years. How much of the
$300,000 do you need to set aside now to have $420,000
in 30 years?
18. Suppose you take the $300,000 cash payment and set aside
$100,000 for savings. You plan on using the interest on the
remaining $200,000. What are your annual earnings from
interest?
19. Which option should you take and why?
20. If the current interest rate is 10%, which option should you
take and why?
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on this book:
What Are Numbers? (Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman and
Company, 1969) by Louis Auslander. Here is a problem
from this book (p. 112): “Suppose a ball has the property
that whenever it is dropped, it bounces up 1/2 the distance
that it fell. For instance, if we drop it from 6 feet, it bounces
up 3 feet. Let us hold the ball 6 feet off the ground and drop
it. How far will the ball go before coming to rest?” Include
the solution of this problem as part of your report.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Dear Customer:
Previously we provided you an enrollment package for our BiWeekly
Advantage Plan.  We have had an excellent response from our mortgagors,
yet we have not received your signed enrollment form and program fee to
start your program.
How effective is the BiWeekly Advantage Plan?  Reviewing your loan as of
the week of this letter we estimate:
MORTGAGE INTEREST SAVINGS OF $99,287.56
LOAN TERM REDUCED BY 7 YEARS.
Many financial advisors agree it is a sound investment practice to pay off
a mortgage early, particularly in light of growing economic uncertainty.
Act today!  Don't let procrastination or indecision deny you and your
family the opportunity to obtain mortgage-free homeownership sooner than
you ever expected.
Please call us toll-free at 1-800-555-6060 if you would like more
information about our BiWeekly Advantage Plan and a free personalized
mortgage analysis.  Our telephone representatives are available to
serve you from 9 am to 5 pm (EST).
Sincerely,
a. What is the letter about?
b. A computer printout (shown above) was included with the letter. Assuming that
these calculations are correct, discuss the advantages or disadvantages of accept-
ing this offer.
which is the best option. Give reasons and show your calculations in the paper that
your group submits.
G39. It is not uncommon for the owner of a home to receive a letter similar to the one shown
below. Write a paper based on this letter. Different members of your group can work on
different parts of the question, but you should submit one paper from your group.
Interest Rate:
Current Balance:
Monthly Payment:
Homeownership: Remaining Terms
Current Payment Plan
BiWeekly Plan
REDUCTION
Total Remaining
Principal & Interest Payments:
Current Payment Plan
BiWeekly Plan
INTEREST SAVINGS
Section 11.8
Chapter Summary
569
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G37. Suppose you have just inherited 
and need to decide what to do with the
money. Write a paper discussing your options and the financial implications of those
options. The paper you turn in should offer several alternatives and then the members
of your group should reach a consensus of the best course of action.
G38. Suppose you were hired for a job paying 
per year and were given the
following options:
Option A:
Annual salary increase of 
Option B:
Semiannual salary increase of 
Option C:
Quarterly salary increase of 
Option D:
Monthly salary increase of 
Each person should write the arithmetic series for the total amount of money earned
in 10 years under a different option. Your group should reach a consensus as to
$10
$75
$300
$1,200
$21,000
$30,000
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

570
CHAPTER 11
The Nature of Financial Management
c. The plan as described in the letter costs 
to sign up. I called the company and
asked what their plan would do that I could not do myself by simply making 13
payments a year to my mortgage holder. The answer I received was that the plan
would do nothing more, but the reason people do sign up is because they do not
have the self-discipline to make the bimonthly payments by themselves. Why is a
biweekly payment equivalent to 13 annual payments instead of equivalent to a
monthly payment?
d. The representative of the company told me that more than 250,000 people have
signed up. How much income has the company received from this offer?
e. You calculated the income the company has received from this offer in part d, but
that is not all it receives. It acts as a bonded and secure “holding company” for
your funds (because the mortgage company does not accept “two-week”
payments). This means that the company receives the use (interest value) of your
money for two weeks out of every month. This is equivalent to half the year. Let’s
assume that the average monthly payment is 
and that the company has
250,000 payments that it holds for half the year. If the interest rate is 
(a secure
guaranteed rate), how much potential interest can be received by this company?
5%
$1,000
$375
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are ideas for extending some of the ideas in this chapter. You can find references to
these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 11.1 Conduct a survey of banks, savings and loan companies, and credit unions
in your area. Prepare a report on the different types of savings accounts available and
the interest rates they pay. Include methods of payment as well as interest rates.
PROJECT 11.2 Do you expect to live long enough to be a millionaire? Suppose that your
annual salary today is 
. If inflation continues at 
, how long will it be
before 
increases to an annual salary of a million dollars?
PROJECT 11.3 Consult an almanac or some government source, and then write a report
on the current inflation rate. Project some of these results to the year of your own 
expected retirement.
PROJECT 11.4 Historical Quest
Write a short paper about Fibonacci numbers. You
might check The Fibonacci Quarterly, particularly “A Primer on the Fibonacci
Sequence,” Parts I and II, in the February and April 1963 issues. The articles, written
by Verner Hogatt and S. L. Basin, are considered classic articles on the subject. One
member of your group should investigate the relationship of the Fibonacci numbers
to nature, another the algebraic properties of the sequence, and another the history of
the sequence.
PROJECT 11.5 Karen says that she has heard something about APR rates but doesn’t 
really know what the term means. Wayne says he thinks it has something to do with
the prime rate, but he isn’t sure what. Write a short paper explaining APR to Karen
and Wayne.
PROJECT 11.6 Some savings and loan companies advertise that they pay interest continu-
ously. Do some research to explain what this means.
PROJECT 11.7 Select a car of your choice, find the list price, and calculate 
and 
price offers. Check out available money sources in your community, and prepare a
report showing the different costs for the same car. Back up your figures with data.
PROJECT 11.8 Outline a program for your own retirement. In the process of writing this
paper, answer the following questions. You will need to state your assumptions
about interest and inflation rates.
a. What monthly amount of money today would provide you a comfortable living?
b. Using the answer to part a, project that amount to your own retirement, calculat-
ing the effects of inflation. Use your own age and assume that you will retire at
age 65.
c. How much money would you need to have accumulated to provide the amount
you found in part b, if you decide to live on the interest only?
d. If you set up a sinking fund to provide the amount you found in part c, how much
would you need to deposit each month?
e. Offer some alternatives to the sinking fund you considered in part d.
f. Draw some conclusions about your retirement.
10%
5%
$52,000
6%
$52,000
www.mathnature.com 
Section 11.8
Chapter Summary
571
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
12.1 Permutations
573
Election problem, factorial, 
distinguishable permutations
12.2 Combinations
582
Committee problem, Pascal’s triangle,
counting with the binomial theorem
12.3 Counting without 
Counting
590
License plate problem, which method?
THE NATURE OF COUNTING
12
Outline
What in the World?
“Hi, guys. I’m glad you came to my party!” said
Bobby. “My dad is starting a contest at his
hardware store tomorrow. It is a ‘Guess the jar’s
contents’ puzzle. Whoever gets the number closest
to the number of gum balls in the jar will win $50.”
“Fifty dollars!!!” shouted Bess. “That’s more than
I make in a year! Let me get a closer look. . . . I’m
going to guess 185.”
Jeannie, chimed in, “I’m sitting closer to this jar
and it looks more like 2,450 gum balls. Yep, that is
my guess, 2,450.”
Bobby, the boy with the notebook, took 
a more academic approach. “I need to help dad get
this right, so I measured the jar. It is 10 inches high
and 5 inches in diameter. The jar’s volume is
Now all
I need to do is find out how many gum balls are 
in a cubic inch. . . .” (See Problem 50, 
Section 12.3, p. 597.)
V 5 Bh 5 p12.5 in.2 2110 in.2 < 196.35 in3.
Overview
Counting is one of the most fundamental ideas in mathemat-
ics and, along with language, is one of the most essential
skills each child must master. But don’t let the fact that it is
one of the first concepts learned by a child fool you. Count-
ing can be as simple or as complicated as you like. In this
chapter, we will learn some of the fundamental ideas of
counting, and in the next chapter we will apply those ideas
to the theory of probability and chance.
The risks and rewards of insurance, arguments involv-
ing the size of the universe, and the complexity of intelligent
design all require that you have an advanced notion of
counting. If you want to build a safer highway system or an-
alyze the risks of hormone therapy, you will use the ideas
presented in this chapter.
12.4 Rubik’s Cube and 
Instant Insanity
598
Rubik’s cube, Instant Insanity
12.5 Chapter Summary
602
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
Courtesy of Orca School Santa Barabara, CA; photo by © Austin MacRae
     Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 12.1
Permutations
573
12.1  Permutations
Music is the pleasure the human soul experiences from counting
without being aware that it is counting.
GOTTFRIED LEIBNIZ, MATHEMATICAL MAXIMS AND
MINIMS, BY N. ROSE (RALEIGH: ROME PRESS, INC., 1988).
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
J
T
I R
H
P
X
G
N
U
F
L ?
We now turn to an investigation of the nature of counting. It may seem like a simple topic
for a college math book, since everyone knows how to count in the usual “one, two,
three, . . .” method. However, there are many times we need to know “How many?” but
can’t find out by direct counting.
Election Problem
Consider a club with five members:
In how many ways could they elect a president and secretary? We call this the election
problem. There are several ways to solve this problem. The first, and perhaps the easiest,
is to make a picture, known as a tree diagram, listing all possibilities (see Figure 12.1).
A 5 5Alfie, Bogie, Calvin, Doug, Ernie6
“I must, each day say o’er the very
same, 
Counting no old thing old, thou 
mine, I thine, 
Even as when first I hallow’d thy 
fair name.”
Sonnet CVIII, William Shakespeare
© 2000–2006; Shakespeare Festival LA. All rights reserved; 
www.shakespearefestivbala.org
FIGURE 12.1 Tree diagram for five choices
President
Secretary
a
b
c
d
e
1
2
3
4
b
a
c
d
e
1
2
3
4
c
a
b
d
e
1
2
3
4
d
a
b
c
e
1
2
3
4
e
a
b
c
d
1
2
3
4
3
4
5
2
1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We see there are 20 possibilities for choosing a president and a secretary from five club
members. This method is effective for “small” tree diagrams, but the technique quickly
gets out of hand. For example, if we wished to see how many ways the club could elect a
president, secretary, and treasurer, this technique would be very lengthy.
A second method of solution is to use boxes or “pigeonholes” representing each
choice separately. Here we determine the number of ways of choosing a president, and
then the number of ways of choosing a secretary.
Ways of choosing a president
Ways of choosing a secretary
c
Since we have chosen a president, only 4 remain.
We multiply the numbers in the pigeonholes,
and we see that the result is the same as from the tree diagram.
A third method is to use the fundamental counting principle (from Section 2.4). We
repeat this principle here for review.
5 # 4 5 20
5
4
574
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
The fundamental counting principle gives the number of ways of performing two or
more tasks. If task A can be performed in m ways, and if after task A is performed, 
a second task B can be performed in n ways, then task A followed by B can
performed in 
ways.
m 3 n
Fundamental Counting Principle
You can guess that a
principle with a title like
this is important.
Example
1 Determine the number of ways of choosing three
In how many ways could the given club choose a president, secretary, and treasurer?
Solution
c
c
c
President Secretary Treasurer
The answer is 5 3 4 3 3 5 60.
5
4
3
Example
2 Determine the number of ways of choosing four
In how many ways could this club choose a president, vice president, secretary, and
treasurer?
Solution
5 3 4 3 3 3 2 5 120
When set symbols 
are used, the order in which the elements are listed is not im-
portant. Suppose now that you wish to select elements from 
by pick-
ing them in a certain order. The selected elements are enclosed in parentheses to signify
order and are called an arrangement of elements of A. For example, if the elements a
and b are selected from A, then there are two pairs, or arrangements:
(a, b)
and
(b, a)
These arrangements are called ordered pairs. Remember, when parentheses are used, the
order in which the elements are listed is important. This example shows ordered pairs,
A 5  5a, b, c, d, e6
5  6
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

but you could also select an ordered triple such as (d, c, a). These arrangements are said
to be selected without repetition, since a symbol cannot be used twice in the same
arrangement.
If we are given some set of elements and we are to choose without repetition a cer-
tain number of elements from the set, we can choose them so that the order in which the
choices are made is important, or so that it is not. If the order is important, we call our re-
sult a permutation, and if the order is not important, it is called a combination. We now
consider permutations, and we will consider combinations in the next section.
Suppose we consider the election problem for a larger set than A; we wish to elect a
president, secretary, and treasurer from among
{Frank, George, Hans, Iris, Jane, Karl}
We could use one of the previously mentioned three methods, but we wish to generalize,
so we ask, “Is it possible to count the number of arrangements without actually counting
them?”
In answering this question, we note that we are selecting 3 persons in order from a
group of 6 people. If an arbitrary finite set S has n elements and r elements are selected
without repetition from S (where 
), then an arrangement of the r selected elements
is called a permutation.
r # n
Section 12.1
Permutations
575
A permutation of r elements selected from a set S with
n elements is an ordered arrangement of those r
elements selected without repetition.
Permutation
Example
3 Number of permutations of two chosen from six
How many permutations of two elements can be selected from a set of six elements?
Solution
Let 
and select two elements:
(a, b), (a, c), (a, d), (a, e), (a, f ), (b, a), (b, c), (b, d), (b, e), (b, f),
(c, a), (c, b), (c, d), (c, e), (c, f ), (d, a), (d, b), (d, c), (d, e), (d, f),
(e, a), (e, b), (e, c), (e, d), (e, f ), ( f, a), ( f, b), ( f, c), ( f, d), ( f, e)
There are 30 permutations of two elements selected from a set of six elements.
B 5  5a, b, c, d, e, f 6
Remember that since we
are considering permuta-
tions, the order is impor-
tant; that is, (a, b) is NOT
the same as (b, a).
Example 3 brings up two difficulties. The first is the lack of notation for the phrase,
“the number of permutations of two elements selected from a set of six elements,” and
the second is the inadequacy of relying on direct counting, especially if the sets are
very large.
The symbol 
is used to denote the number of permu-
tations of r elements selected from a set of n elements.
nPr
Notation for Permutations
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

576
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
Example
4 Evaluate permutations
Evaluate:
a. 52P2
b. 7P3
c. 10P4
d. 10P1
e. nPr
Solution
We use the fundamental counting principle:
a. 52P2  52  51  2,652
b. 7P3  7  6  5  210
Two factors
Three factors
c.
10P4  10  9  8  7  5,040
d. 10P1  10
Four factors
One factor
e.
nPr  n1n  121n  22  . . .  1n  r  12
r factors
⎧⎨⎩
⎧⎨⎩
⎧
⎨
⎩
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪
⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪
⎩
{
Example
5 Find the nature of permutation variables
a. Can r be larger than n?
b. Can r be 0?
c. Can 
?
Solution
a. No, since n is the total number of objects.
b. You must be careful. This example does not exactly fit our definition, so we must
interpret it separately. Now, 
means the number of ways you can permute six
objects by taking none of them. There is only one way to take no objects, and that is
by not taking any. Thus, we define 
for any counting number n.
c. Yes; consider 
6P6 5 6 # 5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 5 720
5P5 5 5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 5 120
nP0 5 1
6P0
r 5 n
Factorial
In our work with permutations, we will frequently encounter products such as (see
Example 5c)
6  5  4  3  2  1
or
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
or 
52  51  50  49  . . .  4  3  2  1
Since these are rather lengthy, we use factorial notation.
For any counting number n, the factorial of n is 
defined by
n!  n1n  121n  22  . . .  3  2  1
Also, 0!  1.
Factorial
Factorial notation was first used
by Christian Kramp in 1808.
Example 3 can now be shortened by writing
Actual number of permutations is 30.
c c
From the fundamental counting principle, we can also write
Total number in set
Number we are 
selecting from the set
Two factors
The next example leads us to a method for calculating permutations.
6P2 6  5 30.
6P2  30

      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 12.1
Permutations
577
Example
6 Evaluate factorials
Evaluate factorials for the numbers 
Solution
0!  1
1!  1 
2!  2  1  2
3!  3  2  1  6
4!  4  3  2  1  24
5!  5  4  3  2  1  120
6!  6  5  4  3  2  1  720
7!  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  5,040
8!  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  40,320
9!  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  362,880
10!  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  3,628,800
0, 1, c, 10
Notice (from Example 6) that these numbers get big pretty fast. We need not wonder
why the notation “!” was chosen! For example,
If you actually carry out the calculations in Example 6, you will discover a useful property
of factorials: 
that is, to calculate 11! you would not
need to “start over” but simply multiply 11 by the answer found for 
This property is
called the multiplication property of factorials or the count-down property.
10!.
3! 5 3 # 2!, 4! 5 4 # 3!, 5! 5 5 # 4!;
52! < 8.065817517 3 1067
n! 5 n # 1n 2 12!
Count-down Property
Example
7 Evaluate factorial expressions
Evaluate:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Solution
a.
b.
Compare order of operations in parts a and b.
c.
Count-down property
d.
Repeated use of the count-down property
e. 100!
98! 5 100 # 99 # 98!
98!
5 9,900
12!
9! 5 12 # 11 # 10 # 9!
9!
5 12 # 11 # 10 5 1,320
8!
7! 5 87!
7! 5 8
16 – 42! 5 2! 5 2
6! 2 4! 5 720 2 24 5 696
100!
98!
12!
9!
8!
7!
16 2 42!
6! 2 4!
This example shows that you need the count-down 
property even if you are using a calculator.
Using factorials, we can find a formula for 
This is the general formula for nPr.
 5
n!
1n 2 r2!
 5 n1n 2 12 1n 2 22 #  c # 1n 2 r 1 12 1n 2 r2!
1n 2 r2!
 5 n1n 2 12 1n 2 22 #  c # 1n 2 r 1 12 # 1n 2 r2!
1n 2 r2!
 nPr 5 n1n 2 12 1n 2 22 #  c # 1n 2 r 1 12
nPr.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

578
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
nPr 5
n!
1n 2 r2!
Permutation Formula
Example
8 Evaluate permutations by formula
Evaluate:
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a.
b.
c. 8P8 5
8!
18 2 82! 5 8!
0! 5 8! 5 40,320
nP0 5
n!
1n 2 02 5 n!
n! 5 1
10P2 5
10!
110 2 22! 5 10!
8! 5 10 # 9 # 8!
8!
5 90
8P8
nP0
10P2
Example
9 Find the number of drivers
A dispatcher is assigning cars to taxi drivers. There are eight possible cars and five
drivers. In how many ways can the assignments be done?
Solution
Five of the eight cars will be assigned to a driver, and since the car one re-
ceives could make a difference, the order of selection is important, so this is a permuta-
tion problem:
8P5 5
8!
18 2 52! 5 8!
3! 5 8 # 7 # 6 # 5 # 4 # 3!
3!
5 6,720
Example 10 Naming the Königsberg bridges
In Section 8.1 we identified the seven bridges of Königsberg by numbering these
bridges. Historical documents tell us these bridges are named the Blacksmith’s Bridge,
Connecting Bridge, High Bridge, Green Bridge, Honey Bridge, Merchant’s Bridge, and
Wooden Bridge. In how many ways could the seven bridges be named?
Solution
We see seven bridges and we have seven names and the order in which we
name these bridges is important. We see that this is a permutation problem:
7P7 5 7! 5 5,040
Example 11 Determine the number of ways of choosing six
We return to the situation at the beginning of this section. In how many ways can we se-
lect a president, secretary, and treasurer from a club of six members?
Solution
The election is a permutation problem:
6P3 5
6!
16 2 32! 5 120
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Distinguishable Permutations
We now consider a generalization of permutations in which one or more of the selected
items is indistinguishable from the others.
Section 12.1
Permutations
579
Example 12 Find the number of distinguishable permutations
Find the number of arrangements of letters in the given word:
a. MATH
b. HATH
Solution
a. This is a permutation of four objects taken four at a time:
b. This is different from part a because not all the letters in the word HATH are distin-
guishable; that is, the first and last letters are both H’s, so they are indistinguishable.
If we make the letters distinguishable by labeling them as HATH, we see that now
the list is the same as in part a. Let us list the possibilities as shown in the margin.
We see that there are 24 possibilities, but notice how we have arranged this list-
ing. If we consider 
(that is, the H’s are indistinguishable), we see that the first
and the second columns are the same. Since there are two indistinguishable letters,
we divide the total by 2:
4!
2 5 24
2 5 12
H 5 H
4P4 5 4! 5 24
Possibilities if H’s are 
indistinguishable 
(First and second columns 
are the same.)
HATH
HATH
HAHT
HAHT
HTAH
HTAH
HTHA
HTHA
HHTA
HHTA
HHAT
HHAT
AHHT
AHHT
AHTH
AHTH
ATHH
ATHH
THHA
THHA
THAH
THAH
TAHH
TAHH
Example 13 Number of letters in a word with a repeated letter
How many permutations are there of the letters in the word ASSIST?
Solution
There are six letters, and if you consider the letters as distinguishable, as in
there are 
possibilities. However,
AS1S2IS3T,
AS1S3IS2T,
AS2S1IS3T,
AS2S3IS1T,
AS3S1IS2T,
AS3S2IS1T
are all indistinguishable, so you must divide the total by 
There are 120 permutations of the letters in the word ASSIST.
6!
3! 5 6 # 5 # 4 # 3!
3!
5 120
3! 5 6:
6P6 5 6! 5 720
AS1S2IS3T
Example 14 Number of letters in a word with two repetitions
Find the number of permutations of the letters in the word ATTRACT.
Solution
The total number of arrangements of the letters in the word is 7!; this is
divided by factorials of the numbers of repeated letters in subcategories:
These examples can be generalized to include several categories.
c
Letters R and C occur once each.
Letter T occurs three times.
Letter A occurs twice.
7!
3! 2! 1!1!

¡
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

These examples suggest a general result.
580
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
The number of distinguishable permutations of n objects which 
are of one kind, 
are of another kind, 
and 
are of a further kind, so that 
is denoted by 
and is defined by the formula
a
n
n1, n2, c ,nk
b 5
n!
n1!n2! # c# nk!
Q
n
n1, n2, . . . ,nkR
n 5 n1 1 n2 1 c1 nk
nk
c
n2
n1
Formula for Distinguishable Permutations
Example 15 Find the number of distinguishable permutations
What is the number of distinguishable permutations of the letters in the words NATURE
OF MATHEMATICS?
Solution
There are 19 letters: A and T (3 times each), E and M (2 times each), and 
9 letters each appearing once. We use the formula for distinguishable permutations.
If we also consider the spaces and where they occur (which would be necessary if you
were programming this on a computer), then the number of possibilities is found by
21!
3!3!2!2!2!1!1!1!1!1!1!1!1! 5 1.773991048 3 1017
19!
3!3!2!2!1!1!1!1!1!1!1!1! 5 8.447576417 3 1014
By calculator; note the sum of the
numbers on the bottom is 19.
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a permutation? What is the
formula for permutations?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a distinguishable permutation?
What is the formula for distinguishable permutations?
Evaluate each expression in Problems 3–30.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30. xPy
5Pr
nP5
gPh
nP4
11P4
10P2
8P3
mP3
50P4
5P5
7P3
16P3
7P5
52P1
92P0
8P0
8P4
5P3
12P5
4P4
52P3
5P4
9P4
9P3
9P2
100P1
9P1
How many permutations are there of the words given in Problems
31–40?
31. HOLIDAY
32. ANNEX
33. ESCHEW
34. OBFUSCATION
35. MISSISSIPPI
36. CONCENTRATION
37. BOOKKEEPING
38. GRAMMATICAL
39. APOSIOPESIS
40. COMBINATORICS
Level 2
41. In how many ways can a president, vice president, secretary,
and treasurer be elected from a group of five people?
42. In how many ways can a president and a vice president be
elected from a group of 15 people?
43. In how many ways can a president, a vice president, and 
a secretary be elected from a group of 10 people?
44. In how many ways can a chairperson and a vice chairperson be
selected from a committee of 25 senators?
Problem Set 12.1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

45. How many outfits consisting of a suit and a tie can a man
select if he has two suits and eight ties?
46. In how many different ways can eight books be arranged on 
a shelf?
47. In how many ways can you select and read three books from 
a shelf of eight books?
48. In how many ways can a row of three contestants for a TV
game show be selected from an audience of 362 people?
49. How many seven-digit telephone numbers are possible if the
first two digits cannot be ones or zeros?
50. Foley’s Village Inn offers the following menu in its restaurant:
Main course
Dessert
Beverage
Prime rib
Ice cream
Coffee
Steak
Sherbet
Tea
Chicken
Cheesecake
Milk
Ham
Decaf
Shrimp
In how many different ways can someone order a meal 
consisting of one choice from each category?
51. Most ATMs require that you enter a four-digit code, using the
digits 0 to 9. How many four-digit codes are available?
52. Some automobiles have five-button locks. How many different
five-digit codes are available for these locks?
53. A museum wishes to display eight paintings next to 
one another on a wall. In how many ways may this be 
done?
54. If there are nine baseball players who need to be arranged in a
batting order, in how many ways might this be done?
55. The “Pick 3” at horse racetracks requires that a person select
the winning horse for three consecutive races. If the first race
has nine entries, the second race eight entries, and the third
race ten entries, how many different possible tickets might be
purchased?
56. Tarot cards are used for telling fortunes, and in a reading, the
arrangement of the cards is as important as the cards themselves.
How many different readings are possible if three cards are
selected from a set of seven Tarot cards?
Level 3
57. A DNA molecule is shown here.
s = sugar
p = phosphate
g = guanine
c = cytosine
a = adenine
t = thymine
bases
P
P
P
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
S
S
S
g
c
a
t
a
a
t
t
g
c
g
c
c
g
a
t
P
A nucleotide is represented by one of the letters {a, t, c, g}. 
A codon is defined to be a triplet of nucleotides. The order of
the nucleotides in a codon is significant, and the nucleotides
can be repeated. These codons are important in determining
how DNA is transformed into protein. How many different
codons are possible?
58. My favorite Moroccan restaurant offers the following menu:
Cold appetizer (no choice): spicy carrots, khobiza, 
and zalouk
Appetizer (select one): spicy chicken wings, charmoula
chicken drumsticks, maaquda, shrimp maaquda, or lamb
borek
Entree (select two): free range chicken, baked kefta, or
shekshouka
Dessert (no choice): almond semolina flour cookies
How many different meals are possible if the cold appetizer
and dessert are served with all meals and the entries are served
in the order of selection?
59. A world-famous prix fixe menu includes the following
choices:
Beverage (choose one): wine, soft drink, coffee, tea, milk,
juice, or cappuccino
First course (no choice): baguette, bruschetta, whole
roasted garlic, and butter
Second course (choose one): quesadilla, onion soup,
salad, Caesar salad, lettuce wedge, spinach salad, or
romaine salad
Third course (choose one): rib eye steak, swordfish, rack
of lamb, whitefish, grilled chicken, southern fried chicken,
lobster, or vegetarian plate.
If you choose steak, then choose one of the following:
fries, mashed potatoes, creamed corn, spinach, broccoli,
or grilled onions.
Fourth course (choose one): chocolate cake, cinnamon
tart, apple tart, pecan tart, crème brulee, mango sorbet,
or chocolate tart.
How many different meals are possible?
Problem Solving 3   
60. Suppose you flip a coin and keep a record of the results. In
how many ways could you obtain at least one head if you flip
the coin six times?
Section 12.1
Permutations
581
anthro.palomar.edu/
biobasis/bio_5.htm
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

582
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
12.2  Combinations
In the last section, we introduced the situation in which we are given some set of ele-
ments and we are to choose without repetition a certain number of elements from the
set. We can choose them so that the order in which the choices are made is important,
or so that it is not. If the order is important, the selection was called a permutation, and
if the order is not important it was called a combination. We consider combinations in
this section.
Committee Problem
Reconsider the club example given at the beginning of the previous section:
In how many ways could they elect a committee of two persons? We call this the commit-
tee problem.
One method of solution is easy (but tedious) and involves the enumeration of all pos-
sibilities:
{a, b}
{b, c}
{c, d}
{d, e}
{a, c}
{b, d}
{c, e}
{a, d}
{b, e}
{a, e}
We see there are ten possible two-member committees. Do you see why we cannot use
the fundamental counting principle for this committee problem in the same way we did
for the election problem?
We have presented two different types of counting problems, the election problem
and the committee problem. For the election problem, we found an easy numerical
method of counting, using the fundamental counting principle. For the committee prob-
lem, we did not; further investigation is necessary.
Let us compare the committee and election problems. We saw in the preceding
section, while considering the election problem, that the following arrangements are
different:
President
Secretary
Treasurer
Alfie
Bogie
Calvin
Bogie
Alfie
Calvin
That is, the order was important. However, in the committee problem, the three-member
committees listed above are the same.
In this case, the order is not important. When the order in which the objects are listed
is not important, we call the list a combination and represent it as a subset of A.
A 5  5Alfie, Bogie, Calvin, Doug, Ernie 6
Example
1 List all arrangements of elements
Select two elements from the set 
and list all possible arrangements
as well as all possible subsets.
A 5  5a, b, c, d, e6,
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
Section 12.2
Combinations
583
Permutations—arrangements
Combinations—subsets
Order important
Order not important
(a, b),
(a, c),
(a, d),
(a, e),
{a, b},
{a, c},
{a, d},
{a, e},
(b, a),
(b, c),
(b, d),
(b, e),
{b, c},
{b, d},
{b, e},
(c, a),
(c, b),
(c, d),
(c, e),
↑
{c, d},
{c, e},
(d, a),
(d, b),
(d, c),
(d, e),
{d, e}
(e, a),
(e, b),
(e, c),
(e, d)
Do not list {b, a} since
{a, b}  {b, a}.
Note that set notation is used. 
There are 10 combinations.
Note that ordered pair notation is used.
There are 20 permutations.
We now state a definition of a combination.
A combination of r elements of a finite set S of n
elements is a subset of S that contains r distinct
elements. The notations 
and 
are both used to
denote the number of combinations of r elements
selected from a set of n elements 1r # n2.
nCr
Qn
rR
Combination
The notation 
is similar to the notation used for permutations, but since 
is more com-
mon in your later work in mathematics, we will usually use this notation for combinations.
The notation 
is read as “n choose r.” The formula for the number of permutations leads
directly to a formula for the number of combinations since each subset of r elements has 
permutations of its members. Thus, by the fundamental counting principle,
so
an
rb 5
nPr
r! 5
n!
r!1n 2 r2!
an
rb # r! 5 nPr
r!
Qn
rR
Qn
rR
nCr
an
rb 5
n!
r!1n 2 r2!
Combination Formula
Example
2 Evaluate combinations
Evaluate:
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a.
b. an
0b 5
n!
0!1n 2 02! 5 1
a10
3 b 5 10!
3!7! 5 10 # 9 # 8 # 7!
3 # 2 # 7!
5 120
Qm 2 1
2
R
Qn
0R
Q10
3 R
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

c.
 5
1m 2 12 1m 2 22
2
 5
1m 2 12 1m 2 22 1m 2 32!
2 # 1 # 1m 2 32!
 am 2 1
2
b 5
1m 2 12!
2!1m 2 1 2 22!
584
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
Example
3 Find the number of possible committees
In how many ways can a club of five members select a three-person committee?
Solution
In an election, the order of selection is important, but in choosing a com-
mittee, the order of selection is not important, so this is a combination. Three members
are selected from five, so we have “5 choose 3”:
a5
3b 5 5!
3!2! 5 5 # 4
2!
5 10
Many applications deal with an ordinary deck of cards, as shown in Figure 12.2.
FIGURE 12.2 A deck of cards
Hearts (red cards)
Diamonds (red cards)
Clubs (black cards)
Spades (black cards)
Example
4 Find the number of five-hand cards that can be drawn
Find the number of five-card hands that can be drawn from an ordinary deck of cards.
Solution
a52
5 b 5 52!
5!47! 5 52 # 51 # 50 # 49 # 48 # 47
5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 # 47!
5 2,598,960
Example
5 Find the number of ways for a heart flush
In how many ways can a heart flush be drawn in poker? (A heart flush is any hand of
five hearts.)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
We need to determine the number of combinations of 13 objects (hearts)
taken 5 at a time. Thus,
a13
5 b 5 13!
5!8! 5 13 # 12 # 11 # 10 # 9 # 8!
5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 # 8!
5 1,287
Section 12.2
Combinations
585
Example
6 Find the number of possible flush hands
In how many ways can a flush be drawn in poker? (A flush is five cards of one suit.)
Solution
There are four possible suits, so we use the fundamental counting principle,
along with the result from Example 5.
Number of suits
4  1,287  5,148
Number of ways for a particular suit
123
{
Example
7 Find the number of possible ways for a full house
In how many ways can a full house of three tens and two queens be dealt?
Solution
Begin with the fundamental counting principle:
Each of the numbers in each pigeonhole is a combination (since the order in which the
cards are dealt is not important):
a4
2b # a4
3b 5 4!
2!2! # 4!
3!1! 5 4 # 3 # 4
2
5 24
Ways of obtaining three tens
#
Ways of obtaining two queens
Queens
678
Tens
678
Pascal’s Triangle
For many applications, if n and r are relatively small (which will be the case for most of
the problems for this course), you should notice the following relationship:
(
a4
4b 5 1
a4
3b 5 4
a4
2b 5 6
a4
1b 5 4
a4
0b 5 1
a3
3b 5 1
a3
2b 5 3
a3
1b 5 3
a3
0b 5 1
a2
2b 5 1
a2
1b 5 2
a2
0b 5 1
a1
1b 5 1
a1
0b 5 1
a0
0b 5 1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

That is, 
is the number in the nth row, rth diagonal of Pascal’s triangle. We repeat the
triangle (from Section 1.1) here for easy reference.
Qn
rR
586
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
Right Diagonals
Left Diagonals
Rows
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
4
6
4
5
10
10
5
6
15
20
6
15
7
7
21
35
35
21
8
28
56
70
56
28
8
9
9
36
36
84
126
126
84
10
10
45
45
120
120
210
210
252
11
11
55
55
165
165
330
330
462
462
12
12
66
66
220
220
495
495
792
792
924
13
13
78
78
286
286
715
715 1287
1287
1716
1716
14
14
91
91
364
364
1001 2002 3003 3432 3003 2002 1001
15
15
105
105
455
455
1365
1365
3003
3003 5005
5005
6435
6435
Each row begins with
a one and ends with a one.
EXAMPLE: Add numbers above
(364 
 91) to obtain additional numbers.
Example
8 Evaluate combinations using Pascal’s triangle
Find
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
a.
row 8, diagonal 3
b.
row 6, diagonal 5
c.
row 14, diagonal 6
d.
row 12, diagonal 10
12C10 5 66
Q14
6 R 5 3,003
Q6
5R 5 6
Q8
3R 5 56
12C10
Q14
6 R
Q6
5R
Q8
3R
Counting with the Binomial Theorem
In Section 6.1 we introduced the binomial theorem, and we saw that Pascal’s triangle
gives the coefficients of the expansion of a power of a binomial. If you look back at the
notation we used in Chapter 6, you will see that we chose to use combination notation
(even though we did not call it such) back then. You see now that this was no coincidence.
We can now restate the binomial theorem using combination notation.
For any positive integer n,
where 
is the number in the nth row, rth diagonal of Pascal’s triangle.
Qn
rR
1a 1 b2 n 5 an
0ban 1 an
1ban21b 1 an
2ban22b2 1 c1 a
n
n 2 1babn21 1 an
nbbn
Binomial Theorem
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 12.2
Combinations
587
Example
9 Number of birth orders
If a family has five children, how many different birth orders could the
parents have if there are three boys and two girls?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Part of understanding this problem might involve estimation.
For example, if a family has one child, there are two ways (boy and girl). If a family has
two children, there are four ways (BB, BG, GB, GG); for three children, eight ways; for
four children, 16 ways; and for five children, a total of 32 ways. This means that an an-
swer of 140 ways, for example, is an unreasonable answer, since for 5 children the num-
ber of all possibilities is 32.
Devise a Plan. The first plan might try direct enumeration: BBBGG, BBGBG, BBGGB,
This seems to be too tedious. Look for a pattern:
One child:
B ←One way
G ←One way
Two children:
BB ←One way
BG
GB
←Two ways
GG ←One way
Three children:
BBB ←One way
BBG  
BGB
←Three ways
GBB 
BGG
GBG   ←Three ways
GGB
GGG ←One way
If we write this as follows, it should look familiar:
One child:
1
1 
Two children:
1
2
1 
Three children:
1
3
3
1
If we write 1B  G23  B3  3B2G  3BG2  G3, we see that the exponents correspond
to the genders of the children and the coefficients give the related number of ways these
gender combinations can occur. Thus, our plan is to use the binomial theorem as a
counting technique.
Carry Out the Plan. We find
1B  G25  B5  5B4G  10B3G2  10B2G3  5BG4  G5
This says that the family could have three boys and two girls (look at the coefficient of
) a total of 10 ways.
Look Back. We see that our plan led us to an answer that is consistent with the pattern
we used in the first step (understanding the problem).
B3G2
Pólya’s 
Method
Example 10 Find the number of subsets
How many subsets of {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} are there?
Solution
There are 
subsets of 5 elements, 
subsets of 4 elements, and so forth.
Thus, the total number of subsets is
a5
0b 1  a5
1b 1  a5
2b 1  a5
3b 1  a5
4b 1  a5
5b
Q5
4R
Q5
5R
14243 14243
123
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Instead of carrying out all of the arithmetic in evaluating these combinations, we note that
so that if we let 
and 
, we have
We see that there are 
subsets of a set containing five elements.
25 5 32
25 5 a5
0b 1 a5
1b 1 a5
2b 1 a5
3b 1 a5
4b 1 a5
5b 
11 1 12 5 5 a5
0b15 1 a5
1b141 1 a5
2b1312 1 a5
3b1213 1 a5
4b1 # 14 1 a5
5b15
b 5 1
a 5 1
1a 1 b2 5 5 a5
0ba5 1 a5
1ba4b 1 a5
2ba3b2 1 a5
3ba2b3 1 a5
4bab4 1 a5
5bb5
588
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
A set of n distinct elements has 
subsets.
2n
Number of Subsets
Example 11 Find the number of subsets of a set of 10 elements
How many subsets are there for a set containing 10 elements?
Solution
There are 
subsets.
210 5 1,024
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a combination? What is the
formula for combinations?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the relationship between
combinations and Pascal’s triangle?
Evaluate each expression in Problems 3–28.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16. Q25
1 R
Q50
48R
Q5
3R
Q7
3R
Q100
1 R
Q4
4R
Q7
2R
Q52
3 R
Q5
4R
Q9
0R
Q9
4R
Q9
3R
Q9
2R
Q9
1R
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
Level 2
29. A bag contains 12 pieces of candy. In how many ways can five
pieces be selected?
30. In how many ways can three aces be drawn from a deck
of cards?
31. In how many ways can two kings be drawn from a deck
of cards?
Q2
1R
Q4
2R
Q10
6 R
Q2
2R
Q6
4R
Q7
1R
Q4
4R
Q8
4R
Q9
1R
Q
9
2, 3, 4R
Q
7
2, 2, 3R
Q
10
4, 3, 3R
mPn
mCn
nC5
kP4
Qn
4R
Qg
hR
Problem Set 12.2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32. In how many ways can four aces be drawn from a deck
of cards?
33. In how many ways can a club flush be obtained?
34. In how many ways can a full house of three aces and two kings
be obtained?
35. In how many ways can a full house of three jacks and a pair of
twos be obtained?
36. In how many ways can a committee of five be formed from 
a group of 15 people?
37. If a family has five children, in how many ways could the
parents have two boys and three girls?
38. If a family has six children, in how many ways could the
parents have three boys and three girls?
39. How many different subsets can be chosen from a set of seven
elements?
40. How many different subsets can be chosen from the U.S. 
Senate?
Level 3
In Problems 41–55, decide whether you would use a permutation,
a combination, or neither. Next, write the solution using permuta-
tion notation or combination notation, if possible, and, finally,
answer the question.
41. A club with 30 members is to select a committee of five
persons. In how many ways can this be done?
42. A club with 30 members is to select five officers (president,
vice president, secretary, treasurer, and historian). In how
many ways can this be done?
43. Tom is leading a workshop for 20 people. He wants each per-
son to meet every other person (shake hands once). How many
handshakes occur?
44. Rita is asked to answer three of five essay questions on an
exam. How many choices does Rita have?
45. An ice cream parlor has 31 different flavors. A super sundae
allows a person to select 3 different flavors. How many differ-
ent selections are possible?
46. An ice cream parlor has 31 different flavors. A super sundae
allows a person to select 3 different flavors and 3 (out of 8)
different toppings. How many different selections are 
possible?
47. How many different arrangements are there of the letters in the
word CORRECT?
48. There are three boys and three girls at a party. In how many
ways can they be seated in a row if they must sit alternating
boys and girls?
49. If there are 10 employees in a club, in how many ways can
they choose a dishwasher and a bouncer?
50. In how many ways can you be dealt two cards from an
ordinary deck of 52 cards?
51. In how many ways can five taxi drivers be assigned 
to six cars?
52. How many arrangements are there of the letters in the 
word GAMBLE?
53. In how many ways can a group of seven choose a committee of
four?
54. In how many ways can seven books be arranged on a
bookshelf?
55. In how many ways can you choose two books to read from a
bookshelf containing seven books?
Problem Solving 3   
56. a. Draw three points on a circle. How many triangles can you
draw using these points as vertices?
b. Draw four points on a circle. How many triangles 
can you draw by using any three of these points 
as vertices?
c. Draw six points on a circle. How many triangles can you
draw by using any three of these points as vertices?
d. Draw n points on a circle (n  3). How many triangles 
can you draw by using any three of these points as 
vertices?
57. Draw n points on a circle (n  5). How many 
pentagons can you draw by connecting any five of 
these points?
58. A club consists of 16 men and 19 women. In how many 
ways can they choose a president, vice president, treasurer, 
and secretary, along with an advisory committee of six 
people?
59. In Problem 58, how many ways can the selection be made if
exactly two of the officers must be women?
60. Prove: Qn
rR 5 Q n
n2rR
Section 12.2
Combinations
589
Sandra O’Claire/istockphoto.com
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

590
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
12.3   Counting without Counting
One of the important topics of this chapter is to understand that there are more efficient
ways of counting than the old “one, two, three, . . .” technique. There are many ways of
counting. We saw that some counting problems can be solved by using the fundamental
counting principle, some by using permutations, and some by using combinations. Other
problems required that we combine some of these ideas. However, it is important to keep
in mind that not all counting problems fall into one of these neat categories.
Keep in mind, therefore, as we go through this section, that, although some problems
may be permutation problems and some may be combination problems, there are many
counting problems that are neither.
In practice, we are usually required to decide whether a given counting problem is a
permutation or a combination before we can find a solution. For the sake of review, recall
the difference between the election and committee problems of the previous sections. The
election problem is a permutation problem, and the committee problem is a combination
problem. We summarize the definitions of permutation and combination.
“Five trillion, four hundred eighty billion,
five hundred twenty-three million,
two hundred ninety-seven thousand,
one-hundred and sixty-two . . .”
A permutation of a set of objects is an arrangement of certain of these objects in a
specific order. A combination of a set of objects is an arrangement of certain of these
objects without regard to their order.
Permutations and Combinations
Remember: Permutation:
Order is important. 
Combination: Order is not
important.
Example
1
Classifying permutations and combinations
Classify the following as permutations, combinations, or neither.
a. The number of three-letter “words” that can be formed using the letters {m, a, t, h}
b. The number of ways you can change a $1 bill with 5 nickels, 12 dimes, and 
6 quarters
c. The number of ways a five-card hand can be drawn from a deck of cards
d. The number of different five-numeral combinations on a combination lock
e. The number of license plates possible in Florida (routine plates have three numerals
followed by three letters)
Solution
a. Permutation, since mat is different from tam.
b. Combination, since “2 quarters and 5 dimes” is the same as “5 dimes and 2 quarters.”
c. Combination, since the order in which you receive the cards is unimportant.
d. Permutation, since “5 to the L, 6 to the R, 3 to the L, . . .” is different from “6 to the
R, 5 to the L, 3 to the L, . . . .” We should not be misled by everyday usage of
the word combination. We made a strict distinction between combination and
permutation—one that is not made in everyday terminology. (The correct
terminology would require that we call these “permutation locks.”)
e. Neither; even though the order in which the elements are arranged is important, this
does not actually fit the definition of a permutation because the objects are separated
into two categories (pigeonholes). The arrangement of letters is a permutation and
the arrangement of numerals is a permutation, but to count the actual number of
arrangements for this problem would require permutations and the fundamental
counting principle.
Illustration © SEPS, licensed by Curtis Licensing,
Indpls, IN. All Rights Reserved
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

License Plate Problem
States issue vehicle license plates, and as the population increases, new plates are designed
with more numerals and letters. For example, the state of California has some plates consist-
ing of three letters followed by three digits. When they ran out of these possibilities, they be-
gan making license plates with three digits followed by three letters. Most recently they have
issued plates with one digit followed by three letters in turn followed by three more digits.
Section 12.3
Counting without Counting
591
The personalized license plates were done by Stephen Underwood, who not only 
assembled the plates to spell out the preamble of the U.S. Constitution, but also did 
it by using all 50 states in alphabetical order!
Example
2
Find the number of possible license plates
How many possibilities are there for each of the following license plate schemes?
a. Three letters followed by three digits
b. Three digits followed by three letters
c. One digit followed by three letters followed by three digits
Solution
a. 26  26  26  10  10  10  17,576,000
Fundamental counting principle
b. This is the same as part a. However, if both schemes are in operation at the same
time, then the effective number of possible plates is
2  17,576,000  35,152,000
c. The addition of one digit yields ten times the number of possibilities in part a:
10  17,576,000  175,760,000
Note: A state, such as California, that decides to leave the old plates in use as they move
through parts a, b, and c could have the following number of license plates:
17,576,000  17,576,000  175,760,000  210,912,000
Notice that the fundamental counting principle is not used for all counting problems.
© Smithsonian Art Museum, Washington, DC/Art Resource, NY
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Which Method?
We have now looked at several counting schemes: tree diagrams, pigeonholes, the funda-
mental counting principle, permutations, distinguishable permutations, and combinations.
In practice, you will generally not be told what type of counting problem you are dealing
with—you will need to decide. Table 12.1 should help with that decision. Remember, tree
diagrams and pigeonholes are applications of the fundamental counting principle, so they
are not listed separately in the table.
592
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
Example 3
Find the number of license plates without repetitions - I
How many license plates can be formed if repetition of letters or digits is not allowed
and the state uses the scheme of three numerals followed by three letters?
Solution
To make sure you understand the question, which of the following plates
would be considered a success (no repetition)?
123ABC
Success
122ABC
Failure; repeated digit
456AAB
Failure; repeated letter
111AAA
Failure; repeated letter and repeated numeral
890XYZ
Success
We can use the fundamental counting principle to count the number of license plates
that do not have a repetition:
10  9  8  26  25  24  11,232,000
Example
4
Find the number of license plates without repetitions - II
What is the number of license plates possible if each license plate consists of three let-
ters followed by three digits, and we add the condition that repetition of letters or digits
is not permitted?
Sandra Lord
Number of digits
Letters in the alphabet
Digits left
Letters left after the first one (no repetitions)
↓
↓
↓
↓
TABLE 12.1
Counting Methods
Fundamental Counting Principle
Permutations
Combinations
Distinguishable Permutations
Counts the total number of separate
tasks.
Number of ways of selecting r items 
out of n items.
n elements divided into k
categories
Repetitions are allowed.
Repetitions are not 
Repetitions are not allowed.
If tasks 
, can be performed
in 
ways, respectively,
then the total number of ways the
tasks can be done is
n1 # n2, # n3,c# nk
n1, n2, n3, c ,nk
1, 2, 3, # ,k
Order important, 
called 
arrangements
Order not 
important, 
called subsets
Order of categories is 
important
Formula:
nPr 5
n!
1n 2 r2!
Formula:
5
n!
r!1n 2 r2!
where n  n1  n2  . . .  nk
5
n!
n1!n2! # # # nk!
a
n
n1, n2, . . . , nkb
allowed.
a
n
r b
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
This is a permutation problem since the order in which the elements are
arranged is important, and the choice is without repetition. The number is found by 
using permutations along with the fundamental counting principle:
26P3 # 10P3 5 26 # 25 # 24 # 10 # 9 # 8 5 11,232,000
Section 12.3
Counting without Counting
593
Example
6
Find the number of sales representatives
Suppose that the Sharp Investment Company has 15 sales representatives who are to be
reassigned to three geographical areas as follows: four in the North, five in the South,
and six in the West. In how many ways could the sales representatives be assigned to
the geographical areas?
Solution
Begin with the fundamental counting principle to fill three pigeonholes
with combinations (order not important):
a15
4 b  #   a11
5 b  #   a6
6b 5 15!
4!11! # 11!
5!6! # 6!
6!0! 5
15!
4!5!6! 5 630,630
Example
5
Find the number of different quartets
A quartet is to be selected from a choir. There is to be one soprano selected from a group
of six sopranos, two tenors selected from a group of five tenors, and a bass selected from
three basses.
a. In how many ways can the quartet be formed?
b. In how many ways can the quartet be formed if one of the tenors is designated 
lead tenor?
Solution
a. Begin with the fundamental counting principle:
b. Since the order of selecting the tenors is important, the middle factor from part a is
replaced by
The number of ways of selecting the quartet is 6  20  3  360.
5P2  5!
3!  20
a6
1b     a5
2b     a3
1b  6  10  3  180
By comparing the solutions to Examples 3 and 4, you can see that alternate 
approaches still provide the same result.
Soprano Two tenors
Bass
r
r
r
North            South 
West
r
r
r
Note the connection between combinations and distinguishable permutations. We could
also model this problem by noting that the geographical areas divide up all the sales rep-
resentatives 14  5  6  152:
a
15
4, 5, 6b 5
15!
4!5!6! 5 630,630
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Sometimes it is easier to count what we are not counting than to enumerate all those
items with which we are concerned. For example, suppose we wish to know the number
of four-member committees that can be appointed from the club:
{Alfie, Bogie, Calvin, Doug, Ernie}
1. We could count directly:
a. Alfie, Bogie, Calvin, Doug
b. Alfie, Bogie, Calvin, Ernie
c. Alfie, Bogie, Doug, Ernie
2. We could use the formula
3. We could count those we are not counting: For each four-member committee, there is
one person left out. We can leave out Alfie, Bogie, Calvin, Doug, or Ernie. Therefore,
there are five four-member committees.
a5
4b 5
5P4
4! 5 # # #
594
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
Solution
This is both a permutation and a combination problem, with the final result
calculated by using the fundamental counting principle.
a39
5 b 5 42!
39! # 39!
5!34! 5 39,658,142,160
42P3  #   
Officers
Committee
r
r
…
Example
8
Number of ways of obtaining at least one head
Suppose you flip a coin three times and keep a record of the result. In how many ways
can you obtain at least one head?
Solution
Consider all possibilities:
H H H
H H T
H T H
H T T
T H H
T H T
T T H
T T T
You could count directly to obtain the answer, but you could also count what you are
not counting by noticing that in only one out of eight possibilities do you obtain no
heads. Thus, there are
8  1  7
possibilities in which you obtain at least one head.
According to the 
Guinness Book of World
Records, the longest
recorded paper-link
chain was 6,077 ft long
and was made by the
first- and second-grade
children at Rose City
Elementary School,
Indiana.
Example
7
Find the number of ways
A club with 42 members wants to elect a president, a vice president, and a treasurer.
From the remaining members, an advisory committee of five people is to be selected. In
how many ways can this be done?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 12.3
Counting without Counting
595
The principle of counting without counting is particularly useful when the results be-
come more complicated, as illustrated by the following example.
Example
9
Find the number of ways of obtaining a diamond
Find the number of ways of obtaining at least one diamond when drawing five cards
from an ordinary deck of cards.
Solution
This is very difficult if we proceed directly, but we can compute the num-
ber of ways of not drawing a diamond:
From Example 4, Section 12.2, there is a total of 2,598,960 possibilities, so the number
of ways of drawing at least one diamond is
2,598,960  575,757  2,023,203
a39
5 b 5 39 # 38 # 37 # 36 # 35
5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1
5 575,757
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
State the fundamental counting prin-
ciple, and explain it in your own words.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the difference between a
permutation and a combination.
3. How many skirt-blouse outfits can a woman wear if she has
three skirts and five blouses?
4. If a state issued license plates using the scheme of one letter fol-
lowed by five digits, how many plates could it issue?
5. Repeat Problem 4 if repetitions are not allowed.
6. In how many ways can a group of 15 people elect a president,
vice president, and secretary?
7. How many two-member committees can be formed from a
group of seven people?
8. New York license plates consist of three letters followed by
three numerals, and 245 letter arrangements are not allowed.
How many plates can New York issue?
3 skirts
5 blouses
10. If a family has seven children, in how many ways could the
parents have four boys and three girls?
11. A certain lock has four tumblers, and each tumbler can assume six
positions. How many different possibilities are there?
12. Suppose you flip a coin and keep a record of the results. In
how many ways could you obtain at least one head if you flip
the coin four times?
13. You flip a coin five times and keep a record of the results. In
how many ways could you obtain at least one tail?
14. You flip a coin six times and keep a record of the 
results. In how many ways could you obtain at least
one tail?
Problem Set 12.3
9. Boats often relay messages by using flags. How many
messages can be made using five flags out of a package of 40
different flags?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30. A night watchman visits 125 offices every night. To prevent others
from knowing when he will be at a particular office, he varies the
order of his visits. In how many ways can this be done?
31. A certain manufacturing process calls for the mixing of six
chemicals. One liquid is to be poured into the vat, and then the
others are to be added in turn. All possibilities must be tested to
see which gives the best results. How many tests are required?
32. There are three boys and three girls at a party. In how many ways
can they be seated if they can sit down four at a time?
33. What is the number of distinguishable arrangements of the 
letters in the word KARL?
34. What is the number of distinguishable arrangements in the 
letters in the word SMITH?
35. The receiving line at a wedding consists of the bride, the groom,
parents of the bride, parents of the groom, the best man, and the
maid of honor (all in that order). In addition, there are five
groomsmen (in any order) followed by five bridesmaids (in any
order). In how many ways can the receiving line be arranged?
36. A space shuttle mission consists of a commander, a pilot, 
3 engineers, a doctor, a scientist, and a civilian. If there are 
7 people from whom the commander and pilot must be chosen,
18 possible engineers, 4 possible doctors, 7 scientists and 
3 candidates for the civilian crew member, in how many ways
can a crew be formed?
37. How many three-digit numbers can be formed using the
numerals {3, 4, 6, 7} without repetition?
38. How many three-digit numbers can be formed using the num-
bers {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7} without repetition?
39. A student is asked to answer 10 out of 12 questions on an exam.
In how many ways can she select the questions to be answered?
Level  2
40. The advertisement shown here claims the following 12 mix-and-
match items give 122 different outfits. 
596
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
15. You flip a coin seven times and keep a record of the results. In
how many ways could you obtain at least one tail?
16. You flip a coin n times and keep a record of the results. In how
many ways could you obtain at least one tail?
17. In how many ways could a club of 15 members choose a presi-
dent, vice president, and treasurer?
18. In how many ways could a club of 30 members choose a presi-
dent, vice president, and secretary?
19.
Many states offer personalized license plates. The state of Califor-
nia, for example, allows personalized plates with seven spaces for
numerals or letters, or one of the following four symbols:
What is the total number of license plates possible using this
counting scheme? (Assume that each available space is
occupied by a numeral, letter, symbol, or space.)
20. How many different ways (boy-girl patterns) can a family have
five children?
21. Suppose a restaurant offers the following prix fixe menu:
Main course: prime rib, steak, chicken, filet of sole, shrimp
Side dish: soup, salad, crab cakes
Dessert: cheesecake, chocolate delight, ice cream
Beverage: coffee, tea, milk
In how many ways can someone order a meal consisting of one
choice from each category?
22. In how many ways could a club of 15 appoint a committee of 
4 people?
23. In how many ways could a club of 30 appoint a committee of 
4 people?
In Problems 24–39, classify each as a permutation, a combination,
or neither, and then answer the question.
24. At Mr. Furry’s Dance Studio, every man must dance the last
dance. If there are five men and eight women, in how many
ways can dance couples be formed for the last dance?
25. Martin’s Ice Cream Store sells sundaes with chocolate, straw-
berry, butterscotch, or marshmallow toppings, nuts, and
whipped cream. If you can choose exactly three of these, how
many possible sundaes are there?
26. Five people are to dine together at a rectangular table, but the
hostess cannot decide on a seating arrangement. In how many
ways can the guests be seated?
27. In how many ways can three hearts be drawn from a deck of
cards?
28. In how many ways can four diamonds be drawn from a deck of
cards?
29. A shipment of 100 TV sets is received. Six sets are to be cho-
sen at random and tested for defects. In how many ways can
six sets be chosen?
Nothing to Wear?
This Simple Wardrobe Will
Solve All Your Problems
12 Mix & Match Items
Give You 122 Outfits
The wardrobe consists of 4 blouses, 2 slacks, 2 skirts, 
1 sweater, 2 jackets, and 1 scarf. Assume that the model must
CA Department of Motor
Vehicles
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 12.3
Counting without Counting
597
Outline a procedure that would allow the fellow in the cartoon
to proclaim that he “did it without counting.” Estimate the
number assuming that the container is a cylinder 15 in. tall and
10 in. across, and that it is filled with kidney beans.
51. The old lady jumping rope in the cartoon at the beginning
of this section (see p. 590) is counting one at a time. Assume
that she jumps the rope 50 times per minute and that she jumps
8 hours a day, 5 days a week, 50 weeks a year. Estimate the
length of time necessary for her to jump the rope the number
of times indicated in the cartoon.
52. A marginal note in this section describes the longest paper-link
chain (see p. 594). If there are 12 paper links per foot, and it
takes 1 minute to construct each link, estimate the length of
time necessary to build this paper-link chain.
53. What numerical property is exhibited by the arrangement of
billiard balls shown in Figure 12.3?
choose one top and one bottom item of clothing. She may or
may not choose a sweater or jacket or a scarf. How many
different outfits are possible?
41. Consider selecting two elements, say, a, and b, from the set 
A  {a, b, c, d, e}. List all possible subsets of those two
elements, as well as all possible arrangements.
42. Consider selecting three elements, say, c, d, and e, from the set
A  {a, b, c, d, e}. List all possible subsets of those three
elements. How many arrangements are there?
43. Consider selecting four elements, say, a, b, c, and d, from the set
A  {a, b, c, d, e}. List all possible subsets of those four
elements. How many arrangements are there?
44. Consider selecting five elements, say, a, b, c, d, and e, from the set
A  {a, b, c, d, e}. List all possible subsets of those five elements.
How many arrangements are there?
45. A typical Social Security number is 555-47-5593. How many
Social Security numbers are possible if the first two digits
cannot be 0?
46. A club consists of four men and three women. In how many
ways can this club elect a president, vice president, and secre-
tary, in that order, if the president must be a woman and the
other two officers must be men?
47. A history teacher gives a 20-question true-false exam. In how
many ways can the test be answered if the possible answers are
T or F or possibly to leave the answer blank?
48. A JVC advertisement appeared in several national periodicals.
It claimed that the SEA graphic equalizer system can create
371,293 different sounds from the thirteen possible zone levels
on each of five different controls. Can this claim be substanti-
ated from the advertisement and the knowledge of this
chapter? If so, explain how; if not, tell why this number is
impossible.
49. In how many ways can 26 books be arranged on 
a bookshelf?
Level  3
50.
"I did it without counting. There are – – – beans in the jar."
CONTEST
$1000.00
GUESS THE NUMBER OF
BEANS IN THE JAR!
13
3
15
14
10
12
1
8
2
11
7
4
5
6
9
FIGURE 12.3 Billiard balls
Problem Solving  3
54. A die can be held so that one, two, or three of its faces can be
seen at any one time.
Is it possible to hold a die in different ways so that at different
times the visible numbers add up to every number from 1
through 15?
55. The News Clip below presents an argument proving that at least
two New Yorkers must have exactly the same number of hairs on
their heads! For this problem, just suppose you knew the number
One face showing a 5
Two faces showing
a total of 9
Three faces showing
a total of 10
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

598
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
57. How many different pizza orders are possible?
58. Jean Sherrod of Little Caesar’s Enterprises, Inc., explains 
that an order where the first pizza is pepperoni and the 
second pizza is ham would be considered different from 
an order in which the first pizza is ham and the second pizza 
is pepperoni. Using this scheme, how many pizza orders are
possible?
59. Double toppings are not included in the calculation in the ad-
vertisement. However, Little Caesar’s does allow double top-
pings. If double toppings are possible, how many different
pizza orders are possible?
60. Show that the sum of the entries of the nth row of Pascal’s 
triangle is 2n.
LITTLE CAESAR'S PIZZA PIZZA!!!
Customer:  So what's this new deal?
Pizza chef:  Two pizzas
Customer [Toward four-year-old boy]: 
            Two pizzas.  Write that down.
Pizza chef:  And on the two pizzas choose any toppings—
            up to five [from a list of 11 toppings].
Older boy:  Do you . . .
Pizza chef:  . . . have to pick the same toppings on each
            pizza?  NO!
Four-year-old-math whiz:  Then the possibilities are 
endless.
Customer:  What do you mean?  Five plus five are ten.
Math whiz:  Actually, there are 1,048,576 possibilities.
Customer:  Ten was just a ballpark figure.
Old man:  You got that right.
of hairs on your head, as well as the exact number of hairs on
anyone else’s head. Now multiply the number of hairs on your
head by the number of hairs on your neighbor’s head. Take this
result and multiply by the number of hairs on the heads of each
person in your town or city. Continue this process until you have
done this for everyone in the entire world! Make a guess (you
can use scientific notation, if you like) about the size of this an-
swer. (Hint: The author has worked this out and claims to know
the exact answer.)
The following transcribed television advertisement is the basis for
Problems 56–59.
56. If we accept the facts of the advertisement and order one 
pizza per day, how long will we be able to order different 
pizzas before we are forced to order a pizza previously
ordered?
An example about reaching a conclusion about the number of 
objects in a set is given by M. Cohen and E. Nagel in An 
Introduction to Logic.  They conclude that there are at least two 
people in New York City who have the same number of hairs 
on their heads.  This conclusion was reached not through 
counting the hairs on the heads of 8 million inhabitants of the 
city, but through studies revealing that:  (1) the maximum 
number of hairs on the human scalp could never be as many as 
5,000 per square centimeter, and (2) the maximum area of the 
human scalp could never reach 1,000 square centimeters.  We 
can now conclude that no human head could contain even
 
5,000 
 1,000 = 5,000,000
hairs.  Since this number is less than the population of New 
York City, it follows that at least two New Yorkers must have 
the same number of hairs on their heads!
12.4  Rubik’s Cube and Instant Insanity
This optional section discusses two famous puzzles, the Instant Insanity and Rubik’s
Cube puzzles.* If you are not familiar with these fascinating puzzles, check them out on
the web. You can reach them via www.mathnature.com.
Rubik’s Cube
In the summer of 1974, a Hungarian architect invented a three-dimensional object
that could rotate about all three axes (sounds impossible, doesn’t it?). He wrote up
the details of the cube and obtained a patent in 1975. The cube is now known world-
wide as Rubik’s cube. In case you have not seen one of these cubes, it is shown in
Figure 12.4.
Rubik’s Cube:
www.schubart.net/rc/
*The term Rubik’s Cube is a trademark of Ideal Toy Corporation, Hollis, New York. The term Rubik’s cube as used in this
book means the cube puzzle sold under any trademark. “Instant Insanity” is a trademark of Parker Brothers, Inc.
First aired on national television on November 8, 1993.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 12.4
Rubik’s Cube and Instant Insanity
599
When you purchase the cube, it is arranged so that each face is showing a different
color, but after a few turns it seems next to impossible to return to the start. In fact, the
manufacturer claims there are 
possible arrangements, of which there is
only one correct solution. This claim is incorrect; there are 2,048 possible solutions
among the 
claimed arrangements (actually, 
). This
means there is one solution for each 
(actually 43,252,003,274,489,856,000)
arrangements.
4.3 3 1019
8.85801027 3 1022
8.86 3 1022
8.86 3 1022
Historical
The puzzle known as Rubik’s 
Cube was designed by Ernö Rubik,
an architect and teacher in
Budapest, Hungary. It was also
invented independently by Terutoshi
Ishige, an engineer in Japan. Both
applied for patents in the mid-
1970s. The cubes were first manu-
factured in Hungary. In 1978, a
Hungarian mathematics professor
brought several with him to the
International Congress of
Mathematics in Helsinki, Finland.
This formally introduced the cube to
Europe and the rest of the world.
They have been widely available in
the United States since 1980. They
are often used today in mathematics
classes to illustrate mathematical
ideas, particularly in group theory.
NOTE
R
F
T
R
F
T
F
R
a. Rotate the top
right corner with
the right face.
b. Rotate the top
right corner with
the front face.
c. Rotate the top
right corner with
the top face.
R
F
T
Watch this cube
FIGURE 12.4 Rubik’s cube
Example
1
How long to solve a Rubik’s cube?
If it took you one-half second for each arrangement, how long would it take you to move
the cube into all arrangements?
Solution
4.3 
Arrangements
2.15 
Divide by 2 for the number of seconds.
3.58 
Divide by 60 for the number of minutes.
5.97 
Divide by 60 for the number of hours.
2.49 
Divide by 24 for the number of days.
6.81  1011
Divide by 365.25 for the number of years.
6.81  109
Divide by 100 for the number of centuries.
6.81  108
Divide by 10 for the number of millennia.
Our problem ends here because it would require over 681,000,000 millennia! If a high-
speed computer listed 1,000,000 arrangements per minute, it would take over 80,000
millennia to print out the possibilities. Remember, it has been only 2 millennia since
Christ!
1014
1015
1017
1019
1019
Let’s consider what we call the standard-position cube, as shown in Figure 12.5. La-
bel the faces Front (F), Right (R), Left (L), Back (B), Top (T), and Under (U), as shown.
Hold the cube in your left hand with T up and F toward you so that L is against your left
palm. Now describe the results of the moves in Example 2.
U
B
L
R
F
T
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
FIGURE 12.5 Standard-position
Rubik’s Cube
Bettmann/CORBIS
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

600
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
Now, a rearrangement of the 54 colored faces of a small cube is a permutation. We
discussed permutations of a square in Problem 60, Section 5.6, at which time we called
them symmetries of a square.
Instant Insanity
An older puzzle, simpler than Rubik’s cube, is called Instant Insanity. It provides four
cubes colored red, white, blue, and green, as indicated in Figure 12.6. The puzzle is to as-
semble them into a 
block so that all four colors appear on each side of the block.
1 3 1 3 4
R
G
B
Y
R
G
B
Y
B
Example
2
Rubik’s cube moves
a. Rotate the right face 90 clockwise; denote this move by R. Return the cube to stan-
dard position; we denote this move by R1. 
b. Rotate the right face 180 clockwise; denote this by R2. Return the cube to standard
position by doing another R2. Notice that R2R2  R4, which returns the cube to stan-
dard position.
c. Rotate the top 90º clockwise; call this T. Return the cube by doing T 1.
d. TR means rotate the top face 90 clockwise, then rotate the right face 90º clockwise.
Describe the steps necessary to return the cube to standard position.
Solution
a.
b.
c.
d.
To return this cube to standard
position, you need 
.
R21T21
F
R
U
F
R
B
R
R
B
R
R
B
R
R
U
F
F
U
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
R
T
T
F
F
L
L
T
B
T
T
B
L
F
B
R
T
B
B
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
L
L
L
T
F
R
B
U
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
F
F
B
F
F
B
F
F
T
T
U
T
T
U
T
T
F
F
T
T
B
T
R
U
F
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
F
F
U
F
F
U
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
B
B
°
°
°
Example
3
How long to solve Instant Insanity?
In how many ways can this Instant Insanity puzzle be arranged?
Solution
A common mistake is to assume that a cube can have 6 different arrangements
(because of our experience with dice). In the case of Instant Insanity, we are interested not
only in the top, but also in the other sides. There are 6 possible faces for the top and then
4 possible faces for the front. Thus, by the fundamental counting principle, there are
arrangements for one cube
6 # 4 5 24
Photo Courtesy  Kadon Enterprises,
www.game puzzles.com Invented
by  Frank Armbruster.
FIGURE 12.6 Instant Insanity
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 12.4
Rubik’s Cube and Instant Insanity
601
Now, for four cubes, again use the fundamental counting principle to find
This is not the number of different possibilities. You are asked to find that number in the
problem set.
24 # 24 # 24 # 24 5 331,776
Level  1
1. Example 3 shows that Instant Insanity has 331,776 possibilities
(not all different). If you could make one different move per
second, how long do you think it would take you to go through
all these arrangements? Estimate your answer first, then calcu-
late the correct answer.
2. Suppose a computer could print out 1,000 arrangements in
Problem 1 every minute. How long would it take for this com-
puter to print out all possibilities?
Show the result of the moves on Rubik’s cube indicated in Problems
3–29. Remember that R, F, L, B, T, and U mean rotate 90º clockwise
the right, front, left, back, top, and under faces, respectively. Use the
standard Rubik’s cube shown in Figure 12.5 as your starting point.
Consider each clockwise rotation by first turning the cube so that
the side you are rotating is facing you.
3. F
4. B
5. U
6. L
7. B1
8. F1
9. L1
10. T1
11. F2
12. T2
13. L2
14. B2
15. F3
16. R3
17. T3
18. U3
19. RL
20. TU
21. FB1
22. F1B
23. RT
24. FT
25. FT1
26. FR1
27. F5
28. U5
29. F1T1
Level  2
Determine whether each of the figures in Problems 30–37 will be a
solution to an Instant Insanity puzzle.
30.
31.
Problem Set 12.4
32. 
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
Instant Insanity:
http://mysite.verizon
.net/m5mammek/
markspuz.html
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problem Solving  3
57. Find the number of different arrangements for the Instant
Insanity blocks.
58. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
The most difficult part of
understanding a solution to Rubik’s cube is understanding the
notation used by the author in stating the solution. In one solu-
tion, the Ledbetter Nering algorithm (see the references in the
Group Research Projects), the authors describe a sequence of
moves that they call THE MAD DOG. This series of moves
can be described using our notation by
1RTF 25
Start with the standard-position cube and show the result after
carrying out THE MAD DOG.
59. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
David Singmaster, in his book Notes
on Rubik’s “Magic Cube” (see the references in the Group
Research Projects), describes a sequence of moves to put the
upper corners in place (after certain other moves). Using our
notation, this set of moves is
FU 2F 1U 2R1UR
Start with the standard-position cube and show the result after
carrying out this sequence of moves.
60. In The Simple Solution to Rubik’s Cube (see the references in
the Group Research Projects), James Nourse describes 
a process to orient the bottom corner cubes. Using our
notation, this set of moves is 
R1U1RU1R1U2RU2
Start with the standard-position cube and show the result after
carrying out this sequence of moves.
Name the move or moves that will return the Rubik’s cube to stan-
dard position after making the move shown in Problems 38–51.
38. F
39. U
40. L1
41. B1
42. T 2
43. U2
44. F 3
45. B3
46. TU
47. BU
48. FB1
49. FT 1
50. U 1T 1
51. F 1B 1
Level  3
52. Are two consecutive moves 
and 
on Rubik’s cube 
commutative; that is,

?
53. Are three consecutive moves 
, 
, and 
, associative;
that is, does
1
2  1
2
?
54. Does each move have an inverse move?
55. We saw in Example 2 that R1T 1 reversed the move
TR. Would T 1R1 also reverse the move TR? Why or
why not?
56. Does the move L1R1 reverse the move LR? Would it also
reverse the move RL? Why or why not?
M3
M1M2
M2M3
M1
M3
M2
M1
M2M1
M1M2
M2
M1
602
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
12.5
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Fundamental counting principle [12.1]
Multiplication property of factorials [12.1]
Formula for permutation [12.1]
Formula for distinguishable permutations [12.1]
Formula for combinations [12.2]
Classify and identify counting techniques [12.3]
Applications of counting (Rubik’s Cube and Instant Insanity) [12.4]
There is no problem in all
mathematics that cannot 
be solved by direct counting.
But with the present
implements of mathematics
many operations can be
performed in a few minutes
which without 
mathematical 
methods would 
take a lifetime.
ERNST MACH
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online,
you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of
problems that were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by
working the problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test help in studying
for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 12
Review Questions
Simplify each expression in Problems 1–5.
1. 8!  3!
2. 8  3!
3. 18  32!
4.
5.
Find the numerical value of each expression in 
Problems 6–10.
6.
7. 8P3
8. 12P0
9. 14C4
10. 100P3
11. In how many ways can a three-member committee be chosen
from a group of 12 people?
12. In how many ways can five people line up at a bank teller’s
window?
13. How many distinguishable permutations are there of the
letters of the words HAPPY and COLLEGE?
14. A jar contains four red and six white balls. Three balls are
drawn at random. In how many ways can at least one red ball
be drawn?
15. If the Senate is to form a new committee of five members,
in how many different ways can the committee be chosen 
if all 100 senators are available to serve on this 
committee?
16. Advertisements for Wendy’s Old Fashioned Hamburgers
claim that you can have your hamburgers 256 ways. If Wendy’s
offers catsup, onion, mustard, pickles, lettuce, tomato, mayon-
naise, and relish, is the advertisement’s claim correct? Explain
why or why not.
a5
3b
a8
2b!
a8
2b!
Section 12.5
Chapter Summary
603
Bloomberg/Getty Images
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on this book:
Escalante, The Best Teacher in America, Jay Mathews
(New York: Holt, 1988).
18. a. One variation of Instant Insanity is a puzzle with five
blocks instead of four. How many arrangements are
possible?
b. If you carry out one arrangement every second, how much
time is required to show the number of arrangements in
part a?
20. The Wednesday Luncheon Club, consisting of ten members,
decided to celebrate its first anniversary by having lunch at a
fancy restaurant. When the members arrived and were ready
to take their seats, they could not decide where to sit.
Just when they were ready to leave because of their embar-
rassment at being unable to decide how to sit around the rec-
tangular table, the manager come to the rescue and told them
to sit down just where they were standing. Then the secretary
of the club was to write down where they were sitting, and
they were to return the following day and sit in a different
order. If they continued this until they had tried all arrange-
ments, the manager would give them anything on the menu,
free of charge.
It sounded like a very good deal, so they agreed. However,
the day of the free lunch never came. Can you explain why?
17. a. A certain mathematics test consists of 10 questions. In how
many ways can the test be answered if the possible
answers are “true” and “false”?
b. Answer the question if the possible answers are “true,”
“false,” and “maybe.”
c. Answer the question if the possible answers are 1a2, 1b2,
1c2, 1d2, and 1e2; that is, the test is multiple choice.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Text not available due to copyright restrictions

Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G40. HISTORICAL QUEST
An interesting pastime began in the fall of 1939 when
Princeton University graduate student Arthur Stone from England trimmed an inch
from his American notebook sheets to fit his English binder. After folding the
trimmed-off strips, he came up with the first hexaflexagon. This led to a more inter-
esting variant known as a hexahexaflexagon, as shown in Figure 12.7.
As you “flex” your device, you can cause each of the numerals 1 through 6 to
show on one side (Figure 12.7 shows the numeral 4). For this problem you are asked
first to construct one, and then you are asked questions about your completed device.
Prepare a strip of paper as shown in Figure 12.8a. Make sure each triangle is
equilateral. Turn it over and mark the other side as shown in Figure 12.8a.
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
604
CHAPTER 12
The Nature of Counting
4
4
4
4
4
4
FIGURE 12.7 A hexahexaflexagon
1
2
2
3
1
1
2
2
3
3
B
A
2
2
2
2
3
1
1
3
B
C
D
A
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
C
D
1
3
3
3
2
2
3
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
4
5
5
5
6
4
6
6
6
4
4
5
5
5
6
6
4
4
FIGURE 12.8 Construction of a hexahexaflexagon
FIGURE 12.9 To “flex” your hexahexaflexagon, pinch together two of the triangles 
(left two figures). The inner edge may then be opened with the other hand (rightmost 
picture). If the hexahexaflexagon cannot be opened, an adjacent pair of triangles is 
pinched. If it opens, turn it inside out, finding a side that was not visible before. 
Be careful not to tear the hexahexaflexagon by forcing the flex.
Starting from the left of Figure 12.8b, fold the 4 onto the 4, the 5 onto the 5, 6
onto 6, 4 onto 4, and so on. Continue by folding 1 onto the 1 from the front, by fold-
ing the 1 onto the 1 from the back, and finally by bringing the 1 up from the bottom
so that it rests on top of the 1 on the top. Your paper should look like the one shown
in Figure 12.8c and Figure 12.8d. Paste the blank onto the blank, and the result is
called a hexahexaflexagon.
With a little practice you’ll be able to “flex” your hexahexaflexagon (see Figure 12.9)
so that you can obtain a side with all 1s, another with all 2s, . . . , and another with all 6s.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
www.mathnature.com 
Section 12.5
Chapter Summary
605
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas in this chapter. You can find references
to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 12.1 Historical Quest
Write a paper on the famous Tower of Hanoi problem.
PROJECT 12.2 How can all the constructions of Euclidean geometry be done by folding
paper?
What assumptions are made when paper is folded to construct geometric figures?
What is a hexaflexagon? How many flexes are possible?
What is origami?
PROJECT 12.3 Find a solution for the Instant Insanity puzzle.
After you have become fairly proficient at “flexing,” count the number of flexes
required to obtain all six “sides.” What do you think is the fewest number of flexes
necessary to obtain all six sides?
G41. A puzzle sold under the name The Avenger is pictured in Figure 12.10.
FIGURE 12.10 The Avenger Puzzle
Douglas Engel
There are four problems posed in the article shown in the reference. Write a report
on this article.
REFERENCE: “Group Theory, Rubik’s Cube and The Avenger,” Games, June/July
1987, pp. 44–45.
G42. Consult one of the references listed below and learn to solve Rubik’s cube. Demon-
strate your skill to the class. Nourse names the following categories:
20 minutes: WHIZ
10 minutes: SPEED DEMON
5 minutes: EXPERT
3 minutes: MASTER OF THE CUBE
a. Stage a contest in front of the class to see which members of your group can com-
plete one face of a Rubik’s cube.
b. Stage a contest to see which member of your group can solve the Rubik’s cube
puzzle the fastest. Report the results to the class.
REFERENCES: Ledbetter and Nering, The Solution to Rubik’s Cube (Rohnert Park,
CA, Noah’s Ark Enterprises, 1980).
James G. Nourse, The Simple Solution to Rubik’s Cube (New York: Bantam Books,
1981).
David Singmaster, Notes on Rubik’s “Magic Cube,” 5th ed. (Hillside, NJ: Enslow
Publishers, 1980).
Bradford Kelley, Wallingford Toy Works
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
13.1 Introduction to 
Probability
607
Terminology, probability, probabilities 
of unions and intersections
13.2 Mathematical 
Expectation
618
Expected value, expectation with 
a cost of playing
13.3 Probability Models
627
Complementary probabilities, odds,
conditional probability
13
Outline
What in the World?
“Probability is the mathematics of uncertainty,”
proclaimed Kevin.
“Wait a minute,” interrupted Sammy. “I thought
that mathematics was absolute and that there was
no uncertainty about it!”
“Well, Sammy, suppose you are playing a game
of MonopolyTM. Do you know which property you’ll
land on for your next turn?” asked Kevin.
“No, but neither do you!”
“That’s right, but mathematics can tell us where
you are most likely to land. There is nothing uncer-
tain about probability; rather, probability is a way of
describing uncertainty. For example, what is the
probability of tossing a coin and obtaining heads?”
“That’s easy; it’s one half,” answers Sammy.
“Right, but why do you say it is one-half?” (See
Problem 48 in Problem Set 13.1.)
Overview
We see examples of probability every day. Weather fore-
casts, stock market analyses, contests, children’s games, po-
litical polls, game shows, and gambling all involve ideas of
probability. Probability is the mathematics of uncertainty.
If you have ever played the lottery (hundreds of billions
are wagered legally each year) or bought a life insurance
policy, you have indirectly used probability. Animals and
plants are bred to enhance certain traits to be passed through
generations, and these breeding techniques are directed by
the probability of genetics. Research in human inherited dis-
eases such as cystic fibrosis, sickle-cell anemia, and Hunt-
ington’s disease involves probability.
In this chapter, we’ll investigate the definition of proba-
bility and some of the procedures for dealing with probability.
THE NATURE 
OF PROBABILITY
13.4 Calculated Probabilities
636
Keno games, independent events,
probability of an intersection, probabil-
ity of a union, drawing with and with-
out replacement, tree diagrams
13.5 The Binomial 
Distribution
648
Random variables, binomial
experiments
13.6 Chapter Summary
655
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
Austin MacRae
     Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.1
Introduction to Probability
607
13.1
Introduction to Probability
It is a truth very certain that, when it is not in our power to 
determine what is true, we ought to follow what is most probable.
RENÉ DESCARTES
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
A
Y
4
C
V
8
E
S
12
G
?
16
Example
1
Find a sample space
Suppose a researcher wishes to study how the color of a child’s eyes is related to the
parents’ eye color.
a. List the sample space.
b. Give an example of a simple event.
c. Give an example of an impossible event.
Solution
a. The sample space is a listing of all possible eye colors: {green, blue, brown, hazel}.
b. A simple event is an event with only one element, say {blue}.
c. An impossible event is one that is empty, say, {purple}.
The next example involves a die, which is a cube showing six faces marked 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, and 6. If an outcome of an experiment has the same chance of occurring as any other
outcome, then they are said to be equally likely outcomes.
Example
2
Find a sample space and list events
a. What is the sample space for the experiment of tossing a coin and then rolling a die?
b. List the following events for the sample space in part a:
Which of these (if any) are simple events?
 X 5 5rolling a six and tossing a tail6
 H 5 5tossing a head6
 E 5 5rolling an even number on the die6
Terminology
An experiment is an observation of any physical occurrence. The sample space of an
experiment is the set of all its possible outcomes. An event is a subset of the sample
space. If an event is the empty set, it is called the impossible event; and if it has only one
element, it is called a simple event.
In this chapter, we introduce the mathematics that describes the likelihood of some event
whose occurrence may not be certain. We begin by introducing some necessary terminology.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
A coin is considered fair if the outcomes of head and tail are equally likely.
We also note that a fair die is one for which the outcomes from rolling it are equally
likely. A die for which one outcome is more likely than the others is called a loaded die.
In this book, we will assume fair dice and fair coins unless otherwise noted.
a. You can visualize the sample space as shown in Figure 13.1. If the sample space is
small, it is sometimes worthwhile to make a direct listing, as shown in Figure 13.1.
Sometimes, it is helpful to build sample spaces by using a tree diagram:
We see that S (the sample space) is
b. An event must be a subset of the sample space. Notice that E, H, and X are all sub-
sets of S. Therefore,
X is a simple event because it has only one element.
 X 5 5T66
 H 5 5H1, H2, H3, H4, H5, H66
 E 5 5H2, H4, H6, T2, T4, T66
S 5 5H1, H2, H3, H4, H5, H6, T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, T66
Heads
Tails
Start
608
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
FIGURE 13.1 Sample
space for tossing a coin
and rolling a die
Two events E and F are said to be mutually exclusive if 
, that is, they
cannot both occur simultaneously.
E d F 5 [
Example
3
Sample space for rolling a die
Suppose that you perform an experiment of rolling a die. Find the sample space, and
then let 
and 
. Which of these
are mutually exclusive?
Solution
The sample space for a single die is shown in Figure 13.2.
H 5 52, 46
E 5 51, 3, 56, F 5 52, 4, 66, G 5 51, 3, 66,
FIGURE 13.2 Sample space for a single die
The sample space is found by looking at the spots on top:
Evidently,
E and F are mutually exclusive, since 
.
G and H are mutually exclusive, since 
E and H are mutually exclusive, since 
.
E d H 5 [
G d H 5 [.
E d F 5 [
S 5 51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 66
But
F and H are not mutually exclusive.
G and F are not mutually exclusive.
E and G are not mutually exclusive.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Probability
A probabilistic model deals with situations that are random in character and attempts to
predict the outcomes of events with a certain stated or known degree of accuracy. For ex-
ample, if we toss a coin, it is impossible to predict in advance whether the outcome will
be a head or a tail. Our intuition tells us that it is equally likely to be a head or a tail, and
somehow we sense that if we repeat the experiment of tossing a coin a large number of
times, a head will occur “about half the time.” To check this out, I recently flipped a coin
1,000 times and obtained 460 heads and 540 tails. The percentage of heads is
, which is called the relative frequency. If an experiment is repeated n
times and an event occurs m times, then
is called the relative frequency of the event
Our task is to create a model that will assign a number p, called the probability of an
event, which will predict the relative frequency. This means that for a sufficiently large
number of repetitions of an experiment,
Probabilities can be obtained in one of three ways:
1. Empirical probabilities (also called a posteriori models) are obtained from experi-
mental data. For example, an assembly line producing brake assemblies for General
Motors produces 1,500 items per day. The probability of a defective brake can be
obtained by experimentation. Suppose the 1,500 brakes are tested and 3 are found to be
defective.Then the empirical probability is the relative frequency of occurrence, namely,
2. Theoretical probabilities (also called a priori models) are obtained by logical
reasoning according to stated definitions. For example, the probability of rolling a die
and obtaining a 3 is , because there are six possible outcomes, each with an equal 
chance of occurring, so a 3 should appear 
of the time.
3. Subjective probabilities are obtained by experience and indicate a measure of
“certainty”on the part of the speaker. These probabilities are not necessarily arrived at
through experimentation or theory. For example, a dad says to his daughter, “After
that outburst the probability that you will go to the dance is almost 
.”
Our focus in this chapter is on theoretical probabilities, but we should keep in mind
that our theoretical model should be predictive of the results obtained by experimentation
(empirical probabilities); if they are not consistent, and we have been careful about our
record keeping in arriving at an empirical probability, we would conclude that our theo-
retical model is faulty. The reason for this conclusion is called the law of large numbers.
0%
1
6 < 17%
1
6
3
1,500 5 0.002 or 0.2%
p < m
n
m
n
460
1,000 5 0.46 5 46%
Section 13.1
Introduction to Probability
609
Historical
Sophie Germain 
(1776–1831)
Sophie Germain is one of the first
women recorded in the history of
mathematics. She did original
mathematical research in number
theory. In her time, women were
not admitted to first-rate universi-
ties and were not, for the most
part, taken seriously, so she wrote
at first under the pseudonym
LeBlanc. The situation is not too
different from that portrayed by
Barbra Streisand in the movie
Yentl. Even though Germain’s
most important research was in
number theory, she was awarded
the prize of the French Academy
for a paper entitled “Memoir on
the Vibrations of Elastic Plates.”
NOTE
Karl Smith library
As an experiment is repeated more and more times, the empirical probability (that is,
the proportion of outcomes favorable to any particular event) will tend to come closer
and closer to the theoretical probability of that event.
Law of Large Numbers
Life is a school of
probability.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This law of large numbers keeps us “honest” in maintaining our records and in setting up
models for finding the theoretical probability.
The simplest probability model makes certain assumptions about the sample space.
If the sample space can be divided into mutually exclusive and equally likely outcomes,
we can define the probability of an event. Let’s consider the experiment of tossing a sin-
gle coin. A suitable sample space is
Suppose we wish to consider the event of obtaining heads; we’ll call this event A. Then
and this is a simple event.
We wish to define the probability of event A, which we denote by P(A). Notice that
the outcomes in the sample space are mutually exclusive; that is, if one occurs, the other
cannot occur. If we flip a coin, there are two possible outcomes, and one and only one
outcome can occur on a toss. If each outcome in the sample space is equally likely, we
define the probability of A as
A “successful” result is a result that corresponds to the event whose probability we are
seeking—in this case, {heads}. Since we can obtain a head (success) in only one way, and
the total number of possible outcomes is two, the probability of heads is given by this
definition as
P(heads)
This must correspond to the empirical results you would obtain if you repeated the experiment
a large number of times. In Problem 48, you are asked to repeat this experiment 100 times.
5 P1A2 5 1
2
P1A2 5 number of successful results
number of possible results
A 5 5heads6
S 5 5heads, tails6
610
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
www.mathnature.com
has a link to an interactive
coin-flipping site.
Fred Lyon/Photo Researchers, Inc.
Heads, I win; tails,
you lose.
17th century -
English saying
If an experiment can result in any of n mutually exclusive and 
equally likely outcomes, and if s of these outcomes are considered
favorable, then the probability of an event E, denoted by P(E), is
P1E2 5 s
n 5 number of outcomes favorable to E
number of all possible outcomes
Probability
Example
4
Find the probability of a spinner event
Use the definition of probability to find first the probability of white and second the
probability of black, using the spinner shown and assuming that the arrow will never lie
on a border line.
Solution
Looking at the spinner, we note that it is divided into three areas of the same
size. We assume that the spinner is equally likely to land in any of these three areas.
P(white)
d Two sections are white.
d Three sections all together
P(black)
d One section is black.
d Three sections all together
These are theoretical probabilities.
5 1
3
5 2
3
This is the basic definition
for this chapter.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.1
Introduction to Probability
611
Example
5
Find the probability of drawing from an urn
Consider a jar that contains marbles as shown in Figure 13.3. Suppose that each marble
has an equal chance of being picked from the jar. Find:
a. P(blue)
b. P(green)
c. P(yellow)
Solution
a. P(blue)
d 4 blue marbles in jar
d 12 marbles in jar
Reduce fractions.
This is a theoretical probability; also note that the probabilities of all the simple events
sum to
1
3 1 7
12 1 1
12 5 1
 5 1
3
5 4
12
FIGURE 13.3 Marbles in jar
P(green)
P(yellow) 5 1
12
5 7
12
b.
c.
Reduced fractions are used to state probabilities when the fractions are fairly simple.
If, however, the fractions are not simple and you have a calculator, it is acceptable to state
the probabilities as decimals, as shown in Example 6.
Example
6
Find an empirical probability
Suppose that, in a certain study, 46 out of 155 people showed a certain kind of behavior.
Assign a probability to this behavior.
Solution
P(behavior shown)
This is an empirical probability because it was arrived at through experimentation.
5 46
155 < 0.30
Example
7
Select the better spinner
Consider two spinners as shown in Figure 13.4
7
5
4
A
1
8
6
B
FIGURE 13.4 Two spinners
You and an opponent are to spin a spinner simultaneously, and the one with the higher
number wins. Which spinner should you choose, and why?
Solution
We begin by listing the sample space:
AB
1
6
8
4
(4, 1)
(4, 6)
(4, 8)
The times that A wins are highlighted.
5
(5, 1)
(5, 6)
(5, 8)
7
(7, 1)
(7, 6)
(7, 8)
We would choose spinner B because it has a greater probability of winning.
P1A wins2 5 4
9; P1B wins2 5 5
9
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

612
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
The following example uses two dice (plural form of die, which is a common ran-
domizing device).
Example
8
Probability of drawing a card
Suppose that a single card is selected from an ordinary deck of 52 cards. Find:
a. P(ace)
b. P(heart)
c. P(face card)
Solution
The sample space for a deck of cards is shown in Figure 12.2, page 584.
a. An ace is a card with one spot.
P(ace)
b. P(heart)
c. P(face card)
d A face card is a jack, queen, or king.
d Number of cards in the sample space
 5 3
13
5 12
52
5 13
52 5 1
4
5 4
52 5 1
13
Example
9
Find the probability of landing on a RR in Monopoly
Suppose you are just beginning a game of Monopoly. (See “What in the World?” at the
beginning of this chapter.) You roll a pair of dice. What is the probability that you land
on a railroad on the first roll of the dice?
Solution
You need to know the locations of the railroads on a Monopoly board. There
are four railroads, which are positioned so that only one can be reached on one roll of a
pair of dice. The required number to roll is a 5. We begin by listing the sample space.
You might try {2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 11, 12}, but these possible outcomes are not
equally likely, which you can see by considering a tree diagram. The roll of the first die has
6 possibilities, and then each of these in turn can combine with any of 6 possibilities on the
second die, for a total of 36 possibilities. The sample space is summarized in Figure 13.5.
Irving Hertzel, a pro-
fessor from Iowa
State, used a com-
puter to find the
most probable
squares on which
you can land in the
game of MonopolyTM.
1. Illinois Avenue
2. Go
3. B.&O. Railroad
4. Free Parking
See Group Research
Project G43 for
some questions
based on Monopoly.
FIGURE 13.5 Sample space for a pair of dice
Otto van Eersel
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Thus, 
for the definition of probability. We need to look at Figure 13.5 to see
how many possibilities there are for obtaining a 5. We find (1, 4) (2, 3) (3, 2), and (4, 1),
so 
. Then
P(five)
d 4 ways to obtain a 5 
d 36 ways to roll a pair of dice
5 1
9
5 4
36
s 5 4
n 5 36
Section 13.1
Introduction to Probability
613
You should use Figure 13.5 when working probability problems dealing with rolling
a pair of dice. You will be asked to perform an experiment (Problem 49) in which you roll
a pair of dice 100 times and then compare the results you obtain with the probabilities
you calculate by using Figure 13.5.
When using the definition of probability, you must be careful not to overlook the
restrictions on s and n. The requirement that the elements listed in the sample space
are mutually exclusive simply means that each outcome of the experiment will be
counted in only one category (that is easy). The importance of the second part of the
restriction, that the n possible outcomes are equally likely, is evident in Example 9. If
we roll a pair of dice and list the outcomes as 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, we
note these are not equally likely possibilities and do not lead to the correct theoretical
probabilities. If we use the sample space in Figure 13.5 for a pair of dice, we note
these are equally likely possibilities, so these 36 possibilities are used for n when
rolling a pair of dice. The following example illustrates the importance of looking at
the correct sample space.
Example 10 Probability of a winning by switching doors
A contest game show has a large prize hidden behind one of three doors. There is a
small joke prize behind each of the other doors. You are asked to pick one of the three
doors, and then the emcee opens a different door to reveal a small joke prize. You are
then asked if you want to stick with your initial choice or switch to the remaining door.
You win whatever is behind the door of your choice. If you switch, what is your proba-
bility of winning the big prize?
Hatos-Hall Productions
There is a similar but dif-
ferent problem, known as
the “Monty Hall Dilemma.”
An interactive link for this
variation can be found at
www.mathnature.com.
Solution
It is an error to reason as follows: the probability of winning the large
prize is 
because there are two prizes left, one large and one small, so the sample
space has two possibilities, one of which is success. If you reason this way, you are
not considering equally likely possibilities in the sample space. (Problem 54 gives an
empirical experiment to illustrate this fact.) Here is a correct arrangement of the
sample space.
50%
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Player Choice
Emcee Choice
Switch and win
You picked a door hiding small prize #1.
The emcee must select the other small prize.
Switch and win
You picked a door hiding small prize #2.
The emcee must select the other small prize.
Switch and lose
You picked a door hiding the big prize.
The emcee can select either of the other doors.
Thus, we see if you switch, 
and if you don’t switch, 
Thus, the correct choice is to switch.
P1big prize2 5 1
3.
P1big prize2 5 2
3
614
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
We know that a probability of is greater than a probability . But we might seek
to find the smallest and largest probabilities. The probability of the empty set is 0,
which means that the event cannot occur. In the problem set, you will be asked to show
that the probability of an event that must occur is 1. These are the two extremes. All
other probabilities fall somewhere in between. The closer a probability is to 1, the
more likely the event is to occur; the closer a probability is to 0, the less likely the
event is to occur.
If the probability you are finding has a sample space that is easy to count, and if all
simple events in the sample space are equally likely, then there is a simple procedure that
we can use to find probabilities.
1
3
2
3
P(Ø) 
 0
P(S) 
 1
impossible even chance
certain
0
0.5
1
If the experiment you are finding has a sample space that is easy to count, and if all
simple events in the sample space are equally likely, then use the following steps to
find the probability of an event of interest:
Step 1
Describe and identify the sample space, S. The number of elements in S is n.
Step 2
Count the number of occurrences that satisfy E, the event of interest (we
call this success); denote it by s.
Step 3
Compute the probability of the event using the formula
P1E2 5 s
n
Finding Probabilities by Counting
Pay attention to this
procedure; it will suffice
for much of what you will
do in this chapter.
Keep in mind that this procedure does not apply to every situation. If it doesn’t, you need
a more complicated model, or else you must proceed experimentally.
Example 11 Comparing or and and
Suppose that a single card is selected from an ordinary deck of cards.
a. What is the probability that it is a two or a king? (See Figure 13.6a.)
b. What is the probability that it is a two or a heart? (See Figure 13.6b.)
Probabilities of Unions and Intersections
The word or is translated as ´ (union), and the word and is translated as 
(intersec-
tion). We will find the probabilities of compound events involving the words or and and
by finding unions and intersections of events.
d
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.1
Introduction to Probability
615
c. What is the probability that it is a two and a heart?
d. What is the probability that it is a two and a king?
Solution
a. P(two or a king) 5 P(two ´ king). Look at Figure 12.2, p. 584. if you are not famil-
iar with a deck of cards.
two 5 two of hearts, two of spades, two of diamonds, two of clubs
king 5 king of hearts, king of spades, king of diamonds, king of clubs
two ´ king 5 two of hearts, two of spades, two of diamonds, two of clubs, king
of hearts, king of spades, king of diamonds, king of clubs
There are 8 possibilities for success. It is usually not necessary to list all of these pos-
sibilities to know that there are 8 possibilities (four twos and four kings):
P two ´ king
b. This seems to be very similar to part a, but there is one important difference. Look at
the sample space and notice that although there are 4 twos and 13 hearts, the total
number ofsuccesses is not 
, but rather 16.
two 5 two of hearts, two of spades, two of diamonds, two of clubs
two ´ heart 5 two of hearts, two of spades, two of diamonds, two of clubs, 
ace of hearts, three of hearts, four of hearts, five of hearts, six of
hearts, seven of hearts, eight of hearts, nine of hearts, ten of
hearts, jack of hearts, queen of hearts, king of hearts .
It is not necessary to list these possibilities. The purpose of doing so in this case was
to reinforce the fact that there are actually 16 (not 17) possibilities. In Chapter 2, we
found the cardinality of a union, which we now use for two ´ hearts :
´ 
Thus, we see
P two ´ heart
c. For this part, we seek 
so there is one element in the
intersection:
P two d heart
d. Finally, 
, so there are no elements in the intersection:
P two d king 5 0
52 5 0
2
1
two d king 5 [
5 1
52
2
1
two d heart 5 5two of hearts6
5 16
52 5 4
13
2
1
 5 16
 5 4 1 13 2 1
 H0 5 0T0 1 0H0 2 0T d H0
 0T
0
0
6
5
heart 5 5ace of hearts, two of hearts, three of hearts, c, king of hearts6
6
5
4 1 13 5 17
5 8
52 5 2
13
2
1
6
5
6
5
6
5
a. Mutually exclusive events
b. Not mutually exclusive
FIGURE 13.6 Finding probabilities
Kings
Twos
Twos
Hearts
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

616
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the difference between
empirical and theoretical probabilities?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Define probability.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Write a simple argument to convince
someone why all probabilities must be between 0 and 1
(including 0 and 1).
For the spinners in Problems 4–7, assume that the pointer can
never lie on a border line.
4. a. P(A)
b. P(B)
c. P(C)
5. a. P(D)
b. P(E)
c. P(F)
6. a. P(G)
b. P(H)
c. P(I)
7. a. P(J)
b. P(G or H)
c. P(I or J)
Give the probabilities in Problems 8–11 in decimal form (correct
to two decimal places). A calculator may be helpful with these
problems.
8. Last year, 1,485 calculators were returned to the manufacturer.
If 85,000 were produced, assign a number to specify the proba-
bility that a particular calculator would be returned.
9. Last semester, a certain professor gave 13 A’s out of
285 grades. If one of the 285 students is to be selected at
random, what is the probability that his or her grade is an A?
10. Last year in Ferndale, California, it rained on 75 days. What is
the probability of rain on a day selected at random?
11. The campus vets club is having a raffle and is selling
1,500 tickets. If the people on your floor of the dorm bought
285 of those tickets, what is the probability that someone on
your floor will hold the winning ticket?
12. Consider the jar containing marbles shown in Figure 13.7.
Suppose each marble has an equal chance of being picked
from the jar. 
FIGURE 13.7 A jar of marbles
Find:
a. P(yellow)
b. P(blue)
c. P(green)
A
C
B
D
F
E
G
J
I
H
Poker is a common game in which players are dealt five cards from
a deck of cards. It can be shown that there are 2,598,960 different
possible poker hands. The winning hands (from highest to lowest)
are shown in Table 13.1. Find the requested probabilities in Prob-
lems 13–22. Use a calculator, and show your answers to whatever
accuracy possible on your calculator.
Problem Set 13.1
4 hands
Other straight 
36 hands
Four of a kind
624 hands
Full house
3,744 hands
Flush
5,108 hands
Straight
10,200 hands
Three of a kind
54,912 hands
Two pair
123,552 hands
One pair
1,098,240 hands
Other hands
1,302,540 hands
Poker Hands*
TABLE 13.1
13. P(royal flush)
14. P(other straight flush)
15. P(four of a kind)
16. P(full house)
17. P(flush)
18. P(straight)
*All of these probabilities are mutually exclusive. That is, the 36 straight flushes do
not include the 4 royal flushes, and the 5,108 flush hands do not include the better
hands of straight flush or royal flush.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.1
Introduction to Probability
617
19. P(three of a kind)
20. P(two pair)
21. P(one pair)
22. P(no pair or better)
Level 2
A single card is selected from an ordinary deck of cards. 
The same space is shown in Figure 12.2. Find the probabilities in
Problems 23–26.
23. a. P(five of clubs)
b. P(five)
c. P(club)
24. a. P(jack)
b. P(spade) 
c. P(jack of spades)
25. a. P(five and a jack)
b. P(five or a jack)
26. a. P(heart and a jack)
b. P(heart or a jack)
Suppose that you toss a coin and roll a die in Problems 27–30. The
sample space is shown in Figure 13.1. 
27. What is the probability of obtaining:
a. Tails and a five?
b. Tails or a five?
c. Heads and a two?
28. What is the probability of obtaining:
a. Tails?
b. Heads or a two?
c. One, two, three, or four?
29. What is the probability of obtaining:
a. Heads and an odd number?
b. Heads or an odd number?
30. What is the probability of obtaining:
a. Heads and a five?
b. Heads or a five?
Use the sample space shown in Figure 13.5 to find the probabilities
in Problems 31–39 for the experiment of rolling a pair of dice. 
31. P(five)
32. P(six)
33. P(seven)
34. P(eight)
35. P(nine)
36. P(two)
37. P(four or five)
38. P(even)
39. P(eight or ten)
Suppose you and an opponent each pick one of the spinners shown
here. A “win” means spinning a higher number. Construct a
sample space to answer each question, and tell which of the two
spinners given in Problems 40–47 you would choose in each case.
3
5
A
6
1
B
4
2
C
7
8
1
D
4
5
6
E
2
3
9
F
40. A plays B
41. A plays C
42. B plays C
43. D plays E
44. E plays F
45. D plays F
46. B plays D
47. F plays C
Level 3
Perform the experiments in Problems 48–51, tally your results, and
calculate the probabilities (to the nearest hundredth).
48. Toss a coin 100 times. 
Make sure that, each time the coin is flipped, it rotates
several times in the air and lands on a table or on the floor.
Keep a record of the results of this experiment. Based on
your experiment, what is P(heads)?
49. Roll a pair of dice 100 times. Keep a record of the results. Based
on your experiment, find:
a. P(two) 
b. P(three) 
c. P(four) 
d. P(five) 
e. P(six) 
f. P(seven) 
g. P(eight) 
h. P(nine)
i. P(ten) 
j. P(eleven) 
k. P(twelve)
50. Flip three coins simultaneously 100 times, and note the results.
The possible outcomes are:
a. three heads
b. two heads and one tail
c. two tails and one head
d. three tails
Based on your experiment, find the probabilities of each of
these events. Do these appear to be equally likely?
51. Simultaneously toss a coin and roll a die 100 times, and note
the outcome of each trial. The possible outcomes are H1, H2,
H3, H4, H5, H6, T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, and T6. Do these appear
to be equally likely outcomes?
52. Suppose it is certain that an earthquake will occur someday.
What is the probability (to the nearest percent) that it will
occur while you are at work? Assume you are at work 
8 hours per day, 240 days per year.
53. Suppose it is certain that an earthquake will occur someday.
What is the probability (to the nearest percent) that it will
occur while you are at school? Assume you are at school 
5 hours per day, 174 days per year.
54. Prepare three cards that are identical except for the
color. One card is black on both sides, one is white on both
sides, and one is black on one side and white on the other. 
Black on
both sides
Black on
one side,
white on
the other
White on
both sides
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

618
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
One side of one card is selected at random and placed flat on
the table. You will see either a black or a white card; record the
color of the face (the top). This is not the event with which we
are concerned; rather, we are interested in finding the probabil-
ity of the other side (the side you cannot see) being black or
white. Record the underside, as shown in the following table.
Repeat the experiment 50 times and find the probability of
occurrence with respect to the known color. Do these appear 
to be equally likely outcomes?
56. In dice, a pair of ones is called snake eyes. What is the
probability of losing a dice game by rolling snake eyes?
57. Consider a die with only four sides, marked one, two, three,
and four.
a. Write out a sample space similar to the one in Figure 13.5 for
rolling a pair of these dice.
Assuming equally likely outcomes, find the probability that the
sum of the dice is the given number.
b. P(two)
c. P(three)
d. P(four)
e. P(five)
f. P(six)
g. P(seven)
58. The game of Dungeons and Dragons uses nonstandard
dice. Consider a die with eight sides marked one, two, three,
four, five, six, seven, and eight. Write a sample space similar to
the one in Figure 13.5 for rolling a pair of these dice.
Problem Solving  3
59. A mad scientist has captured you and is showing you around his
foul-smelling laboratory. He motions to an opaque, formalin-
filled jar. “This jar contains one organ, either a kidney or a brain,”
he cheerily informs you. His voice seems an octave too high as
he gives you a twisted leer. You watch as the madman grabs a
brain lying on his worktable and drops it into the jar as well. He
then shakes the jar and quickly withdraws a single organ. It
proves to be a brain. He turns to you and says, “What is now the
chance of removing another brain?” Fearing that the scientist
might remove your brain in his next ghoulish experiment, you
want to give him the right answer. What is your response?*
60. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
This question is to test your intuition.
Read the following exercises (do not carry out the experiment).
A. Open a phone book to any page in the white pages.
Select 100 consecutive phone numbers and tally the
number of times each of the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9 occurs as a first digit.
B. Repeat A for the third digit.
C. Repeat A for the last digit.
a. Do you think the occurrence of each digit will be about the
same for each of these experiments?
b. Do you think the results of all three experiments will be
about the same?
c. Now, after answering parts a and b, carry out the
experiments described in A, B, and C. 
*Problem by Clifford A. Pick over from Discover®, published by Walt Disney Maga-
zine Publishing Group Inc., March 1997, p. 94. Reprinted with permission.
Color
Outcome 
of Face
Frequency
(Underside Color)
Probability
White
White
Black
Black
White
Black
55. Dice is a popular game in gambling casinos. Two dice are tossed,
and various amounts are paid according to the outcome. 
If a seven or eleven occurs on the first roll, the player wins.
a. What is the probability of winning on the first roll?
b. The player loses if the outcome of the first roll is a two, three,
or twelve. What is the probability of losing on the first roll?
13.2
Mathematical Expectation
One of the best ways to understand the idea of probability is to associate it with a possi-
ble “payoff” if a certain event occurs. You and a friend flip a coin to see who pays for the
coffee you buy each morning, or you purchase a lottery ticket hoping to wind the “big
spin”; these are obvious examples of payoffs associated with certain events. However,
purchasing an insurance policy and deciding which realtor to use to sell your property are
also examples of this same idea.
B.C. By permission of Johnny Hart and Creators Syndicate, Inc. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Expected Value
Choke-up toothpaste is giving away 
. All you must do to have a chance to win is
send a postcard with your name on it (the fine print says you do not need to buy a tube of
toothpaste). Is it worthwhile to enter?
Suppose the contest receives 1 million postcards (a conservative estimate). We wish to
compute the expected value (or your expectation) of winning this contest. We find the ex-
pectation for this contest by multiplying the amount to win by the probability of winning:
EXPECTATION  (AMOUNT TO WIN)  (PROBABILITY OF WINNING)
What does this expected value mean? It means that if you were to play this “game” 
a large number of times, you would expect your average winnings per game to be 
.
$0.01
5 $0.01
5 $10,000 3
1
1,000,000
$10,000
Section 13.2
Mathematical Expectation
619
© Topps Chewing Gum, Inc.
www.wackypackages.org
A game is said to be fair if the expected value is 0. If the
expected value is positive, then the game is in your
favor; and if the expected value is negative, then the
game is not in your favor.
Fair Game
Is the “Choke-up toothpaste giveaway” game fair? If the toothpaste company charges you
1¢ to play the game, then it is fair. But how much does the postcard cost? If you include
this cost, then there is a negative expectation. We see that this is not a fair game.
Example
1
Find the expected value for drawing a card
Suppose that you draw a card from a deck of cards and are paid $10 if it is an ace. What
is the expected value?
Solution
EXPECTATION 5 $10 3 4
52 < $0.77
Since expected value
involves a dollar amount,
round your answer to
the nearest cent.
Example
2
Find the expectation for a contest
A recent contest offered one grand prize worth 
, two second prizes worth 
each, and ten third prizes worth 
each. What is the expected value if you assume
that there are 1 million entries and you can win only one prize?
Solution
P(1st prize) 
P(2nd prize) 
P(3rd prize) 
EXPECTATION
 5 $0.03
 5 $0.01 1 $0.01 1 $0.01
5 $10,000 3
1
1,000,000 1 $5,000 3
2
1,000,000 1 $1,000 3
10
1,000,000
10
1,000,000
2
1,000,000;
1
1,000,000;
$1,000
$5,000
$10,000
amount of 1st prize
2nd prize
s
x
P(1st prize)
3rd prize
t
x
Sometimes there is more than one payoff, and we define the expected value (or expecta-
tion) as the sum of the expected values from each separate payoff.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

You can use mathematical expectation to help you make a decision, as suggested by
the following example.
620
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
Example
3
Select the best game to play
You are offered two games:
Game A: Two dice are rolled. You will be paid 
if you roll two ones, and will
not receive anything for any other outcome.
Game B: Two dice are rolled. You will be paid 
if you roll any pair, but you
must pay 
for any other outcome.
Which game should you play?
Solution
You might say, “I’ll play the first game because, if I play that game, I can-
not lose anything.” This strategy involves minimizing your losses. On the other hand,
you can use a strategy that maximizes your winnings. In this book, we will base our
decisions on maximizing the winnings. That is, we wish to select the game that provides
the larger expectation.
Game A: EXPECTATION
Game B: When calculating the expected value with a charge (a loss), write that
charge as a negative number (a negative payoff is a loss).
EXPECTATION
This means that, if you were to play each game 100 times, you would expect your win-
nings for Game A to be 
or about 
and those from playing Game B to be
or about 
. You should choose to play Game B.
$300
1001$3.002
$10
100 1$0.102
 5 $3.00
 5 $6.00 1 12$3.002
 5 $36.00 3 6
36 1 12$3.602 3 30
36
5 $3.60 3 1
36 5 $0.10
$3.60
$36.00
$3.60
Let the king prohibit
gambling and
betting in his
kingdom, for these
are vices that
destroy the
kingdoms of princes.
The Code of Manu,
ca. 
A.D. 100.
If an event e has several possible outcomes with probabilities
and if for each of these outcomes the amount that
can be won is 
respectively, then the mathematical
expectation (or expected value) of E is
EXPECTATION 5 a1p1 1  a2p2 1  a3p3 1 c1 anpn
a1, a2, a3, c an,
p1, p2, p3, c, pn,
Mathematical Expectation
Since we know that 
we note that in many examples some of
the probabilities may be 0. For Example 1, we might have said that there are two different
payoffs: 
if you draw an ace probability 
and 
otherwise probability 
,
so that 
EXPECTATION 5 $10a 4
52b 1 $0a48
52b < $0.77
B
1 2 4
52 5 48
52
A
$0
B
4
52
A
$10
p1 1 p2 1 c1 pn 5 1,
Study this formula to 
be sure you understand
what it is saying.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.2
Mathematical Expectation
621
$ WIN • WIN • WIN $
PRIZE
Grand Prize Trip
Samsonite Luggage
Magic Chef Range
Murray Bicycle
Lawn Boy Mower
Weber Kettle
VALUE
$15,000
$1,000
$625.00
$525.00
$390.00
$250.00
PROBABILITY
0.000008 
0.000016
0.000016
0.000016
0.000032
0.000032
It is not necessary that the expectation or expected value be reported in terms of dol-
lars and cents. Consider the following example.
Example
5
Expected number of girls
Suppose a family has three children. What is the expected number of girls?
Solution
The sample space for this problem can be found using a tree diagram:
{GGG, GGB, GBG, GBB, BGG, BGB, BBG, BBB}. All possible outcomes and their
probabilities are listed in the following table:
Number of Girls
Probability
Product
0
0
1
2
3
EXPECTED VALUE 5 0 1 3
8 1 6
8 1 3
8 5 12
8 5 1.5
3
8
1
8
6
8
3
8
3
8
3
8
1
8
Notice from Example 5 that the expected value may be a number that can never occur; it
is obvious that 1.5 girls will never occur. An expected value of 1.5 simply means that if
we record the numbers of girls in a large number of different three-child families, the av-
erage number of girls for all these families will be 1.5. We will discuss averages in the
next chapter.
Example
4
Find the expected value for a contest 
A contest offered the prizes shown here.
What is the expected value for this 
contest?
Solution
We note the following values:
a1  $15,000; p1  0.000008
a2  $1,000;
p2  0.000016
a3  $625;
p3  0.000016
a4  $525;
p4  0.000016
a5  $390;
p5  0.000032
a6  $250;
p6  0.000032
EXPECTATION  $15,00010.0000082  $1,00010.0000162  $62510.0000162
 $52510.0000162  $39010.0000322  $25010.0000322
 $0.17
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

622
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
If there is a cost of playing a game, the cost of playing must be subtracted.
EXPECTATION  (AMT. TO WIN)(PROB OF WINNING)  cost of playing
Expectation with a Cost of Playing
Example
6
Decide to play or not to play
Consider a game that consists of drawing a card from a deck of cards. If it is a face card,
you win 
. Should you play the game if it costs 
to play?
Solution
EXPECTATION
You should not play this game, because it has a negative expectation.
 < 2$0.38
5 $20 a12
52b       2        $5
$5
$20
Winnings Prob. of winning
Amt. to play
r
r

Example
7
Decide to take a listing
Eva, who is a realtor, knows that if she takes a listing to sell a house, it
will cost her 
. However, if she sells the house, she will receive 
of the selling
price. If another realtor sells the house, Eva will receive 
of the selling price. If the
house remains unsold after 3 months, Eva will lose the listing and receive nothing. Sup-
pose that the probabilities for selling a particular 
house are as follows: The
probability that Eva will sell the house is 0.4; the probability that another agent will sell
the house is 0.2; and the probability that the house will remain unsold is 0.4. What is
Eva’s expectation if she takes this listing?
Solution
We use Pólya’s  problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. What are the “payoffs”? If the house is sold by the listing
agent, the payoff is 
of the selling price. If the house is sold by another agent, the
payoff is 
of the selling price. Finally, if the house is not sold, there is no payoff. 
Devise a Plan. First, we must decide whether this is an “entrance fee” problem. Is Eva
required to pay the 
before the “game” of selling the house is played? The answer
is yes, so the 
must be subtracted from the expectation.
Carry Out the Plan. We calculate the expectation.
EXPECTATION  $12,000
0.4  $6,000
0.2

$1,000
 $5,000
Look Back. The expectation for the realtor, Eva, is 
.
$5,000
2
1
2
12
1
2
12
1
$1,000
$1,000
3% of $200,000 5 0.031$200,0002 5 $6,000
6% of $200,000 5 0.061$200,0002 5 $12,000
3%
6%
$200,000
3%
6%
$1,000
Pólya’s 
Method
Eva sells the house.
Another agent sells. 
Cost of playing
v
v
t
Expectation with a Cost of Playing
Many games charge you a fee to play. If you must pay to play, this cost of playing should
be taken into consideration when you calculate the expected value. Remember, if the ex-
pected value is 0, it is a fair game; if the expected value is positive, you should play, but if
it is negative, you should not.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

You must understand the nature of the game to know whether to subtract the cost of
playing, as we did in Example 7. If you surrender your money to play, then it must be
subtracted, but if you “leave it on the table,” then you do not subtract it. An example of
the latter is a U.S. roulette game, in which your bet is placed on the table but is not col-
lected until after the play of the game and it is determined that you lost. A U.S. roulette
wheel has 38 numbered slots (1–36, 0, and 00), as shown in Figure 13.8.
Section 13.2
Mathematical Expectation
623
Sometimes it is easier to subtract the cost of playing as you go. For example, you
could calculate the expectation of Example 7 as follows:
EXPECTATION  $12,000  $1,000 0.4  $6,000  $1,000 0.2  $1,000 0.04
 $11,000 0.4  $5,000 0.2  $1,000 0.4
 $4,400  $1,000  $400
 $5,000
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
12
1
2
12
1
2
12
1
Eva sells the house.
Another agent sells.
House doesn’t sell.
y
y
v
FIGURE 13.8 U.S. roulette wheel and board
0
32
15
19
4
21
2
25
17
34
6
27
13
36
11
30
8
23
10
00
5
24
16
33
1
20
14
31
9
22
18
29
7
28
12
35
3
26
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
0
00
1ST 12
2ND 12
3RD 12
ODD
19 TO 36
EVEN
1 TO 18
2 TO 1
2 TO 1
2 TO 1
Here is how bets are placed on the roulette table
Single 0 or Double 00
Played the same as single number bets.
Pays 35 to 1
Even Money Bets
Black, Red, Even, Odd, 1 to 18, 19 to 36.
Pays 1 to 1
Twelve Numbers or Section Bets
Covers all 12 numbers in that section.
Pays 2 to 1
0 to 00 Split
Place bet here for convenience.
Pays 17 to 1
Column Bets
Covers each column of 12 numbers.
Pays 2 to 1
Six Numbers
Covers six numbers across.
Pays 5 to 1
Four Numbers
Covers four joining numbers.
Pays 8 to 1
Three Numbers
Covers the three numbers across
(example: 16, 17, 18).
Pays 11 to 1
Two Numbers or Split
Covers both numbers.
Pays 17 to 1
Single Number
Play any straight up number,
including 0 or 00.
Pays 35 to 1
Five Numbers
Covers 0, 00, 1, 2, 3, only.
Pays 6 to 1
0 & 00 Split
Pays 17 to 1
Some of the more common roulette bets and payoffs are shown. If the payoff is listed
as 6 to 1, you would receive 
for each 
bet. In addition, you would keep the 
you
originally wagered. One play consists of having the croupier spin the wheel and a little
ball in opposite directions. As the ball slows to a stop, it lands in one of the 38 numbered
slots, which are colored black, red, or green. A single number bet has a payoff of 35 to 1.
$1
$1
$6
Example
8
Find a roulette expectation
What is the expectation for playing roulette if you bet 
on number 5?
Solution
The 
you bet is collected only if you lose. Now, you can calculate the
expected value:
EXPECTATION
The expected loss is about 5¢ per play.
< 2$0.05
5 $35   a 1
38b   
1    1212   a37
38b
$1
$1
r
Payoff for a win Probability of winning Payoff for a loss Probability of losing
r
r
r
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

624
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
True or false? In roulette, if you bet
on black, the probability of winning is because there are equal
numbers of black and red spots. Explain.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
True or false? An expected value of
$5 means that you should expect to win $5 each time you play
the game. Explain.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
True or false? If the expected value
of a game is positive, then it is a game you should play.
Explain.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
If you were asked to choose between
a sure $10,000, or an 80% chance of winning $15,000 and a
20% chance of winning nothing, which would you take?
Game A: 
E  $10,000(1)  $10,000
This is a sure thing.
Game B: 
E  $15,000(0.8)  $0(0.2)  $12,000
True or false? The better choice, according to expected value,
is to take the 80% chance of winning $15,000. Explain.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Suppose that you buy a lottery ticket
for $1. The payoff is $50,000, with a probability of winning
11,000,000. Therefore, the expected value is
Is this statement true or false? Explain.
Use estimation to select the best response in Problems 6–11.
Do not calculate.
6. The expectation from playing a game in which you win 
$950 by correctly calling heads or tails when you flip a coin 
is about
A. $500
B. $50
C. $950 
7. The expectation from playing a game in which you win $950
by correctly calling heads or tails on each of five flips of a coin
is about
A. $500
B. $50
C. $950
8. If the expected value of playing a $1 game of blackjack is
$0.04, then after playing the game 100 times you should have
netted about
A. $104
B. $4
C. $4
9. If your expected value when playing a $1 game of roulette is
$0.05, then after playing the game 100 times you should
have netted about
A. $105
B. $5
C. $5
E 5 $50,000 a
1
1,000,000b < $0.05
1
2
10. The probability of correctly guessing a telephone number is
about
A. 1 out of 100
B. 1 out of 1,000
C. 1 out of 1,000,000
11. Winning over $10 million in a super lottery is about as 
probable as
A. having a car accident
B. having an item fall out of the sky into your yard
C. being a contestant on Jeopardy
12. Suppose that you roll two dice. You will be paid $5 if you roll
a double. You will not receive anything for any other outcome.
How much should you be willing to pay for the privilege of
rolling the dice?
13. A magazine subscription service is having a contest in which
the prize is $80,000. If the company receives 1 million entries,
what is the expectation of the contest?
14. A box contains one each of $1, $5, $10, $20, and $100 bills.
You reach in and withdraw one bill. What is the expected
value?
15. A box contains one each of $1, $5, $10, $20, and $100 bills. It
costs $20 to reach in and withdraw one bill. What is the
expected value?
16. Suppose that you have 5 quarters, 5 dimes, 10 nickels, 
and 5 pennies in your pocket. You reach in and choose 
a coin at random so that you can tip your barber. What is 
the barber’s expectation? What tip is the barber most likely 
to receive?
17. A game involves tossing two coins and receiving 50¢ if they
are both heads. What is a fair price to pay for the privilege of
playing?
18. Krinkles potato chips is having a “Lucky Seven Sweepstakes.”
The one grand prize is $70,000; 7 second prizes each pay
$7,000; 77 third prizes each pay $700; and 777 fourth prizes
each pay $70. What is the expectation of this contest, if there
are 10 million entries?
19. A punch-out card contains 100 spaces. One space pays $100,
five spaces pay $10, and the others pay nothing. How much
should you pay to punch out one space?
What is the expectation for the $1 bets in Problems 20–29 on a
U.S. roulette wheel? See Figure 13.8 on page 623.
20. Black
21. Odd
22. Single-number bet
23. Double-number bet
24. Three-number bet
25. Four-number bet
26. Five-number bet
27. Six-number bet
28. Twelve-number bet
29. Column bet
Problem Set 13.2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.2
Mathematical Expectation
625
Level 2
Consider the spinners in Problems 30–33. Determine which repre-
sent fair games. Assume that the cost to spin the wheel once is
and that you will receive the amount shown on the spinner
after it stops.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34. Assume that a dart is randomly thrown at the dartboard shown
here and strikes the board every time. The payoffs are listed on
the board. How much should you be willing to pay for the
opportunity to play this game?
35. Assume that a dart is randomly thrown at the dartboard shown
here and strikes the board every time. The payoffs are listed on
the board. How much should you be willing to pay for the
opportunity to play this game?
36. In old gangster movies on TV, you often hear of “number run-
ners” or the “numbers racket.” This numbers game, which is
still played today, involves betting $1 on the last three digits of
the number of stocks sold on a particular day in the future as
reported in The Wall Street Journal. If the payoff is $500, what
is the expectation for this numbers game?
37. In a TV game show, four prizes are hidden on a game 
board that contains 20 spaces. One prize is worth $10,000, 
two prizes are worth $5,000, and the other prize is worth
$1,000. The remaining spaces contain no prizes. The game
show host offers a sure prize of $1,000 not to play this game.
Should the contestant choose the sure prize or play the 
game?
$4
–$5
$16
$8
$2
$1
$4.00
$1.00
$6.00
$8.00
$10.00
$4.00
$8.00
$2.00
$14.00
$5.00
$8.00
$2.00
$5.00
$0
$10.00
$8.00
$2.00
$5.00
38. Suppose it costs $2,400 to advertise and list a $350,000 house
for sale. The listing agent will earn 5% of the selling price if
the listing agent sells the property, but only 2.5% if the house
is sold by another agent. If the house is unsold after 4 months,
the listing (and the cost of advertising) will be lost. Suppose
that the probabilities for selling the house are as follows:
Event
Probability
Sells the house alone
0.40
Sells through another agent
0.30
Does not sell in 4 months
0.30
What is the expected profit from listing on this house?
39. A realtor who takes the listing on a house to be sold knows that
she will spend $800 trying to sell the house. If she sells it her-
self, she will earn 6% of the selling price. If another realtor
sells a house from her list, the first realtor will earn only 3% of
the price. If the house remains unsold after 6 months, she will
lose the listing. Suppose that probabilities are as follows:
Event
Probability
Sells the house alone
0.50
Sells through another realtor
0.30
Does not sell in 6 months
0.20
What is the expected profit from listing a $185,000 house?
40. An oil-drilling company knows that it costs $25,000 to sink a
test well. If oil is hit, the income for the drilling company will be
$425,000. If only natural gas is hit, the income will be $125,000.
If nothing is hit, there will be no income. If the probability of
hitting oil is 1/40 and if the probability of hitting gas is 1/20,
what is the expectation for the drilling company? Should the
company sink the test well?
41. In Problem 40, suppose that the income for hitting oil is
changed to $825,000 and the income for gas to $225,000. Now
what is the expectation for the drilling company? Should the
company sink the test well?
42. Consider the following game in which a player rolls a single
die. If a prime (2, 3, or 5) is rolled, the player wins $2. If a
square (1 or 4) is rolled, the player wins $1. However, if the
player rolls a perfect number (6), it costs the player $11. Is this
a good deal for the player or not?
43. A game involves drawing a single card from an ordinary
deck. If an ace is drawn, you receive 50¢; if a face card
is drawn, you receive 25¢; if the two of spades is drawn, you
receive $1. If the cost of playing is 10¢, should you play?
44. A company held a contest, and the following information was
included in the fine print:
Number
Probability
Prize
of Prizes
of Winning
$10,000
13
0.000005
$1,000
52
0.00002
$100
520
0.0002
$10
28,900
0.010886
TOTAL
29,485
0.011111
Read this information carefully, and calculate the expectation
(to the nearest cent) for this contest.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

626
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
45. A company held a bingo contest for which the following
chances of winning were given:
Playing One Card, Your Chances of Winning Are at Least:
1 Time
7 Times
13 Times
$25
1 in 21,252
1 in 3,036
1 in 1,635
$3
1 in 2,125
1 in 304
1 in 163
$1
1 in 886
1 in 127
1 in 68
Any prize
1 in 609
1 in 87
1 in 47
What is the expectation (to the nearest cent) from playing one
card 13 times?
46. Heights (in inches) obtained by a group of people in a random
survey are reported in the following table:
Heights
Probability
55
0.001
60
0.022
65
0.136
70
0.341
75
0.341
80
0.136
85
0.022
90
0.001
What is the expected height (in inches)?
47. In a certain school, the probabilities of the number of students
who are reported tardy are shown in the following table:
Number tardy:
0
1
2
3
4
Probability:
0.15
0.25
0.31
0.21
0.08
What is the expected number of tardies (rounded to two
decimal places)?
48. Calculate the expectation (to the nearest cent) for the Reader’s
Digest sweepstakes described. Assume there are 197,000,000
entries.
49. A merchant is considering a purchase of autographed sports
memorabilia for resale to collectors. The probabilities of
Grand Prize Distribution Information
If you are chosen Grand Prize winner,
you will receive FIVE MILLION
DOLLARS in your choice of payment
options: Either 30 equal yearly payments
of $167,000.00 each OR 360 equal
monthly payments of $14,000.00 each.
You must specify your choice of
payment option now by detaching the
Of
To be eligible to win the FIVE MILLION
DOLLAR Grand Prize, you must return
the attached Sweepstakes Entry
Document by August 19, 1991. Failure
to respond by that date will result in the
forfeiture of Grand Prize eligibility. To
be eligible to win any of 58,567 other
prizes (but not the Grand Prize), return
your Sweepstakes Entry Document by
March 2, 1992.
$$10,500,000.00
10,500,000.00
SWEEPSTAKES ENTRY DOCUMENT
OFFICIAL PRIZE LIST
1 First Prize......................$100,000.00
2 Second Prizes..................$50,000.00
3 Third Prizes.....................$20,000.00
4 Fourth Prizes.....................$5,000.00
10 Fifth Prizes.........................$500.00
400 Sixth Prizes......................$100.00
58,147 Seventh Prizes...........Winner's
choice of a "Special Edition" Men's or
Women's Wristwatch, an $89.00
approximate retail value.
appropriate seal at left and af
onto the box provided on your
Sweepstakes Entry Document.
Sponsor
SWEEPSTAKES DIRECTOR
various possible incomes from reselling these collectibles are
estimated in the following table:
Income
Probability
$1,000
0.12
$800
0.38
$500
0.45
$200
0.05
The merchant believes that, in order to make this purchase
worthwhile, the expected profit must be at least $200. Should the
collectibles be purchased if the cost is $500?
Level 3
50. Consider a state lottery that has a weekly television show. On
this show, a contestant receives the opportunity to win $1 mil-
lion. The contestant picks from four hidden windows. Behind
each is one of the following: $150,000, $200,000, $1 million,
or a “stopper.” Before beginning, the contestant is offered
$100,000 to stop. Mathematically speaking, should the contest-
ant take the $100,000?
51. Consider a state lottery that has a weekly television show. On
this show, a contestant receives the opportunity to win $1 mil-
lion. The contestant picks from four hidden windows. Behind
each is one of the following: $150,000, $200,000, $1 million,
or a “stopper.” If the contestant picks the window containing
$150,000 or $200,000, the contestant is asked whether he or
she wishes to quit or continue. Suppose a certain contestant
has picked both the $150,000 and $200,000 windows. 
Mathematically speaking, should the contestant pick 
“one more time”?
52. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Read Problem 51. Discuss what you
would do. Consider this situation: Suppose you owned a
$350,000 home free and clear; would you gamble it on a
50/50 chance to win $1,000,000? According to the mathemat-
ical expectation, what should you do? Discuss.
53. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Suppose you are in class and your
instructor makes you the following legitimate offer. Each stu-
dent receives a ballot with the following two choices, without
communicating with each other:
If everyone checks the first box, then all will receive $1,000. If
anyone checks the second box, then only those who check the
second box will receive $100. Which box would you check,
and why?
54. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Repeat Problem 53, except change
the stakes to $110 and $100, respectively.
55. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Repeat Problem 53, except change
the stakes to $10,000 and $10, respectively.
56. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Repeat Problem 53, except change the
stakes to be an A grade in the class if everyone checks the first
I share the wealth and will receive $1,000 if
everyone in the class checks this box.
I will not share the wealth and want a certain $100.
Courtesy of Reader’s Digest, Inc.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.3
Probability Models
627
box, but if anyone checks the second box, the following will
occur: Those who check it will have a 50% chance of an A
and a 50% chance of an F but those who do not check the
second box will be given an F in this course.
Problem Solving  3
HISTORICAL QUEST
The Swiss mathematican Daniel
Bernoulli (1700–1782) was part of the famous Bernoulli family 
(see Historical Note in Section 9.3). In 1738 he published the book 
St. Petersburg Academy Proceedings in which the problem known
as the St. Petersburg Paradox was first published. To understand
this paradox you must first work Problems 57–60 together. The
paradox is seen after you answer the question in Problem 60.
57. Suppose you toss a coin and will win 
if it comes up 
heads. If it comes up tails, you toss again. This time you 
will receive 
if it comes up heads. If it comes up tails, toss
again. This time you will receive 
if it is heads and nothing
if it comes up tails. What is the mathematical expectation for
this game?
$4
$2
$1
58. Suppose you toss a coin and will win 
if it comes up heads.
If it comes up tails, you toss again. This time you will receive
if it comes up heads. If it comes up tails, toss again. This
time you will receive 
if it is heads. Continue in this fashion
for a total of 10 flips of the coin, after which you receive noth-
ing if it comes up tails. What is the mathematical expectation
for this game?
59. Suppose you toss a coin and will win 
if it comes up heads.
If it comes up tails, you toss again. This time you will receive
if it comes up heads. If it comes up tails, toss again. This
time you will receive 
if it is heads. Continue in this fashion
for a total of 1,000 flips of the coin, after which you receive
nothing if it comes up tails. What is the mathematical expecta-
tion for this game?
60. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Suppose you toss a coin and will win
if it comes up heads. If it comes up tails, you toss again.
This time you will receive 
if it comes up heads. If it comes
up tails, toss again. This time you will receive 
if it is heads.
You continue in this fashion until you finally toss a head.
Would you pay 
for the privilege of playing this game?
What is the mathematical expectation for this game?
$100
$4
$2
$1
$4
$2
$1
$4
$2
$1
13.3  Probability Models
Historical
Engraving by Darcis: Le Trente-et-un.
NOTE
Bettmann/CORBIS
The engraving depicts gambling in
18th-century France. The mathe-
matical theory of probability arose
in France in the 17th century when
a gambler, Chevalier de Méré,
became interested in adjusting the
stakes so that he could win more
often than he lost. In 1654 he
wrote to Blaise Pascal, who in turn
sent his questions to Pierre de
Fermat. Together they developed
the first theory of probability.
Complementary Probabilities
In Section 13.1 we looked at the probability of an event E that consists of n mutually 
exclusive and equally likely outcomes where s of these outcomes are considered favor-
able. Now we wish to expand our discussion. Let
s  NUMBER OF GOOD OUTCOMES (successes)
f  NUMBER OF BAD OUTCOMES (failures)
n  TOTAL NUMBER OF POSSIBLE OUTCOMES s  f  n2
1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

628
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
Then the probability that event E occurs is
The probability that event E does not occur is 
An important property is found by adding these probabilities:
P1E2 1 P1E2 5 s
n 1 f
n 5 s 1 f
n
5 n
n 5 1
P1E2 5 f
n
P1E2 5 s
n
The probabilities 
and 
are called complementary probabilities. In other words,
the property of complements says that probabilities whose sum is 1 are complementary.
P1E2
P1E2
Don’t underestimate the
importance of this simple
property, for it has 
far-reaching applications.
Example
1
Find the probability of a pair
Use Table 13.1 (page 616) to find the probability of not obtaining one pair with a poker hand.
Solution
From Table 13.1, we see that P(pair) 
, so that
P(no pair)  P(
)
 1  P(pair) 
1  0.42
 0.58
<
pair
1,098,240
2,598,960 < 0.42
Example
2
Find the probability of at least one head
What is the probability of obtaining at least one head in three flips of a coin?
Solution
Let F  {obtain at least one head in three flips of a coin}.
METHOD I: Work directly; use a tree diagram to find the possibilities.
P1F2 5 7
8
Start
H
T
H
T
H
T
H
T
H
T
H
T
H
T
H
H
H
yes
H
H
T
yes
H
T
H
yes
H
T
T
yes
T
H
H
yes
T
H
T
yes
T
T
H
yes
T
T
T
no
First Second Third
First Second Third
Success
Historical
Girolamo Cardano 
(1501–1576)
Cardano was a physician, 
mathematician, and astrologer. 
He investigated many interesting
problems in probability and wrote
a gambler’s manual, probably 
because he was a compulsive
gambler. He was the illegitimate
son of a jurist and was at one time
imprisoned for heresy—for 
publishing a controversial
horoscope of Christ’s life. He had
a firm belief in astrology and 
predicted the date of his death.
However, when the day came, 
he was alive and well—so he
drank poison toward the end of
the day to make his prediction
come true!
NOTE
Karl Smith library
P1E2 5 1 2 P1E2 or P1E2 5 1 2 P1E2
Property of Complements
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

METHOD II: For one coin, there are 2 outcomes (heads and tails); for three coins we have
2  2  2  8 possibilities
Fundamental counting principle
We answer the question by finding the complement; 
is the event of receiving no heads
(that is, of obtaining all tails). Without drawing the tree diagram, we note that there is
only one way of obtaining all tails (TTT). Thus,
P1F2 5 1 2 P1F2 5 1 2 1
8 5 7
8
F
Section 13.3
Probability Models
629
Example
3
Find odds against
If a jar has 2 quarters, 200 dimes, and 800 pennies, and a coin is to be chosen at random,
what are the odds against picking a quarter?
Solution
We are interested in picking a quarter, so let s  2; a failure is not obtaining a
quarter, so f  1,000. (Find f by adding 200 and 800.)
Odds in favor of obtaining a quarter:
Odds against obtaining a quarter:
Do not write 
as 500.
The odds against picking a quarter when a coin is selected at random are 500 to 1.
500
1
f
s 5 1,000
2
5 500
1
s
f 5
2
1,000 5
1
500
Odds
Related to probability is the notion of odds. Instead of forming ratios
we form the following ratios:
Odds in favor of an event E:
(ratio of success to failure)
Odds against an event E:
(ratio of failure to success)
Recall: s  NUMBER OF SUCCESSES
f  NUMBER OF FAILURES
n  NUMBER OF POSSIBILITIES
f
s
s
f
P1E2 5 s
n and P1E2 5 f
n
Example
4
Visualize odds
The odds against winning a lottery are 50,000,000 to 1. Make up an 
example to help visualize these odds.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. It is difficult for the human mind to comprehend numbers like
50 million to 1, so the point of this problem is to help us “visualize” the magnitude of
that number.
Devise a Plan. We will fill a house with 50 million ping-pong balls, and then paint one
of them red.
Carry Out the Plan. Imagine one red ping-pong ball and 50,000,000 white ping-pong
balls. Winning a lottery is equivalent to reaching into a container containing these
50,000,001 ping-pong balls and obtaining the red one. To visualize this, consider the size
container you would need. Assume that a ping-pong ball takes up a volume of 
. A
home of 
with an 8-ft ceiling has a volume of
1,200 ft2
1 in.3
Pólya’s 
Method
This example ties
together some of the
ideas of this chapter
with ideas from Chapter
1. It is here to get you to
think twice before
purchasing a lottery
ticket.
The odds are
in on the
Academy Awards
   LAS VEGAS-The odds  in
Nevada blah blah blah blah blah
continue blah blah and so on
odds blah blah blah blah  so it
the blah blah blah blah blah
The Odds Are
Against You...
Your chances of becoming
            are only 1 out of
the book
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Sometimes you know the probability and want to find the odds, or you may know
the odds and want to find the probability. These relationships are easy if you remember:
s 1 f 5 n
630
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
Suppose that you know P(E). 
Odds in favor of an event E:
Odds against an event E:
P1E2
P1E2
P1E2
P1E2
Odds, Given Probability
Example
5
Find the odds in favor
If the probability of an event is 0.45, what are the odds in favor of the event?
Solution
This is given.
Then the odds in favor of E are
The odds in favor are 9 to 11.
P1E2
P1E2 5
9
20
11
20
5 9
20 # 20
11 5 9
11
P1E2 5 1 2 9
20 5 11
20
P1E2 5 0.45 5 45
100 5 9
20
You can show these formulas to be true:
The verification of the second formula is left for the problem set.
P1E2
P1E2 5
s
n
f
n
5 s
n # n
f 5 s
f 5 odds in favor
Do not confuse odds
and probability.
Suppose that you know the odds in favor of an event E: s to f or the odds against an
event E: f to s. Then
P1E2 5
s
s 1 f and P1E2 5
f
s 1 f
Probability, Given Odds
1,200 ft2  8 ft  9,600 ft3
 9,600  12 in.  12 in.  12 in.
 16,588,800 in.3
Look Back. Even though the number 16,588,800 is still not directly comprehensible,
you should be able to imagine a house filled with ping-pong balls. However, we can
now say we would need to fill about 3 homes with ping-pong balls and imagine that one
ball is painted red. We do not even know which house contains the red ball, but we can
imagine picking one of the three houses at random, and then reaching into that one
house and choosing one ball. If the red one is chosen, we win the lottery!
2
1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Conditional Probability
Frequently, we wish to compute the probability of an event but we have additional infor-
mation that will alter the sample space. For example, suppose that a family has two chil-
dren. What is the probability that the family has two boys?
P(2 boys) 
Sample space: BB, BG, GB, GG; 1 success out of 4 possibilities
Now, let’s complicate the problem a little. Suppose that we know that the older child is a
boy. We have altered the sample space as follows:
Original sample space: BB, BG, GB, GG; but we need to cross out the last two
possibilities because we know that the older child is a boy:
Altered sample space:
BB, BG,
GB,
GG;
therefore,
P(2 boys given the older is a boy) 
This is a problem involving a conditional probability—namely, a probability of an event
given that another event F has occurred. We denote this by
P(E 0 F)
Read this as: “probability of E given F.”
If the sample space consists of mutually exclusive and equally likely possibilities,
then P(E F) represents the number of outcomes corresponding to E  F over the number
0
1
2
1
4
Section 13.3
Probability Models
631
Example
6
Find a probability given the odds against
If the odds against you are 20 to 1, what is the probability of the event?
Solution
Odds against an event are f to s, so 
and 
; thus,
P1E2 5
1
20 1 1 5 1
21 < 0.048
s 5 1
f 5 20
Example
7
Find a probability, given the odds in favor
If the odds in favor of some event are 2 to 5, what is the probability of the event?
Solution
Odds in favor are s to f, so 
and 
; thus,
P1E2 5
2
2 1 5 5 2
7 < 0.286
f 5 5
s 5 2
These are crossed out.
6447448
1442443
Altered sample space has two elements.
Success
w
Take special note of this
notation and this idea of
conditional probability.
of outcomes corresponding to F. That is, in “E given F” we are taking F as “given” by
putting only the outcomes in F into the denominator in the definition of probability. In
the numerator, we have the outcomes of E that are also in F. This means that
We call this the conditional probability formula. While this formula is useful in probabil-
ity theory, we will generally find conditional probability by looking at altered sample
spaces, as illustrated by the following example. 
P1E 0 F2 5 0 E d F 0
0 F 0
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

632
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
Example
9
Find conditional probabilities
In a life science experiment, it is necessary to examine fruit flies and to
determine their sex and whether they have mutated after exposure to a certain dose of
radiation. Suppose a single fruit fly is selected at random from the radiated fruit flies.
Find the following probabilities (correct to the nearest hundredth).
a. It is male.
b. It is a normal male.
c. It is normal, given that it is a male.
d. It is a male, given that it is normal.
e. It is mutated, given that it is a male. 
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. We obviously need more information to find the desired 
probabilities. We need to know the number of fruit flies that are part of the experiment.
Assume that the total number is 1,000. We also need some data. Upon examination, we
find that for 1,000 fruit flies examined, there were 643 females and 357 males. Also,
403 of the females were normal and 240 were mutated; of the males, 190 were normal
and 167 were mutated. 
Devise a Plan. We will display the data in table form to make it easy to calculate the 
desired probabilities.
Carry Out the Plan.
Mutated
Normal
Total
Male
167
190
357
Female
240
403
643
Total
407
593
1,000
a. P(male) 
Round answers to the nearest hundredth.
b. P(normal male)  
c. P(normal male)  
Note the altered sample space.
d. P(male normal)  
Yet another altered sample space
e. P(mutated male)  
Look Back. All probabilities seem reasonable, and all are between 0 and 1.
167
357 < 0.47
0
190
593 < 0.32
0
190
357 < 0.53
0
190
1,000 5 0.19
357
1,000 < 0.36
Pólya’s 
Method
This is a crucial example.
Spend some time 
working through all 
the parts.
Example
8
Find a probability using an altered sample space
Suppose that you toss two coins (or a single coin twice). What is the probability that two
heads are obtained if you know that at least one head is obtained?
Solution
Consider an altered sample space: HH, HT, TH, T T. The probability is .
1
3
Example
10 Find the probability of drawing two cards
Two cards are drawn from a deck of cards. Find the probability of the given events.
a. The first card drawn is a heart.
b. The first card drawn is not a heart.
c. The second card drawn is a heart if the first card drawn was a heart.
d. The second card drawn is not a heart if the first card drawn was a heart.
e. The second card drawn is a heart if the first card drawn was not a heart.
f. The second card drawn is not a heart if the first card drawn was not a heart.
g. The second card drawn is a heart.
h. Use a tree diagram to represent the indicated probabilities.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.3
Probability Models
633
Solution
Let H1  {first card drawn is a heart}, H2  {second card drawn is a heart}.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h. We use a tree diagram to illustrate this situation.
Note that we use the word limb to mean “a sequence of branches that starts at the begin-
ning.” Also note that we have filled in the probabilities on each branch. To find the prob-
abilities, we multiply as we move horizontally across a limb, and we add as we move
vertically from limb to limb. Verify that the probabilities for the first card add to 1:
Also, for the second card, the probabilities for each branch add to 1. For P1H22, we can
confirm our reasoning in part g by considering the first and third limbs of the tree diagram:
P1H22 5 13
52 # 12
51 1 39
52 # 13
51 5 663
2,652 5 1
4
P1H12 1 P1H12 5 13
52 1 39
52 5 52
52 5 1
13
52
12
51
Heart
Heart
39
51
Not a heart
13
51
Not a heart
Heart
38
51
Not a heart
39
52
Second card
First card
Probability of limb
·
5
< 0.06
13
52
12
51
3
51
·
5
< 0.19
13
52
39
51
13
68
·
5
< 0.19
39
52
13
51
13
68
·
5
< 0.56
39
52
38
51
19
34
If we do not know what happened on the first draw, then this is not
a conditional probability, so we consider this probability to be the
same as P(H1).
P1H22 5 1
4
If a nonheart is obtained on the first draw, then for the second
draw there are 38 nonhearts in a deck of 51 cards.
P1H2 0 H12 5 38
51
If a heart is not obtained on the first draw, then for the second
draw there are 13 hearts in a deck of 51 remaining cards.
P1H2 0 H12 5 13
51
If a heart is obtained on the first draw, then for the second draw
there are 39 nonhearts in a deck of 51 remaining cards.
P1H2 0 H12 5 39
51 5 13
17
If a heart is obtained on the first draw, then for the second draw
there are 12 hearts in the deck of 51 remaining cards.
P1H2 0 H12 5 12
51 5 4
17
There are 39 nonhearts in a deck of 52 cards.
P1H12 5 39
52 5 3
4
There are 13 hearts in a deck of 52 cards.
P1H12 5 13
52 5 1
4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Notice that conditional probabilities are found in the tree diagram by beginning at
their condition.
Verify that all of the information in parts a–g can be found directly from the tree 
diagram. For this reason, we often use tree diagrams to assist us in finding probabilities
and conditional probabilities.
634
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
To use a tree diagram to find an unconditional probability: Start at the beginning of
the tree.
Step 1
Multiply when moving horizontally across a limb.
Step 2
Add when moving vertically from limb to limb.
To use a tree diagram to find a conditional probability.
Step 3
Start at the condition.
Procedure for Using Tree Diagrams
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the fundamental counting
principle?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain what we mean by 
“conditional probability.”
3. How many different sequences are there for the first five moves
in a game of tick-tack-toe? Give reasons for your answer.
4. What is the property of complements?
5. Compare and contrast odds and probability.
Use estimation to select the best response in Problems 6–11. Do
not calculate. 
6. Of these three means of travel, the safest is
A. car
B. train
C. plane
7. Which of the following is a conditional probability?
A. P(normal female)
B.
C. P(normal female)
8. Which of the following is more probable?
A. Flipping a coin 3 times and obtaining at least 2 heads
B. Flipping a coin 4 times and obtaining at least 2 heads
9. Which of the following is more probable?
A. Rolling a die 3 times and obtaining a six 2 times
B. Rolling a die 3 times and obtaining a six at least 2 times
10. Which of the following is more probable?
A. Correctly guessing all the answers on a 20-question 
true-false examination 
B. Flipping a coin 20 times and obtaining all heads
11. Which of the following is more probable?
A. Correctly guessing all the answers on a 10-question 
5-part multiple-choice test
0
P1A2
B. Your living room is filled with white ping pong balls. 
There is also one red ping-pong ball in the room. You 
reach in and select a ping-pong ball at random and 
select the red ping-pong ball.
Find the requested probabilities in Problems 12–15.
12. P( ) if P(A)  0.6
13. P( ) if P(B) 
14. P(C) if P( ) 
15. P(D) if P( )  0.005
16. A card is selected from an ordinary deck. What is the
probability that it is not a face card?
17. Choose a natural number between 1 and 100, inclusive. 
What is the probability that the number chosen is not a multiple
of 5?
18. Three fair coins are tossed. What is the probability that at least
one is a head?
19. Find the probability of obtaining at least one head in four flips
of a coin.
20. What are the odds in favor of drawing an ace from an ordinary
deck of cards?
21. What are a four-child family’s odds against having 
four boys?
22. The probability of drawing a heart from a deck of cards is ;
what are the odds in favor of drawing a heart?
23. Suppose the probability of an event is 0.81. What are the odds
in favor of this event?
24. The odds against an event are ten to one. What is the
probability of this event?
1
4
D
9
13
C
4
5
B
A
Problem Set 13.3
You will find using tree
diagrams a very helpful
procedure for finding
probabilities.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.3
Probability Models
635
25. Racetracks quote the approximate odds for each race on a large
display board called a tote board.
Here’s what it might say for a particular race:
Horse Number
Odds
1
18 to 1
2
3 to 2
3
2 to 1
4
7 to 5
5
1 to 1
What would be the probability of winning for each of these
horses? Note: The odds stated are for the horse’s losing. Thus, 
P(horse 1 losing)
so 
P(horse 1 winning)
.
26. Suppose the odds in favor are 9 to 1 that a man will be bald by
the time he is 60. State this as a probability.
27. Suppose the odds are 33 to 1 that someone will lie to you at least
once in the next seven days. State this as a probability.
28. Suppose that a family wants to have four children.
a. What is the sample space?
b. What is the probability of 4 girls? 4 boys?
c. What is the probability of 1 girl and 3 boys? 1 boy and 3 girls?
d. What is the probability of 2 boys and 2 girls?
e. What is the sum of your answers in parts b through d?
29. What is the probability of obtaining exactly three heads in four
flips of a coin, given that at least two are heads?
Level  2
30. The Emory Harrison family of Tennessee had 13 boys.
a. What is the probability of a 13-child family having 13 boys?
b. What is the probability that the next child of the Harrison
family will be a boy (giving them 14 boys in a row)?
51 2 18
19 5 1
19
5
18
18 1 1 5 18
19
Bettmann/CORBIS
© PhotoLink/Getty Images
A single card is drawn from a standard deck of cards. Find the
probabilities if the given information is known about the chosen
card in Problems 31–36. A face card is a jack, queen, or king.
31. P(face card 0 jack)
32. P(jack 0 face card)
33. P(heart 0 not a spade)
34. P(two 0 not a face card)
35. P(black 0 jack)
36. P(jack 0 black)
Two cards are drawn from a standard deck of cards, and one of the
two cards is noted and removed. Find the probabilities of the sec-
ond card, given the information about the removed card provided
in Problems 37–42.
37. P(ace 0 two)
38. P(king 0 king)
39. P(heart 0 heart)
40. P(heart 0 spade)
41. P(black 0 red)
42. P(black 0 black)
43. What is the probability of getting a license plate that has a
repeated letter or digit if you live in a state in which license
plates have two letters followed by four numerals?
44. What is the probability of getting a license plate that has a
repeated letter or digit if you live in a state in which license
plates have one numeral followed by three letters followed by
three numerals?
45. What is the probability of getting a license plate that has a 
repeated letter or digit if you live in a state where the scheme is
three numerals followed by three letters?
46. Consider this letter to Dear Abby.*
What is the family’s probability of having eight girls in a row?
What are the odds against?
47. Consider the following table showing the results of a survey of
TV network executives.
Opinion of Current Programming
Network
Satisfied, S
Not Satisfied, 
Total
NBC, N
18
7
25
CBS, C
21
9
30
ABC, A
15
10
25
Total
54
26
80
S
DEAR ABBY: My husband
and I just had our eighth child.
Another girl, and I am really
one disappointed woman.  I
suppose I should thank God
she was healthy, but, Abby, this
one was supposed to have been
a boy.  Even the doctor told me
the law of averages was in our
favor 100 to one.  What is the
probability of our next child
being a boy?
© Kathleen Olson
*Adapted from DEAR ABBY column by Abigail Van Buren. © 1974. Dist. by 
Universal Press Syndicate. Reprinted by permission. All rights reserved.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

636
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
Suppose one network executive is selected at random. Find the
indicated probabilities.
a. What is the probability that it is an NBC executive?
b. What is the probability that the selected person is satisfied?
c. What is the probability the selected person is from CBS 
if we know the person is satisfied with current 
programming?
d. What is the probability the selected person is satisfied if we
know the person is from CBS?
48. Suppose a single die is rolled. Find the probabilities.
a. 6, given that an odd number was rolled
b. 5, given that an odd number was rolled
49. Suppose a single die is rolled. Find the probabilities.
a. odd, given that the rolled number was a 6
b. odd, given that the rolled number was a 5
Level  3
50. Suppose a pair of dice are rolled. Consider the sum of the
numbers on the top of the dice and find the probabilities.
a. 7, given that the sum is odd
b. odd, given that a 7 was rolled
c. 7, given that at least one die came up 2
51. Suppose a pair of dice are rolled. Consider the sum of the
numbers on the top of the dice and find the probabilities.
a. 5, given that exactly one die came up 2
b. 3, given that exactly one die came up 2
c. 2, given that exactly one die came up 2
52. Suppose a pair of dice are rolled. Consider the sum of the
numbers on the top of the dice and find the probabilities.
a. 8, given that a double was rolled
b. a double, given that an 8 was rolled
53. Show that the odds against an event E can be found by 
computing
.
54. Two cards are drawn from a deck of cards. Find the requested
probabilities.
a. The first card drawn is a club.
b. The first card drawn is not a club.
c. The second card drawn is a club if the first card drawn was
a club.
d. The second card drawn is not a club if the first card drawn
was a club.
e. The second card drawn is a club if the first card drawn was
not a club.
f. The second card drawn is not a club if the first card drawn
was not a club.
g. The second card drawn is a club.
h. Use a tree diagram to represent the indicated probabilities.
P(E)P(E)
55. A sorority has 35 members, 25 of whom are full members and
10 are pledges. Two persons are selected at random from the
membership list of the sorority. Find the requested probabilities.
a. The first person selected is a pledge.
b. The first person selected is not a pledge.
c. The second person selected is a pledge if the first person
selected was also a pledge.
d. The second person selected was a full member if the first
person selected was a pledge.
e. The second person selected is a pledge if the first person
selected was a full member.
f. The second person selected is a full member if the first
person selected was also a full member.
g. The second person selected was a pledge.
h. Use a tree diagram to represent the indicated probabilities.
56. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
The odds against winning a 
certain lottery are a million to one. Make up an example to
help visualize these odds.
57. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
The odds against winning a certain
lottery are ten million to one. Make up an example to help 
visualize these odds.
58. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
The odds against winning a certain
“Power Ball” lotto are 150 million to 1. Make up an example to
help visualize these odds.
Problem Solving  3
59. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
One betting system for roulette is to
bet $1 on black. If black comes up on the first 
spin of the wheel, you win $1 and the game is over. 
If black does not come up, double your bet ($2). If you win,
the game is over and your net winnings for two spins is still
$1 (show this). If black does not come up, double your bet
again ($4). If you win, the game is over and your net
winnings for three spins is still $1 (show this). Continue in
this doubling procedure until you eventually win; in every
case your net winnings amount to $1 (show this). What is
the fallacy with this betting system? 
60. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
“Last week I won a free Big Mac at
McDonald’s. I sure was lucky!” exclaimed Charlie. “Do you
go there often?” asked Pat. “Only twenty or thirty times a
month. And the odds of winning a Big Mac were only 20 
to 1.” “Don’t you mean 1 to 20?” queried Pat. “Don’t
confuse me with details. I don’t even understand odds at the
racetrack, and I go all the time.” Is Charlie or Pat correct
about the odds?
13.4  Calculated Probabilities
In this section, we formulate some probability problems using tree diagrams, combina-
tions, permutations, and the fundamental counting principle. We will also consider some
additional models that will allow us to break up more complicated probability problems
into some simpler types.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Example
1
Decide if a game is fair
Suppose a person picks one number and is paid 
if the number picked is among the
20 chosen for the game. The cost for playing this game (the cost is collected in advance)
is 
. Is this a fair game?
Solution
In this problem we are picking 1 out of 80 and we will win if the one num-
ber we pick is among the 20 numbers chosen from the pot. Since the order in which the
20 numbers are picked from the pot does not matter, we see this is a combination.
$1.00
$3.00
Keno Games
A very popular lotto game in several states, as well as in
most casinos, is a game called Keno. The game consists
of a player’s trying to guess in advance which numbers
will be selected from a pot containing 80 numbers. The
person’s choices are marked on a Keno card, and those
choices are registered before the game starts. Twenty
numbers are then selected at random. The player may
choose from 1 to 15 spots and gets paid according to
Table 13.2 on below.
Section 13.4
Calculated Probabilities
637
YOU CAN WIN $50,000
KENO
9
19
29
39
49
59
69
79
1
11
21
31
41
51
61
71
2
12
22
32
42
52
62
72
3
13
23
33
43
53
63
73
4
14
24
34
44
54
64
74
5
15
25
35
45
55
65
75
6
16
26
36
46
56
66
76
7
17
27
37
47
57
67
77
8
18
28
38
48
58
68
78
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
M A R K  1  S P OT
Catch
Play $1.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
Win
3.00
9.00
15.00
M A R K  2  S P OT S
Catch
Play $1.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
2 Win
12.00
36.00
60.00
M A R K  3  S P OT S
Catch
Play $1.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
2 Win
1.00
3.00
5.00
3 Win
40.00
120.00
200.00
M A R K  4  S P OT S
Catch
Play $1.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
2 Win
1.00
3.00
5.00
3 Win
3.00
9.00
15.00
4 Win
113.00
339.00
565.00
M A R K  5  S P OT S
Catch
Play $1.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
3 Win
1.00
3.00
5.00
4 Win
10.00
30.00
50.00
5 Win
750.00
2,250.00
3,750.00
M A R K  6  S P OT S
Catch
Play $1.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
3 Win
1.00
3.00
5.00
4 Win
3.00
9.00
15.00
5 Win
90.00
270.00
450.00
6 Win
1,480.00
4,400.00
7,400.00
M A R K  7  S P OT S
Catch
Play $1.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
4 Win
1.00
3.00
5.00
5 Win
18.00
54.00
90.00
6 Win
400.00
1,200.00
2,000.00
7 Win
8,000.00
24,000.00
40,000.00
M A R K  8  S P OT S
Catch
Play $1.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
5 Win
8.00
24.00
40.00
6 Win
100.00
300.00
500.00
7 Win
1,480.00
4,440.00
7,400.00
8 Win
17,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
M A R K  9  S P OT S
Catch
Play $1.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
5 Win
3.00
9.00
15.00
6 Win
42.00
126.00
210.00
7 Win
350.00
1,050.00
1,750.00
8 Win
4,200.00
12,600.00
21,000.00
9 Win
18,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
M A R K  1 0  S P OT S
Catch
Play $1.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
5 Win
2.00
6.00
10.00
6 Win
20.00
60.00
100.00
7 Win
130.00
390.00
650.00
8 Win
900.00
2,700.00
4,500.00
9 Win
4,500.00
13,500.00
22,500.00
10 Win
20,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
M A R K  1 1  S P OT S
Catch
Play $1.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
6 Win
9.00
27.00
45.00
7 Win
75.00
225.00
375.00
8 Win
380.00
1,140.00
1,900.00
9 Win
2,000.00
6,000.00
10,000.00
10 Win
12,500.00
37,500.00
50,000.00
11 Win
21,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
M A R K  1 2  S P OT S
Catch
Play $1.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
6 Win
5.00
15.00
25.00
7 Win
28.00
84.00
140.00
8 Win
200.00
600.00
1,000.00
9 Win
850.00
2,550.00
4,250.00
10 Win
2,400.00
7,200.00
12,000.00
11 Win
13,000.00
39,000.00
50,000.00
12 Win
25,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
M A R K  1 3  S P OT S
($2.00 minimum)
Catch
Play $2.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
6 Win
6.00
9.00
15.00
7 Win
24.00
36.00
60.00
8 Win
150.00
225.00
375.00
9 Win
1,400.00
2,100.00
3,500.00
10 Win
4,000.00
6,000.00
10,000.00
11 Win
18,000.00
27,000.00
45,000.00
12 Win
28,000.00
42,000.00
50,000.00
13 Win
50,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
M A R K  1 4  S P OT S
($2.00 minimum)
Catch
Play $2.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
6 Win
4.00
6.00
10.00
7 Win
16.00
24.00
40.00
8 Win
64.00
96.00
160.00
9 Win
600.00
900.00
1,500.00
10 Win
1,600.00
2,400.00
4,000.00
11 Win
5,000.00
7,500.00
12,500.00
12 Win
24,000.00
36,000.00
50,000.00
13 Win
36,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
14 Win
50,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
M A R K  1 5  S P OT S
($2.00 minimum)
Catch
Play $2.00
Play $3.00
Play $5.00
6 Win
2.00
3.00
5.00
7 Win
14.00
21.00
35.00
8 Win
42.00
63.00
105.00
9 Win
200.00
300.00
500.00
10 Win
800.00
1,200.00
2,000.00
11 Win
4,000.00
6,000.00
10,000.00
12 Win
16,000.00
24,000.00
40,000.00
13 Win
24,000.00
36,000.00
50,000.00
14 Win
50,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
15 Win
50,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
TABLE 13.2
Keno Payoffs
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

638
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
Example
2
Find the mathematical expectation of a three-spot Keno
What is the mathematical expectation for playing a three-spot $1.00 Keno ticket?
Solution
There are four possibilities for a three-spot ticket: pick 0, 1, 2, or 3. We take
these one at a time. “Pick 2” means picking exactly two numbers.
By calculator
By calculator
Similarly,
 < 0.4165043817
 < 0.4308666018
Q60
3 R
 Q80
3 R
5
Q20
1 R # Q60
2 R
 Q80
3 R
5
 P1pick 02 5 s
n
 P1pick 12 5 s
n
 < 0.1387536514
 5 20 # 19 # 60 # 3
80 # 79 # 78
Q20
2 R # Q60
1 R
 Q80
3 R
5
 P1pick 22 5 s
n
 < 0.0138753651
 5 20 # 19 # 18
80 # 79 # 78
Q20
3 R
 Q80
3 R
5
 P1pick 32 5 s
n
P(picking one number) 
NUMBER OF WAYS OF CHOOSING 1 NO. FROM 20
NUMBER OF WAYS OF CHOOSING 1 NO. FROM 80
We now calculate the mathematical expectation:
EXPECTATION 
Subtract because you pay first.
No, it is not a fair game, since the expectation is negative.
$3.00 a1
4b 2 $1.00 5 2$0.25
5 1
4
5 20
80
Q20
1 R
 Q80
1 R
5
c
The game of Keno becomes more complicated when picking more numbers.
Where s is the number of ways of picking 3 numbers from the
20 winning numbers, and n is the number of ways of picking 
3 numbers from the 80 possible numbers
Where s is the number of ways of picking 2 numbers from the
20 winning numbers, and n is the number of ways of picking 
3 numbers from the 80 possible numbers
It is common to work this example
incorrectly. Note that this is 
WRONG:
1$3.002 1 2  1$1.0021 2  0 
or $3.001 2  $0.75.
On the other hand, 
1$2.0021 2  $1.001 2  $0.25 
is acceptable.
3
4
1
4
1
4
3
4
1
4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We now find the expected value of one $1.00 play using the payoffs from Table 13.2 for
a three-spot ticket:
EXPECTED VALUE  AMT. TO WIN  PROB. OF WINNING  AMT. TO PLAY
 $401probability of picking 32  $11probability of picking 22  $1
 $4010.01387536512  $110.13875365142  $1
 $0.3062
As you can see, either method gives the same answer. The loss is about $0.31 for
each play.
Section 13.4
Calculated Probabilities
639
Independent Events
Consider the following problem dealing with four cards. Suppose four cards are taken
from an ordinary deck of cards, and we form two stacks—one with an ace (one) and a
deuce (two) and the other with an ace and a jack. If a card is drawn at random from each
pile, what is the probability that a blackjack will occur (an ace and a jack)?
The tree diagram illustrates the possibilities. Notice that the probability of obtaining
an ace from the first stack is 
and the probability of obtaining a jack from the second
stack is also 
.
1/2
1/2
Second stack
First stack
Result
Start
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
4
1
4
1
4
1
4
WIN
The probability of a blackjack is . Notice for this example that
PROBABILITY OF ACE FROM FIRST STACK 
PROBABILITY OF JACK FROM SECOND STACK 
PROBABILITY OF BLACKJACK 
If one event (draw from the first stack) has no effect on the outcome of the second event
(draw from the second stack), then we say that the events are independent. Thus, if
events E and F are independent, 
, since the occurrence of event F has no
effect on the occurrence of E. 
P1E 0 F2 5 P1E2
1
2 3 1
2 5 1
4
1
2
1
2
1
4
An alternate method is to
subtract the amount you pay from
each payoff as you go.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To understand how independence is determined, consider the following alternative
problem. Suppose that all four cards are put together into one pile. This is an entirely 
different situation. There are four possibilities for the first draw, and three possibilities
for the second draw, as illustrated here.
The probability of a blackjack is now 
. We find this by looking at the sample
space of equally likely possibilities. We cannot find this probability by multiplying the com-
ponent parts for the first and second draws, as we did when considering independent stacks.
For this second situation we see that the first and second draws are dependent be-
cause the probabilities of selecting a particular second card are influenced by the draw on
the first card. 
Probability of an Intersection
If two events are independent, then we can find the probability of an intersection by mul-
tiplication. This property is called the multiplication property of probability or the
probability of an intersection. If there are n mutually exclusive and equally likely possi-
bilities, then by definition
By the conditional probability formula
 5 P1E 0 F2 0 F 0
n
 P1E d F2 5 0 E d F 0
n
4
12 5 1
3
1
4
1
4
1
3
1
3
1
12
1
3
1
12
1
12
1
3
1
3
1
3
1
12
1
12
1
12
1
4
1
4
1
3
1
3
1
12
1
3
1
12
1
12
1
3
1
3
1
3
1
12
1
12
1
12
Second card 
First card
Result
Start
WIN
WIN
WIN
WIN
640
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

By definition of probability
P1E F2  P1E2 since E and F are independent.
This leads us to the following property.
0
 5 P1E2 # P1F2
 5 P1E 0 F2 # P1F2
 5 P1E 0 F2 # 0 F 0
n
Section 13.4
Calculated Probabilities
641
If E and F are independent events, then
 5 P1E2 # P1F2
 5 P1E 0 F2 # P1F2
 P1E and F2 5 P1E d F2
Multiplication Property of Probability
Note the conditions for
this property: E and F
must be independent.
Example
3
Find a roulette probability
What is the probability of black occurring on two successive plays on a U.S. roulette
wheel?
Solution
Recall (Figure 13.8, page 623) that a U.S. roulette wheel has 38 compart-
ments, 18 of which are black. Since the results of the spin of the wheel for one game are
independent of the results of another spin, the plays are independent. Let B1  {black
on first spin} and B2  {black on second spin}. Then
P1B1 d B22 5 P1B12 # P1B22 5 18
38 # 18
38 < 0.2243767313
The idea of independence is sometimes a difficult idea to communicate outside of the
classroom. On July 8, 1995, in a preliminary hearing in the O. J. Simpson murder trial, an
objection was raised that an adequate foundation had not been laid to establish the inde-
pendence (and consequently the use of the multiplication property of probability) of
blood-type factors. It was a perfect place for the mathematical principle of independence
to be introduced, but instead the response focused on how many previous times the multi-
plication principle had been allowed by the court.
Another example involving a misuse of the multiplication principle involves gam-
blers. If you have ever been at a casino and watched players bet on black or red on a
roulette game, you have seen that if one color comes up several times in a row, players
start betting on the other color because they think it is “due.” The spins of a roulette wheel
are independent and it is a fallacy to think that previous spins have any effect on any fu-
ture spins. For example, let’s continue with Example 3 and ask, What is the probability of
black on the next or third spin?
Where B3  {black on third spin}
But if we ask, what is the probability of obtaining black on the next three consecutive
spins, it is
You might also note that the multiplication property can be used for two or more
independent events.
P1B1 d B2 d B32 5 P1B12 # P1B22 # P1B32 5 a18
38b
3
< 0.1062837148
P1B32 5 18
38 < 0.4736842105
Gambling casinos like to take 
advantage of this fallacy in the 
thinking of their clients.  There 
used to be a pair of dice 
displayed on a red velvet pillow 
behind glass in the lobby of the 
Desert Inn in Las Vegas.  This 
pair of dice made 28 straight 
passes (winning tosses) in 1950.  
The man rolling them won only 
$750; if he had bet $1 and let 
his winnings ride (double for 
each pass), he would have won 
$134,217,727.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Independence and the multiplication property are often used with the idea of com-
plementary events. We now consider the mathematics associated with an experiment
called the birthday problem.
642
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
Example
4
Birthday problem
What is the probability that at least 2 of 4 unrelated persons share the 
same birthday? This example is considered in more detail as a Group Research Project
at the end of this chapter.
Solution
We use Pólya’s  problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. We assume that the birthdays of the individuals are independ-
ent, and we ignore leap years. We also are not considering the birthday year. We want to
know, for example, whether any 2 (or more) of the 4 persons have the same birthday—
say, August 3.
Devise a Plan. The first person’s birthday can be any day (365 possibilities out of 365
days). We will find the probability that the second person’s birthday is different from
the first person’s birthday. This is
The probability that the third person’s birthday is different from the first two birthdays 
is 
, and the probability that the fourth person’s birthday is different is 
. Since these
are independent events, we use the multiplication property of probability.
Carry Out the Plan.
Look Back. There are about 2 chances out of 100 that there will be a birthday match with
4 persons in the group. It is worth noting that if we consider this for 23 persons, we have
This means that if you look at a group of more than 23 persons, it is more likely than
not that there will be a birthday match.
1 2
365P23
36523 < 0.5072972343
 < 0.0163559125
 5 1 2 365
365 3 364
365 3 363
365 3 362
365
 P(match)  1  P(no match)
362
365
363
365
1 2
1
365 5 364
365
Pólya’s 
Method
Probability of a Union
The multiplication property of probability is used to find the probability of an intersec-
tion (E and F); now let’s turn to the probability of a union (E or F).
Translate the word “or” as a union.
Definition of probability
Cardinality of a union
Definition of probability
We have derived a property called the addition property of probability.
 5 P1E2 1 P1F2 2 P1E d F2
 5 0 E 0 1 0 F 0 2 0 E d F 0
n
 5 0 E ´ F 0
n
 P1E or F2 5 P1E ´ F2
See www.mathnature
.com for links to an 
interactive site explor-
ing this problem.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.4
Calculated Probabilities
643
Take some time with this
example; it illustrates
the main ideas of this
section.
For any events E and F,
 5 P1E2 1 P1F2 2 P1E d F2
 P1E or F2 5 P1E ´ F2
Addition Property of Probability
Example
5 Find the probability of a union
Suppose a coin is tossed and a die is simultaneously rolled. What is the probability 
of tossing a tail or rolling a 4? Is this event more or less likely than flipping a coin and
obtaining a head?
Solution
Let T  {tail is tossed} and F  {4 is rolled}.
Addition property
Multiplication property, events are independent.
Calculate the probabilities.
Simplify.
Since 
, we see that this event is more likely than flipping a coin and obtaining
a head.
7
12 < 0.58
 5 7
12
 5 1
2 1 1
6 2 1
2 # 1
6
 5 P1T2 1 P1F2 2 P1T2 # P1F2
 P1T ´ F2 5 P1T2 1 P1F2 2 P1T d F2
Example
6 Find a calculated probability
If A, B, and C are independent events so that P1A2  0.2, P1B2  0.6, and P1C2  0.3,
find 
.
Solution
We need to do some algebra before we evaluate.
P3 1A ´ B2 d C 4
Drawing With and Without Replacement
To highlight the difference between a combination model and a permutation model, we
focus on the idea of replacement. Drawing with replacement means choosing the first
item, noting the result, and then replacing the item in the sample space before selecting
the second item. Drawing without replacement means selecting the first item, noting the
result, and then selecting a second item without replacing the first item.
Complementary probabilities
Multiplication property of probability
Addition property
Multiplication property
Distributive property (watch signs) 
We now evaluate:
 5 0.796
 P3 1A ´ B2 d C2 4 5 1 2 10.22 10.32 2 10.62 10.32 1 10.22 10.62 10.32
 
 5 1 2 P1A2 # P1C2 2 P1B2 # P1C2 1 P1A2 # P1B2 # P1C2
 
 5 1 2 3P1A2 1 P1B2 2 P1A2 # P1B2 4 # P1C2
 
 5 1 2 3P1A2 1 P1B2 2 P1A d B2 4 # P1C2
 
 5 1 2 P1A ´ B2 # P1C2
 P3 1A ´ B2 d C4 5 1 2 P3 1A ´ B2 d C 4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

644
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
Example
7 Find probabilities with and without replacement
Find the probability of each event when drawing two cards from an ordinary deck of cards.
a. Drawing a spade on the first draw and a heart on the second draw with replacement
b. Drawing a spade on the first draw or a heart on the second draw with replacement
c. Drawing two hearts with replacement
d. Drawing a spade on the first draw and a heart on the second draw without replacement
e. Drawing a spade on the first draw or a heart on the second draw without replacement
f. Drawing two hearts without replacement
Rank the events from the most probable to the least probable.
Solution
We state the decimal approximations for each probability for ease of compari-
son. Let S1  {draw a spade on the first draw} and H2  {draw a heart on the second draw}.
With replacement
a. With replacement, the events are independent. Thus
b.
From part a
c. With replacement, the events are independent. Then
Without replacement
d. We use the permutation model since the order is important. The number of possibili-
ties is 
; the number of successes (fundamental counting principle) is
. Thus,
e.
From part a
f. Without replacement, draw both cards at once. We use combinations since the order
is not important.
The ranking is: 112 part b, 122 part e (probabilities of parts b and e are about the same),
132 part d, 142 parts a and c (tie), 152 part f. The probabilities of parts a, c, d, and f are
about the same.
P1two hearts2 5 A13
2 B
A52
2 B
5
13 # 12
2
52 # 51
2
5 1
17 < 0.0588235294
 < 0.4362745098
 5 1
4 1 1
4 2 13
204
 P1S1 ´ H22 5 P1S12 1 P1H22 2 P1S1 d H22
P1S1 d H22 5 13 # 13
52P2
5 13 # 13
52 # 51 5 13
204 < 0.0637254902
13 # 13
52P2 5 52 # 51
P1two hearts2 5 1
4 # 1
4 5 1
16 5 0.0625
 5 0.4375
 5 1
4 1 1
4 2 1
16
 P1S1 ´ H22 5 P1S12 1 P1H22 2 P1S1 d H22
P1S1 d H22 5 P1S12 # P1H22 5 1
4 # 1
4 5 1
16 5 0.0625
Note the first three
words of this subsection.
Tree Diagrams
A powerful tool in handling probability problems is a device we have frequently used—a
tree diagram. If the events are independent, we find the probabilities using the multiplica-
tion property of probability.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.4
Calculated Probabilities
645
Example
8 Deciding to play. Or not?
Consider a game consisting of at most three cuts with a deck of cards. You win and the
game is over if a face card turns up on any of the cuts, but you lose if a face card does
not turn up. (A face card is a jack, queen, or king.) If you stand to win or lose $1 on this
game, should you play?
Solution
P(win)  1  P(lose)
1  0.455  0.545
EXPECTATION  AMOUNT TO WIN  P(win)  AMOUNT TO LOSE  P(lose)
 $1  10.5452  1$12  10.4552
 $0.09
Since the mathematical expectation is positive, the recommendation is to play 
the game. If you played this game 1,000 times, you could expect to be ahead about
1,0001$0.092 5 $90.00
<
P(lose the game) 5
·
·
< 0.455
10
13
10
13
10
13
This sum
must be 1
Face card; win
3
13
10
13
First cut
Continue with
second cut
Face card; win
3
13
10
13
Lose the game:
Face card; win
3
13
10
13
Continue with
third cut
John Paulos, Innumeracy, pp. 54–55.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

646
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by independent
events?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the birthday problem?
3. What is the formula for the probability of an intersection?
4. What is the formula for the probability of a union?
Suppose events A, B, and C are independent and
Find the probabilities in Problems 5–22.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
In Problems 23–34, suppose a die is rolled twice and let
A  {first toss is a prime}
B  {first toss is a 3}
C  {second toss is a 2}
D  {second toss is a 3}
Answer the questions or find the requested probabilities.
23. Are A and B independent?
24. Are A and C independent?
25. Are A and D independent?
26. Are B and C independent?
27. Are B and D independent?
28. Are C and D independent?
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
Level  2
35. A certain slot machine has three identical independent wheels,
each with 13 symbols as follows: 1 bar, 2 lemons, 2 bells,
3 plums, 2 cherries, and 3 oranges. Suppose you spin the wheels
and one of the 13 symbols on each wheel is selected. Find the
probabilities and leave your answers in decimal form.
P(C ´ D)
P(B ´ D)
P(A ´ C)
P(A ´ B)
P(A  C)
P(A  B)
P3 1A ´ B2 d C 4
P1A d B d C2
P1A d B d C2
P1B ´ C2
P1A ´ C2
P1A ´ B2
P1B d C2
P1A d C2
P1A d B2
P1B ´ C2
P1A ´ C2
P1A ´ B2
P1B d C2
P1A d C2
P1A d B2
P1C2
P1B2
P1A2
P1A2 5 1
2  P1B2 5 1
3  P1C2 5 1
6
a. P(3 bars)
b. P(3 oranges)
c. P(3 plums)
d. P(cherry on the first wheel)
e. P(cherries on the first 2 wheels)
36. Suppose a slot machine has three independent wheels as shown
in Figure 13.9. Find the probabilities.
FIGURE 13.9 Slot machine wheels
a. P(3 bars)
b. P(3 bells)
c. P(3 cherries)
d. P(cherries on the first wheel)
e. P(cherries on the first 2 wheels)
37. The payoffs for the slot machine shown in Figure 13.9 are as
follows:
First one cherry
2 coins
First two cherries
5 coins
First two wheels are cherries 
and the third wheel a bar
10 coins
Three cherries
10 coins
Three oranges
14 coins
Three plums
14 coins
Three bells
20 coins
Three bars (jackpot)
50 coins
What is the mathematical expectation for playing the game
with the coin being a quarter dollar? Assume the three
wheels are independent.
38. A “high rollers” Keno is offered in which you pay $749 
to play a one-spot ticket. If you catch your number, you 
are paid $2,247. What is your expectation for this 
game?
First
Wheel
Orange
Cherry
Lemon 
Bell
Plum
Orange
Bar
Plum
Orange
Lemon 
Orange
Bar
Lemon 
Orange
Lemon 
Plum
Lemon 
Orange
Cherry
Lemon 
Second
Wheel
Cherry
Bar
Plum
Bar
Orange
Bell
Cherry
Bell
Cherry
Plum
Orange
Bell
Cherry
Bell
Bar
Bell
Bar
Bell
Cherry
Lemon 
Third
Wheel
Cherry
Plum
Cherry
Plum
Cherry
Cherry
Plum
Bar
Orange
Bell
Cherry
Plum
Bar
Orange
Plum
Cherry
Orange
Cherry
Plum
Cherry
Problem Set 13.4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

39. A special “catch all” Keno ticket allows you to play a 
six-spot ticket that pays only if you pick all 6 numbers. It costs
$5 to play and pays $27,777 if you win. What is your expecta-
tion for this game?
In Problems 40–42, use Table 13.2 for the payoffs.
40. What is the expectation for playing Keno by picking two
numbers and paying $1.00 to play?
41. What is the expectation for playing a three-spot Keno and
paying $3.00 to play?
42. What is the expectation for playing a four-spot Keno and
paying $5.00 to play?
43. What is the probability that at least two of five unrelated
persons share the same birthday?
44. What is the probability that at least two people in your 
class (assume a class of 30 students) have the same 
birthday?
45. What is the probability of obtaining five tails when a coin is
flipped five times?
46. What is the probability of obtaining at least one tail when a
coin is flipped five times?
47. Assume a jar has five red marbles and three black marbles.
Draw out two marbles with and without replacement. Find the
requested probabilities.
a. P(two red marbles)
b. P(two black marbles)
c. P(one red and one black marble)
d. P(red on the first draw and black on the second draw)
48. Suppose that in an assortment of 20 calculators there are 5 with
defective switches. Draw with and without replacement.
a. If one machine is selected at random, what is the probability
it has a defective switch?
b. If two machines are selected at random, what is the 
probability that both have defective switches?
c. If three machines are selected at random, what is the proba-
bility that all three have defective switches?
49. a. A game consists of at most three cuts with a deck of
52 cards. You win $1 and the game is over if a heart turns
up, but lose $1 otherwise. Should you play?
b. Repeat this game, but remove the card that turns up on 
the cut.
50. a. A game consists of removing a card from a deck 
of 52 cards. If the card is a face card, you win $1 and 
the game is over. If it is not a face card, remove another 
card. If that one is a face card, you win $1. Repeat the
process again, and then again (for a total of 4 times). 
If you have not removed any face card, then you lose 
the game, and must pay $1. Should you play this 
game?
b. Repeat this game, but replace the card before doing the 
following draw.
Level  3
51. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Comment on extrasensory perception
(ESP) as described in the guest essay by John Paulos on page 54.
52. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Compare and contrast the following
two betting schemes for roulette, which are sometimes used by
gamblers.
Section 13.4
Calculated Probabilities
647
Double on each loss
Bet $1 on black. If black comes up, you
win $1, and the game is over. If black does not come up, double
your bet 1$22. If black now comes up, your net winnings are $1
(lose $1, then win $22, and the game is over. If black does not
come up, double your bet 1$42. If black now comes up, your net
winnings are $1 (lose $1, lose $2, then win $4). Continue with
the doubling procedure until you eventually win; in every case,
your net winnings are $1.
Double on each win
Bet $1 on black. If black does not come up,
you lose $1, and the game is over. If black comes up, double your
bet 1$22, and play again. If black does not come up on the next
spin, you lose $1 (win $1, then lose $2), and the game is over. If
black comes up, double your bet 1$42 and play again. If black does
not come up on the next spin, you lose $1 11  2  42, and the
game is over. If black comes up, double your bet 1$82, and 
play again. If black does not come up on the next spin, you lose 
$1 11  2  4  82, and the game is over. If black does come
up, double your bet 1$162 one last time. If black does not come up
on the next spin, you lose $1 11  2  4  8  162, and the
game is over. If black does come up, the game is over and you win
$31 11  2  4  8  162. Using this scheme, you are risking a
maximum loss of $1 for a chance at winning $31.
Many states conduct lotteries; a typical lottery (Keno) payoff ticket is
shown here. Assume there are 20 numbers chosen from a set of 80
possible numbers. Use this information for Problems 53–57.
Source: The California Lottery
53. What is the expectation for a three-spot game?
54. What is the expectation for a four-spot game?
55. What is the expectation for a five-spot game?
56. What is the expectation for a six-spot game?
57. Which game illustrated on this Keno payoff ticket has the best
expectation?
KENO PAYOUTS
NUMBER OF
SPOTS MATCHED
PLAY $1. 00…WIN:
6 SPOT GAME
MATCH
PRIZE
6
5
4
3
$1,000
$25
$4
$1
Overall odds of winning a prize in this game — 1:6.2
5 SPOT GAME
MATCH
PRIZE
5
4
3
$250
$10
$2
Overall odds of winning a prize in this game — 1:10.3
4 SPOT GAME
MATCH
PRIZE
4
3
2
$50
$4
$1
Overall odds of winning a prize in this game — 1:3.9
3 SPOT GAME
MATCH
PRIZE
3
2
$20
$2
Overall odds of winning a prize in this game — 1:6.6
2 SPOT GAME
MATCH
PRIZE
2
$8
Overall odds of winning a prize in this game — 1:16.5
1 SPOT GAME
MATCH
PRIZE
1
$2
Overall odds of winning a prize in this game — 1:4.0
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problem Solving  3
58. We know that in a game of U.S. roulette, the probability that
the ball drops into any one slot is 1 out of 38. Suppose that
there are two balls spinning at once, and that it is physically
possible for two balls to fit into the same slot. What is the
probability that both balls would drop into the same slot?
59. Chevalier de Méré used to bet that he could get at least one 
6 in four rolls of a die. He also bet that, in 24 tosses of a pair of
dice, he would get at least one 12. He found that he won more
often than he lost with the first bet, but not with the second. He
did not know why, so he wrote to Pascal seeking the probabili-
ties of these events. What are the probabilities for winning
these two games?
60. In a book by John Fisher, Never Give a Sucker an Even Break
(Pantheon Books, 1976), we find the following problem:
648
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
What is the probability that you win? Remember, the sucker
bets that he can roll out three black olives without getting one
of the green olives.
Take a small opaque bottle and seven olives,
two of which are green, five black. The green
ones are considered the “unlucky” ones. Place
all seven olives in the bottle, the neck of which
should be of such a size that it will allow only
one olive to pass through at a time. Ask the
sucker to shake them and then wager that he
will not be able to roll out three olives without
getting an unlucky green one amongst them. If
a green olive shows, he loses.
13.5 The Binomial Distribution
Many situations model events that have two possible outcomes. For example, when a coin
is flipped, the outcome is either a head or a tail; when a child is born, it is a boy or it is a
girl; the child is either born in December or it is not; when a magician guesses a card
selected at random from a deck of cards, the magician is either correct or incorrect. In this
section, we consider a topic that models this idea.
Random Variables
Managers at Mercedes Benz want to introduce a “zero defects” advertising campaign on a
new line of automobiles, so they decide to do extensive testing of parts coming off the as-
sembly line. Suppose 150 parts come off the assembly line every day, and inspectors keep
track of the number of items with any type of defect. If X is the number of defective items,
then X can obviously assume any of the values 0, 1, 2, 3, 
, 149, 150. This variable X is
an example of a random variable. A random variable X associated with the sample space
S of an experiment is an assignment of a real number to each simple event in S. If S has a
finite number of outcomes, then X is called a finite (or discrete) random variable; if X can
assume any real value on an interval, then it is called a continuous random variable.
Consider now a common type of experiment—one with only two outcomes, A and .
Suppose that 
(call this success) and 
(call this failure). We
are interested in n independent repetitions of the experiment. If 
remains the same
for each repetition and we let X represent the number of times that event A has occurred,
then we call X a binomial random variable.
Toss a coin four times and keep track of the results. The sample space is shown
below.
P1A2
P1A2 5 q 5 1 2 p
P1A2 5 p
A
c
eVox Productions LLC/Photolibrary
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.5
The Binomial Distribution
649
Number of Heads
Outcomes
4
HHHH
3
HHHT
HHTH
HTHH
THHH
2
HHTT
HTHT
HTTH
THTH
THHT
TTHH
1
TTTH
TTHT
THTT
HTTT
0
TTTT
Let the random variable X represent the number of heads that have occurred. That is,
if we obtain no heads; 
means one head is obtained; 
means two heads
are obtained; 
mean three and four heads are obtained, respectively. Since
there are 16 equally likely possibilities,
Note that the sum of these probabilities is one:
This introduction illustrates a common probability model called the binomial distribution,
which is a list of outcomes and probabilities for what we call a binomial experiment.
1
16 1 4
16 1 6
16 1 4
16 1 1
16 5 1
P1x 5 02 5 1
16
P1x 5 12 5 4
16 5 1
4
P1x 5 22 5 6
16 5 3
8
P1x 5 32 5 4
16 5 1
4
P1x 5 42 5 1
16
X 5 3, X 5 4
X 5 2
X 5 1
X 5 0
A binomial experiment is an experiment that satisfies four
conditions:
1. There must be a fixed number of trials. Denote this number
by n.
2. There must be exactly two possible mutually exclusive
outcomes for each trial. Call them success and failure.
3. The trials must be independent. That is, the outcome of a
particular trial is not affected by the outcome of any other trial.
4. The probabilities of success and failure must remain
constant for each trial.
Binomial Experiment
Binomial Experiments
Before you apply the results of this section, you need to determine whether the applica-
tion is a binomial experiment. The four conditions to check are summarized in the
following box.
Consider the manufacture of computer chips. Suppose three items are chosen at ran-
dom from a day’s production and are classified as defective (F) or nondefective (S). We
are interested in the number of successes obtained. Suppose that an item has a probability
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

650
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
of 0.1 of being defective and therefore a probability of 0.9 of being nondefective. We will
assume that these probabilities remain the same throughout the experiment and that the
classification of any particular item is independent of the classification of any other item.
The sample space and probabilities are shown in the margin.
If we let 
the number of successes obtained, then we can calculate the probabili-
ties using the information from the margin:
Line 1 of the sample space
This is found from lines 2, 3, and 4.
FFS
(0.9)(0.1)2
FSF
(0.9)(0.1)2
SFF
(0.9)(0.1)2
This is found from lines 5, 6, and 7.
FSS
(0.9)2(0.1)
SFS
(0.9)2(0.1)
SSF
(0.9)2(0.1)
Line 8 of the sample space
Note that this same result can be achieved by simply considering the following bino-
mial expansion:*
This leads us to the binomial distribution theorem.
10.1 1 0.92 3 5 10.12 3 1 310.12 210.92 1 310.12 10.92 2 1 10.92 3
P1X 5 32 5 10.92 3
P1X 5 22 5 310.92 210.12
P1X 5 12 5 310.92 10.12 2
P1X 5 02 5 10.12 3
X 5
Sample
Associated
space
probabilities
1. FFF (0.1)(0.1)(0.1)  (0.1)3
2. FFS (0.1)(0.1)(0.9)  (0.9)(0.1)2
3. FSF (0.1)(0.9)(0.1)  (0.9)(0.1)2
4. SFF (0.9)(0.1)(0.1)  (0.9)(0.1)2
5. FSS (0.1)(0.9)(0.9)  (0.9)2(0.1)
6. SFS (0.9)(0.1)(0.9)  (0.9)2(0.1)
7. SSF (0.9)(0.9)(0.1)  (0.9)2(0.1)
8. SSS (0.9)(0.9)(0.9)  (0.9)3
*You might wish to review the binomial theorem in Section 6.1.
Let X be a random variable for the number of successes in n independent and identi-
cal repetitions of an experiment with two possible outcomes, success and failure. 
If p is the probability of success, then
where k  0, 1,
, n.
c
P1X 5 k2 5 an
kb pk11 2 p2 n2k
Binomial Distribution Theorem
Example
1
Distinguishing binomial probabilities
In Problem 30 of Section 13.3 we asked for the probability that a family will have 
13 boys. The Grady family also has 13 children, 10 girls and 3 boys.
a. What is the probability of a 10-child family having 10 girls?
b. What is the probability of a 3-child family having 3 boys?
c. What is the probability (rounded to the nearest thousandth) of a 13-child family
having 10 girls and 3 boys?
Solution
a.
b.
c. This is a binomial distribution because there are a fixed number of trials 
.
There are two mutually exclusive outcomes (girl/boy).
The trials are independent.
The probabilities of a girl/boy remain the same for each trial.
Thus, let X represent the number of girls in a 13-child family.
1n 5 132
P13 boys2 5 A1
2B3 5 1
8
P110 girls2 5 A1
2B10 5
1
1,024
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.5
The Binomial Distribution
651
Example
2
Finding binomial probabilities
Suppose a sociology teacher always gives true-false tests with 10 questions.
a. What is the probability of getting exactly 
correct by guessing?
b. What is the probability of getting 
or more correct by guessing?
c. If a student can be sure of getting five questions correct, but must guess at the others,
what is the probability of getting 
or more correct?
Solution
For this problem 
and 
.
a.
b.
Thus,
c.
Binomial experiments are also sometimes called Bernoulli trials, after Jacob Bernoulli
(1654–1705).
 5 13
16 5 0.8125
 5 10 # 1
32 1 10 # 1
32 1 5 # 1
32 1 1 # 1
32
 P12 # X # 52 5 a5
2b a1
2b
5
1 a5
3ba1
2b
5
1 a5
4ba1
2b
5
1 a5
5b a1
2b
5
 5 11
64 < 0.172
 5
1
1,024 < 0.001
 5 176
1,024
 5 1 # 1
210
 P1X $ 72 5 120
1,024 1
45
1,024 1
10
1,024 1
1
1,024
 P1X 5 102 5 a10
10ba1
2b
10
 5
10
1,024 < 0.098
 5
45
1,024 < 0.044
 5 10!
9!1! # 1
210
 5 10!
8!2! # 1
210
 P1X 5 92 5 a10
9 b a1
2b
9
a1
2b
 P1X 5 82 5 a10
8 ba1
2b
8
a1
2b
2
 5 120
1,024 < 0.117
 5 10!
7!3! # 1
210
 P1X 5 72 5 a10
7 ba1
2b
7
a1
2b
3
P1failure2 5 1
2
P1success2 5 1
2
70%
70%
70%
 < 0.035
 5 13!
10!3! # 1
213
 P1X 5 102 5 a13
10b  a1
2b
10 
a1
2b
3
Historical
Jacob Bernoulli (1654–1705)
Jacob Bernoulli is part of the
famous Bernoulli family (see
Historical Note in Section 9.3).
He was a mathematics professor
at the University of Basel from
1683 until his death, at which time
his brother Johann was chosen to
fill his chair. He and his brother
were bitter rivals and he stated (in
print) that Johann only repeated
what his brother (Jacob) had
taught him. His biographer wrote
about Jacob: “He was self-willed,
obstinate, aggressive, vindictive,
beset by feelings of inferiority, and
yet convinced of his own abilities.
With these characteristics, he
necessarily had to collide with his
similarly disposed brother.” His
achievements included his work in
probability (after which Bernoulli
trials are named), logic, algebra,
geometry, and calculus (after which
the Bernoulli equation is named).
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

652
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
Example
3
Find the probability of Bernoulli trials
If the probabilities for the two outcomes of n Bernoulli trials are p and 
, and S
denotes success and F denotes failure, find a formula for the probability of k successes.
Solution
Sometimes Bernoulli trials are cast in terms of randomly drawing balls
from an urn filled with r red balls and b black balls. The proportion of
If each ball is replaced after drawing (and the urn is stirred up to make sure the next ball
is drawn at random), then p and q will remain constant for each drawing. If the balls are
not replaced, then p and q will change after each drawing. For example, if balls are
drawn 8 times with replacement and the sequence is
RBRBBBBB
the probability of this sequence is
On the other hand, if the order is not important and we want the probability of obtaining
2 red balls and 6 black balls, then each sequence such as
RBRBBBBB
or
RBBBBBBR or 
occurs with probability 
. Further, the number of sequences in which 2 red balls and
6 black balls are drawn is given as the coefficient of 
in the binomial expansion of
. This number is
so that the probability is
The probability of k successes in n trials of a Bernoulli experiment is
P(k successes)
for 
.
k 5 0, 1, 2, c , n
5 an
kb pkqn2k
a8
2bp2q6
a8
2b
p 1 q
p2q6
p2q6
c
pqpqqqqq 5 p2q6
red balls is p 5
r
r 1 b and black balls is q 5
b
r 1 b
q 5 1 2 p
Example
4
Find the probability of hitting a target
A missile has a probability of 0.1 of penetrating enemy defenses and reaching its target.
If five missiles are aimed at the same target, what is the probability that exactly one will
hit its target? What is the probability that at least one will hit its target?
Solution
By calculator
Complementary probabilities
The probability that one missile will hit its target is 0.33 (or about 
of time), and the
probability that at least one will hit its target is 0.41 (or about   
of the time).
40%
1/3
 5 0.40951
 5 1 2 a5
0b a 1
10b
0 
a 9
10b
5
 P1X $ 12 5 1 2 P1X 5 02
 5 0.32805
 P1X 5 12 5 a5
1ba 1
10b
1
a 9
10b
4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.5
The Binomial Distribution
653
Example
5
Find the probability of errors
Suppose the probability that a page of a term paper is properly prepared is 0.25. What is
the probability that there will be exactly one page with at least one error in a term paper
of five pages?
Solution
The probability of at least one error on a page is 
. The
solution is given by
By calculator
The probability that there is exactly one page with at least one error is about 
.
15%
 5 0.0146484375
 P1X 5 12 5 a5
1b 10.752 110.252 4
1 2 0.25 5 0.75
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a binomial random variable?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a Bernoulli trial?
Find the binomial probabilities in Problems 3–10.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10. n 5 15, X 5 13, p 5 0.40
n 5 7, X 5 5, p 5 0.10
n 5 8, X 5 8, p 5 0.75
n 5 6, X 5 6, p 5 0.50
n 5 10, X 5 4, p 5 0.80
n 5 12, X 5 6, p 5 0.65
n 5 4, X 5 3, p 5 0.25
n 5 5, X 5 3, p 5 0.30
Problem Set 13.5
11. Find the probability of obtaining exactly three heads on five
tosses of a fair coin.
12. Find the probability of obtaining exactly four heads on five
tosses of a fair coin.
13. Find the probability that a family of six children has 4 boys
and 2 girls.
14. Find the probability that a family of eight children has 5 boys
and 3 girls.
15. Find the probability of obtaining exactly two threes on five
rolls of a fair die.
16. Find the probability of obtaining exactly three twos on five
rolls of a fair die.
17. A couple plans to have four children. Find the probability that
they will have more than two girls.
18. A couple plans to have five children. Find the probability that
they will have more than three girls.
Suppose you are taking a true-false test with ten questions. If you
guess at the answers on this test, find the probabilities in Problems
19–22.
19. Exactly eight correct answers
20. Exactly nine correct answers
Suppose a jar contains 3 pens: 1 red, 1 blue, and 1 green. 
Three people sign a document, one at a time. Each person selects 
a pen, signs the document, and then replaces the pen before the
next person selects a pen at random. Find the probabilities in
Problems 23–26.
23. The red pen is never selected.
24. Exactly one person uses the red pen.
25. Exactly two people use the red pen.
26. All three people select the red pen.
All the cows in a certain herd are white-faced. The probability that
a white-faced calf will be born by mating with a certain bull is 0.9.
Suppose four cows are bred to the same bull. Find the probabilities
in Problems 27–32.
27. Four white-faced calves
28. Three white-faced calves
29. No white-faced calves
30. One white-faced calf
21. Fewer than two correct answers
22. More than eight correct answers
31. At least three white-faced calves
32. No more than two white-faced calves
A researcher chooses three leaves from a target environment 
and classifies each sample as fungus free or contaminated.
Suppose that a leaf has a probability of 0.2 of being infected. 
In Problems 33–38, find the requested probabilities.
33. No infected leaves are found.
34. All three samples are infected.
35. Two are found to be infected.
36. One is infected.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40. The probability that the children in a specific family will 
have brown eyes is . If there are four children in the 
family, what is the probability that at least two of them have
brown eyes?
41. What is the probability that if a pair of dice is rolled six times,
exactly one sum of seven is rolled?
42. What is the probability that if a pair of dice is rolled twelve
times, exactly two sums of seven are rolled?
43. If Marcy can make 
of free throws in a basketball game, what
is the probability that she makes five of the next six free throws?
44. If Bart can make only 
of free throws in a basketball game,
what is the probability that he will make exactly one of the
next three free throws?
45. Lymnozyme cures most infections in Koi fish caused by
bacteria; in fact, it has been shown to be 
effective if
used according to the directions. If five Koi with a bacterial
infection are treated, what is the probability that four of the
fish are cured?
46. Lymnozyme cures most infections in Koi fish caused by
bacteria; in fact, it has been shown to be 
effective if 
used according to the directions. If 15 Koi with a bacterial
infection are treated, what is the probability that 14 of the 
fish are cured?
47. It is known that 
of the graduates of Foley’s School of
Motel Management are placed in a job within 6 months of
graduation. If a class has 20 graduates, what is the probability
that 15 will be placed within 6 months?
48. If a graduating class from Problem 47 has 10 graduates, what is
the probability that at least 9 will be placed within 6 months?
49. Suppose the National League team has a probability of of win-
ning the World Series and the American League team has a prob-
ability of The series is over as soon as one team wins four games.
Find the probability that it takes seven games to decide the winner.
50. Suppose the National League team has a probability of of
winning a World Series game and the American League team
has a probability of . The series is over as soon as one team
wins four games. Find the probability that the National League
team wins the series in seven games.
51. The batting average of the star baseball player Mike Thompson
is 0.300 (that is, P(hit)
). What is the probability that
Thompson will get at least three hits in four times at bat?
5 0.3
2
5
3
5
2
5
3
5
85%
96%
96%
40%
70%
3
8
654
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
37. One or more is infected.
38. Numerically, how are your answers for Problems 33–36
related?
Level 2
39. The probability that children in a specific family will have
blond hair is . If there are four children in the family, what is
the probability that two of them are blond?
3
4
52. Eighty percent of the widgets of the Ampex Widget Company
meet the specifications of its customers. If a sample of six
widgets is tested, what is the probability that three or more of
them would fail to meet the specifications?
Level 3
53. Suppose that research has shown that the probability that a
missile penetrates enemy defenses and reaches its target is 
0.1. Find the smallest number of identical missiles that are
necessary in order to be 
certain of hitting the target at
least once.
54. Suppose a person claims to have extrasensory perception
(ESP) and says she can read mental images 
of the time.
We set up an experiment where she must determine whether
we are looking at a picture of a circle or a square. We agree
that if she can correctly identify the mental image at least five
out of six times, we will grant her claim.
a. What is the probability of granting her claim if she is in fact
only guessing?
b. What is the probability of denying her claim if she really
does have the ability she claims?
55. Repeat Problem 54, except that the person claims to read men-
tal images 
of the time.
56. Fire frequency has a great impact on national parks. If the 
fire frequency is too severe, generally species that occur in
later successional habitats will be excluded. Likewise, the
absence of fire will lead to a paucity of species that require
early successional habitats. If, on average, fire occurs in a site
forest once every 10 years, then the probability is 
that this
site will burn in a given year. If there are 100 such site forests,
what is the probability that fire will occur in at least one site
over the next year? Assume that all sites are independent
of each other; that is, fire does not spread into neighboring
patches.
Problem Solving 3   
57. In a certain office, three men determine who will pay for
coffee by each flipping a coin. If one of them has an outcome
that is different from the other two, he must pay for the coffee.
What is the probability that in any play of the game there will
be an “odd man out”?
58. In the game described in Problem 57, what is the probability
that there will be an odd man out in a particular play if there
are four players?
59. In the game of Problem 57, what is the probability that there
will be an odd man out in a particular play if there are five
players?
60. Generalize Problem 57 for n people playing the game of 
“odd man out.”
10%
90%
75%
80%
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 13.6
Chapter Summary
655
Important Ideas
Probability by counting [13.1]
Expectation with and without a cost for playing [13.2]
Finding odds (given probability) [13.3]
Finding probability (given odds) [13.3]
Procedure for using tree diagrams [13.3]
Probabilities of unions and intersections [13.4]
Drawing with and without replacement [13.4]
Tree diagrams to find probabilities [13.4]
Probabilities of binomial experiments [13.5]
The mathematics curricu-
lum should include the
continued study of proba-
bility so that all students
can use experimental or
theoretical probability, as
appropriate, to represent
and solve problems
involving uncertainty.
NCTM STANDARDS
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online,
you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of
problems that were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by
working the problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test
help in studying for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
Chapter 13
Review Questions
1. Which of the following is the most probable?
A. Winning the grand prize in a state lottery
B. Being struck by lightning
C. Appearing on the Tonight Show
2. Which of the following events has odds of about a million
to one?
A. Selecting a particular Social Security number by picking
the digits at random
B. Selecting a particular phone number at random if the first
digit is known
C. Winning first prize in a state lottery 
3. If a sample from an assembly line reveals four defective
items out of 1,000 sampled items, what is the probability that
any one item is defective?
4. What is the probability of obtaining a prime in a single roll of
a die?
5. A pair of dice is rolled. What is the probability that the
resulting sum is eight?
6. A card is selected from an ordinary deck of cards. What is
the probability that it is a jack or better? (A jack or better is a
jack, queen, king, or ace.)
7. A single card is drawn from a standard deck of cards. What is
the probability that it is an ace, if you know that one ace has al-
ready been removed from the deck?
JIM RUYMEN/UPI/Landov 
13.6
CHAPTER SUMMARY
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

656
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
656
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
8. For a roll of a pair of dice, find the following.
a. P(5 on at least one of the dice)
b. P(5 on one die or 4 on the other)
c. P(5 on one die and 4 on the other)
9. a. If the probability of dropping an egg is 0.01, what is the
probability of not dropping the egg?
b. If P E  0.9, what are the odds in favor of E?
c. If the odds against an event are 1,000 to 1, what is the
probability of the event?
10. A game consists of rolling a die and receiving $12 if a one is
rolled and nothing otherwise. What is the mathematical
expectation?
11. A box contains three orange balls and two purple balls, and
two are selected at random. What is the probability of the sec-
ond ball being orange if we know that the first draw was
orange and we draw the second ball:
a. after replacing the first ball?
b. without replacing the first ball?
12. If A and B are independent events with P A 
and P B  ,
what is P
?
13. A manufacturer of water test kits knows that about 0.1%
of the test strips in the kits are defective. Write the binomial
probability formula that would be used to determine the
probability that exactly x test strips in a kit of n strips are
defective.
The Weather Channel makes accurate predictions about 85% of
the time. Use this information to answer the questions in
Problems 14–15.
14. What is the probability that Weather Channel meterologists
are accurate on exactly 3 of the next 5 days?
15. What is the probability that they are accurate exactly 4 of the
next 4 days?
16. A friend says she has two new baby cats to show you, but she
doesn’t know whether they’re both male, both female, or a
pair. You tell her that you want only a male, and she
telephones the vet and asks, “Is at least one a male?” The vet
answers, “Yes!” What is the probability that if you select one
kitten, then it is a male? Assume that a baby cat is equally
likely to be female or male.
17. The probability that an individual who is selected at random
from a population has blue eyes has been estimated to be 0.35.
Find the probability that at least one of four people selected at
random has blue eyes.
2
A ´ B
1
3
5
2
1
2
3
2
1
2
1
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on one of these books:
How to Take a Chance. Darrell Huff and Irving Geis 
(New York: Norton, 1959).
Beat the Dealer. Edward O. Thorp (New York: Vintage
Books, 1966).
The Power of Logical Thinking, Marilyn vos Savant
(New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1997). This book deals with
people’s perception of probability and statistics.
5
5
5
5
1
1
1
1
D
2
2
2
2
2
2
6
6
C
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
B
4
4
4
0
4
0
4
4
A
FIGURE 13.10 Octahedral dice
19. The following problem appeared in an “Ask Marilyn”
column, by Marilyn vos Savant:
There are five cars on display as prizes, and their five
ignition keys are in a box. You get to pick one key out
of the box and try it in the ignition of one car. If it fits,
you win the car. What are your chances of winning 
a car?
Answer this question.
20. Answer the question in Problem 19 assuming that you are in
the audience and want the probability that the contestant will
win the car you have selected.
18. Consider the set of octahedral dice shown in Figure 13.10.
Suppose your opponent chooses die D. Which die would you
choose, and why, if the game consists of each player rolling
his or her chosen die once and the higher number on top is
the winner?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

on your first turn when
playing a Monopoly
game?
b. Is it possible to make it
from GO to Park Place on
your first roll of the dice in
a Monopoly game? If so,
what is the probability that
not only would that
happen, but also that you
would obtain a 2 on your
next roll to complete a set
(a monopoly)?
G44. Birthday problem:
a. Experiment: Consider the birthdates of some famous 
mathematicians:
Abel
August 5, 1802
Cardano
September 24, 1501
Descartes
March 31, 1596
Euler
April 15, 1707
Fermat
August 17, 1601
Galois
October 25, 1811
Gauss
April 30, 1777
Newton
December 25, 1642
Pascal
June 19, 1623
Riemann
September 17, 1826
Add to this list the birthdates of the members of your class. But before you
compile this list, guess the probability that at least two people in this group will
have exactly the same birthday (not counting the year). Be sure to make your
guess before finding out the birthdates of your classmates. The answer, of course,
depends on the number of people on the list. Ten mathematicians are listed and you
may have 20 people in your class, giving 30 names on the list.
b. Find the probability of at least one birthday match among 3 randomly selected
people. (See Example 4, Section 13.4.)
c. Find the probability of at least one birthday match among 23 randomly selected
people. Have each person in your group pick 23 names at random from a bio-
graphical dictionary or a Who’s Who, and verify empirically the probability you
calculated.
Section 13.6
Chapter Summary
657
See the links for this 
problem at
www.mathnature.com
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions. 
G43. a. In how many possible ways can 
you land on jail (just visiting) 
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
Austin MacRae
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

658
CHAPTER 13
The Nature of Probability
d. Draw a graph showing the probability of a birthday match given a group of n
people. How many people are necessary for the probability actually to reach 1?
e. In the previous parts of this problem we interpreted two people having the same
birthday as meaning at least 2 have the same birthday (see Example 4, Section
13.4). We now refine this idea. Find the following probabilities for a group of 
5 randomly selected people: 
Exactly 2 of the 5 have the same birthday.
Exactly 3 have the same birthday.
Exactly 4 have the same birthday.
All 5 have the same birthday.
There are exactly two pairs sharing 
(a different) birthday.
There is a full house of birthdays 
(that is, three share one birthday,
and two share another).
Show that the questions of this problem account for all the possibilities; that is,
show that the sum of the probabilities for all of these possibilities is the same as
for the original birthday problem involving 5 persons: What is the probability of a
birthday match among 5 randomly selected people? 
G45. Consider the following classroom activity. Suppose the floor consists of square tiles
9 in. on each side. The players will toss a circular disk onto the floor. If the disk
comes to rest on the edge of any tile, the player loses $1. Otherwise, the player wins
$1. What is the probability of winning if the disk is:
a. a dime
b. a quarter
c. a disk with a diameter of 4 in.
d. Now, the real
question: What size should the disk be so that the probability that the player wins
is 0.45?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are ideas for extending some of the ideas in this chapter. You can find references to
these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 13.1 Devise a fair scheme for eliminating coins in this country.
PROJECT 13.2 Find the probability that the 13th day of a randomly chosen month will be
a Friday.
PROJECT 13.3 You have five alternatives from which to choose. List your preferences for
the alternatives from best to worst.
1. Sure win of $5 and no chance of loss
2. 6.92% chance to win $20 and 93.08% chance to win $3.98
3. 27.52% chance to win $20 and 72.48% chance to lose 69 cents
4. 61.85% chance to win $20 and 38.15% chance to lose $19.31
5. 90.46% chance to win $20 and 9.54% chance to lose $137.20
a. Answer the question based on your own feelings.
b. Answer the question using mathematical expectation as a basis for selecting your
answer.
c. Conduct a survey of at least 10 people and summarize your results.
d. What are the conclusions of the study?
PROJECT 13.4
a. Choose between A and B:
A. A sure gain of $240
B. 25% chance to gain $1,000 and 75% chance to gain $0
b. Choose between C and D:
C. A sure loss of $700
D. 75% chance to lose $1,000 and 25% chance to lose nothing
c. Choose between E and F:
E. Imagine that you have decided to see a concert and have paid the admission
price of $10. As you enter the concert hall, you discover that you have lost
your ticket. Would you pay $10 for another ticket?
F. Imagine that you have decided to see a concert where the admission is $10. As
you begin to enter the concert ticket line, you discover that you have lost one
of your $10 bills. Would you still pay $10 for a ticket to the concert?
d. Answer each of the questions* based on your own feelings.
e. Answer questions a and b using mathematical expectation as a basis for selecting
your answers.
f. Conduct a survey of at least 10 people and summarize your results.
PROJECT 13.5 Do some research on Keno probabilities. Write a paper on playing Keno.
*These questions are from “A Bird in the Hand,” by Carolyn Richbart and Lynn Richbart, The Mathematics Teacher,
November 1996, pp. 674–676.
www.mathnature.com 
Section 13.6
Chapter Summary
659
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
14.1 Frequency Distributions 
and Graphs
661
Frequency distributions, bar graphs,
line graphs, circle graphs, pictographs,
misuses of graphs
14.2 Descriptive Statistics
673
Measures of central tendency, 
measures of position, measures 
of dispersion
14.3 The Normal Curve
685
Cumulative distributions, bell-shaped
curves, z-scores
14
Outline
What in the World?
“I signed up for Hunter in History 17,” said Ben.
“Why did you sign up for her?” asked Ted. “Don’t
you know she has given only three A’s in the last 
14 years?!”
“That’s just a rumor. Hunter grades on a curve,”
Ben replied.
“Don’t give me that ‘on a curve’ stuff,” continued
Ted, “I’ll bet you don’t even know what that means.
Anyway, my sister-in-law had her last year and said
it was so bad that . . . .”
Overview
Undoubtedly, you have some idea about what is meant by
the term statistics. For example, we hear about:
Statistics on population growth 
Information about the depletion of the rain forests or the
ozone layer 
The latest statistics on the cost of living 
The Gallup Poll’s use of statistics to predict election
outcomes 
The Nielsen ratings, which indicate that one show has
30% more viewers than another 
Baseball or sports statistics
We could go on and on, but you can see from these exam-
ples that there are two main uses for the word statistics.
First, we use the term to mean a mass of data, including
charts and tables. This is the everyday, nontechnical use of
the word. Second, the word refers to a methodology for col-
lecting, analyzing, and interpreting data. In this chapter,
we’ll examine some of these statistical methods. We do not
intend to present a statistics course, but rather to prepare
you to use statistics in your everyday life, as well as possi-
bly to prepare you to take a college-level statistics course.
14.4 Correlation and 
Regression
694
Regression analysis, best-fitting line
14.5 Sampling
702
Sampling methods, hypothesis testing
Digital Vision/Getty Images
THE NATURE OF STATISTICS
14.6 Chapter Summary
709
Important terms, types of problems, 
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
     Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.1
Frequency Distributions and Graphs
661
14.1  Frequency Distributions and Graphs
There are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies, and statistics.
G. B. HALSTED
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
We are sometimes confronted with large amounts of data, which can be difficult to under-
stand. Computers, spreadsheets, and simulation programs have done a lot to help us deal
with hundreds or thousands of pieces of information at the same time.
Frequency Distribution
We can deal with large batches of data by organizing them into groups, or classes. The
difference between the lower limit of one class and the lower limit of the next class is
called the interval of the class. After determining the number of values within a class,
termed the frequency, you can use this information to summarize the data. The end result
of this classification and tabulation is called a frequency distribution. For example, sup-
pose that you roll a pair of dice 50 times and obtain these outcomes:
3, 2, 6, 5, 3, 8, 8, 7, 10, 9, 7, 5, 12, 9, 6, 11, 8, 11, 11, 8, 7, 7, 7, 10, 11, 6, 4, 8, 
8, 7, 6, 4, 10, 7, 9, 7, 9, 6, 6, 9, 4, 4, 6, 3, 4, 10, 6, 9, 6, 11
We can organize these data in a convenient way by using a frequency distribution, as
shown in Table 14.1.
TABLE 14.1
Frequency Distribution 
for 50 Rolls of a Pair of Dice
Outcome
Tally
Frequency
2
⏐
1
3
⏐⏐⏐
3
4
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
⎯
5
5
⏐⏐
2
6
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
⎯⏐⏐⏐⏐
9
7
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
⎯⏐⏐⏐
8
8
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
⎯⏐
6
9
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
⎯⏐
6
10
⏐⏐⏐⏐
4
11
⏐⏐⏐⏐
⎯
5
12
⏐
1
TABLE 14.2
High Temperatures on Lake Erie
for the Month of October
74 79 79 85 69 69 65
75 81 82 74 70 71 61
75 80 86 70 62 71 69
77 78 82 82 71 75 64
77 82 86
Example
1
Make a frequency diagram
Make a frequency distribution for the high temperatures (in °F) for October on Lake
Erie as summarized in Table 14.2.
Solution
First, notice that the included temperatures range from a low of 61 to a high
of 86. If we were to list each temperature and make tally marks for each, we would have
a long table with few entries for each temperature. Instead, we arbitrarily divide the tem-
peratures into eight categories. Make the tallies and total the number in each group. The
result is called a grouped frequency distribution.
2
7
3
1
4
2
7
5
10
5
2
0
Temperature
Tally
Number
below 60
60–64
⏐⏐⏐
3
65–69
⏐⏐⏐⏐
4
70–74
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
⎯⏐⏐
7
75–79
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
⎯⏐⏐⏐
8
80–84
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
⎯⏐
6
85–89
⏐⏐⏐
3
90 and above
A graphical method useful for organizing large sets of data is a stem-and-leaf plot.
Consider the data shown in Table 14.3.* For these data we form stems representing
decades of the ages of the actors. For example, Jamie Foxx, who won the 2004 best actor
award in 2005 for his role in Ray, was 38 years of age when he won the award. We would
say that the stem for this age is 3 (for 30), and the leaf is 8.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

662
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
Example
2
Make a stem-and-leaf plot
Construct a stem-and-leaf plot for the best actor ages in Table 14.3.
Solution
Stem-and-leaf plot of ages of best actor, 1928–2009.
2 9
3 0 1 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 5 5 5 6 7 7 7 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 9 9
4 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 5 5 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 8 8 8 8 8 9 9 9
5 0 1 1 2 2 3 5 5 6 6 6 9
6 0 1 2
7 6
This plot is useful because it is easy to see that most best actor winners received the
award in their forties.
TABLE 14.3
Best Actors, 1928–2009
Year
Actor
Age Movie
1928
Emil Jannings
44
The Way of All Flesh 
1929
Warner Baxter
38
In Old Arizona 
1930
George Arliss
46
Disraeli 
1931
Lionel Barrymore
53
A Free Soul 
Fredric March
35
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
1932
Wallace Beery
tie
47
The Champ
1933
Charles Laughton
34
The Private Life of Henry VIII 
1934
Clark Gable
33
It Happened One Night 
1935
Victor McLaglen
49
The Informer 
1936
Paul Muni
41
The Story of Louis Pasteur 
1937
Spencer Tracy
37
Captains Courageous 
1938
Spencer Tracy
38
Boys’ Town 
1939
Robert Donat
34
Goodbye Mr. Chips
1940
James Stewart
32
The Philadelphia Story 
1941
Gary Cooper
40
Sergeant York 
1942
James Cagney
48
Yankee Doodle Dandy 
1943
Paul Lukas
48
Watch on the Rhine 
1944
Bing Crosby
43
Going My Way 
1945
Ray Milland
40
The Lost Weekend 
1946
Fredric March
49
The Best Years of Our Lives 
1947
Ronald Colman
56
A Double Life 
1948
Laurence Olivier
41
Hamlet 
1949
Broderick Crawford
38
All the King’s Men 
1950
Jose Ferrer
38
Cyrano de Bergerac 
1951
Humphrey Bogart
52
The African Queen 
1952
Gary Cooper
51
High Noon 
1953
William Holden
35
Stalag 17 
1954
Marlon Brando
30
On the Waterfront 
1955
Ernest Borgnine
38
Marty 
1956
Yul Brynner
41
The King and I 
1957
Alec Guinness
43
The Bridge on the River Kwai 
1958
David Niven
49
Separate Tables 
1959
Charlton Heston
35
Ben Hur 
1960
Burt Lancaster
47
Elmer Gantry
1961
Maximilian Schell
31
Judgment at Nuremburg 
1962
Gregory Peck
46
To Kill a Mockingbird 
1963
Sidney Poitier
39
Lilies of the Field 
1964
Rex Harrison
56
My Fair Lady 
1965
Lee Marvin
41
Cat Ballou 
1966
Paul Scofield
44
A Man for All Seasons
1967
Rod Steiger
42
In the Heat of the Night
1968
Cliff Robertson
43
Charly
f
Year
Actor
Age Movie
1969
John Wayne
62
True Grit 
1970
George C. Scott
43
Patton 
1971
Gene Hackman
40
The French Connection 
1972
Marlon Brando
48
The Godfather 
1973
Jack Lemmon
48
Save the Tiger 
1974
Art Carney
56
Harry and Tonto 
1975
Jack Nicholson
38
One Flew over the Cuckoo’s Nest 
1976
Peter Finch
60
Network 
1977
Richard Dreyfuss
32
The Goodbye Girl 
1978
Jon Voight
40
Coming Home 
1979
Dustin Hoffman
42
Kramer vs Kramer 
1980
Robert De Niro
37
Raging Bull 
1981
Henry Fonda
76
On Golden Pond 
1982
Ben Kingsley
39
Gandhi 
1983
Robert Duvall
55
Tender Mercies 
1984
F. Murray Abraham
45
Amadeus 
1985
William Hurt
35
Kiss of the Spider Woman 
1986
Paul Newman
61
The Color of Money 
1987
Michael Douglas
33
Wall Street 
1988
Dustin Hoffman
51
Rainman
1989
Daniel Day-Lewis
31
My Left Foot 
1990
Jeremy Irons
42
Reversal of Fortune 
1991
Anthony Hopkins
55
Silence of the Lambs 
1992
Al Pacino
52
Scent of a Woman 
1993
Tom Hanks
37
Philadelphia 
1994
Tom Hanks
38
Forrest Gump 
1995
Nicholas Cage
31
Leaving Las Vegas 
1996
Geoffrey Rush
45
Shine 
1997
Jack Nicholson
59
As Good As It Gets 
1998
Roberto Benigni
46
Life Is Beautiful 
1999
Kevin Spacey
41
American Beauty 
2000
Russell Crowe
36
Gladiator 
2001
Denzel Washington
47
Training Day 
2002
Adrien Brody
29
The Pianist 
2003
Sean Penn
43
Mystic River 
2004
Jamie Foxx
38
Ray 
2005
Philip Seymour Hoffman
38
Capote
2006
Forest Witaker
46
The Last Kind of Scotland
2007 
Daniel Day-Lewis
50
There Will Be Blood
2008
Sean Penn
48
Milk
2009
Jeff Bridges 
60
Crazy Heart
*The idea for this example came from “Ages of Oscar-Winning Best Actors and Actresses" by Richard Brown and Gretchen Davis, The Mathematics
Teacher, February 1990, pp. 96–102.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.1
Frequency Distributions and Graphs
663
Example
3
Make a bar graph
Construct a bar graph for the Lake Erie temperatures given in Example 1. Use the
grouped categories. 
Solution
To construct a bar graph, draw and label the horizontal and vertical axes, as
shown in part a of Figure 14.2. It is helpful (although not necessary) to use graph paper.
Next, draw marks indicating the frequency, as shown in part b of Figure 14.2. Finally,
complete the bars and shade them as shown in part c.
The data sets {32, 56, 47, 30, 41} and {3.2, 5.6, 4.7, 3.0, 4.1} have the same stem-
and-leaf plots, with the first set having a leaf unit of 1 and the second set having a leaf
unit of 0.1.
To help us understand the relationship between and among variables, we use a dia-
gram called a graph. In this section, we consider bar graphs, line graphs, circle graphs,
and pictographs.
Bar Graphs
A bar graph compares several related pieces of data using horizontal or vertical bars of
uniform width. There must be some sort of scale or measurement on both the horizontal
and vertical axes. An example of a bar graph is shown in Figure 14.1, which shows the
data from Table 14.1.
2
10
Frequency
12
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11
8
6
4
2
0
FIGURE 14.1 Outcomes of experiment of
rolling a pair of dice
a.  Draw and label axes and scales.
b.  Mark the frequency levels.
c.  Complete and shade the bars.
5
10
Frequency
Temperature
62
67 72
77 82 87
5
10
Frequency
Temperature
62
67 72
77 82 87
5
10
Frequency
Temperature
62
67 72
77 82 87
FIGURE 14.2 Bar graph for Lake Erie temperatures
You will frequently need to look at and interpret bar graphs in which bars of differ-
ent lengths are used for comparison purposes.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Line Graphs
A graph that uses a broken line to illustrate how one quantity changes with respect to an-
other is called a line graph. A line graph is one of the most widely used kinds of graph.
664
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
Example
4
Read a bar graph
Refer to Figure 14.3 to answer the following questions.
a. What was the share of U.S. employment in manufacturing in 1999? 
b. In which year(s) was U.S. employment in services approximately equal to employment
in manufacturing? 
c. From the graph, form a conclusion about U.S. employment in agriculture for the
period 1849–2049.
Solution
a. We see the bar representing manufacturing in 1999 is approximately 20%. (Use a
straightedge for help.) 
b. Employments in services and manufacturing were approximately equal in 1949. 
c. Conclusions, of course, might vary, but one obvious conclusion is that there has been
a dramatic decline of employment in agriculture in the United States over this period
of time.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100%
Agriculture
Manufacturing
Services
1849
1899
1949
1999
2049
FIGURE 14.3 Share of U.S. employ-
ment in agriculture, manufacturing,
and services from 1849 to 2049
Example
5
Make a line graph
Draw a line graph for the data given in Example 1. Use the previously grouped categories.
Solution
The line graph uses points instead of bars to designate the locations of the
frequencies. These points are then connected by line segments, as shown in Figure 14.4.
To plot the points, use the frequency distribution to find the midpoint of each category
(62 is the midpoint of the 60–64 category, for example); then plot a point showing the
frequency (3, in this example). This step is shown in part a of Figure 14.4. The last step
is to connect the dots with line segments, as shown in part b.
FIGURE 14.4 Constructing a line graph for Lake Erie temperatures
Just as with bar graphs, you need to be able to read and interpret line graphs.
b.  Connect the dots with line segments.
5
Frequency
Temperature
62
67 72
77 82 87
a.  Plot the points to represent frequency levels.
5
Frequency
Temperature
62
67 72
77 82 87
Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
and Historical Statistics of the United
States, p. 139; Paine Webber estimates.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.1
Frequency Distributions and Graphs
665
Example
6
Read a line graph
Refer to Figure 14.5 to answer the following questions.
Voter turnout in presidential elections, 1932–2008
Percent of eligible voters
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1932
1936
1940
1944
1948
1952
1956
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
2008
Democrat
Republican
Economic growth
Economic decline
Depression
since 1929
Boom
years
during
WW II
Turnout peaked
at 63.1 percent
as John Kennedy
beat Richard
Nixon
Expansion
years
during
Vietnam era
Bush
years
Nov. 5, 1996
*49%
Lowest in
72 years
Sept. 11, 2001
World Trade
Center
Expansion
years
during Iraq
era
FIGURE 14.5 Voter turnout in presidential elections, 1932–2008
a. In which year was the voter turnout in a presidential election the greatest? 
b. During the period 1932–2008, were there more periods of economic growth or eco-
nomic decline? 
c. What was the voter turnout in 1996? Did a Republican or Democrat win that
election? In which year was the voter turnout the closest to that in 1996? Did a
Republican or a Democrat win in that election?
Solution
a. Voter turnout was the greatest (63.1%) in 1960.
b. Growth is shown as a white region and decline as a shaded region; there are 
13 periods of each, but the growth periods are of greater duration.
c. In 1996 the voter turnout was 49% and a Democrat won the election. Voter turnout had
not been that low since 1988 (about 51%), when the winner was a Republican, or since
1948 (about 52%), when the winner was a Democrat.
Factual science may
collect statistics and
make charts, but its
predictions are, as
has been said, past
history reversed.
John Dewey
Solution
The first step in constructing a circle graph is to write the ratio of each en-
try to the total of the entries, as a percent. This is done by finding the total ($120,000)
and then dividing each entry by that total: 
Circle Graphs
Another type of commonly used graph is the circle graph, also known as a pie chart. This
graph is particularly useful in illustrating how a whole quantity is divided into parts—for
example, income or expenses in a budget.
To create a circle graph, first express the number in each category as a percentage of
the total. Then convert this percentage to an angle in a circle. Remember that a circle is
divided into 
, so we multiply the percent by 360 to find the number of degrees for
each category. You can use a protractor to construct a circle graph, as shown in the fol-
lowing example.
360°
Example
7
Make a circle graph
The 2010 expenses for Karlin Enterprises are shown in Figure 14.6. Construct a circle
graph showing the expenses for Karlin Enterprises.
KARLIN ENTERPRISES
EXPENSE
REPORT
FY 2007
Salaries
$ 72,000
Rents, taxes, insurance
$ 24,000
Utilities
$
6,000
Advertising
$ 12,000
Shrinkage
$
1,200
Materials and supplies
$
1,200
Depreciation
$
3,600
TOTAL
$120,000
FIGURE 14.6 Karlin Enterprises expenses
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Salaries:
Rents:
Utilities:
Advertising:
Shrinkage:
Depreciation:
Materials/supplies:
1,200
120,000 5 1%
3,600
120,000 5 3%
1,2000
120,000 5 1%
12,000
120,000 5 10%
6,000
120,000 5 5%
24,000
120,000 5 20%
72,000
120,000 5 60%
666
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
A circle has 360°, so the next step is to multiply each percent by 360°:
Salaries:
360°  0.60  216°
Advertising:
360°  0.10  36°
Rents:
360°  0.20  72°
Shrinkage:
360°  0.01  3.6°
Materials/supplies:
360°  0.01  3.6°
Utilities:
360°  0.05  18°
Depreciation:
360°  0.03  10.8°
Finally, use a protractor to construct 
the circle graph as shown in
Figure 14.7.
Salaries, 60%
(216°)
Rents, 20%
(72°)
Depreciation, 3%  (10.8°)
Materials, 1%  (3.6°)
Shrinkage, 1%  (3.6°)
Advertising, 10%  (36°)
Utilities, 5%  (18°)
FIGURE 14.7 Circle graph showing the expenses
for Karlin Enterprises
Pictographs
A pictograph is a representation of data that uses pictures to show quantity. Consider the
raw data shown in Table 14.4.
TABLE 14.4
Marital Status* (for persons age 65 and older)
Married
Widowed
Divorced
Never Married
Women
5.4
7.2
0.4
0.8
Men
7.5
1.4
0.3
0.6
*In millions, rounded to the nearest 100,000.
A pictograph uses a picture to illustrate data; it is normally used only in popular pub-
lications, rather than for scientific applications. For the data in Table 14.4, suppose that
we draw pictures of a woman and a man so that each picture represents 1 million persons,
as shown in Figure 14.8.
Women
Men
Married
Divorced
Widowed
Never married
FIGURE 14.8 Pictograph showing the marital status of 
persons age 65 and older
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.1
Frequency Distributions and Graphs
667
Misuses of Graphs
The most misused type of graph is the pictograph. Consider the data from Table 14.4. Such
data can be used to determine the height of a three-dimensional object, as in part a of
Figure 14.9. When an object (such as a person) is viewed as three-dimensional, differences
seem much larger than they actually are. Look at part b of Figure 14.9 and notice that, as
the height and width are doubled, the volume is actually increased eightfold.
a. Pictograph representing values as heights 
b. Doubling height and width increases volume 8-fold 
1 in.
1 in.
1 in.
FIGURE 14.9 Examples of misuses in pictographs
This pictograph fallacy carries over to graphs of all kinds, especially since software
programs easily change two-dimensional scales to three-dimensional scales. For exam-
ple, percentages are represented as heights on the scale shown in Figure 14.10a, but the
software has incorrectly drawn the graph as three-dimensional bars. Another fallacy is to
choose the scales to exaggerate or diminish real differences. Even worse, graphs are
sometimes presented with no scale whatsoever, as illustrated in a graphical “comparison”
between Anacin and “regular strength aspirin” shown in Figure 14.10b.
a. Heights are used to graph three-dimensional objects.
50
40
30
20
10
%
Physicians
Public
Percentage of physicians and general public
reporting that they or a family member has 
been a victim of a medical error
b. No scale is shown in this Anacin advertisment.
BETTER THAN REGULAR
STRENGTH ASPIRIN.
PAIN RELIEF LEVEL
REGULAR
STRENGTH
ASPIRIN
Source: Blendon, RJ. New England Journal of Medicine, 2002: 347–1940.
FIGURE 14.10 Misuse of graphs
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Name and describe several different
types of graphs.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Distinguish between a frequency 
distribution and a stem-and-leaf plot.
Problem Set 14.1
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Write down what you think the
following advertisement means:
Nine out of ten dentists recommend Trident for their
patients who chew gum.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Write down what you think the
following advertisement means:
Eight out of ten owners said their cats prefer Whiskas.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

668
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
5. Consider the line graph shown in Figure 14.11.
FIGURE 14.11 Expenses for two sales people 
of the Leadwell Pencil Company
a. During which month did Herb incur the most expenses?
b. During which month did Lisa incur the least expenses?
6. Consider the graph shown in Figure 14.12.
FIGURE 14.12 Major TV network ratings
a. How many networks are tracked?
Can you think of any other networks that might have 
been included? If so, why do you think they have not 
been included?
b. In which year(s) were the various networks tracked?
c. Which network showed a trend of increased numbers of
viewers in 2008?
7. Consider the graph shown in Figure 14.13.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
FIGURE 14.13 U.S. trade with Canada
a. What is being illustrated in this graph?
b. Did the United States have more imports or exports for the
years 1990–2005?
0
40
80
120
160
200
240
1990
1995
Year
U.S. Imports 
from Canada
U.S. Exports 
to Canada
2000
2005
0
2
4
6
8
HOUSEHOLDS (MILLIONS)
10
12
14
16
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
ABC
CBS
NBC
FOX
UPN
WB
Expenses ($)
Month
J F MAM J J A S O N D
100
200
300
400
Lisa
Brown
Herb
Smith
8. Consider the graph shown in Figure 14.14.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
FIGURE 14.14 U.S. trade with Mexico
a. What is being illustrated in this graph?
b. Did the United States have more imports or exports for the
years 1990–2005?
9. The amount of electricity used in a typical all-electric home is
shown in the circle graph in Figure 14.15.
FIGURE 14.15 Home electricity usage
If, in a certain month, a home used 1,100 kWh (kilowatt-
hours), find the amounts of electricity used from the graph.
a. The amount of electricity used by the water heater
b. The amount of electricity used by the stove
c. The amount of electricity used by the refrigerator
d. The amount of electricity used by the clothes dryer
10. At a well-known major university, the career choices of 1,500
graduates from an MS program are shown in Figure 14.16.
FIGURE 14.16 Career choices of graduates 
Continue for
Ph.D.
29%
Other research
6%
Postdoctoral
position
21%
National
laboratory
19%
Nuclear Industry
4%
Industry 
(other than 
nuclear)
21%
Heating and
air conditioning
42%
Water
heater
11%
Miscellaneous
19%
Refrigerator
19%
Stove
4%
Clothes dryer
5%
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
1990
1995
Year
U.S. Imports 
from Mexico
U.S. Exports 
to Mexico
2000
2005
© 2008 The Nielsen Company. All Rights
Reserved.Chart: ©TVbytheNumbers.com LLC
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.1
Frequency Distributions and Graphs
669
Decide whether something is wrong with each of the graphs shown
in Problems 13–17. Explain your reasoning. 
13. Consider the graph shown in Figure 14.19. Clearly, Anacin 
is better.
FIGURE 14.19 Advertisement for a pain reliever
14. Consider the graph shown in Figure 14.20. Chevy trucks are
clearly better.
FIGURE 14.20 Advertisement for Chevy trucks
15. Consider the graph shown in Figure 14.21. The potential com-
mercial forest growth, as compared with the current commer-
cial forest growth, is almost double (44.9 to 74.2).
Source: U.S. Forest Service
FIGURE 14.21 From the U.S. Forest Service
10
Cubic feet per acre per year
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Current
74.2
Commercial Forest Growth
44.9
Potential
ANACIN
BUFFERED
ASPIRIN
ASPIRIN
EFFECTIVE
LEVEL
a. How many plan to get a job in a national laboratory?
b. How many are planning to continue for a Ph.D.?
c. How many are planning to enter the nuclear or other
industry?
d. How many are going to continue for further research
(including Ph.D. and postdoctoral)?
11. In Section 14.4 we will discuss scatter diagrams, which are
used to study the relationship between two variables, such as
the students’ final exam score and final grade in Smith’s Math
10 class (see Figure 14.17).
FIGURE 14.17 Class grade vs exam grade
Approximately what is the lowest final exam score received by
a student awarded a final grade of C or better?
A. 50%
B. 55%
C. 60%
D. 65%
12. In Section 14.4 we will discuss scatter diagrams, which are
used to study the relationship between two variables, such as
incomes from crops and livestock for selected states in the
United States, as shown in Figure 14.18.
FIGURE 14.18 State income crops vs livestock
For states with income from crops greater than a billion
dollars, the number of states with income from livestock
greater than a billion dollars is about:
A. 16
B. 5
C. 10
D. 22
$1,000
$2,000
$3,000
$1,000
$2,000
$3,000
X
X
X
X XX
X
X
X
X
X
X
XX
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
XX
Income from crops (in millions)
Income from l ivestock (in millions)
50
60
70
80
90
100
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
F
D
C
B
Class grade
Final exam scores (percents)
A
© 1992 GM Corp. All Rights Reserved.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

670
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
Use this bar graph to answer the questions in Problems 18–23. The
following statement is included with the graph: 
There is no safe way to drive after drinking. These charts
show that a few drinks can make you an unsafe driver. They
show that drinking affects your BLOOD ALCOHOL
CONCENTRATION (BAC). The BAC zones for various num-
bers of drinks and time periods are printed in white, gray, and
red. HOW TO USE THESE CHARTS: First, find the chart that
includes your weight. For example, if you weigh 160 lbs., use
the “150 to 169” chart. Then look under “Total Drinks” at the
“2” on this “150 to 169” chart. Now look below the “2”
drinks, in the row for 1 hour. You’ll see your BAC is in the gray
shaded zone. This means that if you drive after 2 drinks in 
1 hour, you could be arrested. In the gray zone, your chances
of having an accident are 5 times higher than if you had no
drinks. But if you had 4 drinks in 1 hour, your BAC would be in
the red shaded area . . . and your chances of having an
accident 25 times higher.
18. Suppose that you weigh 115 pounds and that you have two
drinks in 2 hours. If you then drive, how much more likely 
are you to have an accident than if you had refrained from
drinking?
19. Suppose that you weigh 115 pounds and that you have four
drinks in 3 hours. If you then drive, how much more likely 
are you to have an accident than if you had refrained 
from drinking?
20. Suppose that you weigh 195 pounds and have two drinks in 
2 hours. According to Figure 14.24, are you seldom illegal,
maybe illegal, or definitely illegal?
21. Suppose that you weigh 195 pounds and that you have
four drinks in 3 hours. According to Figure 14.24, are 
you seldom illegal, maybe illegal, or definitely illegal?
22. If you weigh 135 pounds, how many drinks in 3 hours would
you need to be definitely illegal?
23. If you weigh 185 pounds and drink a six-pack of beer during a
3-hour baseball game, can you legally drive home?
Level  2
Consider the following data sets:
Data set A: The annual wages of employees at a small accounting
firm are given in thousands of dollars.
25
25
25
30
30
35
50
60
16
14
18
18
20
Data set B: The numbers of cars registered to homes in a certain
neighborhood are given.
1
2
1
1
0
3
4
1
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
Data set C: The heights (rounded to the nearest inch) of 
30 students are given.
66
68
65
70
67
67
68
64
64
66
64
70
72
71
69
64
63
70
71
63
68
67
67
65
69
65
67
66
69
69
16. Consider the graph shown in Figure 14.22.
FIGURE 14.22 Pictograph showing conflicting estimates 
of oil and gas reserves
17. The graph shown in Figure 14.23 was circulated 
throughout the mathematics department of a leading 
college.
FIGURE 14.23 Math 155 final grades
When a person in California renews the registration for an
automobile, the bar graph shown in Figure 14.24 is included with
the bill. 
FIGURE 14.24 Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) charts
(.01% – .04%) Seldom illegal
SHADINGS IN THE CHARTS ABOVE MEAN:
(.05% – .09%) May be illegal
(.10% Up) Definitely illegal
(.05% – .09%) Illegal if under 18 yrs. old
BAC Zones:   90 to 109 lbs.
TIME
FROM 1st
DRINK
110 to 129 lbs.
130 to 149 lbs.
TOTAL DRINKS
TOTAL DRINKS
TOTAL DRINKS
TOTAL DRINKS
1 hr
2 hrs
3 hrs
4 hrs
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
150 to 169 lbs.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
BAC Zones:   170 to 189 lbs.
TIME
FROM 1st
DRINK
190 to 209 lbs.
210 to 229 lbs.
TOTAL DRINKS
1 hr
2 hrs
3 hrs
4 hrs
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1
230 lbs. & up
TOTAL DRINKS
TOTAL DRINKS
TOTAL DRINKS
FINAL GRADE
W
F
D
C
B
A
5
16.8
10
15
20
25
30
16.8
15
27.1
16.8
7.5
PERCENT
0
FALL 2002  MATH 155  GRADES OF STUDENTS WHO
PREVIOUSLY TOOK MATH 155 DURING
FALL 2001, SPRING 2002  OR SUMMER 2002
How much is "in the bank"?
Conflicting estimates of undiscovered oil and gas reserves—
which can be recovered and produced.
530
Trillion cubic ft.
Estimated by
National
Academy
of Science
1,000
Trillion cubic ft.
Estimated by
U.S.
Geological
Survey
374
Trillion cubic ft.
Estimated by
Oil
Company
200
Billion barrels
Estimated by
U.S.
Geological
Survey
113
Billion barrels
Estimated by
National
Academy
of Science
89
Billion barrels
Estimated by
Oil
Company
Oil Reserves
Gas Reserves
Prepared by the Department of Motor Vehicles in 
cooperation with the Highway Patrol.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.1
Frequency Distributions and Graphs
671
a. Draw a bar graph using the shown scale.
b. Draw a bar graph using the shown scale.
c. If you were an advertiser working on a promotion campaign
for Brand A, which graph would seem to give your product
a more distinct advantage?
42. The financial report from a small college shows the following
income:
Tuition
$1,388,000
Development
90,000
Fund-raising
119,000
Athletic Dept.
44,000
Interest
75,000
Tax subsidy
29,000
TOTAL
$1,745,000
Draw a circle graph showing this income.
43. The financial report from a small college shows the following
expenses:
Salaries
$1,400,000
Academic
$68,000
Plant Operations
$196,000
Student activities
$31,000
Athletic programs
$50,000
TOTAL
$1,745,000
Draw a circle graph showing this income.
44. The national debt is of growing concern in the United States. It
reached $1 billion in 1916 during World War I and climbed to
$278 billion by the end of World War II. It reached its first tril-
lion on October 1, 1981, and rose to $2 trillion on April 3, 1986.
The third trillion milestone was reached on April 4, 1990. How-
ever, the magnitude of the national debt became headline news
when it reached $4 trillion and became a presidential campaign
slogan for Ross Perot in 1992. It passed $5 trillion in 1996, $6
trillion in 2002, and on January 15, 2004, it reached $7 trillion.
We hardly noticed the other milestones:
$8 trillion on October 18, 2005;
$9 trillion on March 6, 2006;
$10 trillion on October 7, 2008; and 
$11 trillion on March 22, 2009. 
Represent this information on a line graph.
100
Brand A
99
98
97
96
95
Percent
Brand B
Brand C
100
Brand A
80
60
40
20
0
Percent
Brand B
Brand C
Data set D: The temperatures (°F) at a particular location for 
30 days are given. 
57
50
58
45
49
50
53
52
43
55
39
53
50
49
57
45
49
40
47
55
52
58
50
44
59
54
51
49
43
54
Prepare a frequency distribution for each data set in 
Problems 24–27.
24. Data set A
25. Data set B
26. Data set C
27. Data set D
Draw a stem-and-leaf plot for each data set in 
Problems 28–31.
28. Data set A
29. Data set B
30. Data set C
31. Data set D
Draw a bar graph for each data set in Problems 32–35.
32. Data set A
33. Data set B
34. Data set C
35. Data set D
Draw a line graph for each data set in Problems 36–39.
36. Data set A
37. Data set B
38. Data set C
39. Data set D
40. The amounts of time it takes for three leading pain 
relievers to reach a person’s bloodstream are as follows: 
Brand A, 480 seconds; Brand B, 500 seconds; Brand C, 
490 seconds.
a. Draw a bar graph using the shown scale.
b. Draw a bar graph using the shown scale. 
c. If you were an advertiser working on a promotion campaign
for Brand A, which graph would seem to give your product
a more distinct advantage?
41. The numbers of trucks from three automobile 
manufacturers that are still on the road 10 years after they
are originally sold are Brand A, 98%; Brand B, 97.5%;
Brand C, 96.4%. 
500
Brand A
490
480
470
460
450
Seconds
Brand B
Brand C
500
Brand A
400
300
200
100
0
Seconds
Brand B
Brand C
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

672
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
56. How much money is projected for the Social Security system
for the year 2012?
57. There seems to be an error in one of the three line graphs.
What is it?
58. There seems to be an error in the pictograph. What is it? 
59. Find the error in the Saab advertisement.
Problem Solving  3
60. The following advertisements (adapted from “Caveat Emptor”
by Robert Leighton, Games, January, 1988, p. 38) 
show some vastly overpriced items. Read between the lines
and identify the item each ad is describing.
a. Miniature, sparkling white crystals harvested in exotic 
Hawaii make perfect specimens for studying the wonders of
science! Each educationally decorated packet contains
hundreds of refined crystals. Completely safe and nontoxic.
Only $3.95.
b. It’s like having U.S. history in your pocket! Miniature por-
traits of America’s best-loved presidents, Washington sites,
and more. Richly detailed copper and silver engraving. Set
of four, just $4.50.
c. Today multimillion-dollar computers need special 
programs to generate random numbers. But this 
GEOMETRICALLY DESIGNED device ingeniously 
It has a wide stance. (About
55 inches.) So it rides and handles
like a sports car.
Outside, our car is smaller
than a lot of “small” cars. 172"
overall length, 57" overall width.
Inside, our car has bucket
seats up front and a full five feet
across in the back so you can
easily accommodate five adults.
It has more headroom than a
Rolls Royce and more room from
the brake pedal to the back seat
than a Mercedes 280. And it has
factory air conditioning as an
option.
There are a lot of other things
that make our car different from
their car. Like roll cage
construction and a special “hot
seat” for cold winter days.
So before you buy their car,
stop by your nearest SAAB dealer
and drive our car. The SAAB 99E.
We think you’ll buy it instead
of theirs. SAAB 99E
When people who know cars
think about Swedish cars, they
think of them as being strong and
durable. And conquering some of
the toughest driving conditions
in the world.
But, unfortunately, when most
people think about buying a
Swedish car, the one they think
about usually isn’t ours. (Even
though ours doesn’t cost any more.)
Ours is the SAAB 99E. It’s
strong and durable. But it’s a lot
different from their car.
Our car has Front-Wheel
Drive for better traction, stability
and handling.
It has a 1.85 liter, fuel-injected,
4 cylinder, overhead cam engine
as standard in every car. 4-speed
transmission is standard too. Or
you can get a 3-speed automatic
(optional).
Our car has four-wheel disc
brakes and dual-diagonal braking
system so you can stop straight
and fast every time.
There are two cars
built in Sweden.
Before you buy theirs,
drive ours.
45. Top Women on Wall Street
Draw a pictograph to represent
the following data on women in big Wall Street firms. In
1996, women comprised approximately 11% of the top-tier
executives. Regina Dolan, the chief financial officer of Paine
Webber, is one of 46 women among 465 managing directors.
Robin Neustein, the chief of staff at Goldman Sachs, is one
of 9 women among 173 managing directors. Theresa Lang,
the company treasurer for Merrill Lynch, is one of 76
women among 694 managing directors.
46. Using Figure 14.13 (Problem 7), what was the approximate
balance of trade with Canada in 2005?
47. Using Figure 14.14 (Problem 8), what was the approximate
balance of trade with Mexico in 2005?
48. Using Figure 14.12 (Problem 6), which network had the best
market share in 2008?
49. Using Figure 14.12 (Problem 6), what is the maximum rating
share by any of the tracked networks?
50. Using Figure 14.12 (Problem 6), what is the minimum rating
share by any of the tracked networks?
51. Using Figure 14.12 (Problem 6), form a conclusion.
Level  3
A newspaper article discussing whether Social Security could be cut
offered the information shown in Figure 14.25. Use the information
in these graphs to answer the questions in Problems 52–58.
FIGURE 14.25 Social Security reform
52. What is the difference between the amount of money 
collected from Social Security taxes and the amount paid out
in 1992?
53. How many workers pay into Social Security for each person
getting benefits in 2020?
54. What are “baby boomers”?
55. When will the baby boomers break the bank?
'80
50
100
150
200
Social Security
and Medicare
Federal taxes,
treated as if they
were equal in 1982.
(1982  100)
...These taxes have increased
at a faster rate than the
federal income tax
Income tax
'81 '82 '83 '84 '85 '86 '87 '88 '89 '90 '91 '92 est.
The crunch to come…
How many workers pay into Social Security for each
...Because there will be
fewer workers to tax
1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040
2.4
3.7
3.2
3.2
3.4
2.9
2.0
2.0
1960
'65
'70
'75
'80
'85
'90
0
50
100
150
200
250
$300
Paid out
Collected
Money paid into the system has
been greatly exceeding
Scale in billions of dollars.
Social security taxes were
raised to build a surplus...
1995
$5,000
By one government projection,
the Social Security system will
be paying out more than it is
taking in by 2015, and
the trust fund will run
out of money by the
year 2036.
Scale in billions
of dollars.
But the baby boomers
will break the bank...
'00
'05
'10
'15
'20
'25
'30
'35
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
Source: © 1971 by SAAB-Scania of America, Inc.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.2
Descriptive Statistics
673
14.2   Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics is concerned with the accumulation of data, measures of central
tendency, and dispersion.
Measures of Central Tendency
In Section 14.1, we organized data into a frequency distribution and then discussed their
presentation in graphical form. However, some properties of data can help us interpret
masses of information. We will use the accompanying Peanuts cartoon to introduce the
notion of average.
Do you suppose that Violet’s dad bowled better on Monday nights (185 avg) than on
Thursday nights (170 avg)? Don’t be too hasty to say “yes” before you look at the scores
that make up these averages:
Monday Night
Thursday Night
Game 1
175
180
Game 2
150
130
Game 3
160
161
Game 4
180
185
Game 5
160
163
Game 6
183
185
Game 7
287
186
Totals
1,295
1,190
To find the averages used by Violet in the cartoon, we divide these totals by the num-
ber of games:
Monday Night
Thursday Night
If we consider the averages, Violet’s dad did better on Mondays; but if we consider the
games separately, we see that Violet’s dad typically did better on Thursday (five out of
seven games). Would any other properties of the bowling scores tell us this fact?
Since we must often add up a list of numbers in statistics, as we did above, we use
the symbol 
to mean the sum of all the values that x can assume. Similarly, 
means
to square each value that x can assume, and then add the results; 
means to first add
the values and then square the result. The symbol 
is the Greek capital letter sigma
(which is chosen because S reminds us of “sum”).
The average used by Violet is only one kind of statistical measure that can be used. It
is the measure that most of us think of when we hear someone use the word average. It is
S
ASxB2
Sx2
Sx
1,190
7
5 170
1,295
7
5 185
Peanuts: © 2010 Peanuts Worldwide LLC., dist by UFS, Inc.
ILL. M14.032
bypasses computer technology to provide random 
numbers quickly and easily! Exciting? You bet! Batteries
not required. Only $4.00.
d. They said we couldn’t do it, but we are! For a limited 
time, our LEADING HOLLYWOOD PROP HOUSE 
is dividing up and selling—yes, SELLING—parcels 
of this famous movie setting. You’ve seen it featured
in Lawrence of Arabia, Beach Blanket Bingo, and 
Ishtar! Our warehouse must be cleared! Own a vial
of movie history—a great conversation piece! Only 
$4.50.
e. As you command water—or any liquid—to flow upward!
Could you be tampering with the secrets of the Earth? Your
friends will be amazed! Just $31.99.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

←Most frequent is the mode.
Most frequent is the mode. →
s
s
Violet used the mean and called it the average. Let us consider other measures of
central tendency for Violet’s dad’s bowling scores.
MEDIAN
Rearrange the data values from smallest to largest when finding the median:
Monday Night
Thursday Night
150
130
160
161
160
163
175
←Middle number is the median. →
180
180
185
183
185
287
186
MODE
Look for the number that occurs most frequently:
Monday Night
Thursday Night
150
130
160
161
160
163
175
180
180
185
183
185
287
186
If we compare the three measures of central tendency for the bowling scores, we find the
following:
These ideas are essential
for understanding many
concepts.
The mean is the most sensi-
tive average. It reflects the
entire distribution and is the
most common average.
The median gives the mid-
dle value. It is useful when
there are a few extraordinary
values to distort the mean.
The mode is the average that
measures “popularity.” It is
possible to have no mode or
more than one mode.
called the mean. Other statistical measures, called averages or measures of central
tendency, are defined in the following box.
Monday Night
Thursday Night
Mean
185
170
Median
175
180
Mode
160
185
We are no longer convinced that Violet’s dad did better on Monday nights than on
Thursday nights. (See highlighted parts for the winning night, according to each measure
of central tendency—Thursday wins two out of three.)
1. Mean
The number found by adding the data and then dividing by the number
of data values. The mean is usually denoted by :
2. Median
The middle number when the numbers in the data values are 
arranged in order of size. If there are two middle numbers (in the 
case of an even number of data), the median is the mean of these 
two middle numbers.
3. Mode
The value that occurs most frequently. If no number occurs more 
than once, there is no mode. It is possible to have more than one mode.
x 5 Sx
n
x
Measures of Central Tendency
674
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.2
Descriptive Statistics
675
Example
1
Find the mean, median, and mode
Find the mean, median, and mode for the following sets of numbers.
a. 3, 5, 5, 8, 9
b. 4, 10, 9, 8, 9, 4, 5
c. 6, 5, 4, 7, 1, 9
Solution
a. Mean:
Median:
Arrange in order: 3, 5, 5, 8, 9. The middle term is the median: 5.
Mode:
The most frequently occurring term is the mode: 5.
b. Mean:
Median:
4, 4, 5, 8, 9, 9, 10; the median is 8.
Mode:
The data have two modes: 4 and 9. If data have two modes, we say they are
bimodal.
c. Mean:
Median:
1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9; the median is 
Mode:
There is no mode because no term appears more than once.
11
2 5 5.5.
6 1 5 1 4 1 7 1 1 1 9
6
5 32
6 < 5.33
4 1 10 1 9 1 8 1 9 1 4 1 5
7
5 49
7 5 7
5 3 1 5 1 5 1 8 1 9
5
5 30
5 5 6
sum of terms
number of terms
2
1 3
5  6
2
 11
2
A rather nice physical model illustrates the idea of the mean. Consider a seesaw that
consists of a plank and a movable support (called a fulcrum). We assume that the plank
has no weight and is marked off into units as shown in Figure 14.26.
Now let’s place some 1-lb weights in the position of the numbers in some given dis-
tribution. The balance point for the plank is the mean. For example, consider the data
from part a of Example 1: 3, 5, 5, 8, 9. If weights are placed on these locations on the
plank, the balance point is 6, as shown in Figure 14.27.
FIGURE 14.26 Fulcrum and plank
model for mean
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
FIGURE 14.27 Balance point for
the data set 3, 5, 5, 8, 9 is 6
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Many calculators have
built-in statistical func-
tions. The method of in-
putting data varies from
brand to brand, and you
should check with your
owner’s manual. Once
the data are entered
your calculator will find
the mean, median, and
sometimes the mode
when you press a single
statistical button.
It is relatively easy to illustrate the basic operations using a calculator. However, as
the processes become more complex, calculators not only become more essential but
at the same time become more dependent upon the particular model of calculator you
might own. In this book, we have made the decision not to be dependent on a particu-
lar model or brand of calculator. For this reason, at this point we recommend you con-
sult the owner’s manual or Web site for your model of calculator. Many calculators
have a 
menu that finds the mean, median, and mode for a given data set.
STAT
COMPUTATIONAL  WINDOW
Example
2
Interpret a bar graph
The graph shown in Figure 14.28
represents the distribution of grades in
Clark’s math class. 
Which of the statements is true?
A. The mean and the mode are the same.
B. The mean is greater than the mode.
C. The median is less than the mode.
D. The mean is less than the mode.
Figure 14.28 Grade distribution for 
Clark’s math class
Frequency
Grade
50
F
60
D
70
C
80
B
90
A
Notice that you are
given data values but
are not given the corre-
sponding frequencies or
relative frequencies.
Therefore, we are not
able to compute the
values of the mean and
median.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
The only measure of central tendency we can determine exactly is the mode: The mode
is the value under the tallest bar. We see the mode is 70. We now estimate the mean. 
In finding the mean, the number 70 would be added most frequently. If the value of 
60 occurred the same number of times as 80, the data would have a mean of 70, but we
see there are more 80s than there are 60s, so the mean must be greater than 70. Similarly,
we see that adding the 50s and 90s would give us a mean of more than 70. Thus, the
mean is greater than 70, and the correct answer is B.
676
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
Example
3
Mean, median, and mode for table values
Consider Table 14.5, which shows the number of days one must wait for a marriage li-
cense in the various states in the United States What are the mean, the median, and the
mode for these data?
Solution
Mean:
To find the mean, we could, of course, add all 50 individual numbers, but in-
stead, notice that
0 occurs 25 times, so write
1 occurs 1 time, so write
2 occurs 1 time, so write
3 occurs 19 times, so write
4 occurs 1 time, so write
5 occurs 3 times, so write
Thus, the mean is
Median:
Since the median is the middle number and there are 50 values, the median is
the mean of the 25th and 26th numbers (when they are arranged in order):
25th term is 0
26th term is 1
Mode:
The mode is the value that occurs most frequently, which is 0.
0 1 1
2
5 1
2
x 5 0 3 25 1 1 3 1 1 2 3 1 1 3 3 19 1 4 3 1 1 5 3 3
50
5 79
50 5 1.58
5 3 3
4 3 1
3 3 19
2 3 1
1 3 1
0 3 25
TABLE 14.5
Wait Time for a 
U.S. Marriage License
Day’s Wait
Frequency
0
25
1
1
2
1
3
19
4
1
5
3
Total
50
s
When finding the mean from a frequency distribution, you are finding what is called
a weighted mean.
Example
4
Find a weighted mean
A sociology class is studying family structures and the professor asks each student to state
the number of children in his or her family. The results are summarized in Table 14.6.
What is the average number of children in the families of students in this sociology
class?
TABLE 14.6 
Family Data
Number 
of Children
Number 
of Students
1
11
2
7
3
3
4
2
5
1
6
1
If a list of scores 
occurs 
times, respectively, then
the weighted mean is
x 5 S1w #  x2
Sw
w1, w2, c , wn
x1, x2, x3, c , xn
Weighted Mean
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.2
Descriptive Statistics
677
Solution
We need to find the weighted mean, where x represents the number of stu-
dents and w the population (number of families).
There is an average of two children per family.
 5 2.12
 5 53
25
 5 1 # 11 1 2 # 7 1 3 # 3 1 4 # 2 1 5 # 1 1 6 # 1
11 1 7 1 3 1 2 1 1 1 1
 x 5 S1w #  x2
Sw
Example
5
Divide exam scores into quartiles
The test results for Professor Hunter’s midterm exam are summarized in Table 14.7.
TABLE 14.7
Grade Distribution
Scores
Number (frequency)
Actual Scores
91–100
4
95, 95, 92, 91
81–90
7
90, 89, 88, 85, 85, 84, 81
65–80
16
80, 78, 78, 75, 74, 74, 74, 72, 70, 70,
70, 69, 68, 65, 65, 65
0–64
3
62, 59, 48
Measures of Position
The median divides the data into two equal parts, with half the values above the median and
half below the median, so the median is called a measure of position. Sometimes we use
benchmark positions that divide the data into more than two parts. Quartiles, denoted by 
(first quartile), 
(second quartile), and 
(third quartile), divide the data into four equal
parts. Deciles are nine values that divide the data into ten equal parts, and percentiles are 99
values that divide the data into 100 equal parts. For example, when you take the Scholastic
Assessment Test (SAT), your score is recorded as a percentile score. If you scored in the 92nd
percentile, it means that you scored better than approximately 
of those who took the test.
92%
Q3
Q2
Q1
Divide these scores into quartiles.
Solution
The quartiles are the three scores that divide the data into four parts. The
first quartile is the data value that separates the lowest 
of the scores from the re-
maining scores; the 2nd quartile is the value that separates the lower 
of the scores
from the remainder. Note that the 2nd quartile is the same as the median since the me-
dian divides the scores so that 
are above and 
are below. The 3rd quartile is the
value that separates the lower 
of the scores from the upper 
.
Begin by noting the number of scores: 
.
First quartile:
0.25(30)
7.5, so 
(the first quartile) is the 8th lowest score. From
Table 14.7, we see that this score is 69.
Second quartile:
the second quartile score, is the median, which is the mean of the 
15th and 16th scores from the bottom. 
.
Third quartile:
, so 
(the third quartile score) is 23 scores from the
bottom (or the 8th from the top). From Table 14.7, we see this score is 85.
Q3
0.751302 5 22.5
74 1 75
2
5 74.5
Q2
Q1
5
4 1 7 1 16 1 3 5 30
25%
75%
50%
50%
50%
25%
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Measures of Dispersion
The measures we’ve been discussing can help us interpret information, but they do not
give the entire story. For example, consider these sets of data:
Set A: 
Mean:
Median:
9
Mode:
9
Set B: 
Mean:
Median:
9
Mode:
9
Notice that, for sets A and B, the measures of central tendency do not distinguish the data.
However, if you look at the data placed on planks, as shown in Figure 14.29, you will see
that the data in Set B are relatively widely dispersed along the plank, whereas the data in
Set A are clumped around the mean.
We’ll consider three measures of dispersion: the range, the standard deviation, and
the variance.
2 1 9 1 9 1 12 1 13
5
5 9
52, 9, 9, 12, 136
8 1 9 1 9 1 9 1 10
5
5 9
58, 9, 9, 9, 106
678
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
a. A = {8, 9, 9, 9, 10}
1
14
13
12
11
10
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
b. B = {2, 9, 9, 12, 13}
1
14
13
12
11
10
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
FIGURE 14.29 Visualization
of dispersion of sets of data
The range of a set of data is the difference between the
largest and the smallest numbers in the set.
Range
Example
6
Find the range
Find the ranges for the data sets in Figure 14.29:
a. Set 
b. Set 
Solution
Notice from Figure 14.29 that the mean for each of these sets of data is the
same. The range is found by comparing the difference between the largest and smallest
values in the set.
a.
b. 13 2 2 5 11
10 2 8 5 2
B 5 52, 9, 9, 12, 136
A 5 58, 9, 9, 9, 106
Notice that the range is determined by only the largest and the smallest numbers in
the set; it does not give us any information about the other numbers.
The range is used, along with quartiles, to construct a statistical tool called a box plot.
For a given set of data, a box plot consists of a rectangular box positioned above a
numerical scale, drawn from 
(the first quartile) to 
(the third quartile). The median
(
, or second quartile) is shown as a dashed line, and a segment is extended to the left to
show the distance to the minimum value; another segment is extended to the right for the
maximum value. Figure 14.30 shows a box plot for the data in Example 5.
Q2
Q3
Q1
FIGURE 14.30 Box plot for grade distribution
50
60
70
80
90
Q1
Q3
Q2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.2
Descriptive Statistics
679
30
40
50
60
70
80
Q1
Q3
Q2
Sometimes a box plot is called a box-and-whisker plot. Its usefulness should be clear
when you look at Figure 14.31. A box plot shows:
1. the median (a measure of central tendency);
2. the location of the middle half of the data (represented by the extent of the box);
3. the range (a measure of dispersion);
4. the skewness (the nonsymmetry of both the box and the whiskers).
The variance and standard deviation are measures that use all the numbers in the
data set to give information about the dispersion. When finding the variance, we must
make a distinction between the variance of the entire population and the variance of a
random sample from the population. When the variance is based on a set of sample
scores, it is denoted by ; and when it is based on all scores in a population, it is denoted
by 
(
is the lowercase Greek letter sigma). We will discuss populations and samples
in Section 14.5, but for this section, we will assume the given data represents a sample
rather than the entire population. The variance for a random sample is found by
To understand this formula for the sample variance, we will consider an example be-
fore summarizing a procedure. Again, let’s use the data sets we worked with in Example 6.
Set A 
Set B 
Mean is 9.
Mean is 9.
Find the deviations by subtracting the mean from each term:
8  9  1
2  9  7
9  9  0
9  9  0
9  9  0
9  9  0
9  9  0
12  9  3
10  9  1
13  9  4
↑
↑
Mean
Mean
52, 9, 9, 12, 136
58, 9, 9, 9, 106
s2 5 S1x 2 x2 2
n 2 1
s
s2
s2
FIGURE 14.31 Box plot
Example
7
Draw a box plot
Draw a box plot for the ages of the actors who received the Best Actor award at the
Academy Awards, as reported in Table 14.3, page 662.
Solution
We find the quartiles by first finding 
, the median. Since there are 83 en-
tries, the median is the middle item. For this example, the middle (42nd) item is 42.
Next, we find 
(first quartile), which is the median of all items below 
. Since
there are 42 elements in this lower portion of the data set, the median of this group is
the mean of the 21st and 22nd values, or 38.
Finally, find 
(third quartile), which is the median of all items above 
. Since
there are 42 elements in this upper portion of the data set, the median of this group
is 48. The minimum age is 29 (Adrien Brody) and the maximum age is 76 (Henry
Fonda), so we have a box plot as shown in Figure 14.31.
Q2
Q3
Q2
Q1
Q2
Historical
Florence Nightingale
(1820–1910)
Even though the origins of statis-
tics are ancient, the development
of modern statistical techniques
began in the 16th century. Adolph
Quetelet (1796–1874) was the
first person to apply statistical
methods to accumulated data. 
He correctly predicted (to his own
surprise) the crime and mortality
rates from year to year. Florence
Nightingale was an early
proponent of the use of statistics
in her work. Since the advent of
the computer, statistical methods
have come within the reach of
almost everyone. Today, statistical
methods strongly influence
agriculture, biology, business,
chemistry, economics, education,
electronics, medicine, physics,
psychology, and sociology. If you
decide to enter one of these
disciplines for a career, you will 
no doubt be required to take at
least one statistics course.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If we sum these deviations (to obtain a measure of the total deviation), in each case
we obtain 0, because the positive and negative differences “cancel each other out.” Next
we calculate the square of each of these deviations:
Set A 
Set B 
18  922  1122  1
12  922  1722  49
19  922  02  0
19  922  02  0
19  922  02  0
19  922  02  0
19  922  02  0
112  922  32  9
110  922  12  1
113  922  42  16
Finally, we find the sum of these squares and divide by one less than the number of
items to obtain the variance:
Set A:
Set B:
The larger the variance, the more dispersion there is in the original data. However, we
will continue to develop a true picture of the dispersion. Since we squared each difference
(to eliminate the canceling effect of positive and negative differences), it seems reasonable
that we should find the square root of the variance as a more meaningful measure of disper-
sion. This number, called the standard deviation, is denoted by the lowercase Greek letter
sigma ( ) when it is based on a population and by s when it is based on a sample. You will
need a calculator to find square roots. For the data sets of Example 6:
Set A:
Set B:
We summarize these steps in the following box.
< 4.301
< 0.707
s 5 !18.5
s 5 !0.5
s
s2 5 49 1 0 1 0 1 9 1 16
5 2 1
5 74
4 5 18.5
s2 5 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1
5 2 1
5 2
4 5 0.5
52, 9, 9, 12, 136
58, 9, 9, 9, 106
680
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
The standard deviation of a sample, denoted by s, is the square root of the variance.
To find it, carry out these steps:
Step 1
Determine the mean of the set of numbers.
Step 2
Subtract the mean from each number in the set.
Step 3
Square each of these differences.
Step 4
Find the sum of the squares of the differences.
Step 5
Divide this sum by one less than the number of pieces of data. This gives
the variance of the sample.
Step 6
Take the square root of the variance. This is the standard deviation of the
sample.
Standard Deviation
Example
8
Find the standard deviation for a math test
Suppose that Hannah received the following test scores in a math class: 92, 85, 65, 89,
96, and 71. Find s, the standard deviation, for her test scores.
Solution
Step 1
This is the mean.
x 5 92 1 85 1 65 1 89 1 96 1 71
6
5 83
Spend some time with
this box; make sure you
understand not only the
procedure, but also the
concept.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.2
Descriptive Statistics
681
Steps 2–4 We summarize these steps in table format:
Score
Square of the Deviation from the Mean
92
192  8322  92  81
85
185  8322  22  4
65
165  8322  11822  324
89
189  8322  62  36
96
196  8322  132  169
71
171  8322  11222  144
Step 5 Divide the sum by 5 (one less than the number of scores):
We note that this number, 151.6, is called the variance. If you do not have access to a
calculator, you can use the variance as a measure of dispersion. However, we assume
you have a calculator and can find the standard deviation.
Step 6 s 5 Å
758
5
< 12.31
81 1 4 1 324 1 36 1 169 1 144
6 2 1
5 758
5
5 151.6
How can we use the standard deviation? We will begin the discussion in Section 14.3
with this question. For now, however, we will give one example. Suppose that Hannah ob-
tained 65 on an examination for which the mean was 50 and the standard deviation was
15, whereas Søren in another class scored 74 on an examination for which the mean was
80 and the standard deviation was 3. Did Hannah or Søren do better in her respective class?
We see that Hannah scored one standard deviation above the mean 
,
whereas Søren scored two standard deviations below the mean 
;
therefore, Hannah did better compared to her classmates than did Søren.
180 2 2 3 3 5 742
150 1 15 5 652
Level 1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by average?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a measure of central 
tendency?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a measure of dispersion?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Compare and contrast mean, 
median, and mode.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
In 1989, Andy Van Slyke’s 
batting average was better than Dave Justice’s; and in 
1990 Andy once again beat Dave. Does it follows that 
Andy’s combined 1989–1990 batting average is better 
than Dave’s?
Andy
Dave
Hits
AB
Avg.
Hits
AB
Avg.
1989
113
476
0.237
12
51
0.235
1990
140
493
0.284
124
439
0.282
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
A professor gives five exams. Two stu-
dents’ scores have the same mean, although one student did bet-
ter on all the tests except one. Give an example of such scores.
7. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
A professor gives six exams. Two
students’ scores have the same mean, although one student’s
scores have a small standard deviation and the other student’s
scores have a large standard deviation. Give an example of
such scores.
8. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Comment on the following
quotation, which was printed in the May 28, 1989, issue 
of The Community, Technical, and Junior College TIMES:
“Half the American students are below average.”
9. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Comment on the following
quotation:  “I just received my SAT scores and I scored in the
78th percentile in English, and 50th percentile in math.”
10. Is the standard deviation always smaller than the variance?
11. Suppose that a variance is zero. What can you say about 
the data?
Problem Set 14.2
Baseball, as everyone knows, 
is played on a field with a bat 
and a ball.  But baseball is 
also played on paper and 
computers with numbers and 
decimals.  The name of this 
game-within-a-game is 
statistics, and to some fans, it 
is more engrossing and more 
real than the action on the 
field.  Most sports keep 
statistics, but baseball 
statistics are in a league by 
themselves.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Problems 12–21, find the three measures of central tendency
(the mean, median, and mode).
12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
13. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21
14. 103, 104, 105, 106, 107
15. 765, 766, 767, 768, 769
16. 3, 5, 8, 13, 21
17. 1, 4, 9, 16, 25
18. 79, 90, 95, 95, 96
19. 70, 81, 95, 79, 85
20. 1, 2, 3, 3, 3, 4, 5
21. 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 16, 21
In Problems 22–31, find the range and the standard deviation 
(correct to two decimal places). If you do not have a calculator,
find the range and the variance.
22. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
23. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21
24. 103, 104, 105, 106, 107
25. 765, 766, 767, 768, 769
26. 3, 5, 8, 13, 21
27. 1, 4, 9, 16, 25
28. 79, 90, 95, 95, 96
29. 70, 81, 95, 79, 85
30. 1, 2, 3, 3, 3, 4, 5
31. 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 16, 21
32. By looking at Problems 12–15 and 22–25, and discovering a
pattern, answer the following questions about the numbers
217,849, 217,850, 217,851, 217,852, and 217,853.
a. What is the mean?
b. What is the standard deviation?
33. The 2001 monthly cost for health care for an employee and
two dependents is given in the following table.
Provider
Cost
Provider
Cost
Maxicare
$415.24
Kaiser
$433.50
Cigna
$424.77
Aetna
$436.11
Health Net
$427.48
Blue Shield
$442.28
Pacific Care
$428.05
Omni Healthcare
$457.86
Redwoods Plan
$431.52
Lifeguard
$457.94
Draw a box plot for the monthly costs of health care (ranked
from lowest to highest).
Level 2
34. Find the mean, the median, and the mode of the following salaries
of employees of the Moe D. Lawn Landscaping Company:
Salary
Frequency
$25,000
4
$28,000
3
$30,000
2
$45,000
1
35. G. Thumb, the leading salesperson for the Moe D. Lawn Land-
scaping Company, turned in the following summary of sales
for the week of October 23–28: 
Date
No. of Clients
Oct. 23
12
Oct. 24
9
Oct. 25
10
Oct. 26
16
Oct. 27
10
Oct. 28
21
Find the mean, median, and mode.
36. Find the mean, the median, and the mode of the following
scores:
Test Score
Frequency
90
1
80
3
70
10
60
5
50
2
37. A class obtained the following scores on a test:
Test Score
Frequency
90
1
80
6
70
10
60
4
50
3
40
1
Find the mean, the median, the mode, and the range for the
class.
38. A class obtained the following test scores:
Test Score
Frequency
90
2
80
4
70
9
60
5
50
3
40
1
30
2
0
4
Find the mean, median, mode, and range for the class. 
682
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
PictureNet/Corbis
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.2
Descriptive Statistics
683
39. The county fair reported the following total attendance 
(in thousands).
Year
2005
2004
2003
2002
2001
2000
Attendance
366
391
358
373
346
364
Find the mean, median, and mode for the attendance figures
(rounded to the nearest thousand).
40. The following salaries for the executives of a certain company
are known:
Position
Salary
President
$170,000
1st VP
$140,000
2nd VP
$120,000
Supervising manager
$54,000
Accounting manager
$40,000
Personnel manager
$40,000
Dept. manager
$30,000
Dept. manager
$30,000
Find the mean, the median, and the mode. Which measure seems
to best describe the average executive salary for the company?
41. The graph in Figure 14.32 shows the distribution of scores on
an examination. 
FIGURE 14.32 Scores on an examination
Which of the following statements is true about the distribution?
A. The mean is less than the mode.
B. The median is the same as the mode.
C. The median is greater than the mode.
D. The mean is the same as the mode.
42. The graph in Figure 14.33 shows the salaries of the 
employees for a certain company.
FIGURE 14.33 Company salaries
Which of the following statements is true about the distribution?
A. The mean is less than the mode.
B. The median is the same as the mode.
C. The median is greater than the mode.
D. The mean is the same as the mode.
36
44
52
60
68
Salaries (in thousands of dollars)
Frequency
Frequency
Scores
50
60
70
80
90
43. Shoe size for a team of football players ranges from size 10 to
14. The majority of players wear size 12, and the number of
players wearing size 11 is the same as the number wearing size
13. It is also true that the number of players wearing size 10 is
the same as the number wearing size 14. Which statement is
true about the distribution?
A. The median is less than the mode.
B. The mean is less than the mode.
C. The mean is the same as the median.
D. The median is greater than the mean.
44. In a survey, members of a math class were asked how 
many minutes per week they exercised. There were three
possible responses:  10 minutes or less (70% checked this), 
between 10 and 60 minutes (20% checked this one), and 
60 minutes or more (10%). Which statement is true about the
distribution?
A. The mode is less than the mean.
B. The median is less than the mode.
C. The mean is less than the median.
D. The mean is the same as the mode.
Use the nutritional information about candy bars given in Table
14.8 to answer the questions in Problems 45 and 46.
TABLE 14.8
Nutritional Information
about Popular Candy Bars
Company
Serving
Size (g)
Total
Size (g)
Calories
from Fat
Total
Fat (g)
Almond Joy
36
180
90
10
Baby Ruth
60
280
110
12
Butterfinger
42
200
70
8
Clark Bar
50
240
90
10
5th Avenue
57
280
110
12
Heath Bar
40
210
110
13
Hershey
43
230
120
13
Hershey w/alm.
41
230
120
14
100 Grand
43
200
70
8
Kit Kat
42
220
110
12
Milky Way
61
280
100
11
Mr. Good Bar
49
280
160
18
Nestle milk choc.
41
220
110
13
Nut Rageous
45
250
140
15
Peppermint Patty
42
170
35
4
Reese’s Cup
45
240
130
14
Rolo
54
230
110
12
Snickers
59
280
120
14
3 Musketeers
60
260
70
8
Twix
57
280
130
14
45. a. What is the mean calories from fat?
b. What is the median (in grams) of total fat?
c. What is the mode (in grams) of the serving size?
46. a. Find the three quartiles for serving size.
b. Draw a box plot for the calories from fat.
c. What are the mean and standard deviation for total size in
Table 14.8?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Find the standard deviation (rounded to the nearest unit) for the
data indicated in Problems 47–52.
47. Problem 35
48. Problem 34
49. Problem 37
50. Problem 36
51. Problem 39
52. Problem 38
53. The number of miles driven on each of five tires was 17,000,
19,000, 19,000, 20,000, and 21,000. Find the mean, the range,
and the standard deviation (rounded to the nearest unit) for
these mileages.
54. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Roll a single die until all six numbers oc-
cur at least once. Repeat the experiment 20 times. Find the mean,
the median, the mode, and the range of the number of tosses.
55. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Roll a pair of dice until all 
11 possible sums occur at least once. Repeat the experiment 
20 times. Find the mean, the median, the mode, and the range
of the number of tosses.
56. When you take the Scholastic Assessment Test (SAT), your
score is recorded as a percentile score. If you scored in the
92nd percentile, it means that you scored better than 
approximately 92% of those who took the test.
a. If Lisa’s score was 85 and that score was the 23rd score
from the top in a class of 240 scores, what is Lisa’s
percentile rank?
b. Lee has received a percentile rank of 85% in a class of 
50 students. What is Lee’s rank in the class?
Level 3
57. The mean defined in the text is sometimes called the
arithmetic mean to distinguish it from other possible means.
For example, a different mean, called the harmonic mean
(H.M.), is used to find average speeds. This mean is defined to
be the sum of the reciprocals of all scores divided into the
number of scores. For example, the harmonic mean of the
numbers 4, 5, 6, 6, 7, 8 is
a. Find the arithmetic and harmonic mean of the numbers 2, 2,
5, 5, 7, 8, 8, 9, 9, 10.
b. A trip from San Francisco to Disneyland is approximately
460 miles. If the southbound trip averaged 52 mph and the
return trip averaged 61 mph, what is the average speed for the
round trip?  Compare the arithmetic and harmonic means.
58. The mean defined in the text is sometimes called the
arithmetic mean to distinguish it from other possible means. 
For example, a different mean, called the geometric mean
(G.M.), is used in business and economics for finding average
 < 5.7
 5
6
1
4 1 1
5 1 1
6 1 1
6 1 1
7 1 1
8
H.M. 5 n
S1
x
rates of change, average rates of growth, or average ratios. This
mean is defined to be the nth root of the product of the
numbers. For example, the geometric mean of 4, 5, and 6 is
a. Find the arithmetic and geometric means for the numbers 
2, 3, 5, 7, 7, 8, and 10.
b. The growth rates for three cities are 1.5%, 2.0%, and 0.9%.
Compare the arithmetic and geometric means.
Problem Solving 3   
59. Journal Problem
IN YOUR OWN WORDS
The example
about averages of bowling scores at the beginning of this sec-
tion is an instance of what is known as Simpson’s paradox.
The following example illustrates this paradox.*
Player A
At Bat
Hits
Average
Against right-handed pitchers 
202
45
0.223
Against left-handed pitchers
250
71
0.284
Overall
452
116
0.257
Player B
At Bat
Hits
Average
Against right-handed pitchers
250
58
0.232
Against left-handed pitchers
108
32
0.296
Overall
358
90
0.251
Notice that Player A has a better overall batting average than
Player B, but yet is worse against both right-handed pitchers
and left-handed pitchers. The following is an algebraic
statement of Simpson’s Paradox.
Consider two populations for which the overall rate r of 
occurrence of some phenomenon in population A is greater
than the corresponding rate R in population B. Suppose
that each of the two populations is composed of the same
two categories 
and 
, and the rates of occurrence of the
phenomenon for the two categories in population A are 
and , and in population B are 
and 
. If 

and 

, despite the
fact that r  R, then Simpson’s 
paradox is said to have occurred.
a. Relate the variables in this statement to the numbers in the
example.
b. An example of Simpson’s paradox from real life is the fact
that the overall federal income tax rate increased from
1974 to 1978, but decreased for each bracket. Make up a
fictitious example to show how this might be possible.
60. Let Q1, Q2, and Q3 be the quartiles for a large population of
scores. Is the following true or false (with reasons):
Q2 2 Q1 5 Q3 2 Q2
R2
r2
R1
r1
R2
R1
r2
r1
C2
C1
 < 4.9
 5 "
3 120
G.M. 5 14 # 5 # 62 1/3
684
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
*From “Instances of Simpson’s Paradox,” by Thomas R. Knapp, College 
Mathematics Journal, July 1985, pp. 209–211.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.3
The Normal Curve
685
14.3  The Normal Curve
Sometimes we represent frequencies in a cumulative way, especially when we want to
find the position of one case relative to the performance of the group.
Cumulative Distributions
A cumulative frequency is the sum of all preceding frequencies in which some order has
been established.
TABLE 14.9
Number of Previous
Appearances
Number Percent
Cumulative
Percent
0
21%
1
25%
2
24%
3
13%
4
8%
5
5%
6 or more
4%
Bell-Shaped Curves
The cartoon in the margin suggests that most people do not like to think of themselves or
their children as having “normal intelligence.” But what do we mean by normal or nor-
mal intelligence?
Suppose we survey the results of 20 children’s scores on an IQ test. The scores
(rounded to the nearest 5 points) are 115, 90, 100, 95, 105, 95, 105, 105, 95, 125, 120, 110,
100, 100, 90, 110, 100, 115, 105, and 80. We can find 
and 
. A frequency
graph of these data is shown in part a of Figure 14.34. If we consider 10,000 scores instead
of only 20, we might obtain the frequency distribution shown in part b of Figure 14.34.
s < 10.93
x 5 103
Example
1
Find the mean, median, and mode
A judge ordered a survey to determine how many of the offenders appearing in her court
during the past year had three or more previous appearances. The accumulated data are
shown in Table 14.9.
Note the last column shows the cumulative percent. This is usually called the cumu-
lative relative frequency. Use the cumulative relative frequency to find the percent who
had three or more previous appearances, and then find the mean, median, and mode.
Solution
From the cumulative relative frequency we see that 70% had 2 or fewer court
appearances; we see that since the total is 100%, 30% must have had 3 or more previous
appearances. 
The mean is found (using the idea of a weighted mean). Note that the sum is 100%, or 1:
The median is the number of court appearances for which the cumulative percent first
exceeds 
; we see that this is 2 court appearances.
The mode is the number of court appearances that occurs most frequently; we see
that this is 1 court appearance.
50%
 5 1.93
 x 5 010.212 1 110.252 1 210.242 1 310.132 1 410.082 1 51.052 1 610.042
1
Cartoon by David Pascal.
IQ
1
2
3
4
5
70
100
6
0
80
90
110
120
130
70.21 81.14 92.07
103 113.93 124.86 135.79
a. IQs of 20 children
Frequency
–x
x+1s
–
x+2s
–
x+3s
–
x–1s
–
x–2s
–
x–3s
–
–x
x+1s
–
x+2s
–
x+3s
–
x–1s
–
x–2s
–
x–3s
–
IQ
10
70
100
80 90
110 120 130
52
68
84
100
116
132
148
b. IQs of 10,000 children
20
30
40
140
Frequency
FIGURE 14.34 Frequency distributions for IQ scores
21%
46%
70%
83%
91%
96%
100%
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The data illustrated in Figure 14.34 approximate a commonly used curve called a
normal frequency curve, or simply a normal curve. (See Figure 14.35.)
Example
2
Find a normal distribution
Predict the distribution of IQ scores of 1,000 people if we assume that IQ scores are nor-
mally distributed, with a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of 15.
Frequency
+1
+2
+3
–1
–2
–3
34.1% 34.1%
13.6%
13.6%
2.2%
0.1%
2.2%
0.1%
FIGURE 14.35 A normal curve
If we obtain the frequency distribution of a large number of measurements (as with
IQ), the corresponding graph tends to look normal, or bell-shaped. The normal curve has
some interesting properties. In it, the mean, the median, and the mode all have the same
value, and all occur exactly at the center of the distribution; we denote this value by the
Greek letter mu (m). The standard deviation for this distribution is s (sigma). Roughly
68% of all values lie within the region from 1 standard deviation below to 1 standard de-
viation above the mean. About 95% lie within 2 standard deviations on either side of the
mean, and virtually all (99.8%) values lie within 3 standard deviations on either side.
These percentages are the same regardless of the particular mean or standard deviation. 
This curve is important
in many different appli-
cations and when
observing many natural
phenomena.
The normal distribution is a continuous (rather than a discrete) distribution, and it
extends indefinitely in both directions, never touching the x-axis. It is symmetric about a
vertical line drawn through the mean, m. Graphs of this curve for several choices of s are
shown in Figure 14.36.
Mlenny/istockphoto.com
Hallgrímskirkja, a modern Lutheran church in Reykjavik,
Iceland, models a normal curve.
+1
–1
+1
–1
+1
–1
FIGURE 14.36 Variations of normal curves
686
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.3
The Normal Curve
687
Solution
First, find the breaking points around the mean. For 
and 
:
We use Figure 14.35 to find that 34.1% of the scores will be between 100 and 115 1i.e.,
between m and m  1s2: 
About 13.6% will be between 115 and 130 1between m  1s and m  2s2:
About 2.2% will be between 130 and 145 1between m  2s and m  3s2:
About 0.1% will be above 145 1more than m  3s2:
The distribution for intervals below the mean is identical, since the normal curve is the
same to the left and to the right of the mean. The distribution is shown in the margin.
0.001 3 1,000 5 1
0.022 3 1,000 5 22
0.136 3 1,000 5 136
0.341 3 1,000 5 341
 m 2 3s 5 100 2 31152 5 55
 m 1 3s 5 100 1 31152 5 145
 m 2 2s 5 100 2 21152 5 70
 m 1 2s 5 100 1 21152 5 130
 m 2 s 5 100 2 15 5 85
 m 1 s 5 100 1 15 5 115
s 5 15
m 5 100
Expected
Scores
Percent
Number
Above 
55 to 70
2.2%
22
Above 
70 to 85
13.6%
136
Above 
85 to 100
34.1%
341
Above 
100 to 115
34.1%
341
Above 
115 to 130
13.6%
136
Above 
130 to 145
2.2%
22
Above 145
0.1%
1
Totals
100.0%
1,000
Example
3
Find a grading distribution
Suppose that an instructor “grades on a curve.” Show the grading distribution on an
examination of 45 students, if the scores are normally distributed with a mean of 73 and
a standard deviation of 9.
Solution
Grading on a curve means determining students’ grades according to the
percentages shown in Figure 14.37.
Frequency
+1
+2
+3
–1
–2
–3
34.1% 34.1%
13.6%
13.6%
2.2%
0.1%
2.2%
0.1%
FIGURE 14.37 Grade distribution for a class 
“graded on a curve”
We calculate these numbers as shown:
Calculation
Scores
Grade
Calculation
Number
Two or more std. dev. above m
91–100
A
0.023  45  1.04
1
82–90
B
0.136  45  6.12
6
Mean: 
64–81
C
0.682  45  30.69
31
55–63
D
0.136  45  6.12
6
Two or more std. dev. below m
0–54
F
0.023  45  1.04
1
Grading on a curve means that the person with the top score in this class of 
45 receives an A; the next 6 ranked persons (from the top) receive B grades; the bottom
score in the class receives an F; the next 6 ranked persons (from the bottom) receive D
grades; and, finally, the remaining 31 persons receive C grades. Notice that the majority
of the class 
will receive an “average” C grade.
134.1% 1 34.1% 5 68.2%2
m 2 2s 5 73 2 2 # 9 5 55
m 2 1s 5 73 2 1 # 9 5 64
m 5 73
m 1 1s 5 73 1 1 # 9 5 82
m 1 2s 5 73 1 2 # 9 5 91
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

z-Scores
Sometimes we want to know the percent of occurrence for scores that do not happen to be
1, 2, or 3 standard deviations from the mean. For Example 3, we can see from Figure 14.37
that 
of the scores are between the mean and 1 standard deviation above the mean.
Suppose we wish to find the percent of scores that are between the mean and 1.2 standard
deviations above the mean. To find this percent, we use Table 14.10.
34.1%
688
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
TABLE 14.10
Standard Normal Distribution
z-scores
For a particular value, this table gives 
the percent of scores between the mean 
and the z-value of a normally distributed 
random variable. 
Area found in table
0
z
z
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.0 0.0000 0.0040 0.0080 0.0120 0.0160 0.0199 0.0239 0.0279 0.0319 0.0359
0.1 0.0398 0.0438 0.0478 0.0517 0.0557 0.0596 0.0636 0.0675 0.0714 0.0753
0.2 0.0793 0.0832 0.0871 0.0910 0.0948 0.0987 0.1026 0.1064 0.1103 0.1141
0.3 0.1179 0.1217 0.1255 0.1293 0.1331 0.1368 0.1406 0.1443 0.1480 0.1517
0.4 0.1554 0.1591 0.1628 0.1664 0.1700 0.1736 0.1772 0.1808 0.1844 0.1879
0.5 0.1915 0.1950 0.1985 0.2019 0.2054 0.2088 0.2123 0.2157 0.2190 0.2224
0.6 0.2257 0.2291 0.2324 0.2357 0.2389 0.2422 0.2454 0.2486 0.2517 0.2549
0.7 0.2580 0.2611 0.2642 0.2673 0.2704 0.2734 0.2764 0.2794 0.2823 0.2852
0.8 0.2881 0.2910 0.2939 0.2967 0.2995 0.3023 0.3051 0.3078 0.3106 0.3133
0.9 0.3159 0.3186 0.3212 0.3238 0.3264 0.3289 0.3315 0.3340 0.3365 0.3389
1.0 0.3413 0.3438 0.3461 0.3485 0.3508 0.3531 0.3554 0.3577 0.3599 0.3621
1.1 0.3643 0.3665 0.3686 0.3708 0.3729 0.3749 0.3770 0.3790 0.3810 0.3830
1.2 0.3849 0.3869 0.3888 0.3907 0.3925 0.3944 0.3962 0.3980 0.3997 0.4015
1.3 0.4032 0.4049 0.4066 0.4082 0.4099 0.4115 0.4131 0.4147 0.4162 0.4177
1.4 0.4192 0.4207 0.4222 0.4236 0.4251 0.4265 0.4279 0.4292 0.4306 0.4319
1.5 0.4332 0.4345 0.4357 0.4370 0.4382 0.4394 0.4406 0.4418 0.4429 0.4441
1.6 0.4452 0.4463 0.4474 0.4484 0.4495 0.4505 0.4515 0.4525 0.4535 0.4545
1.7 0.4554 0.4564 0.4573 0.4582 0.4591 0.4599 0.4608 0.4616 0.4625 0.4633
1.8 0.4641 0.4649 0.4656 0.4664 0.4671 0.4678 0.4686 0.4693 0.4699 0.4706
1.9 0.4713 0.4719 0.4726 0.4732 0.4738 0.4744 0.4750 0.4756 0.4761 0.4767
2.0 0.4772 0.4778 0.4783 0.4788 0.4793 0.4798 0.4803 0.4808 0.4812 0.4817
2.1 0.4821 0.4826 0.4830 0.4834 0.4838 0.4842 0.4846 0.4850 0.4854 0.4857
2.2 0.4861 0.4864 0.4868 0.4871 0.4875 0.4878 0.4881 0.4884 0.4887 0.4890
2.3 0.4893 0.4896 0.4898 0.4901 0.4904 0.4906 0.4909 0.4911 0.4913 0.4916
2.4 0.4918 0.4920 0.4922 0.4925 0.4927 0.4929 0.4931 0.4932 0.4934 0.4936
2.5 0.4938 0.4940 0.4941 0.4943 0.4945 0.4946 0.4948 0.4949 0.4951 0.4952
2.6 0.4953 0.4955 0.4956 0.4957 0.4959 0.4960 0.4961 0.4962 0.4963 0.4964
2.7 0.4965 0.4966 0.4967 0.4968 0.4969 0.4970 0.4971 0.4972 0.4973 0.4974
2.8 0.4974 0.4975 0.4976 0.4977 0.4977 0.4978 0.4979 0.4979 0.4980 0.4981
2.9 0.4981 0.4982 0.4982 0.4983 0.4984 0.4984 0.4985 0.4985 0.4986 0.4986
3.0 0.4987 0.4987 0.4987 0.4988 0.4988 0.4989 0.4989 0.4989 0.4990 0.4990
Note: For values of z above 3.09, use 0.4999.
First, we introduce some terminology. We use z-scores (sometimes called standard
scores) to determine how far, in terms of standard deviations, a given score is from the
mean of the distribution.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.3
The Normal Curve
689
We use the z-score to translate any normal curve into a standard normal curve 
(the particular normal curve with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1) by using the
definition.
Example
4
Find a probability
Find the probability that for a given normal distribution, a score is between the mean
and the indicated number of standard deviations above that mean.
a. 1 standard deviation
b. 1.2 standard deviations
c. 1.68 standard deviations
Solution
a. Since this is a normal curve, we know from Figure 14.35 that the percentage 
is 34.1%. You can also find this on Table 14.10. Look in the row labeled (at the left)
1.0 and in the column headed 0.00: The entry is 0.3413, which is 34.13%. This is 
denoted by saying that the percentage for 
is 34.13%.
b. We are given 
. Look at the entry in the row marked 1.2 in Table 14.10 and the
0.00 column: It is 0.3849. 
c.
; look in Table 14.10 at the row labeled 1.6 and the column headed 0.08 to
find the entry 0.4535. This means that 45.35% of the values in a normal distribution
are between the mean and 1.68 standard deviations above the mean.
z 5 1.68
z 5 1.2
z 5 1
Example
5
Find probabilities in a normal distribution
The Eureka Lightbulb Company tested a new line of lightbulbs and found their lifetimes to
be normally distributed, with a mean life of 98 hours and a standard deviation of 13 hours.
a. What percentage of bulbs will last less than 72 hours?
b. What percentage of bulbs will last less than 100 hours?
c. What is the probability that a bulb selected at random will last longer than 111 hours?
d. What is the probability that a bulb will last between 106 and 120 hours?
Solution
Draw a normal curve with mean 98 and standard deviation 13, as shown in
Figure 14.38.
If x is a value from a normal distribution with mean m
and standard deviation s, then its z-score is
z 5 x 2 m
s
z-Score
+1
+2
+3
–1
–2
–3
34.1% 34.1%
13.6%
13.6%
2.2%
2.2%
0.1%
0.1%
72
85
98
111
124
59
137
FIGURE 14.38 Lightbulb lifetimes are normally distributed
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

690
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
For this example, we are given 
and 
.
a. For 
, 
This is 2 standard deviations below the mean. The percentage we seek is shown in blue
in Figure 14.39a.
z 5 72 2 98
13
5 22.
x 5 72
s 5 13
m 5 98
z 5 22
z
23
22
21
0
1
2
3
72
85
98
111
124
59
137
z
23
22
21
0
1
2
3
72
85
98
111
124
59
137
z
z 5 1
23
22
21
0
1
2
3
72
85
98
111
124
59
137
a. 2 standard deviations below the mean b. 0.15 standard deviations above the meanc. 1 standard deviation above the mean
FIGURE 14.39 Using z-scores
About 2.3% (2.2%  0.1%  2.3%) will last less than 72 hours. We can also use the
z-score to find the percentage. From Table 14.10, the area to the left of 
is
, so the probability is about 2.3%. 
b. For 
.
This is 0.15 standard deviation above the mean. From Table 14.10, we find 0.0596
(this is shown in green in Figure 14.39b). Since we want the percent of values less
than 100, we must add 
for the numbers below the mean (shown in blue). The
percentage we seek is
or about 
.
c. For 
.
This is one standard deviation above the mean, which is the same as the z-score.
The percentage we seek is shown in blue (see Figure 14.39c). We know that about
15.9% (13.6%  2.2%  0.1%  15.9%) of the bulbs will last longer than 111
hours, so
P(bulb life  111 hours)  0.159
We can also use Table 14.10. For z  1.00, the table entry is 0.3413, and we are look-
ing for the area to the right, so we compute
d. We first find the z-scores using m  98 and s  13. For x  106, 
.
From Table 14.10, the area between the z-score and the mean is 0.2324 (shown in
green in the margin). For 
. From Table 14.10, the area
between this z-score and the mean is 0.4545. The desired answer (shown in yellow)
is approximately 
Since percent and probability are the same, we see the probability that the life of the
bulb is between 106 and 120 hours is about 22.2%.
0.4545 2 0.2324 5 0.2221
x 5 120, z 5 120 2 98
13
< 1.69
106 2 98
13
< 0.62
z 5
0.5000 2 0.3413 5 0.1587
x 5 111,  z 5 111 2 98
13
5 1
56.0%
0.5000 1 0.0596 5 0.5596
50%
x 5 100, z 5 100 2 98
13
< 0.15
0.5  0.4772  0.0228
z  2
z
106
120
23
22
21
0
1
2
3
72
85
98
111
124
59
137
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.3
The Normal Curve
691
Example 5 leads us to the observation that there are three equivalent ideas associated
with the normal curve. These are summarized in the following box.
In a standard normal curve, the following three quantities are equivalent:
Probability of a randomly chosen item lying in an interval;
Percentage of total items that lie in an interval;
Area under a normal curve along an interval.
Normal Curve Interpretations
We will come back to the idea of the area under this curve in Section 18.4.
Sometimes data do not fall into a normal distribution, but are skewed, which means
their distribution has more tail on one side or the other. For example, Figure 14.40a
shows that the 1941 scores on the SAT exam (when the test was first used) were nor-
mally distributed. However, by 1990, the scale had become skewed to the left, as shown
in Figure 14.40b.
200
800
average score; midpoint 500
200
800
midpoint 500
average score
a. 1941 SAT scale
b. 1990 SAT scale
In a normal distribution, the mean, median, and mode all have the same value, but if
the distribution is skewed, the relative positions of the mean, median, and mode would be
as shown in Figure 14.41.
FIGURE 14.40 Distribution of SAT scores
Mode
Mean
Median
Mean
Mode
Median
Mode
Median
Mean
a. Skewed to the right
(positive skew)
b. Normal distribution
Skewed to the left
(negative skew)
c.
FIGURE 14.41 Comparison of three distributions
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

692
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by a cumulative
frequency?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does it mean to “grade on a
curve”?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a normal curve?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does the z-score, or standard
score, represent?
5. What is a distribution that is skewed to the right?
6. When will a z-score be negative?
Find the cumulative distribution, the mean, median, and mode for
each of the tables in Problems 7–12.
7. The number of bedrooms of homes in a certain community is
shown on the table below.
Number of Bedrooms
Percent
0
5%
1
11%
2
29%
3
34%
4
15%
5
5%
6 or more
1%
8. The cumulative grade point average of graduating seniors at a
small liberal arts college is shown in the following table.
GPA
Interval Mean
Percent
3.25–4.00
3.625
23%
2.50–3.24
2.87
41%
1.75–2.49
2.12
19%
1.00–1.74
1.37
6%
0.00–0.99
0.495
11%
9. The table gives the distribution of the number of exemptions
claimed by employees of a large university.
Number of Exemptions
Percent
0
1%
1
11%
2
35%
3
21%
4
20%
5
6%
6
3%
7
2%
8
1%
10. The table shows the distribution of the number of motor
vehicles per household.
No. of 
Motor Vehicles
Proportion
0
0.18
1
0.24
2
0.32
3
0.16
4
0.09
5 or more
0.01
11. A store orders tubes of glue in the proportions shown in the
following table.
Size (oz)
Proportion
2
0.28
6
0.12
8
0.35
12
0.06
16
0.19
Problem Set 14.3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.3
The Normal Curve
693
Level  2
In Problems 35–39, suppose that, for a certain mathematics 
class, the scores are normally distributed with a mean of 75
and a standard deviation of 8. The teacher wishes to give A’s to 
the top 6% of the students and F’s to the bottom 6%. The next 
16% in either direction will be given B’s and D’s, with the other
students receiving C’s. Find the bottom cutoff for the grades in
Problems 35–38.
35. A
36. B
37. C
38. D
39. What is the cumulative distribution?
40. In a distribution that is skewed to the right, which has the
greatest value—the mean, median, or mode? Explain why this
is the case.
41. In a distribution that is skewed to the left, which has the 
greatest value—the mean, median, or mode? Explain why this
is the case.
A normal distribution has a mean of 85.7 and a standard deviation
of 4.85. Find data values corresponding to the values of z given in
Problems 42–45.
42. z  0.85
43. z  2.55
44. z  1.25
45. z  3.46
46. Suppose that the breaking strength of a rope (in pounds) is nor-
mally distributed, with a mean of 100 pounds and a standard
deviation of 16. What is the probability that a certain rope will
break before being subjected to 130 pounds?
47. The diameter of an electric cable is normally distributed, with a
mean of 0.9 inch and a standard deviation of 0.01 inch. What is
the probability that the diameter will exceed 0.91 inch?
48. Suppose that the annual rainfall in Ferndale, California, is
known to be normally distributed, with a mean of 35.5 inches
and a standard deviation of 2.5 inches. About 2.3% of the years,
the annual rainfall will exceed how many inches?
12. The distribution of number of years of education of employees
of a large company is shown in the following table.
Number of
Proportion
Years of School
of Employees
11 or fewer
0.01
12
0.27
13
0.13
14
0.07
15
0.05
16
0.32
17
0.02
18
0.11
19 or more
0.02
What percent of the total population is found between the mean
and the z-score given in Problems 13–24?
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
In Problems 25–29, suppose that people’s heights (in centimeters)
are normally distributed, with a mean of 170 and a standard
deviation of 5. We find the heights of 50 people.
25. a. How many would you expect to be between 165 and 
175 cm tall?
b. How many would you expect to be taller than 
168 cm?
26. a. How many would you expect to be between 170 and 
180 cm?
b. How many would you expect to be taller than 
176 cm?
27. What is the probability that a person selected at random is
taller than 163 cm?
28. What is the variance in heights for this experiment?
29. What is the cumulative distribution?
In Problems 30–34 suppose that, for a certain exam, 
a teacher grades on a curve. It is known that the mean is 
50 and the standard deviation is 5. There are 45 students 
in the class.
30. a. How many students should receive a C?
b. How many students should receive an A?
31. What score would be necessary to obtain an A?
32. If an exam paper is selected at random, what is the probability
that it will be a failing paper?
33. What is the variance in scores for this exam?
34. What is the cumulative distribution? 
z 5 23.41
z 5 22.22
z 5 21.19
z 5 20.46
z 5 20.50
z 5 22.33
z 5 20.6
z 5 3.25
z 5 1.86
z 5 2.43
z 5 0.3
z 5 1.4
The Victorian Village of Ferndale, CA
Larry Lee Photography/CORBIS 
49. About what percent of the years will it rain more than 
36 inches in Ferndale (see Problem 48)?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

694
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
50. In Problem 48, what is the probability that the rainfall in a
given year will exceed 30.5 inches in Ferndale?
51. The breaking strength (in pounds) of a certain new synthetic is
normally distributed, with a mean of 165 and a variance of 9.
The material is considered defective if the breaking strength is
less than 159 pounds. What is the probability that a single,
randomly selected piece of material will be defective?
52. The diameter of a pipe is normally distributed, with a mean of
0.4 inch and a variance of 0.0004. What is the probability that
the diameter of a randomly selected pipe will exceed 0.44 inch?
53. The diameter of a pipe is normally distributed, with a mean of
0.4 inch and a variance of 0.0004. What is the probability that
the diameter of a randomly selected pipe will exceed 0.41 inch?
54. Suppose the neck size of men is normally distributed, 
with a mean of 15.5 inches and a standard deviation of 
0.5 inch. A shirt manufacturer is going to introduce a new line
of shirts. Assume that if your neck size falls between two shirt
sizes, you purchase the next larger shirt size. How many of
each of the following sizes should be included in a batch of
1,000 shirts? 
a. 14
b. 14.5
c. 15
d. 15.5
e. 16
f. 16.5
g. 17
55. A package of Toys Galore Cereal is marked “Net Wt. 12 oz.”
The actual weight is normally distributed, with a mean of 
12 oz and a variance of 0.04.
a. What percent of the packages will weigh less than 
12 oz?
b. What weight will be exceeded by 2.3% of the packages?
56. Instant Dinner comes in packages with weights that are normally
distributed, with a standard deviation of 0.3 oz. If 2.3% of the din-
ners weigh more than 13.5 oz, what is the mean weight?
Level  3
57. Journal Problem
The graph shown in Figure 14.42 is from the
February 1991 issue of Scientific American. If the curve in the
middle is a standard normal curve, describe the variance of the
upper curve (labeled a) and then describe the variance of the lower
curve (labeled b).
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
Two Families
Three Families
Four Families
LEP
Average Z Mass
Billions of Electron Volts
Rate of Z Particles Produced/Luminosity
a
b
FIGURE 14.42 Normal curves
Problem Solving 3   
58. The equation for the standard normal curve is an exponential
equation:
Evaluate this formula for
x  4, 3, . . . , 3, 4.
59. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Calculate values for the equation
and compare with the standard normal curve in Prob-
lem 58. List some similarities and some differences.
60. The equation for a general normal curve with mean 
and stan-
dard deviation 
is
Calculate values for x  20, 30, . . . , 70, 80 where m  50 and
s  10. Note that setting m  0 and s  1 gives the equation
for the standard normal curve (Problem 58).
y 5 e21x2m22/12s22
s"2p
s
m
y 5 22x2
y 5 e2x2/2
"2p
14.4   Correlation and Regression
In mathematical modeling, it is often necessary to deal with numerical data and to make
assumptions regarding the relationship between two variables. For example, you may
want to examine the relationship between 
IQ and salary
Study time and grades
Age and heart disease
Runner’s speed and runner’s brand of shoe
Math grades in the 8th grade and amount of TV viewing
Teachers’ salaries and beer consumption
All are attempts to relate two variables in some way or another. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.4
Correlation and Regression
695
Regression Analysis
If it is established that there is a correlation between two variables, then the next step in
the modeling process is to identify the nature of the relationship. This is called regres-
sion analysis. In this section we consider only linear relationships. It is assumed that you
are familiar with the slope-intercept form of the equation of a line (namely, 
).
If you need a review of graphing lines, you should look at Section 15.1.
We are interested in finding a best-fitting line by a technique called the least squares
method. The derivations of the results and the formulas given in this section are, for the
most part, based on calculus and are therefore beyond the scope of this book. We will at-
tempt to focus instead on how to use and interpret the formulas.
The first consideration is one of correlation. We want to know whether two variables
are related. Let us call one variable x and the other y. These variables can be represented
as ordered pairs 1
2 in a graph called a scatter diagram.
x, y
y 5 mx 1 b
Example
1
Draw a scatter diagram
A survey of 20 students compared the grade received on an examination with the length
of time (to the nearest minutes) the student studied. Draw a scatter diagram to represent
the data in the table.
Student number
1
2
3 4
5 6 7 8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Study time length
30 40 30 35 45 15 15 50 30
0 20 10 25 25 25 30 40 35 20 15
Grade (100 poss.)
72 85 75 78 89 58 71 94 78 10 75 43 68 60 70 68 82 75 65 62
Solution
Let x be the study time (in minutes) and let y be the grade (in points). The
graph is shown in Figure 14.43.
Score
Time (minutes)
10
10
20
30
40
20
30
40
50
60
50
60
70
80
90
100
y
x
FIGURE 14.43 Correlation
between study time and grade
Correlation is a measure to determine whether there is a statistically significant rela-
tionship between two variables. Intuitively, it should assign a measure consistent with the
scatter diagrams as shown in Figure 14.44.
a. Strong positive correlation
c. Negative correlation
y
x
f. No correlation
y
x
d. Positive correlation
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
b. Strong negative correlation
e. Perfect negative
    correlation
FIGURE 14.44 Examples of correlation
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

696
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
Such a measure, called the linear correlation coefficient, r, is defined so that it has
the following properties:
1. r measures the correlation between x and y.
2. r is between 1 and 1.
3. If r is close to 0, it means there is little correlation.
4. If r is close to 1, it means there is a strong positive correlation.
5. If r is close to 1, it means there is a strong negative correlation.
To write a formula for r, let n denote the number of pairs of data present; and as before:
denotes the sum of the x-values.
means square the x-values and then sum.
means sum the x-values and then square.
means multiply each x-value by the corresponding y-value and then sum.
means multiply n times 
.
means multiply 
times 
.
gy
gx
1gx2 1gy2
gxy
ngxy
gxy
1gx2 2
gx2
gx
Example
2
Find a correlation coefficient
Find r for the following data (from Example 1).
Solution
Study Time, x
Score, y
xy
x2
y2
30
72
2,160
900
5,184
40
85
3,400
1,600
7,225
30
75
2,250
900
5,625
35
78
2,730
1,225
6,084
45
89
4,005
2,025
7,921
15
58
870
225
3,364
15
71
1,065
225
5,041
50
94
4,700
2,500
8,836
30
78
2,340
900
6,084
0
10
0
0
100
20
75
1,500
400
5,625
10
43
430
100
1,849
25
68
1,700
625
4,624
25
60
1,500
625
3,600
25
70
1,750
625
4,900
30
68
2,040
900
4,624
40
82
3,280
1,600
6,724
35
75
2,625
1,225
5,625
20
65
1,300
400
4,225
15
62
930
225
3,844
Total: 
gy2 5 101,104
gx2 5 17,225
gxy 5 40,575
gy 5 1,378
gx 5 535
The linear correlation coefficient, r, is
r 5
ngxy 2 1gx2 1gy2
"n1gx22 2 1gx2 2 "n1gy22 2 1gy2 2
Formula for Linear Correlation Coefficient
Student number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Study time length 30 40 30 35 45 15 15 50 30
0 20 10 25 25 25 30 40 35 20 15
Grade (100 poss.) 72 85 75 78 89 58 71 94 78 10 75 43 68 60 70 68 82 75 65 62
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.4
Correlation and Regression
697
 < 0.877
 5
74,270
"58,275"123,196
 5
20140,5752 2 15352 11,3782
"20117,2252 2 15352 2"201101,1042 2 11,3782 2
r 5
ngxy 2 1gx2 1gy2
"n1gx22 2 1gx2 2"n1gy22 2 1gy2 2
Most scientific computers have standard operating procedures for finding not
only the correlation coefficient, but also the best fitting-line (discussed later in
this section). Look at your owner’s manual to find the procedure for properly 
entering the data and then for accessing the 
functions available on your
calculator. The problem you will encounter is learning the correct syntax for
asking your calculator to do what you want it to do. For example, many calcula-
tors use 
to find linear regression and 
to find logarithmic regres-
sion. If you don’t know which buttons to press, you will not be able to obtain the
values you seek.
LnReg
LinReg
STAT
COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
Example 2 shows a very strong positive correlation. But if r for this example had
been 0.46, would we still have been able to conclude that there is a strong correlation?
This question is a topic of major concern in statistics. The term significance level is used
to denote the cutoff between results attributed to chance and results attributed to signifi-
cant differences. Table 14.11 gives critical values for determining whether two variables
are correlated. If 
is greater than the given table value, then we may assume a correla-
tion exists between the variables. If we use the column labeled 
, then we say the
significance level is 
. This means that the probability is 0.05 that we will say the variables
are correlated when, in fact, the results should be attributed to chance, and similarly for a sig-
nificance level of 
. For Example 2, since 
, we see in Table 14.11 that
shows a significant linear correlation at both the 
and 
levels. On the other
hand, if 
and 
, then there is a significant linear correlation at a 
level, but
not at a 
level.
1%
5%
n 5 20
r 5 0.46
5%
1%
r 5 0.877
n 5 20
1a 5 0.012
1%
5%
a 5 0.05
0r0
TABLE 14.11
Correlation coefficient, r
n

0.05
5

0.01
5
4
0.950
0.999
5
0.878
0.959
6
0.811
0.917
7
0.754
0.875
8
0.707
0.834
9
0.666
0.798
10
0.632
0.765
11
0.602
0.735
12
0.576
0.708
13
0.553
0.684
14
0.532
0.661
15
0.514
0.641
16
0.497
0.623
17
0.482
0.606
18
0.468
0.590
19
0.456
0.575
20
0.444
0.561
25
0.396
0.505
30
0.361
0.463
35
0.335
0.430
40
0.312
0.402
45
0.294
0.378
50
0.279
0.361
60
0.254
0.330
70
0.236
0.305
80
0.220
0.286
90
0.207
0.269
100
0.196
0.256
The derivation of this table is
beyond the scope of this course. It
shows the critical values of the
Pearson correlation coefficient.
Example
3
Find a critical value
Find the critical value of the linear correlation coefficient for 13 pairs of data and a sig-
nificance level of 0.05.
Solution
From Table 14.11, the critical value is 0.553. For n  13, any value greater
than r  0.553 or less than 0.553 is evidence of linear correlation.
Example
4
Determine if variables are correlated
If 
and 
, are the variables correlated at a significance level of 
?
Solution
For 
and 
, the Table 14.11 table entry is 0.684. Since r is
negative and 
, we see that there is a negative linear correlation.
0r0 . 0.684
a 5 0.01
n 5 13
1%
n 5 13
r 5 20.85
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The significance of the negative correlation in Example 5 implies that professors’
salaries and beer drinking are related, but be careful! In any event, the techniques in this
chapter can be used only to establish a statistical linear relationship. We cannot establish
the existence or absence of any inherent cause-and-effect relationship on the basis of a
correlation analysis.
Best-Fitting Line
The final step in our discussion of correlation is to find the best-fitting line.* That is, we
want to find a line 
so that the sum of the squared distances of the data points
from this line will be as small as possible. (We use 
instead of y to distinguish between
the actual second component, y, and the predicted y-value, 
.) Since some of these dis-
tances may be positive and some negative, and since we do not want opposites to “cancel
each other out,” we minimize the sum of the squares of the distances. Therefore, the re-
gression line is sometimes called the least squares line.
yr
yr
yr 5 mx 1 b
698
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
Example
5
Find a correlation coefficient
The following table shows a sample of some past annual mean salaries for college pro-
fessors, along with the annual per capita beer consumption (in gallons) for Americans.
Find the correlation coefficient.
Year
1995
1993
1991
1990
1989
1988
Salary
$58,400
$57,400
$55,800
$53,200
$50,100
$47,200
Consumption
22.6
22.8
23.1
24.0
25.4
24.7
Solution
gx  322,100
gy2  3,395.46
gy  142.6
 1.0374841  1011
gxy  7,632,720
 20,334.76
The number r
0.9151 is statistically significant at the 5% level, but not at the
1% level. This means that there is a negative correlation between these two
phenomena.
<
 < 20.9151
 5
617,632,7202 2 1322,1002 1142.62
"611.738705 3 10102 2 1.0374841 3 1011 "613,395.462 2 20,334.76
r 5
ngxy 2 1gx2 1gy2
"n1gx22 2 1gx2 2"n1gy22 2 1gy2 2
1gy2 2
1gx2 2
gx2 5 1.738705 3 1010
n 5 6
Once again, we remind
you to use a calculator
to carry out calculations
such as the ones shown
in Example 5. You should
check the work shown in
this example on your own
calculator. Keep in mind
that many calculators
have built-in function
keys for finding the 
correlation.
*If you  need a review of graphing lines, see Section 15.1.
The least squares (or regression) line is y  mx  b, where
This is the line of best fit.
m 5 n1gxy2 2 1gx2 1gy2
n1gx22 2 1gx2 2   b 5 gy 2 m1gx2
n
Least Squares Line
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.4
Correlation and Regression
699
Example
6
Find a best-fitting line
Find the best-fitting line for the data in Example 1.
Solution
From Example 2, n  20, gx  535, gy  1,378, gxy  40,575, 
gx2  17,225, and gy2  101,104. Thus,
and
Then we approximate the best-fitting line as the line with equation 
.
This line (along with the data points) is shown in Figure 14.45.
yr 5 1.3x 1 35
 < 34.8078
 < 1.27447
 5 1,378 2 1.2744715352
20
 5 20140,5752 2 15352 11,3782
20117,2252 2 15352 2
b 5 gy 2 m1gx2
n
m 5 n1gxy2 2 1gx2 1gy2
n1gx22 2 1gx2 2
Example
7
Use regression to make a prediction
Use the regression line in Example 6 to predict the score of a person who studied hour.
Solution
minutes, so 
.
yr 5 1.3x 1 35 5 1.31302 1 35 5 74
x 5 30
1
2
Student number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Study time length 30 40 30 35 45 15 15 50 30
0 20 10 25 25 25 30 40 35 20 15
Grade (100 poss.) 72 85 75 78 89 58 71 94 78 10 75 43 68 60 70 68 82 75 65 62
Score
Time (minutes)
10
10
20
30
40
20
30
40
50
60
50
60
70
80
90
100
y
x
y' = 1.3 x + 35
FIGURE 14.45 Regression line
A Final Word of Caution.
You should use the regression line only if r indicates that
there is a significant linear correlation, as shown in Table 14.11.
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by correlation?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a least squares line?
3. How do you find a linear correlation coefficient?
4. How do you determine whether there is a linear correlation
between two variables x and y?
5. Discuss the correlation shown by the following chart.
6. Discuss the correlation shown by the following chart.
Problem Set 14.4
Romania
Bulgaria
Spain
Greece
Yugosl avia
TaiwanMexico
Sri Lanka
El Sal vador
Japan
Colombia
Philippines
Thailand
Hong Kong
Poland
Panama
Chile
Venezuela
Portu gal
Hungary
Finland
Czechosl ovakia
Italy
South Africa
Israel
Netherlands
Denmark
New Zealand
U.S.
Belgium
Canada
U.K.
Switzerland
Ireland
France
Norway
Austria
Australia
Sweden
Germa ny
0
20
40
60
80
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
Estimated fat intake (grams per day)
Age-adjusted deaths per 100,000 population
100
120
140
160
180
Various quadrupeds (cat to rhinoceros)
v2
gl
s
l
Human (biped)
Kangaroo (biped)
0
5
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
Froude Number
Relative stride length
10
15
20
Source: Graph by Slim Films, From “Diet and Cancer,” by Leonard A. Cohen, Scientific American,
November 1987, p. 44. © 1987 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Source:  Graph by Patricia J. Wynne, From “How Dinosaurs Ran,” by R. McNeill Alexander,
Scientific American, April 1991, p. 132.  © 1991 by Scientific American, Inc.  All rights reserved.
In Problems 7–18, a sample of paired data gives a linear correla-
tion coefficient r. In each case, use Table 14.11 to determine
whether there is a significant linear correlation.
7. n  10, r  0.7; 1% level
8. n  30, r  0.4; 1% level
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

700
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
9. n  30, r  0.4; 5% level
10. n  15, r  0.732; 5% level
11. n  35, r  0.413; 1% level
12. n  50, r  0.3416; 1% level
13. n  25, r  0.521, 1% level
14. n  100, r  0.4109; 1% level
15. n  40, r  0.416; 5% level
16. n  20, r  0.214; 5% level
17. n  10, r  0.56; 1% level
18. n  10, r  0.7; 5% level
Draw a scatter diagram and find r for the data shown in each table
in Problems 19–24.
19.
x
y
4
0
5
10
10
10
10
20
Match the equation and correlation in Problems 31–36 
with a graph.
31. y  0.6x  2; r  0.9
32. y  0.5x  2; r  0.7
33. y  0.4x  2; r  0.5
34. y  0.4x  2; r  0.4
35. y  0.5x  2; r  0.6
36. y  0.7x  2; r  0.8
20.
x
y
1
1
2
5
3
8
4
13
21.
x
y
1
30
3
22
3
19
5
15
8
10
23.
x
y
85
80
90
40
100
30
102
28
105
25
22.
x
y
0
25
1
19
2
16
3
12
4
10
24.
x
y
10
20
20
48
30
60
30
58
50
70
60
75
26.
x
y
1
1
2
5
3
8
4
13
28.
x
y
0
25
1
19
2
16
3
12
4
10
27.
x
y
1
30
3
22
3
19
5
15
8
10
29.
x
y
85
80
90
40
100
30
102
28
105
25
30.
x
y
10
20
20
48
30
60
30
58
50
70
60
75
Find the regression line for the data points in Problems 25–30.
25.
x
y
4
0
5
10
10
10
10
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1
2
3
4
–1
–2
–3
–4
1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
2
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
2
1
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1
2
3
–1
–2
–3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
A.
C.
E.
D.
F.
B.
Level  2
Given the information in Problems 37–40, find the equation for the
least squares line as well as the correlation coefficient.
37. n  8, gx  40, gy  48, gxy  240, 
gx2  210, gy2  288
38. n  10, gx  30, gy  20, gxy  60, 
gx2  90, gy2  40
39. n  6, gx  36, gy  48, gxy  322, 
gx2  250, gy2  418
40. n  10, gx  57, gy  1, gxy  13,
gx2  353, gy2  45
41. U.S. wine consumption for specific years (in gallons per per-
son per year) is shown in the following table.
Year
1988
1989
1990
1991
1993
1995
Consumption
2.24
2.09
2.05
1.85
1.74
1.80
Compare these numbers with the U.S. beer consumption
(found in Example 5, page 698) for those years in which both
numbers are reported. Are beer drinking and wine drinking
correlated?  What is the correlation coefficient?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.4
Correlation and Regression
701
rate (x) and the number of applicants (y), and if so, is it
significant at the 5% or the 1% significance level?
Interest
9.5
9.9
10.0
10.5
11.0
11.5
11.0
12.0
Number
27
29
25
25
19
20
17
13
Interest
12.0
12.5
13.0
13.5
13.0
12.5
11.5
11.5
Number
15
10
10
6
5
5
11
14
50. Find the best-fitting line for the data in Problem 46. 
51. Find the best-fitting line for the data in Problem 47. 
52. Find the best-fitting line for the data in Problem 48. 
53. Find the best-fitting line for the data in Problem 49. 
Level  3
Problems 54–58 are based on a 100-mile footrace, called the
Hardrock 100, held in Colorado each year.* For each of these
problems, the distances are in miles and the times are given in
hours and minutes, but when answering these questions, convert
them to decimal hours. For example,
2:57 is 2 hours 57 minutes  2 hr 
hr
 2.95 hr
54. The winner of the 1994 race was Scott Hirst. Here are his
arrival times at the first 6 aid stations:
Time
2:57
5:03
7:22
9:26
10:10
11:16
Distance
12.2
19.0
28.0
33.4
36.6
43.8
Predict his arrival time at the next aid station at 51.7 miles.
55. a. Predict when Scott Hirst (see Problem 54) will reach the
end of the race (100.1 miles).
b. Scott’s actual time of arrival was 32:00. What is the
difference between the predicted and actual arrival times?
Comment on the results.
56. The last-place runner who completed the 1994 race was John
DeWalt. Here are his arrival times at the first 6 aid stations:
Time
3:53
6:56
10:36
14:12
15:26
17:50
Distance
12.2
19.0
28.0
33.4
36.6
43.8
Predict his arrival time at the next aid station at 51.7 miles.
57. a. Predict when John DeWalt (see Problem 56) will reach the
end of the race (100.1 miles).
b. John’s actual time of arrival was 47:50. What is the differ-
ence between the predicted and actual arrival times?  Com-
ment on the results.
58. The ages of the runners in the 1994 race and their finishing
positions are given in the following ordered pairs. We write  
(x, y), where x is the finish position and y is the person’s age.†
(1, 33), (2, 46), (3, 32), (4, 31), (5, 42), (6, 38), (7, 43), 
(8, 39), (9, 43), (10, 44), (11, 35), (12, 38), (13, 42), 
(14, 27), (15, 49), (16, 49), (17, 40), (18, 40), (19, 43), 
(20, 47), (21, 41), (22, 36), (23, 59), (24, 48), (25, 51), 
(26, 36), (27, 31), (28, 33), (29, 51), (30, 43), (31, 34), 
(32, 56), (33, 54), (34, 46), (36, 35), (37, 58)
Is there a significant correlation between age and running
times?
57
60
42. A group of ten people were selected and given a standard IQ
test. These scores were then compared with their high school
grades.
IQ
117
105
111
96
135
81
103
99
107
109
GPA
3.1
2.8
2.5
2.8
3.4
1.9
2.1
3.2
2.9
2.3
Find r and determine whether it is statistically significant at the
1% level.
43. A new computer circuit was tested and the times (in nano-
seconds) required to carry out different subroutines were
recorded. 
Difficulty
1
2
2
3
4
5
5
5
Time
10
11
13
8
15
18
21
19
Find r and determine whether it is statistically significant at the
1% level.
44. Find the regression line for the data in Problem 42. Assume x
is the IQ and y is the GPA.
45. Find the regression line for the data in Problem 43. Assume x
is the difficulty level and y is the
time. 
46. The following data are measurements
of temperature (x  °F) and chirping
frequency (y  chirps per second)
for the striped ground cricket. 
Is there a correlation between
temperature and chirping, and if so,
is it significant at the 5% or the 1%
significance level?
Temperature
31.4
22.0
34.1
29.1
27.0
24.0
20.9
27.8
Frequency
20.0
16.0
19.8
18.4
17.1
15.5
14.7
17.1
Temperature
20.8
28.5
26.4
28.1
27.0
28.6
24.6
Frequency
15.4
16.2
15.0
17.2
16.0
17.0
14.4
47. The following data are the number of years of full-time educa-
tion (x) and the annual salary in thousands of dollars (y) for 
15 persons. Is there a correlation between education and salary,
and if so, is it significant at the 5% or the 1% significance
level?
Education
20
27
28
18
13
18
9
16
Salary
35.2
24.6
23.7
33.3
24.4
33.4
11.2
32.3
Education
16
12
12
19
16
14
13
Salary
25.1
22.1
18.9
37.8
25.9
28.4
29.6
48. A researcher chooses and interviews a group of 15 male work-
ers in an automobile plant. The researcher then gives 
a score (x) ranging from 1 to 20 based on a scale of
patriotism—the higher the score, the more patriotic the person
appears to be. Each person is then given a written test and is
scored (y) on their patriotism. Is there a correlation between the
researcher score and the test score, and if so, is it significant at
the 5% or the 1% significance level?
Researcher
10
14
15
17
17
18
18
19
Test
15
12
19
8
9
16
17
6
Researcher
16
18
20
12
14
9
17
Test
11
14
12
11
10
12
6
49. A bank records the number of mortgage applications and its own
prevailing interest rate (at the first of the month) for each of
16 consecutive months. Is there a correlation between the interest
“What do you 
mean, I can't
predict the
weather!”
*This information is from “Data Analysis and the Hardrock 100,” by Marny Frantz and
Sylvia Lazarnick in The Mathematics Teacher, April 1997, pp. 274–276.
†The 35th-place finisher had no age given, so we omitted the data for this runner for
this problem.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

702
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
59. The ages of the runners in the 1994 race and their finishing
times are given in the following table.*
(33, 32:00), (46, 32:20), (32, 32:29), (31, 33:57), 
(42, 34:36), (38, 35:29), (43, 35:52), (39, 36:54), 
(43, 38:04), (44, 38:04), (35, 38:20), (38, 38:43), 
(42, 39:18), (27, 39:21), (49, 41:50), (49, 42:06), 
(40, 42:06), (40, 42:06), (43, 42:59), (47, 43:41), 
(41, 43:41), (36, 43:41), (59, 44:46), (48, 44:46), 
(51, 44:46), (36, 45:21), (31, 46:19), (33, 46:26), 
(51, 46:49), (43, 47:08), (34, 47:21), (56, 47:27), 
(54, 47:43), (46, 47:46), (35, 47:50), (58, 47:50)
Is there a significant correlation between age and running
times?
Problem Solving 3   
60. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
A study was made to see whether a
correlation existed between students’ grades in a course and
students’ rankings of the professor’s teaching.† The results
of this survey are shown in Table 14.12. Use these results to
formulate a conclusion. Remove the last data point from the
table (class no. 47). This was a class who rated the
professor’s teaching low, and the students’ grades were also
very low. Does this change your conclusion?  Elaborate on
your answer.
TABLE 14.12
Mean Student Academic Grades and Mean
Teacher Ratings for Forty-seven Classes
Student 
Teacher
Class Rank Grade
Rating
25
2.68
2.22
26
2.36
2.25
27
3.35
1.00
28
3.27
1.00
29
3.11
1.13
30
3.18
1.27
31
3.16
1.31
32
2.83
1.33
33
3.05
1.50
34
3.61
1.50
35
2.92
1.53
36
3.17
1.58
37
2.18
1.58
38
3.14
1.73
39
3.55
1.80
40
2.69
1.82
41
2.55
1.90
42
3.08
1.91
43
3.00
1.92
44
3.67
2.20
45
3.67
2.27
46
2.95
2.60
47
1.68
2.80
Student 
Teacher
Class Rank Grade
Rating
1
3.19
1.00
2
3.58
1.06
3
3.89
1.17
4
2.50
1.30
5
3.11
1.38
6
2.81
1.39
7
3.73
1.40
8
3.06
1.43
9
3.55
1.44
10
3.63
1.50
11
3.71
1.55
12
2.00
1.56
13
3.19
1.60
14
3.23
1.70
15
3.38
1.70
16
3.21
1.79
17
3.25
1.82
18
2.63
1.83
19
3.27
1.85
20
2.58
2.00
21
3.13
2.00
22
3.19
2.00
23
3.46
2.07
24
3.00
2.10
*Technically, times should be changed to hours. However, for this problem it is
acceptable to enter these as decimal hours. For example, 32:20 is 32 hours 
20 minutes  32 hours  2060 hours  32.33, but for purposes of convenience,
you can use 32.20.
†“The Correlation Coefficient and Influential Data Points,” by 
Donald J. Dessart, The Mathematics Teacher, March 1997, pp. 242–246.
14.5  Sampling
The first three sections of this chapter dealt with what is called descriptive statistics, which
is concerned with the accumulation of data, measures of central tendency, and dispersion.
A second branch of statistics is inferential statistics, which is concerned with making
generalizations or predictions about a population based on a sample from that population.
Sampling Methods
A sample is a group of items chosen to represent a larger group. The larger group is
called a population. Thus, the sample is a proper subset of the population. The popula-
tion to be considered for a statistical application is called the target population. The
sample is analyzed; then, based on this analysis, some conclusion about the entire popu-
lation is made. Sampling necessarily involves some error, because the sample and the
population are not identical. A great deal of effort in statistics is devoted to the methodol-
ogy of sampling. Here are some common sampling procedures:
Simple random sampling: This sample is obtained in a way that allows every mem-
ber of the target population to have the same chance of being chosen. This is the type
of sampling we assumed so far.
Poll-taker to boss:
“Our latest opinion
poll showed that 90%
of the people aren't
interested in the
opinions of others.”
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.5
Sampling
703
Systematic sampling: The sample is obtained by drawing every kth item on a list or
production line. The first item is determined by using a random number.
Cluster sampling: This procedure is applied on a geographical basis. The result is
sometimes known as an area sample.
Stratified sampling: The entire population is divided into parts, called strata, accord-
ing to some factor (such as gender, age, or income). When a population has varied
characteristics, it is desirable to separate the population into homogeneous strata and
then take a random sample from each stratum.
To choose the most appropriate procedure for selecting an unbiased sample from a
target population, we must take into account two considerations:
1. Is the procedure random? For example, asking people to voluntarily mail or phone in
their preferences is not random, since the respondents select themselves (and there is
nothing to prevent someone from sending in more than one response). Likewise, select-
ing names from an alphabetical listing may introduce an ethnic bias and is not random.
2. Does the procedure take into account the intended target population? For example,
if you wish to know how many students at a certain college are interested in
expanding the hours of operation at the college library, then it would not make
sense to send the survey forms to the entire population of the city. Any procedure
that would be appropriate in this case would ensure that only college students were
surveyed.
The inference drawn from a poll can, of course, be wrong, so statistics is also con-
cerned with estimating the error involved in predictions based on samples. In 1936, the
Literary Digest predicted that in the race for president, Alfred Landon would defeat
Franklin D. Roosevelt—who was subsequently reelected president by a landslide. (The
magazine ceased publication the following year.) In 1948, the Chicago Daily Tribune
drew an incorrect conclusion from its polls and declared in a headline that Thomas
Dewey had just been elected president over Harry S. Truman. And in 1976, the Milwau-
kee Sentinel printed the erroneous headline shown here about the Wisconsin Democratic
primary, again based on the result of its polls.
Example
1
Discuss methods for obtaining an unbiased sample
A long-distance phone provider wants to sell a new “unlimited minutes” plan, and wishes
to conduct a survey to find the degree of interest its customers have in such a plan. Which
of the following methods would be most appropriate for obtaining an unbiased sample?
A. Survey the current customers whose names are chosen from an alphabetical listing
of all customers on the west coast.
B. Survey a random selection of customers whose names are chosen from an
alphabetical listing of all customers.
C. Survey the first 1,000 customers whose names are chosen from an alphabetical 
listing of all the customers.
D. Survey the first 1,000 customers whose names are chosen from a list purchased
from a competing phone company.
E. Survey 1,000 persons whose names are chosen from the local telephone directory.
Solution
The solution depends on identifying the target population; it is the current
customers of the long-distance phone company.
Choices D and E are not appropriate, because they do not reach the target popula-
tion. Choice C hits the target population, but is not sufficiently random. Choice A hits
only part of the target population. Therefore, choice B is the most appropriate since it
addresses the target population in a random manner.
Bettmann/Corbis
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

704
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
In an attempt to minimize error in their predictions, statisticians follow very careful 
procedures.
Procedure for making statistical inferences:
Step 1
Propose some hypothesis about a population.
Step 2
Gather a sample from the population.
Step 3
Analyze the data.
Step 4
Accept or reject the hypothesis.
Inference Procedure
Hypothesis Testing
Suppose that you want to decide whether a certain coin is a “fair” coin. You decide to test
the hypothesis, “This is a fair coin,” by flipping the coin 100 times. This provides a sam-
ple. Suppose the result is
Heads:
55
Tails:
45
Do you accept or reject the hypothesis that “This coin is fair”? The expected number of
heads is 50, but certainly a fair coin might well produce the results obtained.
As you can readily see, two types of errors are possible in any hypothesis-testing 
situation.
Type I: Rejection of the hypothesis when it is true
Type II:Acceptance of the hypothesis when it is false
Types of Error
How can we minimize the possibility of making either error? Let’s carry this
example further, and repeat the experiment of flipping the coin 100 times:
Trial number
1
2
3
4
5
6
…
Number of heads
55
52
54
57
59
55
…
If the coin is fair and we repeat the experiment a large number of times, it can be
shown mathematically that the distribution of the number of heads should be normal, with
a mean of 50 and a standard deviation of 5, as shown in Figure 14.46. The question is
whether to accept the unknown test coin as fair.
1
1
1
1
34.1% 34.1%
13.6%
13.6%
2.2%
2.2%
0.1%
0.1%
40
45
50
55
60
FIGURE 14.46 Given normal distribution for the number of heads 
upon flipping a fair coin 100 times
Suppose that you are willing to accept the coin as fair only if the number of heads falls
between 45 and 55 (that is, within 1 standard deviation of the expected number). If you
adopt this standard, you know you will be correct 
of the time if the coin is fair. How
68%
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.5
Sampling
705
do you know this? Look at Figure 14.46, and note that 
of the results are within 
and 
are within 
of the mean; the total is 
.
But a friend says, “Yes, you will be correct 68% of the time, but you will also be re-
jecting a lot of fair coins!” You respond, “But suppose that a coin really is a bad coin (it
really favors heads), with a mean number of heads of 60 and a standard deviation of 5. If
I adopted the same standard 
, I’d be accepting all the coins in the shaded region of
Figure 14.47.”
161s2
34.1% 1 34.1% 5 68.2%
21s
34.1%
11s
34.1%
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Hypothesis: This is a fair coin.
Fair coin
Biased coin
Accept ±1:
Type II error:
Accept hypothesis
when it is false.
Type I error:
Reject hypothesis
when it is true.
FIGURE 14.47 Comparison of Type I and Type II errors
Example
2
Classify errors
Consider the hypothesis that the mean grade for a class is 75. We conduct a survey of
five people from the class and find that their grades are 85, 65, 70, 52, and 96. There are
four possibilities:
We decide to reject the conclusion that the mean grade is 75 and:
A. The actual mean is 75.
B. The actual mean is not 75.
We decide to accept the conclusion that the mean grade is 75 and:
C. The actual mean is 75.
D. The actual mean is not 75.
For each of the four possibilities, state whether the conclusion is true or which type
of error has been made.
Solution
A. reject a true conclusion; Type I error
B. correct decision
C. correct decision
D. accept a false conclusion; Type II error
As you can see, decreasing the Type I error probability increases the Type II error prob-
ability, and vice versa. Deciding which type of error to minimize depends on the stakes in-
volved and on some statistical calculations that go beyond the scope of this course.
Consider a company that produces two types of valves. The first type is used in jet
aircraft, and the failure of this valve might cause many deaths. A sample of the valves is
taken and tested, and the company must accept or reject the entire shipment on the basis
of these test results. Under these circumstances, the company would rather reject many
good valves than accept a bad one. On the other hand, the second valve is used in toy air-
planes; the failure of this valve would merely cause the crash of the model. In this case,
the company wouldn’t want to reject too many good valves, so it would minimize the
probability of rejecting the good valves.
Many times we read of a poll in the newspaper or hear of it on the evening news, 
and a percentage is given. For example, “The candidate was favored by 
of those
sampled.” What is not often stated (or is stated only in small print) is that there is a 
48%
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

margin of error and a confidence level. For example, “The margin of error is 4 percent at
a confidence level of 
.” This means that we are 
confident that the actual percent
of people who favor the candidate is between 
and 
.
52%
44%
95%
95%
706
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
Average
smoker
Average
nonsmoker
Smoker
Nonsmoker
Rare nonsmoker
dying early
Year of death
Rare smoker
that lives long
5
years
1–2
Example
3
Find error in faulty reasoning
My mother, who is 78, has been a smoker since she was 18 years old. Even though she
has emphysema, she claims that she will live well into her eighties, which is proof that
the smoking warning claims do not mean a thing. What is wrong with this reasoning?
Solution
It is known that the average nonsmoker lives about 
years longer than the
average smoker. Consider the normal curves shown in Figure 14.48.
51
2
FIGURE 14.48 Life expectancies for smokers and nonsmokers
As you can see, sometimes the nonsmoker will die early (analogous to a Type II
error) and sometimes the smoker will live long (analogous to a Type I error).
Many times you may hear of people reasoning or forming a conclusion by looking at
one particular case, which may be an exception. This occurs so often, in fact, that we give
this type of reasoning a name—we call it the fallacy of exceptions.
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
When you hear the word statistics,
what comes to mind? Look up the word in a dictionary, and see
if you wish to supplement or change any part of your answer.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the difference between
descriptive and inferential statistics. 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the fallacy of the exception.
4. An ice cream store wants to use a survey to determine which
newspapers its customers regularly read. Which of the follow-
ing procedures would be most appropriate for obtaining a sta-
tistically unbiased sample?
A. Survey a randomly selected sample of people living in the
city’s limits.
B. Survey the first 100 customers on an alphabetical listing of
all the ice cream store’s customers.
C. Survey 100 customers whose names are randomly chosen
from an alphabetical listing of all customers of the ice
cream store.
D. Survey 100 people whose names are randomly chosen from
the local telephone directory.
5. In a certain geographical market, Sprint wishes to increase its
market share by taking a survey of customers of its
competitor, Pacific Bell, in an effort to find out which parts
of its service are least satisfactory. Which of the following
procedures would be most appropriate for obtaining a
statistically unbiased sample?
A. Survey a random selection of people chosen from a list of
Sprint’s customers.
B. Survey a random selection of people chosen from a list of
Pacific Bell’s customers.
Problem Set 14.5
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.5
Sampling
707
C. Place a newspaper advertisement asking for survey
participants, and then randomly choose 100 people from
those who respond.
D. Call local phone numbers and ask people who answer if
they are satisfied with their phone service.
6. A movie theater would like to use a survey to determine which
factors are most important to those who come to their theater.
Which of the following procedures would be most appropriate
for obtaining a statistically unbiased sample?
A. Survey a random selection of people passing by the 
theater in the mall in front of the theater.
B. Survey a random selection of shoppers in the mall.
C. Survey a random selection of people who are leaving the
theater after watching a movie.
D. Induce people to answer survey questions by offering
discount coupons for various city events, including the
movie theater.
7. A local congressional candidate would like to use a survey to
determine the issues of importance to the voters in her
congressional district. Which of the following procedures
would be most appropriate for obtaining a statistically
unbiased sample?
A. Survey a selection of people whose names are randomly
chosen from a local list of registered voters who are party
members.
B. Survey a selection of people whose names are randomly
chosen from a local list of all registered voters.
C. Survey a selection of people whose names are randomly
chosen from the telephone directory.
D. Survey a selection of people whose names are randomly
chosen from a national list of party members.
8. A school board wishes to determine opinions of parents
regarding the assigning of homework in mathematics classes.
Which of the following procedures would be most appropriate
for obtaining a statistically unbiased sample?
A. Survey a selection of parents from the official school roster
of parents.
B. Survey a selection of people whose names are randomly
chosen from the telephone directory.
C. Survey people chosen from the first 1000 names on an
alphabetical listing of parents of mathematics students.
D. Survey a selection of people whose names are randomly
chosen from a listing of parents of mathematics students.
9. An environmental group wants to use a survey to determine the
extent to which its members would be willing to protest a
recent decision of the governor of a particular state. Which of
the following procedures would be most appropriate for obtain-
ing a statistically unbiased sample?
A. Survey a selection of people whose names are randomly
chosen from the telephone directory.
B. Have signups of which workers gather signatures at local
malls throughout the state.
C. Survey members attending the annual convention of the
environmental group.
D. Survey a selection of people whose names are randomly
chosen from a list of members of the environmental group.
10. Cal Trans wants to use a survey to determine the extent of pub-
lic approval for a project to construct a new freeway through a
particular neighborhood. Which of the following procedures
would be most appropriate for obtaining a statistically
unbiased sample?
A. Go door-to-door in the affected neighborhood, soliciting
opinions.
B. Hold a public forum in the affected neighborhood, and
distribute questionnaires there.
C. Place advertisements in newspapers in the affected neigh-
borhood, asking readers to mail in their opinions.
D. Survey a selection of people whose names are randomly
chosen from the city telephone directory.
11. Betty’s Koi Emporium has decided to conduct a survey to
determine the number of its customers who order supplies on
the Internet. Which of the following procedures would be most
appropriate for obtaining a statistically unbiased sample?
A. Survey a random selection of customers chosen from a list
of all people who have purchased an item from Betty’s Koi
Emporium.
B. Distribute questionnaires to people who make a purchase in
the next 30 days.
C. Post notices soliciting the necessary information on bulletin
boards in the Koi Emporium. 
D. Survey people coming out of a nearby shopping mall.
12. IN-N-OUT BURGER® is considering building a franchise in a
particular city. It will use a survey to determine the extent of
interest among residents of the city. Which of the following
procedures would be most appropriate for obtaining a statisti-
cally unbiased sample?
AP Photo/Adam Lau
A. Survey a random selection of people whose names are 
obtained from national sales records of IN-N-OUT
BURGER customers.
B. Survey a selection of people who are listed on the
residential roll sheets of the city.
C. Survey a selection of people whose names are randomly
chosen from the telephone directory of the target city.
D. Survey a random selection of customers coming out of
other donut shops in the city.
13. An espresso coffee franchise is considering expanding its serv-
ices to a new location in the city, but prior to doing so it will
use a survey to determine the extent to which its customers are
interested in a second location. Which of the following proce-
dures would be most appropriate for obtaining a statistically
unbiased sample?
A. Survey a selection of people whose names are randomly
chosen from the telephone directory for the city.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

708
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
B. Ask customers who drive through to voluntarily phone in
their preferences.
C. Ask customers who drive through to voluntarily mail in
their preferences.
D. Survey a selection of people whose names are randomly
chosen from a list of all customers.
Level  2
IN YOUR OWN WORDS
In Problems 14–23, decide on a
reasonable means for conducting the survey to obtain the desired
information.
14. A newsstand wishes to use a survey to determine which out-of-
town newspapers it should regularly stock.
15. Sprint would like to take customers from AT&T, one of its
competitors in a certain geographical area. Sprint would like to
survey AT&T’s customers in order to find out which elements
of its service are least satisfactory.
16. A pet store would like to use a survey to determine which fac-
tors are most important to cat owners in determining the brand
of cat food that they purchase.
17. A local political party would like to use a survey to determine
the level of support among party members for the party’s can-
didates in the upcoming primary election. 
18. A health and fitness club would like to survey its members in
order to determine which new equipment they would prefer.
19. A union wants to use a survey to determine the extent members
approve of a newly negotiated collective bargaining agreement. 
20. The city council wants to use a survey to determine the extent
of public approval for a project to construct a new playground
in a certain residential neighborhood. 
21. The college student government will use a survey to determine
the level of support among students for a proposal to lower the
student fees.
22. A retailer is considering offering extended warranty policies on
video recorders. It will use a survey to determine the extent of
interest among owners of the video recorders.
23. A supermarket is considering expanding its services by 
adding a florist, but prior to doing so, it will use a survey to
determine the extent to which its customers are interested in
such a service. 
Level  3
24. Suppose you were interested in knowing the mean score for a
certain test in a mathematics class with 20 students. You sam-
ple four members of the class and find their test scores to be
49, 56, 72, and 96. The instructor reports that the mean was 72,
but you are not sure that is truthful. List the four possibilities
and categorize the conclusions including the types of possible
errors.
25. Suppose you were interested in knowing the mean score for a
certain test in a mathematics class with 20 students. You sam-
ple four members of the class and find their test scores to be
52, 56, 96, and 99. The instructor reports that the mean was 72,
but you are not sure that is truthful. List the four possibilities
and categorize the conclusions including the types of possible
errors.
26. Suppose that of 80 workers randomly selected and
interviewed, 55 were opposed to an increase in Social Security
taxes. Would you accept or reject the hypothesis that the
majority of workers are opposed to the increase in taxes? List
the four possibilities and categorize the conclusion including
the types of possible errors.
Problem Solving 3   
27. Conduct a survey asking the following questions.
a. Do you doodle?
b. If you doodle, which of the following do you doodle? 
c. When do you most often doodle?
28. Conduct a survey to determine the major worry of college 
students.
29. Conduct a survey to determine whether there is a significant
correlation between math scores in the 8th grade and amount
of TV viewing.
30. Suppose that John hands you a coin to flip and wants to bet on the
outcome. Now, John has tried this sort of thing before, and you
suspect that the coin is “rigged.” You decide to test this hypothesis
by taking a sample. You flip the coin twice, and it is heads both
times. You say, “Aha, I knew it was rigged!” John replies, “Don’t
be silly. Any coin can come up heads twice in a row.”
The following scheme was devised by mathematician
John von Neumann to allow fair results even if the coin is
somewhat biased. The coin is flipped twice. If it comes up
heads both times or tails both times, it is flipped twice again. If
it comes up heads-tails, this will decide the outcome in favor of
the first party; and if it comes up tails-heads, this will decide
the outcome in favor of the second party. Show that this will
result in a fair toss even if the coins are biased.
(1) while at a meeting or class
(2) while on the phone at home
(3) when solving a problem
(4) when you have nothing else to do
(5) when writing a letter
(6) at meals
(1) circles, curves, or spirals
(2) squares, rectangles, or other straight-line designs
(3) people or human features
(4) symbols, such as stars, arrows, or other objects
(5) words, letters, or numerals
(6) other
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.6
Chapter Summary
709
Important Ideas
Bar graphs, line graphs, circle graphs, and pictographs [14.1]
Misuses of graphs [14.1]
Measures of central tendency [14.2]
Mean, weighted mean, median, and mode [14.2]
Standard deviation [14.2]
Normal curve [14.3]
z-scores [14.3]
Linear correlation coefficient [14.4]
Slope and y-intercept of the least squares (or regression) line [14.4]
Descriptive and inferential statistics [14.5]
Sample vs. population [14.5]
Type I and Type II sampling error [14.5]
If you want to
understand nature, you
must be conversant with
the language in which
nature speaks to us.
RICHARD FEYNMAN,
EVERYBODY COUNTS: 
A REPORT TO THE NATION
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online,
you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of
problems that were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by
working the problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test
help in studying for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
Chapter 14 Review Questions
1. Make a frequency table for the following results of tossing a
coin 40 times:
HTTTT HHTHH TTHHT THTHT HHTTH THHTH
HHTHT TTTTT
2. Draw a bar graph for the number of heads and tails given in
Problem 1.
3. Three students, Andrew, Barbara, and Carla, were assessed
for their reading proficiency, as shown in Table 14.13.
Use the data set {5, 21, 21, 25, 30, 40} in Problems 4–8 to find
the requested value.
4. mean
5. median
6. mode
7. range
8. standard deviation
9. A small grocery store stocked several sizes of Copycat cola
last year. The sales figures are shown in Table 14.14. Find the
mean, the median, and the mode. If the store manager
decides to cut back the variety and stock only one size, which
measure of central tendency will be most useful in making
this decision?
TABLE 14.13
Grade Level from a Standardized Reading Test
Word 
Recognition
Spelling
Voca-
bulary
Compre-
hension
A (Andrew)
10.0
8.0
7.0
8.0
B (Barbara)
3.0
3.0
8.0
8.0
C (Carla)
5.0
5.0
6.0
8.0
TABLE 14.14
Sales of Copycat Cola
Size
Number of Case Sold
6 oz
5 cases
10 oz
10 cases
12 oz
35 cases
14.6
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Draw a line graph showing this information.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

710
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
10. A student’s scores in a certain math class are 72, 73, 74, 85, and
91. Find the mean, the median, and the mode. Which measure
of central tendency is most representative of the student’s
scores?
11. The 2003–2004 school superintendents’ salaries in Sonoma
County, California, are shown in Table 14.15.
a. Was a difference in the survival rates related to the class
of passenger? Draw a bar graph of survival rates of first-,
second-, and third-class passengers.
b. Was a difference in the survival rates related to the gender
or age of the passenger? Draw a bar graph of survival
rates of men, women, and children.
13. Consider the graph shown in Figure 14.49.
a. Which mode of transportation cost the most in October?
b. Which mode of transportation in Figure 14.49 generally
has the least monthly cost for May–December?
c. In which month were the transportation costs for Ocean
and TL about the same?
TABLE 14.15
Sonoma Country Superintendents’ Salaries
District
Salary
Bellevue
$102,686
Bennett Valley Elementary
$96,402
Cotati-Rohnert Park Unified
$148,209
Forestville Elementary
$96,565
Geyserville Unified
$90,094
Gravenstein Elementary
$92,978
Healdsburg Unified
$114,517
Mark West Elementary
$119,000
Oak Grove Elementary
$91,870
Old Adobe Elementary
$110,750
Petaluma City Schools
$129,064
Piner-Olivet Elementary
$115,145
Ricon Valley Elementary
$117,899
Roseland Elementary
$128,092
Santa Rosa City School
$143,760
Sebastopol Elementary
$110,000
Sonoma Valley Unified
$124,879
Twin Hills Elementary
$93,500
West Sonoma County High
$106,466
Windsor Unified
$145,000
Wright Elementary
$105,000
Source: California Teachers Association, Research and Finance Department
Find the mean, the median, and the mode (to the nearest 
dollar). Which measure of central tendency is most represen-
tative of the superintendents’ salaries?
12. The blockbuster movie Titanic brought about a renewed in-
terest in that disaster. Table 14.16 shows actual passenger
survival for that fateful voyage.
TABLE 14.16
Passengers and Survivors on the Titanic
Passenger 
Category
No. of
Passengers
No. of
Survivors
Children, 1st class
6
6
Children, 2nd class
24
24
Children, 3rd class
79
27
Women, 1st class
144
140
Women, 2nd class
93
80
Women, 3rd class
165
76
Men, 1st class
175
57
Men, 2nd class
168
14
Men, 3rd class
462
75
MONTHLY TRANSPORTATION COST BY MODE, YEAR TO DATE
$300,000
$250,000
$200,000
$150,000
$100,000
$50,000
$0
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG
SEPT
OCT
NOV
DEC
AIR
CARGO
COURIER
AIR
COURIER
GROUND
LTL
OCEAN
TL
FIGURE 14.49 Monthly transportation cost by mode
www.transkor.com/images/Line20Graph.gif
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.6
Chapter Summary
711
The fastest growing cities in California are shown with their pop-
ulations in Table 14.17.
18. Table 14.19 compares age with blood pressure.
TABLE 14.17
Fastest-Growing California
Cities
City
Population
Coalinga
15,200
Brisbane
4,060
Brentwood
23,100
Dublin
32,500
Rio Vista
4,850
Cupertino
52,900
La Quinta
24,250
Rocklin
35,250
Lincoln
9,675
Temecula
53,800
Use this information for Problems 14–16.
14. Draw a bar graph showing the population of each of these
cities.
15. What is the mean, median, and mode for these populations?
16. What is the standard deviation?
17. Table 14.18 shows the U.S. government’s expenditures for
defense.
TABLE 14.18
U.S. Defense Expenditures
Year
Billions of Dollars
1993
$279
1994
$269
1995
$260
1996
$253
a. Draw a bar graph to represent these data.
b. Suppose that you had the following viewpoint: 
Defense spending down only 
trillion from 1993 to 
1996. Draw a graph that shows very little decrease in 
the expenditures.
c. Suppose you had the following viewpoint: Defense expendi-
tures drastically cut
from 1993 to 1996.
Draw a graph that shows a tremendous decrease in the 
expenditures.
d. In view of parts b and c, discuss the possibilities of using
statistics to mislead or support different views.
$26,000,000,000
$0.3
Draw a scatter diagram and find the regression line for this
set of data.
19. Find the linear correlation coefficient (rounded to the nearest
thousandth) for the data in Table 14.19 and determine
whether the variables are significantly correlated at either the
1% or 5% level.
20. Read the Dear Abby column. Abby’s answer was consoling
and gracious, but not very statistical. If pregnancy durations
have a normal distribution with a mean of 266 and a standard
deviation of 16 days, what is the probability of having a 
314-day pregnancy?
Dear Abby:
You wrote in your column that 
a woman is pregnant for 266 
days.  Who said so?  I carried 
my baby for ten months and 
five days, and there is no doubt 
about it because I know the 
exact date my baby was 
conceived.  My husband is in 
the Navy and it could not have 
possibly been conceived any 
other time because I saw him 
only once for an hour, and I 
didn't see him again until the 
day before the baby was born.  
I don't drink or run around, and 
there is no way this baby isn't 
his, so please print a retraction 
about that 266-day carrying 
time because otherwise I am in 
a lot of trouble.
San Diego Reader
Dear Reader:
The average gestation period is 
266 days.  Some babies come 
early.  Others come late.  Yours 
was late.
Source: DEAR ABBY column by  Abigail Van Buren © 1973. Dist. by Universal Press
Syndicate. Reprinted with permission. All  rights reserved.
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on this book:
How to Lie with Statistics, Darrell Huff (New York:
Norton, 1954).
TABLE 14.19
Age and Blood Pressure
Age (in years)
20
25
30
40
50
35
68
55
Blood Pressure
85
91
84
93 100 86
94
92
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

712
CHAPTER 14
The Nature of Statistics
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G46. Toss a toothpick onto a hardwood floor 1,000 times as described in Figure 14.50, or
toss 1,000 toothpicks, one at a time, onto the floor. Let l be the length of the toothpick
and d be the distance between the parallel lines determined by the floorboards.
Equipment needed: A box of toothpicks (of uniform length) and a large sheet of
paper with equidistant parallel lines. A hardwood floor works very well instead of
using a sheet of paper. The length of a toothpick should be less than the perpendicu-
lar distance between the parallel lines.
a. Guess the probability p that a toothpick will cross a line. Do this before you begin
the experiment. The members of your group should reach a consensus before 
continuing.
b. Perform the experiment and find p empirically. That is, to find p, divide the 
number of toothpicks crossing a line by the number of toothpicks tossed (1,000 in
this case).
c. By direct measurement, find l and d.
d. Calculate 2l and pd, and .
e. Formulate a conclusion. This is an experiment known as Buffon’s needle problem.
G47. You are interested in knowing the number and ages of children (0–18 years) in a part
(or all) of your community. You will need to sample 50 families, finding the number
of children in each family and the age of each child. It is important that you select
the 50 families at random. How to do this is the subject of a course in statistics. For
this problem, however, follow these steps:
Step 1
Determine the geographic boundaries of the area with which you are
concerned.
Step 2
Consider various methods for selecting the families at random. For
example, could you:
(i) select the first 50 homes at which someone is at home when you call?
(ii) select 50 numbers from a phone book that covers the same geographic
boundaries as those described in step 1?
(iii) Using (i) or (ii) could result in a biased sample. Can you guess why
this might be true? In a statistics course, you might explore other ways
of selecting the homes. For this problem, use one of these methods.
Step 3
Consider different ways of asking the question. Can the way the family is
approached affect the response?
Step 4
Gather your data.
Step 5
Organize your data. Construct a frequency distribution for the children,
with integral values from 0 to 18.
Step 6
Find out the number of families who actually live in the area you’ve
selected. If you can’t do this, assume that the area has 1,000 families.
a. What is the average number of children per family?
b. What percent of the children are in the first grade (age 6)?
c. If all the children aged 12–15 are in junior high, how many are in junior
high for the geographic area you are considering?
d. See if you can actually find out the answers to parts b and c, and
compare these answers with your projections.
e. What other inferences can you make from your data?   
2,
pd
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
Toothpick of length ,
d  Distance between boards
FIGURE 14.50 Buffon’s needle problem 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 14.6
Chapter Summary
713
Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
www.mathnature.com 
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas discussed in this chapter. You can find
references to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 14.1 Collect examples of good statistical graphs and examples of misleading
graphs. Use some of the leading newspapers, national magazines, and web sites.
PROJECT 14.2 Carry out the following experiment: A cat has two bowls of food; one
bowl contains Whiskas and the other contains some other brand. The cat eats
Whiskas and leaves the other untouched. Make a list of possible reasons why the cat
ignored the second bowl. Describe the circumstances under which you think the 
advertiser could claim: Eight out of ten owners said their cat preferred Whiskas.
PROJECT 14.3 Roll a pair of dice 36 times, and draw a bar graph of the outcomes.
a. Find the mean, the variance, and the standard deviation for this model.
b. Repeat the experiment.
c. Compare the results of parts a and b.
PROJECT 14.4 Prepare a report or exhibit showing how statistics are used in baseball.
PROJECT 14.5 Prepare a report or exhibit showing how statistics are used in educational
testing.
PROJECT 14.6 Prepare a report or exhibit showing how statistics are used in psychology.
PROJECT 14.7 Prepare a report or exhibit showing how statistics are used in business.
Use a daily report of transactions on the New York Stock Exchange. What inferences
can you make from the information reported?
PROJECT 14.8 Investigate the work of Adolph Quetelet, Francis Galton, Karl Pearson, 
R. A. Fisher, and Florence Nightingale. Prepare a report or an exhibit of their work
in statistics.
PROJECT 14.9 Historical Quest
“We need privacy and a consistent wind,” said Wilbur.
“Did you write to the Weather Bureau to find a suitable location?” “Well,” replied
Orville, “I received this list of possible locations and Kitty Hawk, North Carolina,
looks like just what we want. Look at this. . ..”
However, Orville and Wilbur spent many days waiting in frustration after they
arrived in Kitty Hawk, because the winds weren’t suitable. The Weather Bureau’s
information gave the averages, but the Wright brothers didn’t realize that an accept-
able average can be produced by unacceptable extremes. Write a paper explaining
how it is possible to have an acceptable average produced by unacceptable extremes. 
PROJECT 14.10 Select something that you think might be normally distributed (for
example, the ring size of students at your college). Next, select 100 people and make
the appropriate measurements (in this example, ring size). Calculate the mean and
standard deviation. Illustrate your findings using a bar graph. Do your data appear to
be normally distributed?
© Bettmann/CORBIS
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
15.1 Cartesian Coordinates and
Graphing Lines
715
Solving equations with two variables,
Cartesian coordinate system, graphing
a line by plotting points, graphing a line
by slope-intercept
15.2 Graphing Half-Planes
724
15.3 Graphing Curves
726
Curves by plotting points, 
exponential curves
15
Outline
What in the World?
“Well, Billy, can I make it?” asked Evel.
“If you can accelerate to the proper speed, and if
the wind is not blowing too much, I think you can,”
answered Billy.
“It will be one huge money-maker, but I want
some assurance that it can be done!” retorted Evel.
About 30 years ago, a daredevil named Evel
Knievel attempted a skycycle ride across the Snake
River. In this chapter, we will develop the
mathematics necessary to help in the decision
about whether he will make it safely across the
Snake River. (See Problem 55, Section 15.3, p. 731.)
Overview
One of the most revolutionary ideas in the history of human
thought was the joining together of algebra and geometry. It
was basically a simple idea (as are most revolutionary
ideas)—namely, representing an ordered pair from algebra
as a point on a flat surface, called a plane. This was summa-
rized by the great mathematician Lagrange, who said, “As
long as algebra and geometry proceeded along separate
paths, their advance was slow and their application limited.
But when these sciences joined company, they drew from
each other fresh vitality and thenceforth marched on at rapid
pace toward perfection.”
In this chapter, we introduce a tie between algebra and
geometry: the idea that every curve can be associated with
an equation and every equation can be associated with a
graph. We consider both lines and nonlinear curves in this
chapter.
THE NATURE OF GRAPHS
AND FUNCTIONS
15.4 Conic Sections
732
Geometrical definition of conic
sections, algebraic representation of
conic sections, graphing conic
sections, parabolic reflectors
15.5 Functions
745
15.6 Chapter Summary
753
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
Douglas J. Malewicki
     Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 15.1
Cartesian Coordinates and Graphing Lines
715
15.1
Cartesian Coordinates and Graphing Lines
Algebra is but written geometry and geometry is but figured algebra.
G. B. HALSTED
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
We have solved equations with one variable, and in this chapter we consider equations
with two variables.
Solving Equations with Two Variables
Let’s consider an equation with two variables, say, x and y. If there are two values x and y
that make an equation true, then we say that the ordered pair (x, y) satisfies the equation
and that it is a solution of the equation.
As long as algebra
and geometry
proceeded along
separate paths,
their advance was
slow and their 
application limited.
But when these 
sciences joined 
company, they drew
from each other
fresh vitality and
thenceforth
marched on at 
rapid pace toward
perfection.
Lagrange
Example
1
Satisfy an equation
Tell whether each ordered pair satisfies the equation 
.
a. 11, 22
b. 12, 12
c. 11, 52
Solution
You should substitute each pair of values of x and y into the given equation
to see whether the equation is true or false. If it is true, the ordered pair is a solution.
a. 11, 22 means x  1 and y  2:
3x  2y  3112  2122
 3  4
 7
Since 7  7, we see that 11, 22 is a solution.
b. 12, 12 means x  2 and y  1 (compare with part a and notice that the order is
important in determining which variable takes which value).
3x  2y  3122  2112
 6  2
 8
Since 8  7, we see that 12, 12 is not a solution.
c. 11, 52:
3x  2y  3112  2152
 3  10
 7
The ordered pair 11, 52 is a solution.
3x 2 2y 5 7
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Cartesian Coordinate System
Have we found all the ordered pairs that satisfy the equation 
? Can you find
others? Let’s represent this information by drawing a graph. A Cartesian coordinate
system is formed by drawing two perpendicular number lines, called axes. The point of
intersection is called the origin, and the plane is divided into four parts called quadrants,
which are labeled as shown in Figure 15.1.
Point P(a, b) in Figure 15.1 is found in the plane by counting a units from the origin
in a horizontal direction (either positive or negative), and then b units (either positive or
negative) in a vertical direction. The number a is sometimes called the abscissa or first
component and b the ordinate (or second component) of the point P. Together, a and b
are called the coordinates of the point P.
Suppose we plot the ordered pairs in Examples 1a and 1c, along with four others, as
shown in Figure 15.2a. The points seem to lie in a line, and we use a straightedge to draw
a line passing through the plotted points, as shown in Figure 15.2b.
3x 2 2y 5 7
716
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
Quadrant II
Quadrant I
Quadrant III
Quadrant IV
y-axis
x-axis
Origin, s0, 0d
P  sa, bd
b units
a units
Graphing a Line by Plotting Points
The process of graphing a line requires that you find ordered pairs that make an equation
true. To do this, you must choose convenient values for x and then solve the resulting
equation to find a corresponding value for y.
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
a.  Plotting points
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
b.  Drawing the line
FIGURE 15.1 Cartesian coordinate
system
FIGURE 15.2 Steps in graphing the solution of the equation 3x 2 2y 5 7
Example
2
Find ordered pairs
Find three ordered pairs that satisfy the equation 
.
Solution
You choose any x value, say x  1. Substitute this value into the given equa-
tion to find a corresponding y-value:
Given equation
Substitute chosen value.
You choose this value.
T
The first ordered pair is 11, 12.
c
You find this value by substitution into the equation.
Choose a second value, say, x  2. Then,
Start with given equation.
Substitute chosen value.
Simplify.
 5 21
 5 22122 1 3
 y 5 22x 1 3
 5 1
 5 22 1 3
 5 22112 1 3
 y 5 22x 1 3
y 5 22x 1  3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Have we found all the ordered pairs that satisfy the equation 
? Can you
find others? Suppose we plot the ordered pairs in Example 2, along with three additional
points, as shown in Figure 15.3. Do you notice anything about the arrangement of these
points in the plane? Suppose that we draw a line passing through these points, as shown in
Figure 15.4. This line represents the set of all ordered pairs that satisfy the equation.
y 5 22x 1  3
Section 15.1
Cartesian Coordinates and Graphing Lines
717
The second ordered pair is 12, 12.
Choose a third value, say, x  1. Then,
The third ordered pair is 11, 52.
 5 5
 5 221212 1 3
 y 5 22x 1 3
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
FIGURE 15.3 Points that satisfy
y 5 22x 1 3
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
FIGURE 15.4 Representation of all points that satisfy y 5 22x 1 3
If we carry out the process of finding three ordered pairs that satisfy an equation of a
line, and then we draw the line through those points, we say that we are graphing the line,
and the final set of points we have drawn represents the graph of the line.
To graph a line:
Step 1
Find two ordered pairs that lie on the line.
Step 2
Plot these points; any two points determine a line.
Step 3
Find a third point as a check.
Step 4
Draw the line (using a straightedge) passing through these three points.
Procedure for Graphing a Line by Plotting Points
If the three points don’t lie on a straight line, then you have made an error.
Example
3
Graph a line
Graph 
.
Solution
It is generally easier to pick x and find y.
Given equation
Substitute.
Simplify.
Plot the point 10, 22.
Plot the point 11, 42.
 5 4
 5 2112 1 2
 If x 5 1: y 5 2x 1 2
 5 2
 5 2102 1 2
 If x 5 0: y 5 2x 1 2
y 5 2x 1  2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Graphing a Line by Slope-Intercept
Let’s introduce some terminology.
718
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
Plot the point 12, 62.
Draw the line passing through the three plotted points, as shown in Figure 15.5.
 5 6
 5 2122 1 2
 If x 5 2: y 5 2x 1 2
Graphing a line by plotting points is generally not the most efficient way. Consider
the standard form of the equation of a line:
If 
, then there is no y-term and the line is vertical. If 
, we can solve for y:
Notice that if 
and 
, then the first degree equation in two variables x
and y (with 
) can be written in the form
This is a very useful way of writing the equation of a line. Note that lowercase b in this
form is not the same as capital B in the standard form. This form is easy to use when you
know a value for x and want to find a value for y. We call x, the first component, the
independent variable and calculate the value of y, the second component, called the
dependent variable.
The points where a graph crosses the coordinate axes are usually easy to find, and they
are often used to help sketch the curve. A y-intercept is a point where a graph crosses
the y-axis and, consequently, it is a point with a first component of 0. When we say b is a
y-intercept, we mean the curve crosses the y-axis at the point (0, b). An x-intercept is 
a point where a graph crosses the x-axis, and it has a second component of 0. If we speak
of an x-intercept of a, we mean the graph crosses the x-axis at the point (a, 0).
The slope of a line passing through the points 
and 
is the steepness of
that line, and is measured by rise divided by run:
m 


Figure 15.6 shows how slope can be used to measure the steepness, or pitch, of a roof.
We can now define the most useful form for the equation of a line.
y2 2 y1
x2 2 x1
CHANGE IN THE VERTICAL DISTANCE
CHANGE IN THE HORIZONTAL DISTANCE
RISE
RUN
1x2, y22
1x1, y12
y 5 mx 1 b
B 2 0
b 5 2C
B
m 5 2A
B
 y 5 2A
Bx 2 C
B
 By 5 2Ax 2 C
B 2 0
B 5 0
Ax 1 By 1 C 5 0
Study the form of this
equation so that in the
future you will be able to
recognize a line by looking
at the equation.
129
Run
59 Rise
129
19
FIGURE 15.6 Cross section of roof
gables is an example of slope
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
(2, 6)
(1, 4)
(0, 2)
FIGURE 15.5 Graph of y 5 2x 1 2
The standard form of the equation of a line is
where A, B, and C are real numbers (A and B not both 0) and (x, y) is any point on
the line. This equation is called:
a first-degree equation in two variables, or 
a linear equation in two variables.
Ax 1 By 1 C 5 0
Standard Form
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 15.1
Cartesian Coordinates and Graphing Lines
719
This is the most
important form of the
equation of a line.
x
y
2
–4
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
6
8
(–6, 1) Start
Down
2
Over 5
Example
4
Given a point and the slope, graph a line
Graph the line passing through (6, 1) with slope 
.
Solution
Begin by plotting the point (6, 1). Think of the slope as a fraction, 
(for example, where RISE  2 and RUN  5). These steps are shown in Figure 15.7.
Be careful when writing the slope as a fraction. 
can be written as 
or
but
NOT as
.
22
25
2
25
22
5
22
5
m 5 22
5
m 5 22
5
FIGURE 15.7 Graph of the line passing through 
with slope 22/5
126, 12
We can use the procedure illustrated in Example 4 to graph a line when we are given
the equation of a line. We use the y-intercept as the given point.
Example
5
Given an equation, graph a line
Graph the line 
.
Solution
Solve for y to put the equation into slope-intercept form:
Given equation
Subtract x from both sides.
Divide both sides (all terms) by 2.
c
The y-intercept is (0, 3); plot this point.
The slope is 
; start at the y-intercept and count down 1 unit and over (rightward) 
2 units:
m 

Plot this point, which we call a slope point, meaning that it is found by counting out the
slope (rise and run) from a given point. Using this slope point, as well as the y-intercept,
we now draw the line as shown in Figure 15.8.
21
2 5 21
2
RISE
RUN
m 5 21
2
 y 5 21
2
 x 1 3
 2y 5 2x 1 6
 x 1 2y 5 6
x 1 2y 5 6
x
y
2
–4
–2
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
6
8
(0, 3) Start here
(2, 2)
(–2, 4)
Slope point
FIGURE 15.8 Graph of x 1 2y 5 6
Slope-Intercept Form
The first-degree equation 
where b is the y-intercept and m is the slope, is called the slope-intercept form of
the equation of a line.
y 5 mx 1 b
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Even though the slope-intercept form for graphing a line is the preferred method,
sometimes it is not convenient to plot the y-intercept.
A general procedure can now be stated for graphing a line using the slope-intercept
method. This procedure is shown in Figure 15.9.
720
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
START
Is
there a
y-term
?
No
Draw the
vertical line
x 5 h.
Yes
Solve for x.
Write as
x 5 h.
Solve for y.
Write as
y 5 mx 1 b.
Plot the y -intercept, b.
This represents
the point (0, b).
Write the slope,
m, as a fraction:
m 5RUN
From the y -intercept,
count out the rise and
the run to plot a
second point.
Draw the
line passing
through the
two points.
RISE
FIGURE 15.9 General procedure
for graphing lines
Study the procedure for
graphing a line as
described in Figure 15.9.
Example
6
Graph a line using slope and y-intercept
Sketch the graph of 
Solution
For most graphs, the most efficient
method is to solve the equation for y and then find the
y-intercept and the slope by inspection. This is the
general procedure illustrated in Figure 15.9.
Thus, 
; plot the y-intercept (0, 2) as shown in
Figure 15.10.
Since 
, we start at the y-intercept and
move up 2 and over (rightward) 3; plot another point (which we have called a slope
point). Draw the line passing through the two plotted points.
m 5 2
3
b 5 2
 y 5 2
3
 x 1 2
 2x 1 6 5 3y
 2x 2 3y 1 6 5 0
2x 2 3y 1 6 5 0.
x
y
–4
–2
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
6
8
Starting
point
Slope
point
2
3
FIGURE 15.10 Graph of
2x 2 3y 1 6 5 0
Many calculators available today do a variety of
types of graphing problems. The cost is still
somewhat prohibitive ($50–$70), but it is
worthwhile to show how easily you can graph lines
and other curves by using a graphing calculator.
There is generally a button labeled 
. Press
this button and input the equation you wish to graph.
For Example 6, we wish to graph
After inputting the equation, we usually obtain the graph by pressing a button 
labeled
. The graph is shown.
To see the coordinates of points on a graph, we can press
, which
displays the coordinates of the point on the curve corresponding to the location of
the cursor.
TRACE
GRAPH
y 5 2
3
 x 1 2
Y 
COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
Example
7
Graph a line using the slope and a point
Sketch the graph of 
.
Solution
Since 
, we have 
and 
. The y-intercept is a
little awkward to plot, so find some other point to use. If 
, then
 5 0
 5 28 2 28
5 271242 2 28
 y 5 27x 2 28
x 5 24
b 5 228
m 5 27
y 5 27x 2 28
7x 1 y 1 28 5 0
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 15.1
Cartesian Coordinates and Graphing Lines
721
In Example 7, note that 
means “up 7 and back (leftward) 1,” and
means “down 7 and over 1.” A positive slope (as in Example 6) indicates
that the line increases (goes uphill) from left to right, and a negative slope (as in
Example 7) indicates that the line decreases (goes downhill) from left to right. A zero
slope (as in the following example) indicates that the line is horizontal. For a vertical
line, we say that the slope does not exist.
m 5 27 5 27
1
m 5 27 5 27
1
Example
8
Graph horizontal and vertical lines
Graph
a.
b.
Solution
a. Since the only requirement is that y (the second component) equal 4, we see that there is
no restriction on the choice for x. Thus, (0, 4), (1, 4), and (2, 4) all satisfy the equation
that 
. If you plot and connect these points, as shown in Figure 15.12a, you will see
that the line formed is a horizontal line. A horizontal line has slope equal to zero.
y  4
x 5 3
y 5 4
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
(–2, 4)
(0, 4)
(1, 4)
a.  Horizontal line, slope is zero
x
y
2
4
–2
–4
–6
–8
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
(3, 0)
(3, –1)
(3, 2)
b.  Vertical line, no slope
FIGURE 15.12 Two special types of lines
x
y
–4
–2
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
–2
–6
–8
6
8
Start at any
known point
Use slope to
plot this slope
point.
(–4, 0)
FIGURE 15.11 Graph of 7x 1 y 1 28 5 0
b. Since the only requirement is that x (the first component) equal 3, we see that there is
no restriction on the choice for y. Thus, (3, 2), (3, 1), and (3, 0) all satisfy the condi-
tion that x  3. If you plot and connect these points, as shown in Figure 15.12b, you
will see that the line formed is a vertical line. A vertical line does not have any slope.
Note that a line with no slope is vertical, but a line with zero slope is horizontal.
and 
is a point on the line. Write the slope as 
and find a slope
point by counting down 7 and over 1. Note that another slope point can be found by
using 
. The graph is shown in Figure 15.11.
m 5 27 5
7
21
m 5 27 5 27
1
124, 02
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

722
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
Level  1
1. Use the map of Venus shown in Figure 15.13 to name the land-
marks at the specified locations.
a. (90, 0)
b. (0, 65)
c. (165, 65)
d. 1
80, 322
e. 130, 502
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does it mean to solve a linear
equation in two variables?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a y-intercept of a line? What
is the slope?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Outline a procedure for graphing a
line by plotting points.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Contrast horizontal and vertical lines
and their slopes.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Outline a procedure for graphing a
line using the slope–intercept method.
For each equation in Problems 7–18, find three ordered pairs that
satisfy the equation, and then use this information to graph each line.
2
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
Graph the lines through the given points and with the given slopes
as indicated in Problems 19–30.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29. 12, 32; no slope
30.
Level 2
Graph the lines in Problems 31–44.
31. y  2x  3
32. y  4x  5
33. x  y  4  0
34. 3x  y  2  0
35. 2x  3y  6  0
36. x  3y  2  0
37. 3x  2y  5  0
38. 3x  4y  5  0
39. x  5
40. y  2
12, 232; m 5 1.5
12, 32; m 5 0
11, 32; m 5 3
11, 212; m 5 2
121, 32; m 5 1
16, 32; m 5 22
5
11, 212; m 5 21
7
15, 02; m 5 22
3
124, 232; m 5 3
4
17, 232; m 5 1
5
12, 52; m 5 1
3
x 1 2y 5 4
3x 1 4y 5 8
y 1 3x 5 1
y 5 2x 1 1
y 5 23x 1 1
y 5 22x 1 1
Problem Set 15.1
FIGURE 15.13 Map of Venus
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12. y 5 x 1 1
y 5 x 2 1
y 5 x 2 4
y 5 2x 1 5
y 5 2x 2 1
y 5 x 1 5
NASA
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 15.1
Cartesian Coordinates and Graphing Lines
723
41. x  y  100  0
42. y  50x
43. y  100x
44. y  0.001x
Level 3
Problems 45–50 show scatter diagrams along with a best-fitting
line. Match the best-fitting line in each with an appropriate equa-
tion named A–H.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
A. y  0.5x  4
B. y  0.5x  2
C. y  0.7x  2
D. y  0.5x  4
E.
y  0.9x  2
F.
y  0.9x  2
G. y  0.7x  4
H. y  0.7x  4
Problem Solving  3
51. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
The Brazilian Institute of Geography
and Statistics reported the following fertility rates for Brazil,
measured as the average number of children born per woman
of childbearing age:
1970:
5.8
1980:
4.4
1991:
2.7
1994:
2.2
a. Do you think the fertility rate is declining linearly?
(That is, if you plot these points, is the graph linear?) 
Support your answer.
b. Pick two data points and find the equation of the line
between these points.
c. Predict the fertility rate in the year 2005. Will this answer
vary depending on the selected data points? Support your
answer.
52. Two lines in the same plane are parallel if there is no point 
of intersection. Without graphing the lines, determine 
y
x
–1
–2
1
2
3
4
5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
y
x
1
2
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
–7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
x
y
1
2
3
4
–1
–2
–3
–4
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
y
x
1
2
3
4
–1
–2
–3
–4
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
y
x
1
2
3
4
–1
–2
–3
–4
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1
y
x
–1
–2
–3
2
3
4
5
6
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
how you can decide whether the graphs of two equations are
parallel lines.
53. If a present value P is invested at the simple interest rate r for 
t years, then the future value after t years is given by the
formula 
. Suppose you invest $10,000 at 8%
simple interest per year.
a. Graph the amount you will have in t years. 
b. What is the slope of the graph?
c. What is the A-intercept of the graph?
54. A business purchasing an item for business purposes may use
straight-line depreciation to obtain a tax deduction. The
formula for the present value, P, after t years is
where C is the cost and s is the scrap value after L years. The
number L is called the useful life of the item.
a. If a certain piece of equipment costs $20,000 and has a scrap
value of $2,000 after 8 years, write an equation to represent
the present value after t years.
b. Graph the amount you will have in t years.
c. What is the slope of the graph?
55. Suppose the profit P (in dollars) of a certain item is 
given by 
, where x is the number 
of items sold.
a. Graph this profit relationship.
b. Interpret the value of P when 
.
c. The slope of this graph is called the marginal profit. Find
the marginal profit, and give an interpretation.
56. Suppose the cost C (in dollars) of x items is given by 
C  2.25x  550.
a. Graph this cost relationship.
b. Interpret the value of C when 
.
c. The slope of the graph is called the marginal cost. Find the
marginal cost and give an interpretation.
57. The population of Texas was 17.0 million in 1990 and 19.8 mil-
lion in 1998. Let x be the year (let 1990 be the base year; that
is, 
represents the year 1990 and 
represents 1998)
and y be the population. Use this information to write a linear
equation, and then use this equation to predict the population of
Texas in the year 2009. Compare with the actual 2009 popula-
tion and comment.
58. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Show that the equation of a line pass-
ing through (h, k) with slope m is
This is called the point–slope form.
59. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Begin with the point–slope form in
Problem 58 and derive the two-point form. If the line passes
through 
and 
, then
60. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Show that the equation of the line
with x-intercept a and y-intercept b is
. This is called the intercept form.
1a 2 0, b 2 02
x
a 1 y
b 5 1
y 2 y1 5 a
y2 2 y1
x 2 2 x 1
b 1x 2 x 12
1x2, x22
1x1, x12
y 2 k 5 m1x 2 h2
x 5 8
x 5 0
x 5 0
x 5 0
P 5 1.25x 2 850
P 5 C 2 aC 2 s
L
bt
A 5 P11 1 rt2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

724
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
15.2
Graphing Half-Planes
Once you know how to graph a line, you can also graph linear inequalities. We begin by
noting that every line divides a plane into three parts, as shown in Figure 15.14.
The two parts labeled I and II are called half-planes. The third part is called the
boundary and is the line separating the half-planes. The solution of a first-degree in-
equality in two unknowns is the set of all ordered pairs that satisfy the given inequality.
This solution set is a half-plane. The following table offers some examples of first-degree
inequalities with two unknowns, along with some associated terminology.
Example
Inequality Symbol
Boundary Included
Terminology
no
open half-plane
no
open half-plane
yes
closed half-plane
yes
closed half-plane
We can now summarize the procedure for graphing a first-degree inequality in two
unknowns.
#
3x  y  5
$
3x  y  5
,
3x  y  5
.
3x  y 	 5
This process may sound complicated, but if you know how to draw lines from equa-
tions, you will not find this difficult.
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
Boundary line
I
II
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
4
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
Test point
(0, 0)
–8
FIGURE 15.14 Half-planes
FIGURE 15.15 Graph of 3x 2 y $ 5
To graph a linear inequality:
Step 1
Graph the boundary
Replace the inequality symbol with an equality symbol and draw the result-
ing line. This is the boundary line. Use a solid line when the boundary is in-
cluded 
Step 2
Test a point
Choose any point in the plane, called a test point, that is not on the bound-
ary line; the point (0, 0) is usually the simplest choice.
If this test point makes the inequality true, shade in the half-plane that con-
tains the test point. That is, the shaded plane is the solution set.*
If the test point makes the inequality false, shade in the other half-plane for
the solution.
1# or $2.
Procedure for Graphing a Linear Inequality
Example
1
Graph a linear inequality with included boundary
Graph 
Solution
Note that the inequality symbol is , so the boundary is included. 
Step 1
Graph the boundary; draw the (solid) line corresponding to 
Replace the inequality symbol with an equality symbol.
The y-intercept is 5 and the slope is 3; the boundary line is shown in Figure 15.15.
 y 5 3x 2 5
 3x 2 y 5 5
3x 2 y $ 5.
*A highlighter pen does a nice job of shading in your work.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 15.2
Graphing Half-Planes
725
Example
2
Graph a linear inequality with excluded boundary
Graph 
Solution
Note that the inequality symbol is , so the boundary line is not included. 
Step 1
Draw the (dashed) boundary line, 
, as shown in Figure 15.16.
Step 2
Choose a test point. We can’t pick (0, 0), because (0, 0) is on the boundary line.
Since we must choose some point not on the boundary, we choose (1, 0):
This is true.
Therefore, shade the half-plane that contains the test point, as shown in Figure 15.6.
0 , 1
y  x
y  x
y , x.
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
4
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
Test point
(1, 0)
–8
FIGURE 15.16 Graph of y , x
Step 2
Choose a test point; we choose (0, 0). Plot (0, 0) in Figure 15.15 and note that
it lies in one of the half-planes determined by the boundary line. We now check
this test point with the given inequality:
You can usually test this in your head.
This is false.
Therefore, shade the half-plane that does not contain (0, 0), as shown in Figure 15.15.
 0 $ 5
 3102 2 102 $ 5
 3x 2 y $ 5
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a linear inequality in two
variables?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Outline a procedure for graphing
first-degree inequalities in two variables.
State whether each statement in Problems 3–11 is true or false. If it
is false, explain why you think that is the case.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
Problem Solving  3
30. Will a baseball player’s batting average always change when the
player is at bat? That is, under what conditions will the batting
average stay the same? Hint: Let a be the number of times at bat,
and let h be the number of hits. Then the batting average is . If
the player gets a hit, then the new batting average is
and if the player does not get a hit, then the new batting
average is
This problem is continued as an Individual Research 
Project 15.1 on page 755.
h
a 1 1
h 1 1
a 1 1
h
a
2x 2 3y 1 6 # 0
x 1 2y 1 4 # 0
2x 2 3y , 1
3x 1 2y . 1
6x 2 2y , 1
x 2 3y $ 9
x # 0
y $ 0
2x , 3y
3x # 2y
y . x
x $ y
y , 22x 1 5
y . 3x 2 3
y $ 22x 1 3
y . 5x 2 3
Problem Set 15.2
3. The linear inequality 
does not have a boundary
line, because the inequality symbol is ,.
4. A good test point for the linear inequality 
is (0, 0).
5. The test point (0, 0) does not work for 
because 0 is not
greater than 0.
6. The test point (0, 0) satisfies the inequality 
.
7. The test point (0, 0) satisfies the inequality 
.
8. The test point (0, 0) satisfies the inequality 
.
9. The test point (2, 4) satisfies the inequality 
.
10. The test point (2, 4) satisfies the inequality 
.
11. The test point (2, 4) satisfies the inequality 
.
Level 2
Graph the first-degree inequalities in two unknowns in 
Problems 12–29.
12.
13. y $ 5x 2 3
y # 2x 1 1
4x , 3y
5x 1 2y # 9
y . 2x 2 1
3x . 2y
3x 2 2y $ 21
2y 2 3x , 2
y . x
y . x
2x 1 5y , 2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

726
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
15.3  Graphing Curves
Graphing lines is an important first step in understanding the nature of graphs, but it is
only a first step. In this section, we investigate the graphing of curves that are not lines.
Curves by Plotting Points
When cannons were introduced in the 13th century, their primary use was to demoralize
the enemy. It was much later that they were used for strategic purposes. In fact, cannons
existed nearly three centuries before enough was known about the behavior of projectiles
to use them with any accuracy. The cannonball does not travel in a straight line, it was dis-
covered, because of an unseen force that today we know as gravity. Consider Figure 15.17.
It is a scale drawing (graph) of the path of a cannonball fired in a particular way, neglect-
ing wind resistance or other factors than gravity.
Historical
Rene Descartes 
(1596–1650)
Rene Descartes, the person after
whom we name the coordinate
system, was a person of frail
health. He had a lifelong habit of
lying in bed until late in the morn-
ing or even the early afternoon. It
is said that these hours in bed
were probably his most
productive. During one of these
periods, it is presumed, Descartes
made the discovery of the coordi-
nate system. This discovery led to
a branch of modern mathematics
called analytic geometry, which
can be described as an algebraic
way of looking at geometry, or a
geometric way of looking at alge-
bra; simply put, it is the blending
of algebra and geometry.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
FIGURE 15.17 Path of a cannonball
64
128
192
256
320
384
80
128
144
Height (feet)
Time (seconds)
Distance (feet)
1
2
3
4
5
6
The path described by a projectile is called a parabola. Any projectile—a ball, an
arrow, a bullet, a rock from a slingshot, even water from the nozzle of a hose or sprinkler—
will travel a parabolic path. Note that this parabolic curve has a maximum height and is
symmetric about a vertical line through that height. In other words, the ascent and descent
paths are symmetric.
Example
1
Graph a parabola
Graph 
Solution
We will choose x-values and find corresponding y-values.
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Notice in Figure 15.18 that the points obtained from
the given equation do not fall in a straight line. If we
find two more points, we can begin to see the shape
of the graph.
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Connect the points to form a smooth curve as shown
in Figure 15.19. To graph an equation means to plot
all ordered pairs that satisfy the equation.
122, 42.
x 5 22: y 5 1222 2 5 4;
12, 42.
x 5 2: y 5 22 5 4;
121, 12.
x 5 21: y 5 1212 2;
11, 12.
x 5 1: y 5 12 5 1;
10, 02.
x 5 0: y 5 02 5 0;
y 5 x2.
FIGURE 15.18 Plot points
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
FIGURE 15.19 Graph of y 5 x 2
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The curve shown in Figure 15.19 is a parabola that is said to open upward. The low-
est point, (0, 0) in Example 1, is called the vertex. The following example is a parabola
that opens downward. Notice that the number a in 
is negative.
y 5 ax2
Section 15.3
Graphing Curves
727
Example
2
Graph a parabola that opens down
Sketch 
Solution
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Connect these points to form a smooth curve, as shown in Figure 15.20.
14, 282.
x 5 4: y 5 21
2142 2 5 28;
122, 222.
x 5 22: y 5 21
21222 2 5 22;
12, 222.
x 5 2: y 5 21
2122 2 5 22;
121, 21
22.
x 5 21: y 5 21
21212 2 5 21
2;
11, 21
22.
x 5 1: y 5 21
2112 2 5 21
2;
10, 02.
x 5 0: y 5 21
2102 2 5 0;
y 5 21
2x2.
FIGURE 15.20 Graph of y 5 21
2x 2
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
Notice from Example 2 that you can use symmetry to plot points on one side of the
vertex. If the vertex is at the origin, (0, 0), we call the curve a standard parabola.
You can sketch many different curves by plotting points. The procedure is to decide
whether you should pick x-values and find the corresponding y-values, or pick y-values
and find the corresponding x-values. Find enough ordered pairs so that you can connect
those points with a smooth graph. Many graphs in mathematics are not smooth, but we
will not consider those in this course.
If the equation is
y 5 ax2 1 bx 1 c
The graphs of the following curves are parabolas with vertex (0, 0)
opens up
opens down
opens right
opens left
x 5 2ay2
x 5 ay2
y 5 2ax2
y 5 ax2
Standard Parabolas
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

then the graph is a parabola that opens upward if 
and downward if 
If the
equation is
then the graph is a parabola that opens to the right if 
and to the left if 
These
forms are called the standard-form equations of a parabola.
a , 0.
a . 0
x 5 ay2 1 by 1 c
a , 0.
a . 0
728
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
Example
3
Graph a parabola which opens right
Sketch the graph of the curve 
Solution
We use the same procedure to find points on the graph, except that in this
equation we see that it will be easier to choose y-values and find corresponding x-values.
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
How many points should we find? For lines, we needed to find two points, with a third
point as a check. For curves that are not lines, we do not have a particular number of points
to check. We must plot as many points as are necessary to enable us to draw a smooth
curve. We connect the points we have plotted to draw the curve shown in Figure 15.21.
14, 62.
y 5 6: x 5 62 2 6 # 6 1 4 5 36 2 36 1 4 5 4;
121, 52.
y 5 5: x 5 52 2 6 # 5 1 4 5 25 2 30 1 4 5 21;
124, 42.
y 5 4: x 5 42 2 6 # 4 1 4 5 16 2 24 1 4 5 24;
125, 32.
y 5 3: x 5 32 2 6 # 3 1 4 5 9 2 18 1 4 5 25;
124, 22.
y 5 2: x 5 22 2 6 # 2 1 4 5 4 2 12 1 4 5 24;
121, 12.
y 5 1: x 5 12 2 6 # 1 1 4 5 1 2 6 1 4 5 21;
14, 02.
y 5 0: x 5 02 2 6 # 0 1 4 5 4;
x 5 y2 2 6y 1 4.
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
FIGURE 15.21 Graph of x 5 y2 2 6y 1 4
x
y
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
6
8
–2
–4
–6
–8
Exponential Curves
We considered exponential equations in Section 10.1. Recall that an exponential equation
is one in which a variable appears as an exponent. Consider the equation 
This
equation represents a doubling process. The graph of such an equation is called an expo-
nential curve and is graphed by plotting points.
y 5 2x.
Example
4
Graph an exponential curve
Sketch the graph of 
Solution
Choose x-values and find corresponding y-values. These values form or-
dered pairs (
). Plot enough ordered pairs so that you can see the general shape of the
curve, and then connect the points with a smooth curve.
x, y
y 5 2x.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Let 
plot 
Connect the points with a smooth curve as shown in Figure 15.22.
a23, 1
8b.
x 5 23: y 5 223 5 1/8;
a22, 1
4b.
x 5 22: y 5 222 5 1/4;
a21, 1
2b.
x 5 21: y 5 221 5 1/2;
13, 82.
x 5 3: y 5 23 5 8;
12, 42.
x 5 2: y 5 22 5 4;
11, 22.
x 5 1: y 5 21 5 2;
10, 12.
x 5 0: y 5 20 5 1;
Section 15.3
Graphing Curves
729
FIGURE 15.22 Graph of y 5 2x
1
2
3
4
4
8
12
16
20
24
y
x
21
22
23
24
Remember, to change a percent to a decimal, move
the decimal point two places to the left.
Press:
Display:
4121.803177
2500



(
)
10
e
.05
〈
Example
5
Make a population projection
Marsha and Tony have owned a parcel of property within the city limits
of their small town for a number of years. Now a developer is threatening to build a
large housing project on the land next to their property, but to do so the developer is
seeking a zoning change from the City Planning Commission. The hearing is next week,
and Tony believes that the population projections presented by the developer are vague
and unfounded. Tony needs a mathematical method for projecting population and needs
to communicate his findings to the Planning Commission.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Tony calls his local Chamber of Commerce and finds that the
growth rate of his town is now 5%. Also, according to the 1990 census, the population
was 2,500 in that year.
Devise a Plan. Tony decides to draw a graph showing the population between the years
1990 and 2010. The formula for population growth (from Section 10.3) is 
Carry Out the Plan. For this problem, 
and 
The equation of the graph is 
If 
Plot the point 
If 
This means that the predicted population
in the year 2000 is about 4,120. Plot the 
point 
If 
This means that the predicted population
for the year 2010 is 6,800. We have plotted
these points in Figure 15.23.
Look Back. To do a good job with per-
suasion, you need facts and data to back
up your argument. The visual impact of a
graph can be quite impressive.
t 5 20: A 5 2,500e0.051202 < 6,800.
110,41202.
t 5 10: A 5 2,500e0.051102 < 4,120.
10,25002.
t 5 0: A 5 2,500e0 5 2,500.
A 5 A0ert 5 2,500e0.05t.
r 5 5% 5 0.05.
A0 5 2,500
A 5 A0ert.
Pólya’s 
Method
FIGURE 15.23 Graph showing population A
for 1990 to 2010 (base year, t  0, is 1990)
t
A
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
8
4
16
12
20
This is the 1990 popula-
tion; 1990 is called the
base year. It is also
called the “present
time” (even if it is now
2011). Thus, if t  5,
then the population
corresponds to the
year 1995. If t  10
the population is for 
the year 2000.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

One of the most important concepts for intelligent functioning in today’s world is in-
terest and how interest works. We can now return to this idea and look at graphs showing
the growth of money as the result of interest accumulation. Simple interest is represented
by a line, whereas compound interest requires an exponential graph. This means that, for
short periods of time, there is very little difference between simple and compound inter-
est, but as time increases, the differences become significant.
730
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
Example
6
Compare simple and compound interest
Suppose that you deposit 
at 
interest. Graph the total amounts you will have if
you invest your money at simple interest and if you invest your money at compound in-
terest. Recall the appropriate formulas:
Simple interest:
Compound interest:
Solution
For this example, 
and 
the variables are t and A. We be-
gin by finding some ordered pairs. A calculator is necessary for calculating compound
interest.
r 5 0.10;
P 5 100
A 5 P11 1 r2 t
A 5 P11 1 rt2
10%
$100
Year
Simple Interest
Compound Interest
t  0
A  10011  0.10
02  100
Plot (0, 100).
A  10011  0.1020  100
Plot (0, 100).
t  1
A  10011  0.10
12  110
Plot (1, 110).
A  10011  0.1021  110
Plot (1, 110).
t  10
A  10011  0.10
102  200
Plot (10, 200).
A  10011  0.10210  259
Plot (10, 259).
t  20
A  10011  0.10
202  300
Plot (20, 300).
A  10011  0.10220  673
Plot (20, 673).




The graphs through these points are shown in Figure 15.24.
FIGURE 15.24 Comparison of simple
interest and compound interest
t
A
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
8
4
16
Simple interest
Compound interest
12
20
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a parabola?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does the symbol e represent?
Sketch the graph of each equation in Problems 3–30.
3. y  3x2
4. y  2x2
5. y  10x2
6. y  x2
7. y  2x2
8. y  3x2
Problem Set 15.3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9. y  5x2
10. y  5x2
11. y  x2
12. x  2y2
13. x  3y2
14. x 
15. y  2x3
16. y  x3
17. x  y3
18. y 
19. y 
20. y 
21. y 
22. y 
23. y  x2  4
24. y  x2  4
25. y  9  x2
26. y  3x2  4
27. y  2x2  3
28. y  2x2  3
29. y  x2  2x  1
30. y  x2  4x  4
Level 2
Sketch the graphs of the equations in Problems 31–38.
31. y  3x
32. y  4x
33. y  5x
34. y  3x
35. y  6x
36. y  7x
37. y  10x
38. y  100  2x
Sketch the graph of the equations for x  0 in Problems 39–42.
39. y 
40. y 
41. y 
42. y 
43. a. Graph h  16t2  96t.
b. Does the parabola in part a open upward or downward? 
c. If we relate the graph in part a to the cannonball in 
Figure 15.17, can t be negative? Draw the graph of the
parabola in part a for 0  t  6.
44. a. Graph d  16t2.
b. Does the parabola in part a open upward or downward? 
c. Graph the parabola in part a for 0  t  16.
Draw the graphs in Problems 45–50.
45. y  2x2  4x  2
46.
47.
48. y  x2  2x  3
49. x  3y2  12y  14
50. x  4y  y2  4
51. Change the growth rate in Example 5 to 6% and graph the
population curve.
52. Change the growth rate in Example 5 to 1.5% and graph the
population curve.
53. Rework Example 6 for a 12% interest rate.
54. Rework Example 6 for an 8% interest rate.
Level 3
55. HISTORICAL QUEST
“Well, Billy, can I make it?” asked
Evel. “If you can accelerate to the proper speed, and if the
wind is not blowing too much, I think you can,” answered
Billy. “It will be one huge money-maker, but I want some
assurance that it can be done!” retorted Evel. 
About 30 years ago, a daredevil named Evel Knievel attempted
a skycycle ride across the Snake River (see Figure 15.25).
Suppose that the path of Evel Knievel’s skycycle is
y 5 20.0005x2 1 2.39x
y 5 1
2x2 1 x 1 1
2
y 5 1
4x2 2 1
2x 1 1
4
2A 1
10Bx
A 1
10Bx
A1
3Bx
A1
2Bx
1
1,000x2
2 1
10x2
1
10x2
22
3x2
1
3x2
1
2 y2
1
2
Assuming that the ramp is at the origin and x is the 
horizontal distance traveled, graph this relationship. 
Using your graph, answer Evel’s question: Will he make 
it? Assume that the actual distance the skycycle must 
travel is 4,700 ft.
Problem Solving 3   
56. In archeology, carbon-14 dating is a standard method of
determining the age of certain artifacts. Decay rate can be
measured by half-life, which is the time required for one-half
of a substance to decompose. Carbon-14 has a half-life of
approximately 5,600 years. If 100 grams of carbon were
present originally, then the amount A of carbon present 
today is given by the formula
where t is the time since the artifact was alive until today.
Graph this relationship by letting t  5,600, t  11,200, 
t  16,800 . . . , and adjust the scale accordingly.
57. The healing law for skin wounds states that 
where A is the number of square centimeters of unhealed skin
after t days when the original area of the wound was A0. Graph
the healing curve for a wound of 50 cm2.
58. A learning curve describes the rate at which a person learns
certain specific tasks. If N is the number of words per minute
typed by a student, then, for an average student
where n is the number of days of instruction. Graph this formula.
59. The equation for the standard normal curve (the normal curve
with mean 0 and standard deviation 1) graphs as an exponen-
tial curve. Graph this curve, whose equation is
by using a calculator or by plotting points.
60. Graph the curve 
and compare with the standard
normal curve (Problem 59). List some similarities and some
differences.
y 5 22x2
y 5 e2x2/2
!2p
N 5 8011 2 e20.016n2
A 5 A0
e0.1t
A 5 100a1
2b
t/5,600
Section 15.3
Graphing Curves
731
Highest point
Launching
ramp
x
Snake River Canyon
1,700 feet
600-foot drop
FIGURE 15.25 Snake River Canyon 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

732
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
15.4  Conic Sections
In the last section we graphed parabolas by plotting points. The parabola is one of the
curves studied by the Greeks, in particular Apollonius (ca. 262–190 B.C.). His methods,
expounded in an eight-volume work called Conics, were so modern that they are some-
times considered an analytic geometry preceding René Descartes. (See the Historical
Note on page 726.)
Here is the foundation of this study by Apollonius. Consider the intersection of a
cone and a plane in three dimensions. The possibilities are shown in Figure 15.26. The
set of points that results from this intersection of a cone and a plane is a two-dimensional
curve known as a conic section.
FIGURE 15.26 Conic sections
a.  Parabola
b.  Ellipse
c.  Hyperbola
A generator
of the cone
Axis of
the cone
Upper nappe
of the cone
The plane is parallel to 
one of the generators
of the cone.
The plane intersects only
one nappe and is not parallel
to a generator.
The plane intersects
both nappes of
the cone.
You can see the conic sections using a flashlight and a basketball. If you hold the
flashlight off to the side (as shown in Figure 15.27), you will be able to generate a shadow
that is a parabola. If you adjust the angle of the flashlight as shown, the shadow’s shape
becomes an ellipse. If you hold the flashlight directly above the basketball, you will see
the shadow of a circle. A circle is considered to be a special case of an ellipse. To picture
a shadow that is a hyperbola, you need two basketballs (or you can “imagine” a second
ball), as shown in Figure 15.27.
FIGURE 15.27 Model showing the conic sections
Parabola
Ellipse
Circle
Hyperbola
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Geometric Definition of Conic Sections
In the last section we graphed parabolas by plotting points, but for the other conic sec-
tions, the algebra and arithmetic necessary for graphing by plotting points are more com-
plicated, so in this section we will consider some important characteristics of the curve
that will help us easily sketch a graph.
We begin with a geometric definition for each of the conic sections.
Section 15.4
Conic Sections
733
A parabola is the set of all points in a plane equidistant from a given point (called
the focus) and a given line (called the directrix).
An ellipse is the set of all points in a plane such that, for each point on the ellipse,
the sum of its distances from two fixed points (called the foci) is a constant.
A circle (a special case type of an ellipse) is the set of all points in a plane a given
distance from a given point, called the center of the circle.
A hyperbola is the set of all points in a plane such that, for each point on the hy-
perbola, the difference of its distances from two fixed points (called the foci) is a
constant.
Geometric Definition of the Conic Sections
This is a tough defini-
tion, so we will spend
some time
interpreting it below.
To help us understand this definition, we will draw each of these curves by using the
definition.
Example
1
Graph a circle using the definition
Draw a circle using the definition.
FIGURE 15.28 A circle graphed
from its definition
P
r
Solution
Consider a circle with center at point P and a given radius of r. This circle is
shown in Figure 15.28. You can use a compass to help you draw a circle.
Example
2
Graph a parabola using the definition
Draw a parabola using the definition.
Solution
Label the given point F and the given line L. (Any point and any line are
acceptable, as long as the point is not on the line.) Imagine a special “parabola graph
paper” as shown in Figure 15.29a. It consists of circles drawn at F with radii of 1, 2, 3,
It also consists of lines drawn parallel to L at 1, 2, 3,
To sketch a parabola using the definition, plot points in the plane equidistant from
the focus F and the directrix L. Draw a line through the focus and perpendicular to the
c.
c.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

directrix. This line is called the axis of the parabola. Let V be the point on this line
halfway between the focus and the directrix. It is called the vertex of the parabola. Plot
other points equidistant from F and L, as shown in Figure 15.29b. We denote the dis-
tance between the vertex and the focus of the parabola as c.
734
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
FIGURE 15.29 Parabola graphed from its definition
0
–1
–2
1
2
1 2
3
4
5
6
7
8
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
L
F
This point is 5 units from F
since it is on the circle of radius 5
and also 5 units from L because
it is on the line parallel to L
5 units away.
5 units
5 units
a.  Parabola graph paper
b.  Parabola on graph paper
0
–1
–2
1
2
1 2
3
4
5
6
7
8
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
L
F
(x, y) A point on the
parabola is equidistant
from the focus and the
directrix.
Distance c
Vertex
Focal chord
Directrix of parabola
Axis of the parabola
}
Example
3
Graph an ellipse using the definition
Draw an ellipse using the definition.
Solution
Let 
and 
be any distinct points, and imagine a special type of graph pa-
per shown in Figure 15.30a. This paper is constructed by plotting two points, labeled F1
F2
F1
FIGURE 15.30 Graphing an ellipse from its definition
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12
13
14
15
F1
F2
P2
P1
8
4
4
8
a.  Ellipse graph paper
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12
13
14
15
P2
P1
b.  Ellipse on graph paper
Major axis
Minor axis
F1
F2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and 
and then drawing concentric circles with radii 
emanating from each focus.
We can use this special graph paper to graph an ellipse. Our objective is to plot
all points such that the sum of the distances from two fixed points is a constant, as
stated in the definition. We begin by picking a constant. This constant must be greater
than the straight-line distance from 
to 
. For this demonstration, we note that 
and 
in Figure 15.30 are 10 units apart, so the given constant is 12. We plot all the
points so that the sum of their distances from the foci is 12. This is easy with our spe-
cial graph paper. If a point is 8 units from 
for example, then it is 4 units from 
,
so we look at the intersection of the circle with 
from 
with the circle with
from 
as shown in Figure 15.30a. We continue this process by plotting the
following points:
Distance from F1
Distance from F2
8
4
9
3
10
2
11
1
Do you see why 11 units is the maximum integer distance from F1?
7
5
6
6
5
7
4
8
3
9
2
10
1
11
Do you see also why 11 units is the maximum integer distance from F2?
There are, of course, other rational and irrational choices that could be made, but
connecting these points as shown in Figure 15.30 will give a good picture of an ellipse
with constant 12 and a distance of 10 units between 
and F2.
F1
F2, 
r 5 4
F1
r 5 8
F2
F1, 
F2
F1
F2
F1
r 5 1, r 5 2, r 5 3, c
F2, 
Section 15.4
Conic Sections
735
Example
4
Graph a hyperbola using the definition
Draw a hyperbola using the definition.
Solution
We are given two points; call them 
and 
We use the definition and
ellipse graphing paper to draw a hyperbola. The hyperbola shown in Figure 15.31 has a
given constant of 8.
F2.
F1
The line passing through 
and 
is called the major axis. The center of an
ellipse is the midpoint of the segment 
The line passing through the center perpen-
dicular to the major axis is called the minor axis. The ellipse is symmetric with respect
to both the major and minor axes. Even though we know that lines do not have length, it
is common to talk about the length of the major axis. This is the distance between the
vertices along the major axis. This distance is 2a. Similarly, we define the length of the
minor axis to be 2b.
F1F2.
F2
F1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The line passing through the foci is called the transverse axis. The center of a
hyperbola is the midpoint of the segment connecting the foci. The line passing through
the center perpendicular to the transverse axis is called the conjugate axis. The hyper-
bola is symmetric with respect to both the transverse and the conjugate axes.
736
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
FIGURE 15.31 Hyperbola on graph paper
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12
13
14
15
Center
Conjugate axis
Focus
Focus
Transverse axis
13
5
The general form of the equation of a conic section is
where A, B, C, D, E, and F are real numbers and 
is any point on the curve.
This equation is called a:
first-degree equation if 
second-degree equation otherwise.
If 
, then we classify the conic sections as follows:
If 
, then the conic section is a line.
If 
and 
or if 
and 
, it is a parabola.
If A and C have the same signs, it is an ellipse.
If 
, it is a circle.
If A and C have opposite signs, it is a hyperbola.
If 
, then the conic is rotated.
B 2 0
A 5 C 2 0
C 5 0
A 2 0
C 2 0
A 5 0
A 5 C 5 0
B 5 0
A 5 B 5 C 5 0;
1x, y2
Ax2 1 Bxy 1 Cy2 1 Dx 1 Ey 1 F 5 0
General Form of Conic Section
In this book we will not consider rotated conic sections, so we assume that B  0.
Algebraic Representation of Conic Sections
Analytic geometry allows us to give algebraic as well as geometric representations to the
conic sections.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 15.4
Conic Sections
737
Example
5
Identify a conic from its equation
Identify each conic.
a. 4x2  9y2  36
b. 4x2  9y  36
c. 9x2  16y2  144
d. 9x  16y  144
e. 25x2  25y2  1
f. 25x2  4y2  10
g. 25x2  4y2  3x  5y  6  0
h. 25x2  4y2  50x  8y  0
Solution
To identify each conic, compare the given form with the form
Ax2  Cy2  Dx  Ey  F  0
a. 4x2  9y2  36; second-degree in both x and y, with A  4 and C  9 both positive;
the graph is an ellipse.
b. 4x2  9y  36; no y2-term (C  0), so the graph is a parabola (A  4).
c. 9x2  16y2  144; second-degree in both x and y with A  9 and C  16 opposite
in sign; thus, the graph is a hyperbola.
d. 9x  16y  144; no x2- and y2-terms (A  0, C  0); thus, the graph is a line.
e. 25x2  25y2  1; A  C  25, so the graph is an ellipse (in fact, it is also a circle).
f. 25x2  4y2  10; A and C have the same sign, so the graph is an ellipse. 
g. 25x2  4y2  3x  5y  6  0; A and C have opposite signs, so the graph is a
hyperbola.
h. 25x2  4y2  50x  8y  0; A and C have the same sign, so the graph is an ellipse.
Graphing Conic Sections
We noted that in this book we will not consider rotated conic sections (that is, we assume
We further assume that the conic sections we graph from a given equation will
be centered at the origin. Such conics are said to be in standard form. Conics can be lo-
cated anywhere in the plane, and a process called completing the square can be used to
transform the general-form equation into one of several standard forms, but the method is
beyond the scope of this text.
We considered graphing lines and parabolas earlier in this chapter, so we conclude
this section by considering graphing ellipses and hyperbolas.
Ellipses
B 5 02.
The standard-form equations for an ellipse are
If 
, then the ellipse is a circle, and we let 
. The standard-form 
equation for a circle is
x2 1 y2 5 r2
a 5 b 5 r
a 5 b
x2
a2 1 y2
b2 5 1 y2
a2 1 x2
b2 5 1
Standard-Form Ellipse
Here is the procedure for sketching an ellipse from a standard-form equation. Write the
equation in standard form, so that there is a 1 on the right and the coefficients of the square
terms are also 1. The center is (
); plot the intercepts on the x-axis and the y-axis. For the
x-intercepts, plot 
the square root of the number under the ; for the y-intercepts, plot 
the square root of the number under the . Finally, draw the ellipse using these intercepts.
The longer axis is called the major axis; if this major axis is horizontal, then it is called a
horizontal ellipse; if the major axis is vertical, it is called a vertical ellipse.
y2
6
x2
6
0, 0
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

738
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
Example
7
Graph a vertical ellipse from an equation
Sketch 
Solution
Divide both sides by 36 to put this equation into standard form:
or
We see that 
and 
, which indicates an ellipse with the major axis vertical
because the larger number is under the -term; thus, this is an example of a vertical el-
lipse. The x-intercepts are 
and the y-intercepts are 
(these are the vertices). The
sketch is shown in Figure 15.33.
63
62
y2
b2 5 4
a2 5 9
x2
4 1 y2
9 5 1
9x2
36 1 4y2
36 5 36
36
9x2 1 4y2 5 36.
FIGURE 15.33 Graph of x2
4 1
y2
9 5 1
x
y
–2
–4
4
2
4
2
–2
–4
Example
6
Graph a horizontal ellipse from an equation
Sketch 
Solution
The center of the ellipse is at 
. The x-intercepts are 
;
these are the vertices), and the y-intercepts are 
Sketch the ellipse using the
four intercepts, as shown in Figure 15.32.
6!4 5 62.
6316!9 5 63
10, 02
x2
9 1 y2
4 5 1.
FIGURE 15.32 Graph of x2
9 1
y2
4 5 1
x
y
–3
3
4
2
–2
–4
Because the horizontal distance (3 for this example) is larger than the vertical distance
(2 for this example), we see that this is an example of a horizontal ellipse.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The lengths of a and b are related to the location of the foci, as well as to the amount
of “roundness” of the ellipse. For example, if 
, it is clear that the ellipse is “per-
fectly round,” but if 
, then the ellipse is “elongated.” We know (from the defini-
tion) that the foci of the ellipse are on the major axis, and if the distance from the center
to the foci is c (c a positive number), 
A measure of the roundness of an ellipse is the eccentricity, which is defined as
Since 
, we see that the eccentricity is between 0 and 1. If 
, then 
and the
conic is a circle. For an ellipse, we see that
One of the most interesting applications of ellipses is their use in modeling planetary
orbits. The orbit of a planet can be described by an ellipse with the sun at one focus. The
orbit is commonly identified by the length of its major axis, 2a, and its eccentricity, .
The aphelion is the point where a planet is farthest from the sun, and the perihelion is the
point where a planet is closest to the sun.
P
0 # P , 1
P 5 0
a 5 b
c , a
P 5 c
a 5 Å1 2 b2
a2
c2 5 a2 2 b2
a 5 5b
a 5 b
Section 15.4
Conic Sections
739
Example
8
Model the earth’s orbit
Find an equation that models the earth’s orbit around the sun.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Before we can do this, we need additional information. An
elementary astronomy book, an encyclopedia, or an almanac will tell us that the length
of the major axis of the earth’s orbit is 
mi and the eccentricity of the earth’s
orbit is about 0.017.
Devise a Plan. Using this information, we have 
and 
mi or
. Then
We can now find b2 and substitute into the equation for an ellipse. 
Carry Out the Plan.
If we take the sun to be at one of the foci of the ellipse, we find the equation of the
earth’s orbit to be
Look Back. We graph the equation that we have obtained, which is shown in Fig-
ure 15.34a. The graph is complicated by the scale, which you can simplify by making a
good scale choice. For this example,
 5 "8.649 3 "1015    
5 "8.647 3 "1015
 a 5 "8.649 3 1015   
 b 5 "8.647 3 1015
 a2 5 8.649 3 1015   
 b2 5 8.647 3 1015
x2
8.649 3 1015 1
y2
8.647 3 1015 5 1
 5 8.646500439 3 1015
 b2 5 19.3 3 1072 2 2 11.581 3 1062 2
 c2 5 a2 2 b2
 c 5 1.581 3 106
 0.017 5
c
9.3 3 107
 P 5 c
a
a 5 9.3 3 107
2a 5 1.86 3 108
P 5 0.017
1.86 3 108
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Choose each unit to be 
to obtain the equation
This simpler, but equivalent, graph is shown in Figure 15.34b.
FIGURE 15.34 Graph of the earth’s orbit around the sun
We see that the orbit is almost circular with the sun at the center. The fact that
tells us that the earth’s orbit is almost circular.
P 5 0.0177
x
y
–5.0 × 107
–5.0 × 107
5.0 × 107
10.0 × 107
5.0 × 107
0
0
Earth
Sun
a ≈ 9.3 × 107
b ≈ 9.3 × 107
F
x
y
a.  Graph with units in miles
b.  Graph with units of √1015
–3
–3
3
3
x2
8.649 1
y2
8.647 5 1
"1015
740
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
Another application of ellipses is the so-called “whispering room” phenomenon.
This is how these rooms work: One person stands at each focus of an elliptic dome. If
one person whispers, the other will clearly hear what is said, but anyone not near a focus
will not hear anything. This is especially impressive when the foci are far apart. Some
famous buildings with this property are St. Paul’s Cathedral in London, England; the old
U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C.; and the Mormon Tabernacle in Salt Lake City, Utah.
These galleries use the geometric property of ellipses that a wave (a sound wave, for ex-
ample) from one focus will reflect an ellipse and be projected back to the other focus
(see Figure 15.35a).
a.  A whispering room: Only a person
     standing at focus F2 clearly hears
     a sound emanating from focus F1.
b.  A pulse emanating from focus
     F1 is concentrated on a kidney
     stone at focus F2.
F1
F1
F2
F2
FIGURE 15.35 Applications of ellipses
The elliptic reflective property is also used in a procedure for disintegrating kidney
stones. A patient is placed in an ellipsoidal tub of water (see Figure 15.35b—an ellipsoid
is a three-dimensional elliptic figure) such that the kidney stone is at one focus. A pulse
generated at the other focus is then concentrated at the kidney stone.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As with the other conic sections, we will sketch a hyperbola by inspection of the
equation. The points of intersection of the hyperbola with the transverse axis are called
the vertices. For
and
notice that the vertices for the first equation occur at 
and 
. These are found
by letting 
and solving for x. This is the equation of a horizontal hyperbola, and
we call the distance 2a the length of the transverse axis. The foci are located at 
and
. The vertices for the second equation occur at 
and 
. This is the
equation of a vertical hyperbola with foci located at 
and 
A hyperbola does not intersect the conjugate axis, but if we plot the points
and 
, respectively, we determine a segment on the conju-
gate axis whose length is called the length of the conjugate axis.
The procedure we will use to sketch a hyperbola is illustrated in the next example.
12b, 02, 1b, 02
10, b2, 10, 2b2
10, 2c2.
10, c2
10, 2a2
10, a2
12c, 02
1c, 02
y 5 0
12a, 02
1a, 02
x2
a2 2 y2
b2 5 1
x2
a2 2 y2
b2 5 1
Section 15.4
Conic Sections
741
The standard-form equations for a hyperbola are
For the hyperbola, c2 5 a2 1 b2.
x2
a2 2 y2
b2 5 1
x2
a2 2 y2
b2 5 1
Standard Form Hyperbola
Hyperbolas
To transmit motion to a skew
shaft, gears with blades form
hyperbolas. Such gears are
called hyperboloidal gears.
Example
9
Graph a hyperbola
Sketch 
Solution
The center of the hyperbola is at 
, and 
and 
, by
inspection.
Step 1
Plot the vertices 2 units and 2 units from the center, (0, 0), at 
2, as shown
in Figure 15.36. The transverse axis is along the x-axis, and the conjugate axis
is along the y-axis.
6
b 5 3
a 5 2
10, 02
x2
4 2 y2
9 5 1
x
y
–3
3
4
2
–2
–4
(2, 0) Vertex
(0, 3) Pseudovertex
(0, –3) Pseudovertex
Vertex (–2, 0)
Center
FIGURE 15.36 Preliminary sketch
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Step 2
Plot the endpoints of the conjugate axis at 3 units and 3 units from the cen-
ter. We call these points the pseudovertices, since the curve does not actually
pass through these points.
Step 3
Draw lines through the vertices and pseudovertices parallel to the axes of the
hyperbola. These lines form what we call the central rectangle. The diagonal
lines passing through the corners of the central rectangle are slant asymptotes
for the hyperbola, as shown in Figure 15.37.
Step 4
Draw the hyperbola using the slant asymptotes and the vertices.
742
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
FIGURE 15.37 Graph of x2
4 2
y2
9 5 1
x
y
–4
4
4
–4
(2, 0) 
(0, 3)
(0, –3) 
(–2, 0) 
Hyperbolas also have a useful reflec-
tion property. To illustrate, suppose an
aircraft has crashed somewhere in the
desert. A device in the wreckage emits a
“beep” at regular intervals. Two observers,
located at listening posts a known distance
apart, time a beep. It turns out that the time
difference between the two listening posts
multiplied by the speed of sound gives the
value 2a for a hyperbola on which the
airplane is located. A third listening post
will determine two more hyperbolas in a
similar fashion, and the airplane can thus
be located at the intersection of these
hyperbolas. See Figure 15.38.
Recall that the eccentricity 
of an
ellipse satisfies
0 # P , 1
P
FIGURE 15.38 LORAN (LOng-RAnge
Navigational) measures the differences in the
time of arrival of signals from two sets of
stations. The plane’s position at the
intersection lines is charted on a special map
based on a hyperbolic coordinate system. 
(See Individual Project 15.5, p. 763.)
LORAN lines of position
LORAN
Master
Station
Navigator can 
determine airplane
position by finding
points of intersection.
LORAN
Slave
Station
with a circle having eccentricity 
. Since 
, we see for a hyperbola that 
(because 
. The remaining possibility for the positive number is the case where
In this case, the conic section is a parabola.
Parabolic Reflectors
Parabolic curves are used in the design of lighting systems, telescopes, and radar anten-
nas, mainly because of the reflective property illustrated in Figure 15.39.
P 5 1.
P
c . a2
P . 1
P 5 c
a
P 5 0
F
axis
axis
a.  A reflecting telescope:
     Light rays parallel to the
     axis are concentrated at
     the focus.
b.  A parabolic flashlight:
     A light source at the focus
     sends out beams of light
     parallel to the axis.
As an illustration of the reflective property of parabolas, let us examine its applica-
tion to reflecting telescopes (see Figure 15.39a). The eyepiece of such a telescope is
placed at a point, F, called the focus of a parabolic mirror. Light enters the telescope in
rays that are parallel to the axis of the parabola. It is known from physics that when light
is reflected, the angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection. Hence, the parallel rays
FIGURE 15.39 The reflective property of parabolas
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

of light strike the parabolic mirror so that they all reflect through the focus, which means
that all the parallel rays are concentrated at the eyepiece, thereby maximizing the light-
gathering ability of the mirror. If the distance from the vertex of the parabola to the focus
is c, then it can be shown that the equation of a parabola with vertex 
depends on its
orientation.
Opens right:
Opens up:
Opens left:
Opens down:
Flashlights and automobile headlights (see Figure 15.39b) simply reverse the
process: A light source is placed at the focus of a parabolic mirror, the light rays strike
the mirror with an angle of incidence equal to the angle of reflection, and each ray is
reflected along a path parallel to the axis, thus emitting a light beam of parallel rays.
Radar utilizes both of these properties. First, a pulse is transmitted from the focus to
a parabolic surface. As with a reflecting telescope, parallel pulses are transmitted in this
way. The reflected pulses then strike the parabolic surface and are sent back to be
received at the focus.
x2 5 24cy
y2 5 24cx
x2 5 4cy
y2 5 4cx
10, 02
Section 15.4
Conic Sections
743
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a conic section?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Define a parabola.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Define an ellipse.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Define a hyperbola.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give a procedure for sketching an
ellipse using its equation.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give a procedure for sketching a
hyperbola using its equation.
7. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain how you recognize each of
the following conics by inspecting the equation.
a. line
b. parabola
c. ellipse 
d. hyperbola
8. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the eccentricity for each of
the given conics? Also, explain how changes in the eccentricity
affect the curve.
a. parabola
b. ellipse
c. hyperbola
If Ax2  Cy2  Dx  Ey  F  0, for Problems 9–13, then list con-
ditions on the constants to assure that the indicated graph results.
9. a hyperbola
10. a circle
11. a parabola
12. an ellipse
13. a line
Sketch the requested conic sections in Problems 14–23 using the
definition. 
14. A circle with radius 3
15. A circle with radius 5
16. A parabola with the distance between the directrix and 
focus 2 units
17. A parabola with the distance between the directrix and 
focus 4 units
18. A parabola with the distance between the directrix and 
focus 6 units
19. A parabola with the distance between the directrix and 
focus 1 unit
20. An ellipse with the distance between the foci 10 units and the
sum of the distances 12 units
21. An ellipse with the distance between the foci 10 units and the
sum of the distances 14 units
22. A hyperbola with the distance between the foci 10 units and
the difference of the distances 8 units
23. A hyperbola with the distance between the foci 10 units and
the difference of the distances 6 units
Identify the curves in Problems 24–27.
24. a.
b.
c.
25. a.
b.
c.
26. a.
b.
c.
27. a.
b.
c. 9x2 1 6y2 1 18x 2 23 5 0
9x2 2 6y2 1 18y 2 23 5 0
2y2 1 8y 2 20x 1 148 5 0
x2 2 9y2 2 6x 1 18 5 0
y2 1 4x 2 3y 1 1 5 0
x2 1 y2 2 3y 5 0
y2 2 4x 1 10y 1 13 5 0
x2 1 81y 2 122 2 5 16
2x 1 y 2 10 5 0
1x 2 12 5 221 y 1 22
4x2 2 16y 5 0
2x 2 y 2 8 5 0
Problem Set 15.4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Level 2
Sketch the curves using the equations given in Problems 28–51. 
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
Level 3
52. If the length of the major axis of the earth’s orbit is
186,000,000 mi and its eccentricity is 0.017, how far is
the earth from the sun when it is at aphelion and at perihelion?
53. If the length of the semimajor axis of the orbit of Mars
is 1.4  108 mi and the eccentricity is about 0.093, determine
the greatest and least distance of Mars from the sun.
54. If the planet Mercury is 28 million miles from the sun at peri-
helion and the eccentricity of its orbit is about 1/5, how long is
the major axis of Mercury’s orbit?
55. The moon’s orbit is elliptical, with the earth at one focus. The
point at which the moon is farthest from the earth is called the
apogee, and the point at which it is closest is called the perigee.
If the moon is 199,000 miles from the earth at apogee and the
length of the major axis of its orbit is 378,000 miles, what is
the eccentricity of the moon’s orbit?
Problem Solving 3   
56. A parabolic archway has the dimensions shown in Figure 15.40.
FIGURE 15.40 A parabolic archway
y
x
3 ft
3 ft
3 ft
12 ft
6 ft
18 ft
3x2 2 4y2 5 5
4y2 2 4x2 5 5
3y2 5 4x2 1 5
3x2 2 4y2 5 12
x2 2 y2 5 9
4y2 2 x2 5 9
3y2 5 4x2 1 12
36y2 2 25x2 5 900
y2
16 2 x2
36 5 1
y2
36 2 x2
9 5 1
x2
4 2 y2
9 5 1
x2
9 2 y2
4 5 1
y2 2 x2 5 4
x2 2 y2 5 1
16x2 1 9y2 5 144
25x2 1 16y2 5 400
4x2 1 9y2 5 36
x2 1 y2
9 5 1
x2
25 1 y2
36 5 1
x2
4 1 y2
9 5 1
x2 1 y2 5 250
x2 1 y2 5 50
x2 1 y2 5 64
x2 1 y2 5 1
If we draw coordinate axes as shown, it can be shown that the
equation of the archway portion is
for some constant c. Find the standard-form equation of the
parabolic portion.
57. A radar antenna is constructed so that a cross section along its
axis is a parabola with the receiver at the focus. Find the focus if
the antenna is 12 m across and its depth is 4 m, as shown in
Figure 15.41.
FIGURE 15.41 Radar antenna 
58. A parabolic reflector (see Figure 15.41) is constructed so that
a cross section along its axis is a parabola with the light source at
the focus. Find the location of the focus if the reflector is 16 cm
across and its depth is 8 cm.
59. Beams of light parallel to the axis of the parabolic mirror
shown in Figure 15.42 strike the mirror and are reflected. Find
the distance from the vertex to the point where the beams con-
centrate.
FIGURE 15.42 A parabolic mirror
60. A stone tunnel is to be constructed such that the opening is a
semielliptic arch, as shown in Figure 15.43. It is necessary to
know the height at 4-ft intervals from the center. That is, how
high is the tunnel at 4, 8, 12, 16, and 20 ft from the center?
(Answer to the nearest tenth of a foot.)
FIGURE 15.43 Semielliptic arch 
40 ft
15 ft
6 ft
Sun’s rays
4 ft
F
Axis
V
6 m
6 m
4 m
Focus
© Topham/The Image Works
x2 5 24c1 y 1 32
744
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 15.5
Functions
745
15.5  Functions
The idea of looking at two sets of variables at the same time was introduced in Section 15.3.
Sets of ordered pairs provide a very compact and useful way to represent relationships be-
tween various sets of numbers. To consider this idea, let’s look at the following cartoon.
The distance an object will fall depends on (among other things) the length of time it
falls. If we let the variable d be the distance the object has fallen (in feet) and the variable
t be the time it has fallen (in seconds), and if we disregard air resistance, the formula is
Therefore, in the B.C. cartoon, if the well is 16 seconds deep (and we neglect the time it
takes for the sound to come back up), we know that the depth of the well (in feet) is
The formula 
gives rise to a set of data:
Time (in seconds)
0
1
2
3
4
. . .
15
16
Distance (in ft)
0
16
64
144
256
. . .
3,600
4,096
For every nonnegative value of t, there is a corresponding value of d. We can repre-
sent the data in the table as a set of ordered pairs in which the first component represents
a value for t and the second component represents a corresponding value for d. For this
example, we have 10, 02, 11, 162, 12, 642, 13, 1442, 14, 2562, .  . . , 115, 36002, 116, 40962.
Whenever we have a situation comparable to the one illustrated by this example—
namely, whenever the first component of an ordered pair is associated with exactly one
second component—we call the set of ordered pairs a function.
d 5 16t2
 5 4,096
 5 1612562
 d 5 161162 2
d 5 16t2
B. C. cartoon reprinted by permission of Johnny Hart and Creators Syndicate.
Remember,
First component (values for t)
↓
(x, y)
↑
Second component (values for d)
A function is a set of ordered pairs in which the first component
is associated with exactly one second component.
Function
Not all sets of ordered pairs are functions, as we can see from the following examples.
Example
1
Identify a function from a set of ordered pairs
Which of the following sets of ordered pairs are functions?
a. {(0, 0), (1, 2), (2, 4), (3, 9), (4, 16)}
b. {(0, 0), (1, 1), (1, 1), (4, 2), (3, 2)}
c. {(1, 3), (2, 3), (3, 3), (4, 3)}
d. {(3, 1), (3, 2), (3, 3), (3, 4)}
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
a. We see that
0 S
0
1 S
2
2 S
4
3 S
9
4 S
16
Since each first component is associated with exactly one second component, the set
is a function.
b. For this set,
0 S
0
1
1
1
4 S
2
3 S
2
Since the first component can be associated with more than one second component,
the set is not a function.
c. For this set,
1
2
3
3
4
This is an example of a function.
d. Finally, 
1
2
3
3
4
Since the first component is associated with several second components, the set is not a
function.
746
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
Sometimes it is helpful to think of the first component as the “picker” and
the second component as the “pickee.” Given an ordered pair (x, y), we find
that each replacement for x “picks” a partner, or a second value. We can
symbolize this by x →y.
S
Since 1 picks two values as a partner or a second component, we call the
number 1 a “fickle picker.” But a function is a set of ordered pairs for which
there are no fickle pickers.
S
There are no fickle pickers, so it is a function.
The number 3 is a fickle picker, so this set of ordered pairs is not a 
function.
S
S
Another way to consider functions is with the idea of a function machine, as shown
in Figure 15.44.
Input
Output
FIGURE 15.44 Function machine
S
S
S
S
S
S
Think of this machine as having an input where items are entered and an output
where results are obtained, much like a vending machine. If a number 2 is dropped into
the input, a function machine will output a single value. If the name of the function
machine is f, then the output value is called “f of 2” and is written as f(2). This is called
functional notation. The set of all possible replacements for x in f(x) is called the
domain and the set of all possible values for f(x) is called the range.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
a. Input is 4; output is g(4), pronounced “gee of four.” To calculate g(4), first add 2,
then multiply by 5:
Input value
Output value
14  22  5  6  5  30
We write g142  30.
b. Input is 3; output is g132, pronounced “gee of negative three”:
g132  13  22  5  1  5  5
c. Input is p; output is g1p2, pronounced “gee of pi”:
g1p2  1p  22  5  51p  22
d. Input is x; output is g1x2, pronounced “gee of ex”:
g1x2  1x  22  5  51x  22
Section 15.5
Functions
747
g machine
Multiply
by 5
Add 2
Example
2
Use a function machine
If you input each of the given values into a function machine named g, what is the
resulting output value?
a. 4
b.
c.
d. x
p
23
{
↓
Example
3
Find functional values
If a function machine f squares the input value, we write 
where x represents
the input value. We usually define functions by simply saying “Let 
” Identify
the value of f for the given value.
a. f(2)
b. f(8)
c. f(3)
d. f(t)
Solution
a. f(2)  22  4
b. f(8)  82  64
c. f(3)  (3)2  9
d. f(t)  t2
f 1x2 5 x2.
f 1x2 5 x2,
Pay attention to the correct use of functional notation. If we write “let 
” we
are defining a function named “f ” by giving the formula that tells us how to find the sec-
ond component “f(x)” for a given first component “x.” That is, f represents the function,
whereas f(x) represents a number. In the next example, we use functional notation to find
what is sometimes called a difference quotient for a given function. This difference quo-
tient is defined to be the function
which will be used in calculus (Section 18.3).
f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
f 1x2 5 x2
Example
4
Find a difference quotient
If 
find the difference quotient.
Solution
We find the difference quotient by listing four highlighted steps.
1.
List the given function.
2.
Replace x by x  h in the given function.
5 1
2 1x 1 h2 2
f(x  h)
5 1
2 x2
f(x)
f 1x2 5 1
2x2,
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.
Subtract f(x) from f(x  h).
Simplify.
4.
Divide the result of step 3 by h.
Factor (common factor of h).
Simplify.
 5 x 1 1
2
 h
 5
h1x 1 1
2 h2
h
5
xh 1 1
2 h2
h
f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
 5 xh 1 1
2 h2
 5 1
2
 x2 1 xh 1 1
2 h2 2 1
2
 x2
 5 1
2
 1x2 1 2xh 1 h22 2 1
2
 x2
5 1
2
 1x 1 h2 2 2 1
2
 x2
f(x  h)  f(x)
748
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
If a function is defined as a graph, there is an easy test to decide whether the graph
represents a function. It is called the vertical line test, and it states that every vertical line
passes through the graph of a function in at most one point. This means that if you sweep
a vertical line across a graph and it simultaneously intersects the curve at more than one
point, then the curve is not the graph of a function.
Example
5
Use the vertical line test
Use the vertical line test to determine whether the given curve is the graph of a function.
Name the probable domain and range by looking at the graph.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
x
y
1
–2
–1
–3
–4
2
3
4
2
1
–1
–2
–3
–4
3
4
x
y
2
–4
–2
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
6
8
x
y
1
–2
–1
–3
–4
2
3
4
2
1
–1
–2
–3
–4
3
4
x
y
1
–2
–1
–3
–4
2
3
4
2
1
–1
–2
–3
–4
3
4
x
y
1
–2
–1
–3
–4
2
3
4
2
1
–1
–2
–3
–4
3
4
x
y
2
–4
–2
–6
–8
4
6
8
2
1
–1
–2
–3
–4
3
4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
a.
b.
Passes the vertical line test;
it is a function.
Domain:

Range:
y  0
c.
d.
Does not pass the vertical line test; 
it is not a function.
Domain:
x  0
Range:      
e.
f.
Does not pass the vertical line test; 
it is not a function.
Domain:
2  x  2
Range:      4  y  4
x
y
1
–2
–1
–3
–4
2
3
4
2
1
–1
–2
–3
–4
3
4
x
y
2
–4
–2
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
6
8
x
y
1
–2
–1
–3
–4
2
3
4
2
1
–1
–2
–3
–4
3
4
x
y
1
–2
–1
–3
–4
2
3
4
2
1
–1
–2
–3
–4
3
4
x
y
1
–2
–1
–3
–4
2
3
4
2
1
–1
–2
–3
–4
3
4
x
y
1
–2
–1
–3
–4
2
3
4
2
1
–1
–2
–3
–4
3
4
Section 15.5
Functions
749
Passes the vertical line test; 
it is a function. 
Domain:

Range:      
Passes the vertical line test; 
it is a function.
Domain:

Range:     
Passes the vertical line test; 
it is a function.
Domain:
x  2, x  2
Range:
or
y 	 1
y # 3
4
Many of the concepts we have previously discussed are functions, but we need to be
careful with our characterizations. For example, consider the conic sections. Lines are
generally functions, but a vertical line is not a function. Parabolas that open up or down
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

are functions, but those that open right or left are not functions. Circles, ellipses, and
hyperbolas are generally not functions. Here are the forms of some important functions:
Constant function:
f 1x2  k
Linear function:
f(x2  mx  b, m  0
Quadratic function:
f 1x2  ax2  bx  c, a  0
Trigonometric functions:
f 1x2  sin x or f 1x2  cos x or f 1x2  tan x
Exponential function:
f 1x2  bx, b  0, b  1
Logarithmic function:
f 1x2  logb x, b  0, b  0, x  0
Probability function:
A function P that satisfies the following properties: 
0  P1E2  1, P1S2  1, and if E and F are mutually exclusive events, then 
P1E  F2  P1E2  P1F2.
750
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
Example
6
Classify a function
Graph and then classify the function 
Solution
We graph this function by plotting points. Recall, that 
is the exponent on a base 2
that gives the result x. In finding g(x), we select values of x that are powers of 2:
x
g1x2
1
0
log2 1 is the exponent on 2 that gives 1:
20  1
2
1
log2 2 is the exponent on 2 that gives 2:
21  2
4
2
log2 4 is the exponent on 2 that gives 4:
22  4
8
3
log2 8 is the exponent on 2 that gives 8:
23  8
This is a logarithmic function and the graph is shown in Figure 15.45.
log2x
g1x2 5 log2 x.
FIGURE 15.45 Graph of 
g1x2 5 log 2 x
x
y
2
–4
–2
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
6
8
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a function?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Explain the notation f(x).
Which of the sets in Problems 3–14 are functions?
3. {(1, 4), (2, 5), (4, 7), (9, 12)}
4. {(4, 1), (5, 2), (7, 4), (12, 9)}
5. {(1, 1), (2, 1), (3, 4), (4, 4), (5, 9), (6, 9)}
6. {(1, 1), (1, 2), (4, 3), (4, 4), (9, 5), (9, 6)}
7. {(4, 3), (17, 29), (18, 52), (4, 19)}
8. {(13, 4), (29, 4), (5, 4), (9, 4)}
9. {(19, 4), (52, 18), (29, 17), (3, 4)}
10. {(4, 9), (4, 4), (4, 29), (4, 19)}
11. {(5, 0)}
12. {(0, 0)}
13. {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
14. {69, 82, 44, 37}
Tell what the output value is for each of the function machines in
Problems 15–20 for 
(a) 4,
(b) 6,
(c) 8,
(d)
(e) t
15.
f machine
Multiply
by 2
Add 5
1
2,
Problem Set 15.5
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21. If f(x)  x 7, find
a. f(15)
b. f(9)
c. f(p)
22. If g(x)  2x, find
a. g(100)
b. g(25)
c. g(m)
23. If h(x)  3x  1, find
a. h(0)
b. h(10)
c. h(a)
24. If f(x)  x2  1, find
a. f(3)
b.
c. f(b)
25. If g(x)  , find
x
2
f A1
2B
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
x + 1
2
x
x
x
x +
1
2
c
–
– ––
x  2x
x
g
x x
x
1 1
1
2
2 22
2x–1
2x –1
+
+ ++
x x+
x
S
x x
x
 x+x       x+x+
   x+x+x
3x
x x
x
+
+ ++
+
+ ++
1 11
1
x
x
M
x2   +
x 2+1
x2+1
g machine
Multiply
by 3
Add 8
Use the vertical line test in Problems 27–32 to determine whether
the curve is a function. Also state the probable domain and range.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
Section 15.5
Functions
751
a. g(10)
b. g(4)
c. g(3)
26. If h(x)  0.6x, find
a. h(4.1)
b. h(2.3)
c. h A5
2B
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52. For each number x in the domain, the corresponding range
value y is found by squaring and then subtracting 5 times the
domain value.
53. For each number x in the domain, the corresponding range
value y is found by taking the square root of the difference of
the domain value subtracted from 5.
54. For each number x in the domain, the corresponding range
value y is found by adding 1 to the domain value and then
dividing that result into 5 added to 5 times the domain value.
Problem Solving 3   
55. “Look out! That old abandoned well is very dangerous, Huck.
I think that it should be capped so that nobody could fall in and
kill his self.”
“Ah, shucks, Tom, let’s climb down and see how deep it is. I’ll
bet it is a mile down to the bottom.”
If we assume that it is not possible for Tom or Huck to
climb down into the well, how can they find out the depth of
the well? Assume that the well is a mile deep and explain how
Tom and Huck might determine this fact.
56. It is estimated that t years from now, the population of a certain
suburban community will be 
thousand people.
a. What will the population of the community be 
9 years from now?
b. By how much will the population increase during the ninth
year?
c. What will happen to the size of the population in the “long
run”?
57. From a square whose side has length x, create a new square
whose side is 5 in. longer. Find an expression for the differ-
ence between the areas of the two squares as a function of x.
Graph this expression for 0  x  10.
58. From a square whose side has length x, create a new square
whose side is 10 m longer. Find an expression for the sum of
the areas of the two squares as a function of x. Graph this
expression for 0  x  10.
59. Find the area of a square as a function of its perimeter.
60. Find the area of a circle as a function of its circumference.
P1t2 5 20 2
6
t 1 1
© Kazuyoshi Nomachi/CORBIS
752
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
Level 3
45. The velocity v (in feet per second) of
the rock dropped into the well in the
B.C. cartoon at the beginning of this
section is also related to time t (in
seconds) by the formula
v  32t
Complete the table showing the time
and velocity of the rock.
Time (in seconds)
0
1
2
3
4
. . .
8
. . .
16
Velocity (in fps)
0
32
a.
b.
c.
. . .
d.
. . .
e.
46. Using the table of values in Problem 45, find the velocity of
the rock at the instant it was released, after 8 seconds, and
when it hit the bottom of the well. Write your answers in the
form (t, v).
47. An independent distributor bought a new vending machine for
$2,000. It had a probable scrap value of $100 at the end of its
expected 10-year life. The value V at the end of n years is given by
V  2,000  190n
Complete the table showing the year and the value of the
machine.
Year
0
1
3
5
7
9
10
Value
2,000
1,810
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
48. Using the table of values in Problem 47, find the value of the
machine when it is purchased, when it is 5 years old, and when
it is scrapped. Write your answers in the form (n, V).
49. Let P(x) be the number of prime numbers less than x. Find
a. P(10)
b. P(10)
c. P(100)
50. Let S(x) be the exponent on a base 2 that gives the result x. Find
a. S(32)
b.
c.
For each verbal description in Problems 51–54, write a rule in the
form of an equation and then state the domain.
51. For each number x in the domain, the corresponding range
value y is found by multiplying by 3 and then subtracting 5.
S1 !22
S A1
8B
In Problems 33–38, graph each function and then classify as a linear,
quadratic, exponential, logarithmic, or probability function.
33. f(x)  2x2
34. f(x)  2x
35. f(x)  log x
36. f(x) 
37. f(x)  
38. f(x)  5  x
e2x2/2
!2p
A1
2Bx
Level 2
Find the difference quotient, 
for the functions 
given Problems 39–44.
39. f(x)  3x  5
40. f(x)  3x2  5
41. f(x)  x3
42. f(x)  5x3
43. f(x) 
44. f(x)  1
x2
1
x
f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
,
B. C. cartoon reprinted by permission of
Johnny Hart and Creators Syndicate.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 15.6
Chapter Summary
753
15.6
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Line (plotting points and slope-intercept) [15.1]
Vertical and horizontal lines [15.1]
Half-planes [15.2]
Equations by plotting points [15.3]
Parabolas [15.3]
Exponential curves [15.3]
Conic sections (general-form equation) [15.4]
Graph standard-form conic sections [15.4]
Functional notation [15.5]
Nature herself exhibits to
us measurable and
observable quantities in
definite mathematical
dependence; . . . Nearly all
the “known” functions
have presented themselves
in the attempt to solve
geometrical, mechanical,
or physical problems.
J. T. MERTZ
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
the important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online,
you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of
problems that were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by
working the problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test
help in studying for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
Chapter 15
Review Questions
Graph the lines, curves, or half-planes in Problems 1–12.
1. 5x  y  15
2. y 
 3
3. 2x  3y  15
4. x 
y  1
5. x  150
6. x  3y
7. y  1  x2
8. y  2x
9.
10.
11. x2  y2  1
12. x2  y2  1
13. Is {(4, 3), (5, 2), (6, 3)} a function? Tell why or why not.
Find the value of each function in Problems 14–17.
14. f(x) 3x  2; find f (6).
15. g(x)  x2  3; find g(0).
16. F(x)  5x  25; find F(10).
17. m(x)  5; find m(10).
18. An amount of money A results from investing a sum P at a
simple interest rate of 7% for 10 years, and is specified by
the formula
A  1.7P
Graph this equation, where P is the independent variable.
x2
20 1 y2
10 5 1
x2
16 2 y2
9 5 1
22
3
24
5 x
19. If a cannonball is fired upward with an initial velocity of 128
feet per second, its height can be calculated according to the
formula
y  128t  16t2
where t is the length of time (in seconds) after the 
cannonball is fired. Sketch this equation by letting 
t  0, 1, 2, . . . , 7, 8. Connect these points with part of 
a parabola.
20. Draw a population curve for a city whose growth rate is 1.3%
and whose present population is 53,000. The equation is 
Let t  0, 10, . . . , 50 to help you find points for graphing
this curve.
P 5 P0ert
BOOK REPORT
Write a 500-word report on this book:
Beyond Numeracy: Ruminations of a Numbers Man,
John Paulos (New York: Random House, 1992).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

754
CHAPTER 15
The Nature of Graphs and Functions
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G48. If the path of a baseball is parabolic and is 200 ft wide at the base and 50 ft high at
the vertex, write an equation that specifies the path of the baseball if the origin is the
point of departure for the ball, and the form of the equation is 
where (h, k) are the coordinates of the highest point of the baseball.
G49. According to the Centers for Disease Control, the number of AIDS-related cases is
shown in Table 15.1.
y 2 k 5 a1x 2 h2 2,
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
TABLE 15.1
Number of U.S. AIDS-related cases
Year
No. of New Cases
2001
41,270
2002
39,280
2003
38,188
2004
38,730
a. Plot the points represented in Table 15.1 using 2000 as the base year (that is,
represents the year 2000). Plot a point that you think will be the number of
new AIDS- related cases in the United States for the year 2006.
b. Use an exponential formula, 
using the data for 2001 and 2004 to find r.
Using the plot from part a, graph the equation 
and then use this
equation to predict the number of new AIDS-related cases in the United States for
the year 2006.
c. Use a normal-curve formula with mean at July 1, 2002, and standard deviation 
we approximate the data with the equation
Using the plot from part a, graph this equation and use it to predict the number of
new AIDS-related cases in the United States for the year 2006.
d. Using a best-fitting program we find the equation of a parabola which
approximates the given data: 
Using the plot 
from part a, graph this equation and then use it to predict the number of new
AIDS-related cases the United States for the year 2006.
e. Research the number of AIDS cases in 2008 and decide which model in parts a–d
makes the best prediction.
G50. Investigate the topic of conic sections. Build models 
find three-dimensional
models for the conic sections. What did the Greeks know of the conic sections?
and/or
y 5 633x2 2 4,036x 1 44,710.
y 5 1,500,000e21x22.522/10
10p
!5,
y 5 41,270erx,
A 5 A0ert
x 5 0
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas discussed in this chapter. You can find
references to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 15.1 This problem is a continuation of Problem 30, Section 15.2. A player’s
batting average really isn’t simply the ratio 
It is the value of rounded to the near-
est thousandth. It is possible that a batting average could be raised or lowered, but
the reported batting average might remain the same when rounded. Write a paper on
this topic.
PROJECT 15.2 The population in California was 33,871,648 in January 2000 and
36,553,215 in January 2007. Predict California’s population in the year 2010.
PROJECT 15.3 The population in Sebastopol, California, was 7,774 in January 2000 and
7,598 in January 2005. Predict Sebastopol’s population in the year 2010.
PROJECT 15.4 Predict the population of your city or state for the year 2010.
PROJECT 15.5 Before GPS, ships at sea located their positions using the LOng RAnge
Navigation system known as LORAN. In this system, which ceased operation in
2010, a master station sent signals that could be received by ships at sea. To fix the
position of a particular ship, a secondary sending station also emitted signals that
could be received by the ship. Since the ship monitoring the two signals would be
nearer one of the two stations, there would be a difference in the distances that the
two signals travel. Because 
there was a slight time difference between the
signals. If the ship followed a path so that the time difference remained constant, the
path the ship would follow could be determined. Suppose the difference in the arrival
of the time signals is 
(Note: 
is a microsecond—that is, one millionth
of a second.) Also, suppose that the foci are 100 miles apart. Finally, suppose that
signals travel at 
Find the path of the ship with these time readings.
PROJECT 15.6 Write a short paper exploring the concept of the eccentricity of an ellipse.
980 ft/msec.
msec
300 msec.
d 5 rt,
h
a
h
a.
www.mathnature.com 
Section 15.6
Chapter Summary
755
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
16.1 Systems of Linear 
Equations
757
Graphing method, substitution
method, linear combination (addition)
method
16.2 Problem Solving with
Systems
762
Coin problems, combining rates,
supply and demand, age problems,
mixture problems
16.3 Matrix Solution of a System
of Equations
773
Definition of a matrix, matrix form of a
system of equations, elementary row
operations and pivoting, Gauss-Jordan
elimination
16
Outline
What in the World?
“I think I’m going crazy, Bill,” said George. “I can’t
figure out a good rating system for the state league.
I’ve got over a hundred teams and I need to come
up with a statewide rating system to rank all of
those teams. Any ideas?”
“As a matter of fact, yes!” said Bill enthusiastically.
“Have you ever heard of the Harbin Football Team
rating system? I think they use it in Ohio. They use it
to determine the high school football teams that are
eligible to compete in postseason playoffs. Each
team earns points for games it wins and for games
that a defeated opponent wins. Here’s how it works:
Level 1 points are awarded for each game a team
wins. A level 2 point is awarded for each game a 
defeated opponent wins.”
“I hear ya, but I still don’t get it. How do you put
all that together?” asked George.
“Well,” said Bill, “it’s very easy. We simply use a
matrix . . . .”
Overview
Solving systems of equations is a procedure that arises
throughout mathematics. One of the fundamental building
blocks of this book has been problem solving, and in most
real-life situations, solving a problem requires (1) under-
standing the problem, (2) devising a method of solution,
(3) carrying out the method, and (4) checking. Devising a
method of solution may involve many quantities that are un-
known, as well as many relationships between and among
those quantities. Systems of equations and inequalities may
facilitate the solution of a particular problem. This chapter
begins by reviewing those methods that you have probably
studied in a previous course, and then proceeds to two meth-
ods that are particularly suitable for calculator or computer
solutions—namely, Gauss-Jordan elimination and inverse
matrix methods. The chapter concludes by considering
some applied problems that involve finding a maximum or
minimum value subject to a set of constraints.
THE NATURE OF
MATHEMATICAL SYSTEMS
16.4 Inverse Matrices
783
Matrix operations, zero-one matrices,
algebraic properties of matrices,
inverse property, systems of equations
16.5 Modeling with Linear
Programming
796
Systems of inequalities, linear
programming
16.6 Chapter Summary
807
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
© Johnny Crawford/The Image Works
     Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.1
Systems of Linear Equations
757
Example
1
Use the graphing method to solve a linear system
Solve the given systems by graphing:
a.
b.
c. e
2x 2 3y 5 28
y 5 2
3x 1 8
3
e 2x 2 3y 5 28
4x 2 6y 5 0
e 2x 2 3y 5 28
x 1 y 5 6
5
6
8
6
8
11
8
11
15
11
15
?
16.1  Systems of Linear Equations
Now, when these studies reach the point of intercommunion and
connection with one another, and come to be considered in their
mutual affinities, then, I think, but not till then, will the pursuit of
them have a value for our objects; otherwise there is no profit in them.
PLATO
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
Two or more equations that are to be solved at the same time make up a system of equations.
The simultaneous solution of a system of equations is the intersection of the solution sets of
the individual equations. We use a brace to show that we are looking for a simultaneous solu-
tion. If all the equations in a system are linear, it is called a linear system.
We begin by reviewing those methods of solving linear systems that you encountered
in your previous algebra courses, then we generalize first to matrices, and later in this
chapter to systems of linear inequalities.
Graphing Method
The graph of each equation in a system of linear equations in two variables is a line; in
the Cartesian plane, two lines must be related to each other in one of three ways:
1. They intersect at a single point.
2. The graphs are parallel lines. In this case, the solution set is empty, and the system is
called inconsistent. In general, any system that has an empty solution set is referred to
as an inconsistent system.
3. The graphs are the same line. In this case, there are infinitely many points in the
solution set, and any solution of one equation is also a solution of the other. Such a
system is called a dependent system. 
In other words: Graph the equations and check for the intersection point. If the graphs do
not intersect, then the equations represent an inconsistent system. If they coincide, then
they represent a dependent system. When we solve a system by graphing the equations
and then looking for points of intersection, we call it the graphing method.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

758
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Solution
a. Graph the given lines:
Graph is shown in blue.
Graph is shown in red.
Look at the point(s) of intersection. The solution appears to be (2, 4), which can be veri-
fied by direct substitution into both the given equations.
 y 5 2x 1 6
 x 1 y 5 6
 y 5 2
3x 1 8
3
 3y 5 2x 1 8
 2x 2 3y 5 28
x
y
2
–4
–2
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
6
8
You can graph these lines with a graphing calculator:
Use a
or
to find x  2
y  4.
ISECT
TRACE
 Y2 5 2X 1 6
 Y1 5 12/32X 1 18/32
COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
b. The graph of 
is shown in Figure 16.1.
e 2x 2 3y 5 28
4x 2 6y 5 0
x
y
2
–4
–2
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
6
8
FIGURE 16.1 Inconsistent system
x
y
2
–4
–2
–6
–8
4
6
8
4
2
–2
–4
–6
–8
6
8
FIGURE 16.2 Dependent system
Notice that these lines are parallel; you can show this analytically by noting that the
slopes of the lines are the same. Since they are distinct parallel lines, there is not a
point of intersection. This is an inconsistent system.
c. The graph of 
is shown in Figure 16.2.
The equations represent the same line. This is a dependent system.
e 2x 2 3y 5 28
y 5 2
3x 1 8
3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Substitution Method
The graphing method can give solutions as accurate as the graphs you can draw, and con-
sequently it is adequate for many applications. However, there is often a need for more
exact methods.
In general, given a system, the procedure for solving is to write a simpler equivalent
system. Two systems are said to be equivalent if they have the same solution set. In this
book we limit ourselves to finding only real roots. There are several ways to go about writ-
ing equivalent systems. The first nongraphical method we consider comes from the substi-
tution property of real numbers and leads to a substitution method for solving systems.
Section 16.1
Systems of Linear Equations
759
If you are graphing with variables other than x and y, 
you will need to reassign them. For this example, 
we let 
and 
Many calculators have an
function to find: 
x  4
y  1
ISECT
y 5 q:
x 5 p
COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
To solve a system of equations with two equations and two unknowns:
Step 1
Solve one of the equations for one of the variables.
Step 2
Substitute the expression that you obtain into the other equation.
Step 3
Solve the resulting equation.
Step 4
Substitute that solution into either of the original equations to find the value
of the other variable.
Step 5
State the solution.
Substitution Method
Example
2
Use the substitution method to solve a linear system
Solve:
Solution
Since 
, substitute 
for q in the other equation:
Now, substitute 4 for p in either of the given equations:
The solution is (p, q)  (4, 1). If the variables are not x and y, then you must also
show the variables along with the ordered pair. This establishes which variable is asso-
ciated with which number—namely, p  4 and q  1.
 5 21
 5 221 2 1 7
 q 5 22p 1 7
 p 5 4
 24p 5 216
 2p 2 6p 1 21 5 5
 2p 1 3122p 1 72 5 5
 2p 1 3q 5 5
22p 1 7
q 5 22p 1 7
e 2p 1 3q 5 5
q 5 22p 1 7
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Linear Combination (Addition) Method
A third method for solving systems is called the linear combination method (or, as
it is often called, the addition method). It involves substitution and the idea that if
equal quantities are added to equal quantities, the resulting equation is equivalent to
the original system. In general, addition will not simplify the system unless the nu-
merical coefficients of one or more terms are opposites. However, you can often force
them to be opposites by multiplying one or both of the given equations by nonzero
constants.
760
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
To solve a system of equations by linear combinations:
Step 1
Multiply one or both of the equations by a constant or constants so that the
coefficients of one of the variables become opposites.
Step 2
Add corresponding members of the equations to obtain a new equation in a
single variable.
Step 3
Solve the derived equation for that variable.
Step 4
Substitute the value of the found variable into either of the original
equations, and solve for the second variable.
Step 5
State the solution.
Linear Combination
In other words: Multiply one or both of the equations by a constant or constants so that
the coefficients of one of the variables are opposites, and then add the equations to elimi-
nate the variable.
Example
3
Use the linear combination method to solve 
a linear system
Solve the given system by the linear combination method.
Solution
Multiply both sides of the first equation by 2, and both sides of the second
equation by 3. This procedure, denoted as shown below, forces the coefficients of x to
be opposites:
This means you should add the equations.
T
y  4
Mentally, add the equations.
If y  4, then 2x  3y  0 means 2x  3(4)  0, which implies that x  6. The so-
lution is (6, 4).
1 e 6x 1 10y 5 24
26x 2 9y 5 0
2
23 e 3x 1 5y 5 22
2x 1 3y 5 0
e 3x 1 5y 5 22
2x 1 3y 5 0
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.1
Systems of Linear Equations
761
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a system of linear equations?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Distinguish inconsistent and
dependent systems.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the graphing method for
solving a system of equations.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the substitution method for
solving a system of equations.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the addition method for
solving a system of equations.
Solve the systems in Problems 6–13 by graphing.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
Solve the systems in Problems 14–25 by the substitution method.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
Solve the systems in Problems 26–37 by the addition method.
26.
27.
28.
29.
e 3x 1 y 5 13
x 2 2y 5 9
e x 1 y 5 6
x 2 2y 5 12
e x 1 y 5 560
x 2 y 5 490
e x 1 y 5 16
x 2 y 5 10
e x 1 3y 5 0
x 5 5y 1 16
e x 5 3y 2 4
5x 2 4y 5 29
e x 5 27y 2 3
2x 1 5y 5 3
e 3t1 1 5t2 5 1,541
t2 5 2t1 1 160
e
x
3 2 y 5 7
x 1 y
2 5 7
e
4y 1 5x 5 2
y 5 5
4 x 1 2
e x 1 y 5 12
0.6y 5 0.51122
e 2x 2 3y 5 15
y 5 2
3 x 2 8
e 3x 2 y 5 21
x 5 2y 1 3
e y 5 5 2 3x
2x 1 3y 5 1
e 5x 2 2y 5 219
x 5 3y 1 4
e y 5 3 2 2x
3x 1 2y 5 217
e 3x 1 2y 5 5
4x 2 3y 5 1
e 4x 2 3y 5 21
22x 1 3y 5 21
e 6x 1 y 5 25
x 1 3y 5 2
e x 2 6 5 y
4x 1 y 5 9
e 2x 2 3y 5 12
24x 1 6y 5 18
e y 5 3x 1 1
x 2 2y 5 8
e 3x 2 4y 5 16
2x 1 2y 5 26
e x 2 y 5 2
2x 1 3y 5 9
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
Level  2
Solve the systems in Problems 38–55 for all real solutions, using
any suitable method.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
Level  3
56. JOURNAL PROBLEM* The premise of this problem is that
since dogs supposedly age seven times as quickly as humans, at
some point the dog will become “older” than its owner. Karen
wanted to determine exactly on which day this milestone would
occur for her and her dog, Sydney, so that they could celebrate
e y 5 2x 2 1
y 5 23x 2 9
e 12x 2 5y 5 239
y 5 2x 1 9
e x 1 y 5 10
0.4x 1 0.9y 5 0.51102
e q 1 d 5 147
0.25q 1 0.10d 5 24.15
e x 5 3
4y 2 2
3y 2 4x 5 5
e 100x 2 y 5 0
50x 1 y 5 300
e 5x 1 4y 5 9
9x 1 3y 5 12
e 5x 2 2y 5 21
3x 1 y 5 17
e 6x 1 9y 5 24
9x 1 3y 5 1
e 2x 2 y 5 6
4x 1 y 5 3
e 3x 1 4y 5 8
x 1 2y 5 2
e x 1 y 5 4
2x 1 3y 5 9
e 2x 1 3y 5 9
x 5 5y 2 2
e y 5 3x 1 1
x 2 2y 5 8
e x 2 6y 5 23
2x 1 3y 5 9
e 2x 1 2y 5 2
4x 2 7y 5 25
e x 2 y 5 8
x 1 y 5 2
e x 1 y 5 7
x 2 y 5 21
e 5x 1 4y 5 5
15x 2 2y 5 8
e 2x 1 5y 5 7
2x 1 6y 5 14
e 2u 2 3v 5 16
5u 1 2v 5 21
e s 1 t 5 12
s 2 2t 5 24
e 5s1 1 2s2 5 23
2s1 1 7s2 5 34
e 3a1 1 4a2 5 29
5a1 1 7a2 5 214
e3u 1 2v 5 5
4v 5 10 2 6u
e 6r 2 4s 5 10
2s 5 3r 2 5
Problem Set 16.1
*From “When Does a Dog Become Older Than Its Owner?” by Anne Larson Quinn and
Karen R. Larson, The Mathematics Teacher, December 1996, pp. 734–737.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solve this system for x and y in terms of a. This is not 
a linear system, and you will need to use the quadratic 
formula after substituting.
60. HISTORICAL QUEST
The following problem was
written by Leonhard Euler: “Two persons owe conjointly 
29 pistoles;* they both have money, but neither of them enough
to enable him, singly, to discharge this common debt.” The
first debtor says therefore to the second, “If you give me of
your money, I can immediately pay the debt.” The second
answers that he also could discharge the debt, if the other
would give him of his money. Determine how many pistoles
each had.
3
4
2
3
the occasion. Here are the basic facts. Karen was born on Decem-
ber 7, 1970, and Sydney was born on April 18, 1992. For every
year that Karen aged, Syndey aged seven equivalent people-
years. On what date are Karen and Sydney “the same age”?
57. Assume that Sydney in Problem 56 is a cat instead of a dog, and
assume that cats age four times as quickly as humans. Using this
assumption, when will Karen and Sydney be “the same age”?
58. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Assume that you obtain a dog that
was born today. When will this dog be older (in dog years)
than you are?
Problem Solving  3
59. HISTORICAL QUEST
The Louvre Tablet from the Baby-
lonian civilization is dated about 1500 B.C. It shows a system
equivalent to
exy 5 1
x 1 y 5 a
762
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
*A pistole is a unit of money.
16.2
Problem Solving with Systems
Problem solving has been a major theme in this book since it was first introduced in
Chapter 1. The procedure that we described as “evolving to a single variable” is equiva-
lent to solving a system by substitution. However, as we see in this chapter, substitution
is only one of the techniques for solving systems. In this chapter, we look at systems that
can be solved by a variety of techniques. This section introduces some of the usual types
of word problems, and as we develop the rest of this chapter, we will introduce some of
the more unusual types of problems that use systems of equations.
As we have seen, substitution is one of the primary tools used in solving word prob-
lems. Many word problems are given in a form that indicates more than two variables.
There are at least three ways you can reduce the number of variables in an applied problem:
1. Substitute numbers for variables. Use this type of substitution when the value of a
variable is known.
2. Substitute variables for other variables by using a known formula.
3. Substitute variables for other variables when relationships between those variables are
given in the problem.
Coin Problems
The first type of problem we consider in this section is coin problems. We begin here be-
cause coin problems vividly illustrate the need to be careful in defining the variables you
use. In money problems, you must distinguish between the number of coins and the value
of the coins because, for example, the number of quarters you have is not the same as the
value of those quarters. The formulas you will need for money problems are:
VALUE OF QUARTERS  25(NUMBER OF QUARTERS)
VALUE OF DIMES  10(NUMBER OF DIMES)
VALUE OF NICKELS  5(NUMBER OF NICKELS)
VALUE OF PENNIES  NUMBER OF PENNIES
Notice that the values in the preceding formulas are in terms of cents and not dollars.
Historical
Leonhard Euler 
(1707–1783)
It was difficult to decide where to put
a Historical Note about Euler, since his
name is attached to every branch of
mathematics. His name is pronounced
“Oiler” and it is sometimes joked that
if you want to give a student a one-
word mathematics test, just ask the
student to pronounce Leonhard’s last
name. He was the most prolific writer
on the subject of mathematics, and
his mathematical textbooks were mas-
terfully written. His writing was not at
all slowed down by his total blindness
for the last 17 years of his life. He pos-
sessed a phenomenal memory, had
almost total recall, and could mentally
calculate long and complicated prob-
lems. I’ve included a problem from his
1740 textbook Algebra in the problem
set for this section.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.2
Problem Solving with Systems
763
Example
1
Coin problem
A box of coins has dimes and nickels totaling $4.20. If there are three more nickels than
dimes, how many of each type of coin is in the box?
Solution
Restate the problem in equation form. It does not matter if you use more
than two variables.
VALUE OF DIMES  VALUE OF NICKELS  TOTAL VALUE
NUMBER OF NICKELS  NUMBER OF DIMES  3 
We used five different unknowns in this statement.
Substitute known numbers:
TOTAL VALUE = 420
T
VALUE OF DIMES  VALUE OF NICKELS  TOTAL VALUE
NUMBER OF NICKELS  NUMBER OF DIMES  3 
Substitute using a formula:
10(NUMBER OF DIMES)
5(NUMBER OF NICKELS)
T
T
VALUE OF DIMES  VALUE OF NICKELS  420 
NUMBER OF NICKELS  NUMBER OF DIMES  3 
Now that we have only two unknowns, we choose variables. Let d  NUMBER OF DIMES
and n  NUMBER OF NICKELS.
Solve this system by substitution:
Substitute n  d  3.
If
, then
. There are 27 dimes and 30 nickels. Check:
Three more nickels than dimes, and the value is 27($0.10)  30($0.05)  $4.20.
n 5 d 1 3 5 27 1 3 5 30
d 5 27
 d 5 27
 15d 5 405
 10d 1 5d 1 15 5 420
 10d 1 51d 1 32 5 420
 10d 1 5n 5 420
e 10d 1 5n 5 420
n 5 d 1 3
U
U
U
Combining Rates
On a recent visit to an airport, I was walking from the terminal to the gate and there was a
moving sidewalk. This caused me to think (of course) of a variety of algebra problems. If
I walk at a rate of 100 feet per minute and the sidewalk travels at 80 ft per minute, then
my rate is:
100 feet per minute if I walk to the terminal without using the moving sidewalk; 
80 feet per minute if I stand on the moving sidewalk; 
100  80  180 feet per minute if I walk on the moving sidewalk; 
100  80  20 feet per minute if I walk against the movement of the moving sidewalk.
This illustrates a general principle. When you move in air, in water, on a treadmill, or 
on some other medium that is also moving, you combine rates. If you move in the same
direction, your rate is added to the rate of the medium. If you move against the movement
of the medium, the rates are subtracted. Consider the following examples.
© Jeff Greenberg/PhotoEdit
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Supply and Demand
We have solved word problems with linear combinations and with substitution. Some-
times it is useful to solve word problems by graphing. One such application has to do
with supply and demand. If supply greatly exceeds demand, then money will be lost be-
cause of unsold items. On the other hand, if demand greatly exceeds supply, then money
will be lost because of insufficient inventory. The most desirable situation is when the
supply and demand are equal. The point for which the supply and demand are equal is
764
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Example
2
Tide problem
A deep-sea fishing boat travels at 20 mph going out with the tide. Sometimes it comes
in against the tidal current and is able to make only 15 mph. What is the boat’s rate with-
out the current, and what is the rate at which the tide moves the water?
Solution
We are given:
RATE WITH THE TIDE is 20 mph.
RATE AGAINST THE TIDE is 15 mph.
This gives us the following system of equations:
(RATE OF BOAT)  (RATE OF TIDE)  20
Same direction: Add rates.
(RATE OF BOAT)  (RATE OF TIDE)  15
Opposite direction: Subtract rates.
We assume that the rate of the boat is greater so that we obtain a positive distance. There
are two unknowns; let b  RATE OF BOAT and t  RATE OF TIDE.
Substitute to find t:
The boat’s speed is 17.5 mph, and the tide moves at 2.5 mph.
 t 5 2.5
 17.5 1 t 5 20
 b 5 17.5
 2b 5 35
1 e b 1 t 5 20
b 2 t 5 15
U
Example
3
Add/Subtract rates
On a certain day a large bird was clocked at 80 mph flying with the wind, but could fly
only 10 mph against the wind. What is the speed of the bird in still air?
Solution
We are given:
RATE WITH THE WIND is 80 mph.
RATE AGAINST THE WIND is 10 mph.
This gives us the following system:
BIRD’S RATE  WIND’S RATE  80 
BIRD’S RATE  WIND’S RATE  10
Let b  BIRD’S RATE and w  WIND’S RATE:
Assume the bird’s rate is greater than the wind’s rate.
The bird’s rate in still air is 45 mph.
 b 5 45
 2b 5 90
1 e b 1 w 5 80
b 2 w 5 10
U
Remember to answer
the question that was
asked. In Example 3, we
were not asked to find
the rate of the wind.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.2
Problem Solving with Systems
765
called the equilibrium point. In this section we assume that supply and demand func-
tions are linear.
Example
4
Market price
Suppose you have a small product that is marketable to the students on
your campus. You want to know what price to charge for this product to maximize 
your profit.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. There is not sufficient information given to answer this 
question. A little market research shows that only 200 people would buy the product 
if it were priced at
, but 2,000 would buy it at
. This information represents the 
demand.
Let p  PRICE and n  NUMBER OF ITEMS.
Then, because the demand, n, is determined by the price, let the price, p, be the inde-
pendent variable. That is, let the ordered pairs be (
). From the given information, we
see that the demand curve passes through the points (
) and (
). If we as-
sume that demand is linear (a straight line), we label the line passing through these
points the “demand” line, as shown in Figure 16.3.
There is still insufficient information. We call a local shop and find that it can
make the product during slack time and could supply 300 items at a price that allows
you to sell them for
. To supply more, the shop must use overtime. If the shop sup-
plies 1,500 items, you will have to charge
for your product. This information rep-
resents the supply. Use (
) as defined for demand. From the given information, the
supply curve passes through (
) and (
). If we assume that supply is lin-
ear, we draw the line through these points and label it the “supply” line, as shown in
Figure 16.3.
6, 1500
2, 300
p, n
$6
$2
1, 2000
10, 200
p, n
$1
$10
Pólya’s 
Method
p
n
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
4
2
8
6
10
Demand
Supply
Equilibrium
point
(5, 1200)
FIGURE 16.3 Supply and demand
Devise a Plan. We now have sufficient information to solve the problem. Profit is
maximized at the equilibrium point. This is the point of intersection of the supply
and demand lines. We will look for the intersection point of the supply and demand
lines.
Carry Out the Plan. We see from Figure 16.3 that the equilibrium point is (
).
This means that the price charged should be 
. It also says that you should expect to
sell 1,200 items.
Look Back. As a real modeling problem, you would need to research the parts shown
in italic, but for our purposes in this book, you will be supplied this information.
$5
5, 1200
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

766
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Example
5
Celebrity age problem
Director Ron Howard is 9 years older than actor Tom Cruise. If the sum of their birth
years is 3,915, in what year was Tom Cruise born?
Solution
Let 
Since Ron Howard is 9 years older, you add 9 to his birth year to obtain Cruise’s birth
year: 
. Thus, we have the following system:
We solve this system by substituting 
for y in the second equation (this is easy
since the first equation is already solved for y):
We are looking for Tom Cruise’s birth year, so 
 5 1962
 5 1953 1 9
 y 5 x 1 9
 x 5 1953
 2x 5 3,906
 2x 1 9 5 3,915
 x 1 1x 1 92 5 3,915
x 1 9
e x 1 9 5 y
x 1 y 5 3,915
x 1 9 5 y
y 5 Tom Cruise’s birth year
x 5 Ron Howard’s birth year
Age Problems
If you are comparing birthdates of individuals, then the younger person has the larger
birthdate (year). For example, if you were born in 1985, and your sister is 6 years
younger, then her birthdate is
years between ages
T
1985  6  1991
birthdate of older person
birthdate of younger person
U
U
Mixture Problems
Another common textbook application problem is the so-called mixture problem. The
process involves combining two (or more) ingredients to obtain a mixture. Each ingredi-
ent has a certain quantity, and the quantity of the mixture is the sum of the quantities of
the added ingredients. Quantities are measured in some appropriate unit; for example,
consider the following spreadsheet:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
A
B
C
D
E
F
INGREDIENT I
+
INGREDIENT II
=
MIXTURE
a.     5 lb
+
10 lb
=
15 lb
b.     x lb
+
y lb
=
(x  + y ) lb
c.     18 oz
+
20 oz
=
38 oz
d.     s  oz
+
t  oz
=
(s  + t ) oz
e.     8 L
+
p  L
=
(8 + p ) L
Spreadsheet Application
The solution to the
equation may not be the
answer to the question
asked.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This idea seems easy enough, but with mixture problems we have additional considera-
tions. We begin with a simple example of mixing peanuts and cashews.
Section 16.2
Problem Solving with Systems
767
Example
6
Mixture fundamentals
a. If you mix 16 lb of peanuts with 4 lb of cashews, how many pounds are in this
mixture (called mixture I)?
b. If you mix 2 lb of peanuts with 8 lb of cashews, how many pounds are in this 
mixture (called mixture II)?
c. If you mix mixtures I and II, what are the percentage of peanuts and the percentage
of cashews?
Solution
PEANUTS

CASHEWS

MIXTURE
a. 16 lb
 4 lb
 20 lb (mixture I)
b. 2 lb
 8 lb
 10 lb (mixture II)
c. 116  22 lb  14  82 lb
 120  102 lb (final mixture)
Notice the double check; columns add down and rows add across to determine the total
amount in the final mixture. As percentages these are:
18
30 5 0.6 or 60%  12
30 5 0.4 or 40%
Mixture problems are often stated using percentages. The following example is a restate-
ment of Example 6.
Example
7
Mixture problem-fundamentals
If you mix together 20 lb of a peanut/cashew mixture consisting of 
peanuts with
10 lb of a peanut/cashew mixture consisting of 
peanuts to obtain 30 lb of a
peanut/cashew mixture consisting of 
peanuts, how many pounds of peanuts and
cashews are present in mixture I, mixture II, and the final mixture?
Solution
MIXTURE I

MIXTURE II

FINAL MIXTURE
Given:
20 lb

10 lb

30 lb
PEANUTS [0.8(20)  16 lb]

[0.2(10)  2 lb]

18 lb
CASHEWS [0.2(20)  4 lb]

[0.8(10)  8 lb]

12 lb
TOTAL
[116  42 lb]

[12  82 lb]

118  122 lb
Check: Final mixture should be 
peanuts: 
.
0.60(30) 5 18 lb
60%
60%
20%
80%
The last of this related trilogy of introductory examples repeats the information in
the previous two examples in the form of a typical mixture problem. If you have difficulty
with this example, you can look back at the previous two examples.
The percentages of the
parts must total 100%.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
We must mix together
MIXTURE I

MIXTURE II

FINAL MIXTURE
Given:
30 lb
Let x  number of pounds of mixture I
y  number of pounds of mixture II
x

y

30
These mixtures are made up of peanuts and cashews:
PEANUTS
0.8x

0.2y

0.6(30)  18 lb
CASHEWS
0.2x

0.8y

0.4(30)  12 lb
Notice that the percentages add to 100% (or as decimals add to 1). This gives rise to the
following system:
You notice that we have three equations with two unknowns. We will discuss such sys-
tems in general in the following section, but for a problem like this one we can use sub-
stitution. From the first equation, we have 
, which we substitute into either
of the other equations:
If
, then
; combine 20 pounds of mixture I with 10 pounds of mixture II.
Check:
•
x 1 y 5 30
20 1 10 5 30 ✓
0.8x 1 0.2y 5 18
0.81202 1 0.21102 5 18 ✓
0.2x 1 0.8y 5 12
0.21202 1 0.81102 5 12 ✓
y 5 10
x 5 20
 x 5 20
 0.6x 5 12
 0.6x 1 6 5 18
 0.8x 1 6 2 0.2x 5 18
 0.8 1 0.2130 2 x2 5 18
 0.8x 1 0.2y 5 18
y 5 30 2 x
•
x 1 y 5 30
0.8x 1 0.2y 5 18
0.2x 1 0.8y 5 12
768
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Example
9
Mixture problem
How many liters of water must be added to 3 liters of an 
acid solution to obtain a
acid solution? (By an 
acid solution we mean a solution that is 
acid and
water; remember that the sum of the percentages of all ingredients must be 
.)
Solution
The basic relationship for this mixture is 
100%
20%
80%
80%
30%
80%
Example
8
Mixture problem–complete
How much of a peanut/cashew mixture consisting of 
peanuts must be mixed with a
peanut/cashew mixture consisting of 
peanuts to obtain 30 lb of a peanut/cashew
mixture consisting of 
peanuts?
60%
20%
80%
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

AMOUNT. OF SOLUTION (in L):
3

x

y
AMOUNT. OF ACID (in L):
0.8(3)

0(x)

0.3y
Section 16.2
Problem Solving with Systems
769
=
Liters
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Liters
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Liters
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
80%
acid
Old
solution
3 liters
Amount of
water to be
added
– unknown
Amount of
water to be
added
80% acid in
old solution
30% acid in
new solution
70% water in
new solution
20% water in
old solution
20%
water
where x  AMOUNT OF WATER TO BE ADDED
y  AMOUNT AFTER MIXING
This leads to the system
Solve the second equation for y to obtain y  8, and substitute this into the first equa-
tion to obtain
The amount of water to be added is 5 liters.
 x 5 5
 3 1 x 5 8
e 3 1 x 5 y
2.4 1 0 5 0.3y
Example 10 Mix milk and cream
Milk containing 
butterfat and cream containing 
butterfat are mixed to produce
half-and-half, which is 
butterfat. How many gallons of each must be mixed to
make 140 gallons of half-and-half?
Solution
BEFORE MIXING
AFTER MIXING
AMT. OF SOLUTION:
MILK  CREAM

HALF-AND-HALF
AMT. OF BUTTERFAT:
0.10(MILK)  0.80(CREAM)  0.5(HALF-AND-HALF)
We see that there are two unknowns; let
m  AMOUNT OF MILK
c  AMOUNT OF CREAM
140  AMOUNT OF HALF-AND-HALF
We have the system of equations (with variables):
AMOUNT OF SOLUTION:
AMOUNT OF BUTTERFAT:
Multiply both sides of the second equation by 10:
If 
, then 
so that 
. You must mix 60 gallons of milk and 
80 gallons of cream.
m 5 60
m 1 80 5 140
c 5 80
 c 5 80
 27c 5 2560
1 e m 1 c 5 140
2m 2 8c 5 2700
e m 1 c 5 140
0.10m 1 0.80c 5 0.5011402
50%
80%
10%
AMOUNT OF ACID  PERCENT ACID  AMOUNT OF SOLUTION
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

770
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Level  1
Carefully interpret each problem, restate the information and
relationships until you are able to write the equations, solve the
equations, and state an answer. Problems 1–3 are patterned 
after Example 1.
1. A box contains twenty-five more dimes than nickels. 
How many of each type of coin is there if the total value 
is 
?
2. A box contains only dimes and quarters. The number of 
dimes is three less than twice the number of quarters. If the
total value of the coins is 
, how many dimes are in 
the box?
3. Forty-two coins have a total value of 
. If the coins are all
nickels and quarters, how many are nickels?
Problems 4–6 are patterned after Examples 2–3.
4. A boat travels 25 mph relative to the riverbank while going
downstream and only 15 mph returning upstream. What is the
boat’s speed in still water?
5. An airliner flies at 510 mph in the jet stream, but only 270 mph
returning against it. What is the speed of the plane in still air?
6. A plane travels 200 mph relative to the ground while flying
with a strong wind and only 150 mph returning against it. What
is the plane’s speed in still air?
Problems 7–9 are patterned after Example 4.
7. The demand for a product varies from 150,000 units at 
per unit to 300,000 at 
per unit. Also, 300,000 could be
supplied at 
per unit, whereas only 200,000 could be sup-
plied for 
each. Find the equilibrium point for the system.
8. California Instruments, a manufacturer of calculators, finds by
test marketing its calculators at UCLA that 180 calculators
could be sold when they were priced at 
, but only 20 calcu-
lators could be sold when they were priced at 
. On the
other hand, the manufacturer finds that 20 calculators can be
supplied at 
each. If they were supplied at 
each, over-
time shifts could be used to raise the supply to 180 calculators.
What is the optimum price for the calculators?
9. A manufacturer of lapel buttons test marketed a new item at
the University of California, Davis. It was found that 900 items
could be sold if they were priced at 
, but only 300 items
could be sold if the price were raised to 
. On the other hand,
the manufacturer finds that 600 items can be supplied at 
each. If they were supplied at 
each, overtime shifts could be
used to raise the supply to 1,000 items. What is the optimum
price for the items?
Problems 10–12 are patterned after Example 5.
10. Mel Brooks is seven years older than fellow funnyman Dom
DeLuise. If the sum of their birth years is 3,859, when was
DeLuise born?
$9
$1
$7
$1
$40
$10
$40
$10
$10
$90
$20
$110
$6.90
$22.65
$7.15
11. Clint Eastwood is fifteen years older than fellow actor Goldie
Hawn. If the sum of their years of birth is 3,875, then in what
year was Hawn born?
12. The sum of the birth years of actresses Debra Winger and
Meryl Streep is 3,904. If Debra is six years younger, in what
year was she born?
Problems 13–18 are patterned after Examples 6–7. The
information is based on the spreadsheet shown on page 766.
Suppose Ingredient I is made up of
micoden and 
water,
Ingredient II is made up of 
micoden, 
bixon, and 
water, and these ingredients are mixed together.
20%
50%
30%
20%
80%
Problem Set 16.2
Spreadsheet Application
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
B
C
D
E
F
Ingredient I
Ingredient II
MIXTURE
a.    5 lb
10 lb
15 lb
b.
x lb
y  lb
(x + y ) lb
c.    8 L
p  L
(8 + p ) L
13. How much micoden is in mixture a?
14. How much water is in mixture b?
15. How much bixon is in mixture c?
16. What is the percentage of water in mixture a?
17. What is the percentage of micoden in mixture a?
18. What is the percentage of bixon in mixture a?
Problems 19–21 are patterned after Examples 8–10.
19. How many ounces of a base metal (no silver) must be alloyed
with 100 ounces of 21% silver alloy to obtain an alloy that is
15% silver?
20. An after-shave lotion is 50% alcohol. If you have 6 fluid
ounces of the lotion, how much water must be added to reduce
the mixture to 20% alcohol?
21. Milk containing 20% butterfat is mixed with cream containing
60% butterfat to produce half-and-half, which is 50% butterfat.
How many gallons of each must be mixed to make 180 gallons
of half-and-half?
Level 2
Problems 22–57 provide a variety of types of word problems.
Answer each question.
22.
Suppose a car rental agency
gives the following choices:
Option A:
$30 per day plus
40¢ per mile
Option B:
Flat $50 per day
(unlimited miles)
At what mileage are both rates the same if you rent the car for
three days?
Hartmut Schmidt/Photolibrary
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23. The supply for a certain commodity is linear and determined 
to be
whereas the demand is linear with 
where p is the price and n is the number of items. What is the
equilibrium point for (p, n)?
24. Suppose a car rental agency gives the following options:
Option A:
$40 per day plus 50¢ per mile
Option B:
Flat $60 per day with unlimited mileage 
At what mileage are both rates the same if you rent the car for
four days?
25. A certain item has a linear supply curve 
and a linear demand 
where p is the price and n is the number of items. What is the
equilibrium point (p, n)?
26. There are six more dimes than quarters in a container.
How many of each coin is there if the total value is $3.75?
27. A box contains $8.40 in quarters and dimes. The number of
quarters is twice the number of dimes. How many of each type
of coin is in the box?
28. A canoeist rows downstream in 1 hr and back upstream in 3
hr. What is the rate of the current if the canoeist rows 9 miles
in each direction?
29. Charles Bronson was born nine years before another movie
hard guy, Clint Eastwood. If the sum of their years of birth is
3,851, in what year was Eastwood born?
30. A plane makes a 660-mile flight with the wind in 
2 hours. Returning against the wind takes 3 hours. Find the
wind speed.
31. Matt Damon is six years older than Sandra Bullock. 
The sum of their years of birth is 3,934. In what year was
Matt born?
32. You have a 24% silver alloy and some pure silver. How 
much of each must be mixed to obtain 100 oz of 43% silver?
33. How much water must be added to a gallon of 80% antifreeze
to obtain a 60% mixture?
34. How much antifreeze must be added to a gallon of 60%
antifreeze to obtain an 80% mixture?
35. The area of Texas is 208,044 square miles greater than that of
Florida. Their combined area is 316,224 square miles. What is
the area of each state?
36. The combined area of New York and California is 204,192
square miles. The area of California is 108,530 square miles
more than that of New York. Find the land area of each state.
1
2
1
2
p 5 8 2 0.0006n
p 5 0.0005n 2 3
p 5 150 2 0.01n
p 5 0.005n 1 12
37. Forty-two coins have a total value of $9.50. If the coins are all
nickels and quarters, how many are quarters?
38. A collection of coins has a value of $4.76. There is the same
number of nickels and dimes but there are four fewer pennies
than nickels or dimes. How many pennies are in the collection
if there are 86 coins?
39. A bunch of change contains nickels, dimes, and quarters. There
is the same number of dimes and quarters, and there are eight
more nickels than either dimes or quarters. How many dimes
are there if the value of the 98 coins is $12.40?
40. A box contains $8.40 in nickels, dimes, and pennies. How many
of each type of coin is in the box if the number of dimes is six
less than twice the number of pennies, and there is an equal
number of dimes and nickels in the box?
41. Sherlock Holmes was called in as a consultant to solve the
Great Bank Robbery.
He was told that the thief had made away with a bag of money
containing $5, $10, and $20 bills totaling $1,390. When the
bankers were checking serial numbers to see how many of
each denomination were taken, Holmes said, “It is elementary,
since there were five times as many $10 bills as $5 bills and
three more than twice as many $20 bills as $5 bills.” How
many of each denomination were taken?
42.
Have you ever seen an old western movie in which a cowboy
would drink half a bottle of whiskey in the saloon and then
Comstock/Fotosearch
© 2006 The American Historical Theatre, Inc., 
www.americanhistoricaltheatre.org
Section 16.2
Problem Solving with Systems
771
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

walk out and have a successful gunfight? That was possible
because the whiskey sold in the Wild West was generally 15%
alcohol. The wilder the saloon, the less alcohol was in the bot-
tle. Everybody diluted a little more and more until the whiskey
was hardly stronger than wine or tea. 
In the United States a 100-proof whiskey means that the
drink is 50% alcohol. Suppose a bartender wishes to dilute 
a gallon of 100-proof whiskey to make it “a 15% drink.” How
much water must be added?
43. A plane makes an 870-mile flight in 
hours against a strong
head wind, but returns in 50 minutes less with the wind. What
is the plane’s speed without the wind?
44. A plane with a tail wind makes its 945-mile flight in 3 hours.
The return flight against the wind takes a half hour longer.
What is the wind speed?
45. A dairy has cream containing 23% butterfat and milk that is
3% butterfat. How much of each must be mixed to obtain
30 gallons of a richer milk containing 4% butterfat?
46. A chemist has two solutions of sulfuric acid. One is a 
50% solution, and the other is a 75% solution. How many
liters of each does the chemist mix to get 10 liters of a 
60% solution?
47. The combined height of the Transamerica Tower and the Bank
of America Building is 1,632 ft. The Transamerica Tower is 
74 ft taller. What is the height of each of the San Francisco
skyscrapers?
48. The Standard Oil and the Sears buildings have a combined
height of 2,590 ft. The Sears Tower is 318 ft taller. What is the
height of each of these Chicago towers?
49. End to end, the Verrazano Narrows and the George
Washington bridges would span 7,760 ft. If the Verrazano 
Narrows is the longer of the two New York structures by 
760 ft, how long is it?
50. The combined length of the Golden Gate and San Francisco
Bay bridges is 6,510 ft. If the Golden Gate is 1,890 ft longer,
what is its length?
51. Noxin Electronics has investigated the feasibility of
introducing a new line of magnetic tape. The study shows 
that both supply and demand are linear. The supply can
increase from 1,000 items at $2 each to 5,000 units at $4 each.
The demand ranges from 1,000 items at $4 to 7,000 at $3.
What is the equilibrium point of this supply-and-demand 
system?
52. Noxin Electronics is considering producing a small cassette
line. Research shows linear demand to be from 40,000
cassettes at $2 to 100,000 at $1. Similarly, the supply goes
from 20,000 cassettes at 50¢ to 80,000 at $5. What is the
equilibrium point?
53. Sterling silver contains 92.5% silver. How many grams of pure
silver and sterling silver must be mixed to get 100 grams of a
94% alloy?
54. A pain remedy contains 12% aspirin, and a stronger formula
has 25% aspirin, but is otherwise the same. A chemist mixes
31
3
some of each to obtain 100 mg of a mixture with 20% aspirin.
How much of each is used?
55. How many gallons of 24% butterfat cream must be mixed 
with 500 gallons of 3% butterfat milk to obtain a 4% butterfat
milk?
56. The radiator of a car holds 17 quarts of liquid. If it now contains
15% antifreeze, how many quarts must be replaced by antifreeze
to give the car a 60% solution in its radiator?
57. A party punch bowl contains 5 quarts containing 
20% 7-UP, and the host wants to change it to a 30% 7-UP
solution. How much of the punch must be replaced with 
7-UP to accomplish this task?
Level 3
58. The supply curve for a certain commodity is
, and the demand curve for the same prod-
uct is 
, where n is the number of items
and p is the number of dollars.
a. At $15 per unit of the commodity, how many items 
would be supplied? How many would be 
demanded?
b. At what price would no items be supplied?
c. At what price would no items be demanded?
d. What is the equilibrium price for this product?
e. How many units will be produced at the equilibrium 
price?
59. The supply curve for a new software product is given by
, and the demand curve for the same product is
, where n is the number of items and p is the
number of dollars.
a. At $250 for the product, how many items would be supplied?
How many would be demanded?
b. At what price would no items be supplied?
c. At what price would no items be demanded?
d. What is the equilibrium price for this product?
e. How many units will be produced at the equilibrium price?
Problem Solving 3   
60. What is wrong, if anything, with the following statement?
Explain your reasoning. 
Answer:
There is obviously more cream in the coffee since it
was added before any coffee was removed.
You have identical cups, one containing coffee and one
containing cream. One teaspoon of the cream is added
to the coffee and stirred in. Now a teaspoon of the
coffee/cream mixture is added back to the cup of cream
and stirred in. Both cups contain identical amounts of
liquid, but is there more cream in the coffee or more
coffee in the cream?
n 5 200 2 0.5p
n 5 2.5p 2 500
n 5 31,500 2 1,500p
n 5 2,500p 2 500
772
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.3
Matrix Solution of a System of Equations
773
16.3  Matrix Solution of a System of Equations
Systems of equations can occur in a variety of different disciplines. In fact, common real-
world problems require the simultaneous solution of systems involving 3, 4, 5, or even 20
or 100 unknowns. The methods of the previous section will not suffice and, in practice,
techniques that will allow computer or calculator help in solving systems are common. In
this section, we introduce a way of solving large systems of equations in a general way so
that we can handle the solution of a system of m equations with n unknowns.
Definition of a Matrix
Consider a system with unknowns 
and 
. We use subscripts 1 and 2 to denote the
unknowns, instead of using variables x and y, because we want to be able to handle n
unknowns, which we can easily denote as 
; if we continued by using
for systems in general, we would soon run out of letters. Here is the way we
will write a general system of two equations with two unknowns.
The coefficients of the unknowns use double subscripts to denote their position in the
system; 
is used to denote the numerical coefficient of the first variable in the first row;
denotes the numerical coefficient of the second variable in the first row; and so on.
The constants are denoted by 
and 
.
We now separate the parts of this system of equations into rectangular arrays of
numbers. An array of numbers is called a matrix. A matrix is denoted by enclosing the
array in large brackets.
Let [A] be the matrix (array) of coefficients:
Let [X] be the matrix of unknowns:
Let [B] be the matrix of constants:
We will write the system of equations as a matrix equation,
, but before we
do this, we will do some preliminary work with matrices.
Matrices are classified by the number of (horizontal) rows and (vertical) columns.
The numbers of rows and columns of a matrix need not be the same; but if they are, the
matrix is called a square matrix.
The order or dimension of a matrix is given by an expression 
(pronounced
“m by n”), where m is the number of rows and n is the number of columns. For example,
the matrix [A] shown above is of order 
, and matrices (plural for matrix) [X] and
[B] have order 
.
Matrix Form of a System of Equations
We write a system of equations in the form of an augmented matrix. The matrix refers
to the matrix of coefficients, and we augment (add to, or affix) this matrix by writing the
constant terms at the right of the matrix (separated by a dashed line):
in matrix form is
c
a11
a21 a12
a22 b1
b2d
e
a11x1 1 a12x2 5 b1
a21x1 1 a22x2 5 b2
2 3 1
2 3 2
m 3 n
3A4 3X4 5 3B4
c
b1
b2d
c
x1
x2d
c
a11
a12
a21
a22d
b2
b1
a12
a11
e
a11x1 1 a12x2 5 b1
a21x1 1 a22x2 5 b2
x, y, y, z, c
x1, x2, x3, c , xn
x2
x1
Country
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
France
G. Britain
Holland
Italy
Spain
Sweden
Fiat
$149
$130
$164
$189
$160
$156
$179
$156
$178
Opel
$219
$222
$269
$206
$208
$213
$259
$210
$246
Renault
$289
$273
$408
$215
$225
$299
$353
$247
$281
You are already familiar with matrices
from everyday experiences. For
example, the following table shows
a rental chart in the form of a matrix.
Considering the numerical entries
in this chart as a 9 by 3 matrix, we
would say that the price of the
Renault in Belgium is found in row 2,
column 3 (namely, $273). In contrast,
the entry in row 3, column 2 ($269) is
the cost of the Opel in Denmark.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

774
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Example
1
Write an augmented matrix
Write the augmented matrix and then give the order of the resulting system.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
Note that some coefficients are negative and some are zero.
a.
b.
c.
; Order: 5  6
E
1
0
23
0
1
23
0
1
0
1
0
21
0
0
1
0
1
7
1
1
21
4
0
28
1
1
1
1
1
8
U
c5
23
1
23
2
0
5
14d ; Order:  2 3 4
2
1
3
£ 3
21
2
4
3
7
§ ; Order:  3 3 3
e 
x1 2 3x3 1 x5 5 23
x2 1 x4 5 21
x3 1 x5 5 7
x1 1 x2 2 x3 1 4x4 5 28
x1 1 x2 1 x3 1 x4 1 x5 5 8
e 5x 2 3y 1 z 5 23
2x 1 5z 5 14
•
2x 1 y 5 3
3x 2 y 5 2
4x 1 3y 5 7
Example
2
Write a system of equations from a given matrix
Write a system of equations (use 
) that has the given augmented matrix.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
a.
b.
c.
d. μ
x1 5 27
x2 5 3
x3 5 21
 0 5 0
μ
x1 5 5
x2 5 12
x3 5 23
 0 5 4
•
x1 5 3
x2 5 22
x3 5 21
•
2x1 1 x2 2 x3 5 23
3x1 2 2x2 1 x3 5 9
x1 2 4x2 1 3x3 5 17
≥
1
0
0
27
0
1
0
3
0
0
1
21
0
0
0
0
¥
≥
1
0
0
5
0
1
0
12
0
0
1
23
0
0
0
4
¥
£
1
0
0
3
0
1
0
22
0
0
1
21
§
£
2
1
21
23
3
22
1
9
1
24
3
17
§
x1, x2, x3, c
The goal of this section is to solve a system of m equations with n unknowns. We
have already looked at systems of two equations with two unknowns. In previous courses
you may have solved three equations with three unknowns. Now, however, we want to be
able to solve problems with two equations and five unknowns, or three equations and two
unknowns, or systems with any number of linear equations and unknowns. The procedure
for this section—Gauss-Jordan elimination—is a general method for solving all these
types of systems. We write the system in augmented matrix form (as in Example 1), then
carry out a process that transforms the matrix until the solution is obvious. Look back at
Example 2—the solution to part b is obvious. Part c shows 
in the last equation, so
this system has no solution (0 cannot equal 4), and part d shows 
(which is true for
all replacements of the variable), which means that the solution is found by looking at the
0 5 0
0 5 4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

other equations (namely, 
and 
). The terms with nonzero coeffi-
cients in these examples (that is, parts b, c, and d) are arranged on a diagonal, and such a
system is said to be in diagonal form.
x3 5 21
x1 5 27, x2 5 3
Section 16.3
Matrix Solution of a System of Equations
775
Check your owner’s manual for the matrix operations. Most will have a 
key, and then you will need to name the matrix. We assume your calculator will
allow for at least three matrices (which we will call [A], [B], and [C]. After
naming the matrix, you will need to input the order (most will handle up to order
). After inputting a matrix, it is a good idea to recall it to make sure it is
input correctly.
6 3 6
MATRIX
COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
Elementary Row Operation 1: RowSwap
Interchanging two equations is equivalent to interchanging two rows in the matrix for-
mat, and certainly, if we do this, the solution to the system will be the same:
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
In this example we interchanged the first and the second rows of the matrix. If we denote
the original matrix as [A], then we indicate the operation of interchanging the first and
second rows of matrix A by RowSwap ([A], 1, 2).
31
21
22
294
32
22
   4
  14 4
33
   2
   1
  164
£
1
21
22
29
2
22
4
14
3
2
1
16
§
•
x 2 y 2 2z 5 29
2x 2 2y 1 4z 5 14
3x 1 2y 1 z 5 16
Elementary Row Operations and Pivoting
What process will allow us to transform a matrix into diagonal form? We begin with some
steps called elementary row operations. Elementary row operations change the form of
a matrix, but the new form represents an equivalent system. Matrices that represent equiv-
alent systems are called equivalent matrices; we now introduce the elementary row op-
erations, which allow us to write equivalent matrices. Let us work with a system
consisting of three equations and three unknowns (any size will work the same way).
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
.
For the discussion, we call this matrix A, and denote it by [A].
32
22
    4
  14 4
31
21
22
294
33
    2
    1
  164
£
2
22
4
14
1
21
22
29
3
2
1
16
§
•
2x 2 2y 1 4z 5 14
x 2 y 2 2z 5 29
3x 1 2y 1 z 5 16
Elementary Row Operation 2: Row+
Since adding the entries of one equation to the corresponding entries (similar terms) of
another equation will not change the solution to a system of equations, the second ele-
mentary row operation is called row addition. (This is the step called linear combinations
in Section 16.1.) In terms of matrices, we see that this operation corresponds to adding
one row to another:
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
32
22
   4
  144
31
21
22
294
33
   2
   1
 164
£
2
22
4
14
1
21
22
29
3
2
1
16
§
•
2x 2 2y 1 4z 5 14
x 2 y 2 2z 5 29
3x 1 2y 1 z 5 16
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Add row 1 to row 3:
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
Notice that only row 3 changes; we call the row being added to (that is, the row that is be-
ing changed) the target row. We indicate this operation by Row([A], 1, 3).
c
target row
32
22
    4
  14  4
31
21
22
294
35
   0
   5
  30  4
£
2
22
4
14
1
21
22
29
5
0
5
30
§
•
2x 2 2y 1 4z 5 14
x 2 y 2 2z 5 29
5x 1 5z 5 30
776
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Elementary Row Operation 4: *Row
When solving systems, more often than not we need to multiply both sides of an equation
by a scalar before adding to make the coefficients opposites. Elementary row operation 
4 combines row operations 2 and 3 so that this can be accomplished in one step. Let us
return to the original system:
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
We can change this system by multiplying the second equation by 2 and adding the re-
sult to the first equation. In matrix terminology we say that we multiply the second row
by 2 and add it to the first row. Denote this by *Row(2, [A], 2, 1).
c
c
scalar
target row
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
30
   0
   8
  324
31
21
22
294
33
   2
    1
  164
£
0
0
8
32
1
21
22
29
3
2
1
16
§
•
8z 5 32
x 2 y 2 2z 5 29
3x 1 2y 1 z 5 16
 
32
22
   4
  144
31
21
22
294
33
    2
    1
  164
£
2
22
4
14
1
21
22
29
3
2
1
16
§
•
2x 2 2y 1 4z 5 14
x 2 y 2 2z 5 29
3x 1 2y 1 z 5 16
1
Elementary Row Operation 3: *Row
Multiplying or dividing both sides of an equation by any nonzero number does not
change the simultaneous solution; so, in matrix format, the solution will not be changed
if any row is multiplied or divided by a nonzero constant. In this context we call the con-
stant a scalar. For example, we can multiply both sides of the first equation of the origi-
nal system by (note that dividing both sides of an equation by 2 can be considered as 
multiplying both sides by ).
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
Multiply the first row by to obtain:
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
We indicate this operation by *Row
[A], 1 .
c
c
scalar target row
B
1
2,
A
31
21
    2
    74
31
21
22
294
33
    2
    1
  164
£
1
21
2
7
1
21
22
29
3
2
1
16
§
•
x 2 y 1 2z 5 7
x 2 y 2 2z 5 29
3x 1 2y 1 z 5 16
1
2
32
22
   4
  144
31
21
22
294
33
   2
   1
  164
£
2
22
4
14
1
21
22
29
3
2
1
16
§
•
2x 2 2y 1 4z 5 14
x 2 y 2 2z 5 29
3x 1 2y 1 z 5 16
1
2
1
2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Once again, multiply the second row, this time by 3, and add it to the third row. Wait!
Why 3? Where did that come from? The idea is the same one we used in the linear com-
bination method—we use a number that will give a zero coefficient to the x in the third
equation.
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
Note that the multiplied row is not changed; instead, the changed row is the one to which
the multiplied row is added. We call the original row the pivot row. Note also that we did
not work with the original matrix [A] but rather with the previous answer, so we indicate
this by
pivot row
↓
*Row(2, [Ans], 2, 3)
c
c
scalar
target row
30
0
8
32  4
31
21
22
294
30
5
7
43  4
£
0
0
8
32
1
21
22
29
0
5
7
43
§
•
8z 5 32
x 2 y 2 2z 5 29
5y 1 7z 5 43
Section 16.3
Matrix Solution of a System of Equations
777
Example
3
Use matrix format to solve a linear system 
of equations
Solve using system, matrix, and calculator format: 
Solution
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
Operation Performed
Given system
Swap the rows to obtain a 1 in the first row, first column of the matrix format: 
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
Operation Performed
RowSwap([A], 1, 2)
31
22
14
32
25
54
c1
22
1
2
25
5d
e x 2 2y 5 1
2x 2 5y 5 5
3A4 5 32
25
54
31
22
14
3A4 5 c2
25
5
1
22
1d
e 2x 2 5y 5 5
x 2 2y 5 1
e 2x 2 5y 5 5
x 2 2y 5 1
There you have it! You can carry out these four elementary operations until you have a
system for which the solution is obvious, as illustrated by the following example.
This matrix is called [Ans] be-
cause it is the result of the
previous matrix operation.
Obtain a zero below the 1 in the first column:
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
Operation Performed
*Row(2, [Ans], 1, 2)
This matrix is now referred to as [Ans].
Multiply the last row by 1:
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
Operation Performed
*Row(1, [Ans], 2)
31
22
    14
30
1
234
c1
22
1
0
1
23d
e x 2 2y 5 1
y 5 23
31
22
14
30
21
34
c1
22
1
0
21
3d
e x 2 2y 5 1
2y 5 3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Finally, multiply the last row by 2 and add it to the first row:
System Format
Matrix Format
Calculator Format
Operation Performed
*Row(2, [Ans], 2, 1)
The solution (5, 3) is now obvious.
31
0
254
30
1
234
c1
0
25
0
1
23d
e x 5 25
y 5 23
778
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
As you study Example 3, first look at how the elementary row operations led to a sys-
tem equivalent to the first—but one for which the solution is obvious. Next, try to decide
why a particular row operation was chosen when it was. Many students quickly learn the
elementary row operations, but then use a series of (almost random) steps until the obvi-
ous solution results. This often works, but is not very efficient. The steps chosen in
Example 3 illustrate a very efficient method of using the elementary row operations to
determine a system whose solution is obvious. Let us restate the elementary row opera-
tions as part of the following definition.
There are four elementary row operations for producing equivalent matrices:
1. RowSwap
Interchange any two rows.
2. Row
Row addition—add a row to any other row.
3. *Row
Scalar multiplication—multiply (or divide) all the elements of a
row by the same nonzero real number.
4. *Row
Multiply all the entries of a row (pivot row) by a nonzero real
number and add each resulting product to the corresponding
entry of another specified row (target row).
Elementary Row Operations
These elementary row operations are used together in a process called pivoting.
This operation changes
only the target row.
The process known as pivoting means to carry out the following two steps.
Step 1
Divide all entries in the row in which the pivot appears (called the pivoting
row) by the nonzero pivot element so that the pivot entry becomes a 1. This
uses elementary row operation 3, Row.
Step 2
Obtain zeros above and below the pivot element by using elementary row
operation 4, Row .
1
*
*
Pivoting
Gauss-Jordan Elimination
You are now ready to see the method worked out by Gauss and Jordan; it is known as
Gauss-Jordan elimination. It efficiently uses the elementary row operations to diago-
nalize the matrix. That is, the first pivot is the first entry in the first row, first column; the
second is the entry in the second row, second column; and so on until the solution is obvi-
ous. A pivot element is an element that is used to eliminate elements above and below it
in a given column by using elementary row operations.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.3
Matrix Solution of a System of Equations
779
Step 1
Select as the first pivot the element in the first row, first column, and pivot.
Step 2
The next pivot is the element in the second row, second column; pivot.
Step 3
Repeat the process until you arrive at the last row, or until the pivot element
is a zero. If it is a zero and you can interchange that row with a row below
it, so that the pivot element is no longer a zero, do so and continue. If it is
zero and you cannot interchange rows so that it is not a zero, continue with
the next row. The final matrix is called the row-reduced form.
Gauss-Jordan Elimination
Example
4
Use Gauss-Jordan for three equations 
and three unknowns
Solve:
Solution
We solve this system by choosing the steps according to the Gauss-Jordan
method.
This matrix represents the given system.
First pivot is Row 1, Column 1.
*Row(1, [Ans], 2)
Second pivot is Row 2, Column 2.
*Row(0.5, [Ans], 3)
Third pivot is Row 3, Column 3.
*Row(1, [Ans], 3, 1)
The solution (2, 3, 4) is found by inspection since this matrix represents the system
To check this answer, substitute the x-, y-, and z-values into the original equations:
✓
✓
✓
•
2 1 21232 2 1242 5 0
2122 1 31232 2 21242 5 3
2122 2 41232 1 31242 5 22
•
1x 1 0y 1 0z 5 2
0x 1 1y 1 0z 5 23
0x 1 0y 1 1z 5 24
S £
1
0
0
2
0
1
0
23
0
0
1
24
§
S £
1
0
21
6
0
1
0
23
0
0
1
24
§
*Row(2, [Ans], 2, 1)
*Row(2, [Ans], 2, 3)
S £
1
0
21
6
0
1
0
23
0
0
2
28
§
S £
1
2
21
0
0
1
0
23
0
22
2
22
§
S £
1
2
21
0
0
21
0
3
0
22
2
22
§
3A4 5 £
1
2
21
0
2
3
22
3
21
24
3
22
§
•
x 1 2y 2 z 5 0
2x 1 3y 2 2z 5 3
2x 2 4y 1 3z 5 22
1
2
-1
2
3
-4
-1
-2
3
0
3
-2
WHO NEEDS 'EM!
:
:
:
x
y
z
Courtesy of Patrick J. Boyle
*Row(2, [A], 1, 2)
*Row(1, [Ans], 1, 3)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

780
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Example
5
Find the correct feed mix
A rancher has to mix three types of feed for her cattle. The following analysis shows the
amounts per bag (100 lb) of grain:
Grain
Protein
Carbohydrates
Sodium
A
7 lb
88 lb
1 lb
B
6 lb
90 lb
1 lb
C
10 lb
70 lb
2 lb
How many bags of each type of grain should she mix to provide 71 lb of protein, 854 lb
of carbohydrates, and 12 lb of sodium?
Solution
Let a, b, and c be the number of bags of grains A, B, and C, respectively,
that are needed for the mixture. Then
Grain
Protein
Carbohydrates
Sodium
A
7a lb
88a lb
a lb
B
6b lb
90b lb
b lb
C
10c lb
70c lb
2c lb
Total needed:
71 lb
854 lb
12 lb
Thus, 
Let 
.
We show the steps in Gauss-Jordan elimination:
Mix three bags of grain A, five bags of grain B, and two bags of grain C.
 S £
1
0
0
3
0
1
0
5
0
0
1
2
§
 S £
1
0
55
113
0
1
253
2101
0
0
1
2
§
 S £
1
0
55
113
0
1
253
2101
0
0
257
2114
§
 S £
1
1
2
12
0
1
253
2101
0
21
24
213
§
 S £
1
1
2
12
0
2
2106
2202
0
21
24
213
§
 £
7
6
10
71
88
90
70
854
1
1
2
12
§ S £
1
1
2
12
88
90
70
854
7
6
10
71
§
3A4 5 £
7
6
10
71
88
90
70
854
1
1
2
12
§
•
7a 1 6b 1 10c 5 71
88a 1 90b 1 70c 5 854
a 1 b 1 2c 5 12
RowSwap([A], 1, 3)
Pivot row
*Row(88, [Ans], 1, 2)
*Row(7, [Ans], 1, 3)
*Row(23, [Ans], 2)
*Row(1, [Ans], 2, 1)
Pivot row
*Row(1, [Ans], 2, 3)
*Row(157, [Ans], 3)
*Row(55, [Ans], 3, 1)
*Row(53, [Ans], 3, 2)
Pivot row
Historical
Karl Friedrich Gauss
(1777–1855)
Karl Gauss has been profiled in a
previous Historical Note, but we
cannot ignore him here in our
discussion of this procedure for
solving a system of equations. 
The process for solving equations
described in this section was, for
years, attributed solely to Gauss,
and for that reason is often
referred to as Gaussian
elimination. Camille Jordan is
known for his work in algebra and
a branch of mathematics called
Galois theory. In 1878, however,
Jordan worked with forms of sys-
tems of equations that we study in
this section, so today we refer to
the process as Gauss-Jordan
elimination.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.3
Matrix Solution of a System of Equations
781
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a matrix?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
List the elementary row operations
and briefly describe each.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is Gauss-Jordan elimination?
In Problems 4–13, decide whether the statement is true or false.
If it is false, tell what is wrong.
4. Entry a34 is in row 3, column 4.
5. The matrix for the system
has order 4  4.
6. In *Row notation, the first number listed is the 
target row.
7. In *Row and *Row notation, the target row is the last
number listed.
8. If row 3 of a matrix [A] is added to row 5 of [A], then the
correct notation is *Row([A], 3, 5).
9. If row 7 of a matrix [B] is multiplied by 2 and then 
added to row 6 of [B], then the correct notation is 
*Row(2, [B], 7, 6).
10. The notation *Row(2, [ANS], 6, 3) means multiply row 
6 of the previous matrix by 2 and add the corresponding entries
to row 3.
11. The notation *Row(31, [C], 4, 2) means multiply row 
2 of matrix [C] by and add the corresponding entries to the
entries in row 4.
12. In the notation *Row(3, [A], 4, 5), the target row is 3.
13. For the matrix 
the first step in Gauss-Jordan elimination is 
RowSwap([A], 1, 3).
14. Write each system in augmented matrix form.
a.
b.
c. μ
x1 1 2x2 2 5x3 1 x4 5 5
x1 2 3x3 1 6x4 5 0
x3 2 3x4 5 215
x2 2 5x3 1 5x4 5 2
•
x 1 y 1 z 5 4
3x 1 2y 1 z 5 7
x 2 3y 1 2z 5 0
e 4x 1 5y 5 216
3x 1 2y 5 5
3A4 5 £
0
7
8
3
1
2
3
4
0
1
3
4
§
1
3
d 
x1 5 1
x2 5 2
x3 5 0
x4 5 5
15. Write a system of equations that has the given augmented 
matrix.
a.
b.
c.
Given the matrices in Problems 16–19, perform elementary
row operations to obtain a 1 in the row 1, column 1 position.
Answers may vary. 
16.
17.
18.
19.
Given the matrices in Problems 20–23, perform elementary row
operations to obtain zeros under the 1 in the first column. Answers
may vary. 
20.
21.
22.
23. 3D4 5 £
1
5
3
2
2
3
21
4
3
2
1
0
§
3C4 5 £
1
2
4
1
22
5
0
2
24
5
1
3
§
3B4 5 £
1
3
25
6
23
4
1
2
0
5
1
3
§
3A4 5 £
1
2
23
0
0
3
1
4
2
5
1
6
§
3D4 5 £
5
20
15
6
7
25
3
2
12
0
1
4
§
3C4 5 £
2
4
10
212
6
3
4
6
10
21
0
1
§
3B4 5 £
22
3
5
9
1
0
2
28
0
1
0
5
§
3A4 5 £
3
1
2
1
0
2
4
5
1
3
24
9
§
D
1
0
0
32
0
1
0
27
0
0
1
25
0
0
0
3
T
c1
0
0
3
0
1
2
4d
£
6
7
8
3
1
2
3
4
0
1
3
4
§
Problem Set 16.3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Given the matrices in Problems 24–27, perform elementary
row operations to obtain a 1 in the second row, second column
without changing the entries in the first column. Answers may vary.
24.
25.
26.
27.
Given the matrices in Problems 28–31, perform elementary
row operations to obtain a zero (or zeros) above and below the 1 in
the second column without changing the entries in the first column.
Answers may vary.
28.
29.
30.
31.
Given the matrices in Problems 32–35, perform elementary
row operations to obtain a 1 in the third row, third column without
changing the entries in the first two columns. Answers may vary.
32.
33.
34.
35.
Given the matrices in Problems 36–39, perform elementary row
operations to obtain zeros above and below the 1 in the third
column without changing the entries in the first or second columns.
Answers may vary.
36.
37. 3B4 5 £
1
0
23
22
0
1
4
5
0
0
1
3
§
3A4 5 £
1
0
21
5
0
1
2
6
0
0
1
4
§
3D4 5 D
1
0
28
2
8
0
1
21
3
2
0
0
2
0
10
0
0
22
1
6
T
3C4 5 D
1
0
22
1
1
0
1
6
2
0
0
0
4
0
22
0
0
2
1
0
T
3B4 5 £
1
0
4
25
0
1
3
6
0
0
8
12
§
3A4 5 £
1
0
4
5
0
1
23
6
0
0
5
10
§
3D4 5 D
1
5
21
2
8
0
1
5
2
0
0
1
4
0
5
0
2
23
1
7
T
3C4 5 D
1
6
23
4
1
0
1
7
3
0
0
3
4
0
22
0
22
3
1
0
T
3B4 5 £
1
3
6
12
0
1
22
25
0
22
2
6
§
3A4 5 £
1
5
23
2
0
1
4
5
0
3
4
2
§
3D4 5 £
1
3
22
0
0
4
2
9
0
3
6
1
§
3C4 5 £
1
4
21
6
0
5
1
3
0
4
6
5
§
3B4 5 £
1
5
23
5
0
3
9
215
0
2
1
5
§
3A4 5 £
1
3
5
2
0
2
6
28
0
3
4
1
§
38.
39.
Level 2
Solve the systems in Problems 40–57 by the Gauss-Jordan method.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
Level 3
58. A winery has a large amount of a wine labeled “Lot I” that is a
mixture of 92% Merlot wine and 8% Cabernet Sauvignon wine.
It also has a second wine labeled “Lot II” that is a mixture of
88% Cabernet Sauvignon and 12% Merlot. The winemaster
decides to mix together these two lots to obtain 500 gallons of
a mixture that is 50% Merlot and 50% Cabernet Sauvignon.
How much of each should be used to obtain this blend?
59. To control a certain type of crop disease, it is necessary to use
23 gal of chemical A and 34 gal of chemical B. The dealer can
order commercial spray I, each container of which holds 5 gal
of chemical A and 2 gal of chemical B, and commercial spray
II, each container of which holds 2 gal of chemical A and 
7 gal of chemical B. How many containers of each type of
•
x 1 2z 5 0
3x 2 y 1 2z 5 0
4x 1 y 5 6
•
x 1 2z 5 9
2x 1 y 5 13
2y 1 z 5 8
•
x 1 y 5 21
y 1 z 5 21
x 1 y 1 z 5 1
•
x 1 y 5 22
y 1 z 5 2
x 2 y 2 z 5 21
•
5x 1 z 5 9
x 2 5z 5 7
x 1 y 2 z 5 0
•
4x 1 y 5 22
3x 1 2z 5 29
2y 1 3z 5 25
•
x 1 2z 5 13
2x 1 y 5 8
22y 1 9z 5 41
•
x 1 5z 5 9
y 1 2z 5 2
2x 1 3z 5 4
•
x 1 y 5 2
x 2 z 5 1
2y 1 z 5 1
•
x 2 y 5 1
x 1 z 5 1
y 2 z 5 1
e 3x 2 4y 5 16
2x 1 2y 5 26
e x 2 y 5 2
2x 1 3y 5 9
e 3x 1 7y 5 5
4x 1 9y 5 7
e 4x 2 3y 5 1
5x 1 2y 5 7
e x 2 6y 5 23
2x 1 3y 5 9
e 2x 1 2y 5 2
4x 2 7y 5 25
e x 2 y 5 8
x 1 y 5 2
e x 1 y 5 7
x 2 y 5 21
3D4 5 D
1
0
28
2
8
0
1
4
2
0
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
21
1
7
T
3C4 5 D
1
0
21
4
1
0
1
4
3
0
0
0
1
0
22
0
0
23
1
0
T
782
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

commercial spray should be used to obtain exactly the right
proportion of chemicals needed?
60. A candy maker mixes chocolate, milk, and mint extract to pro-
duce three kinds of candy (I, II, and III) with the following
proportions:
I: 7 lb chocolate, 5 gal milk, 1 oz mint extract
II: 3 lb chocolate, 2 gal milk, 2 oz mint extract
III: 4 lb chocolate, 3 gal milk, 3 oz mint extract
If 67 lb of chocolate, 48 gal of milk, and 32 oz of mint extract
are available, how much of each kind of candy can be
produced?
Section 16.4
Inverse Matrices
783
16.4  Inverse Matrices
The availability of computer software and calculators that can carry out matrix operations
has considerably increased the importance of a matrix solution to systems of equations.
This process involves the inverse of a matrix. If we let [A] be the matrix of coefficients of
a system of equations, [X] the matrix of unknowns, and [B] the matrix of constants, we
can then represent the system of equations by the matrix equation
 [B]
If we can define an inverse matrix, denoted by 
we should be able to solve the sys-
tem by finding
To understand this simple process, we need to understand what it means for matrices to
be inverses and develop a basic algebra for matrices. Even though these matrix operations
are difficult with a pencil and paper, they are easy with the aid of computer software or a
calculator that does matrix operations.
Matrix Operations
The next box gives a definition of matrix equality along with the fundamental matrix
operations.
3X4 5 3A214 3B4
3A421,
3A4 3X4
Equality
[M]  [N] if and only if matrices [M] and [N] are the same order and the
corresponding entries are the same.
Addition
[M]  [N]  [S] if and only if [M] and [N] are the same order and the entries 
of [S] are found by adding the corresponding entries of [M] and [N].
Multiplication by a scalar
c[M]  [cM] is the matrix in which each entry of [M] is multiplied by the scalar
(real number) c.
Subtraction
[M]  [N]  [D] if and only if [M] and [N] are the same order and the entries
of [D] are found by subtracting the entries of [N] from the corresponding
entries of [M].
Multiplication
Let [M] be an m  r matrix and [N] an r  n matrix. The product matrix
[M][N]  [P] is an m  n matrix. The entry in the ith row and jth column
of [M][N] is the sum of the products formed by multiplying each entry of the ith
row of [M] by the corresponding entry in the jth column of [N].
Matrix Operations
Note that 
does not
mean 
but rather means
the inverse of matrix [A].
1
3A4
[A]1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

All of these definitions, except multiplication, are straightforward, so we will con-
sider multiplication separately after Example 1. If an addition or multiplication cannot be
performed because of the order of the given matrices, the matrices are said to be noncon-
formable.
784
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Example
1
Matrix operations
Let 
,
,
,
,
. 
Find: a. [A]  [B]
b. [A]  [C]
c. [D]  [E]
d. (5)[C]
e. 2[A]  3[B]
Solution
a.
b. [A]  [C] is not defined because [A] and [C] are nonconformable.
c.
Add entry by entry.
d.
Multiply each entry by 5.
e.
 5 322
220
174
 
 5 310
4
24 1 3212
224
154
23A4 2 33B4 5 235
2
14 1 1232 34
8
254
1252 3C4 5 1252 c7
3
2
5
24
23d 5 c235
215
210
225
20
15d
 5 £
7
2
0
21
3
4
22
6
2
§
3D4 1 3E4 5 £
4
22
1
23
3
21
2
4
21
§ 1 £
3
4
21
2
0
5
24
2
3
§
 5 39
10
244
 5 35 1 4
2 1 8
1 1 1252 4
3A4 1 3B4 5 35
2
14 1 34
8
254
3E4 5 £
3
4
21
2
0
5
24
2
3
§
3D4 5 £
4
22
1
23
3
21
2
4
21
§
3C4 5 c7
3
2
5
24
23d
3B4 5 34
8
254
3A4 5 35
2
14
We illustrate matrix multiplication for matrices of different order (size).
To be conformable, these numbers must be the same.
Same
32
3
4
54 ≥
1
23
0
2
¥ 5 32112 1 31232 1 4102 1 5122 4 5 334
32
3
4
54 ≥
a
b
c
d
¥ 5 32a 1 3b 1 4c 1 5d 4
Matrix operations are
particularly easy using 
a calculator that handles
matrices. Check with the
owner’s manual or the
website for the calculator
you are using.
COMPUTATIONAL 
WINDOW
123
123
4  1 matrix
→
→
→
14444444444442444444444443
1  1 matrix answer
14444244443
1 4 matrix
1444444244444443
1  1 matrix answer
4  1 matrix
→
14444244443
1 4 matrix
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Not the same
35
3
24  ≥
1
2
3
4
¥ not  defined
Section 16.4
Inverse Matrices
785
14444444444444444424444444444444444443
1  2 matrix answer
14444444424444444443
(row 1, column 1) entry
144442444443
4  2 matrix
144444424444443
1 4 matrix
1444444442444444443
(row 1, column 2) entry
Same: Answer is a 1  2 matrix.
→
144444444444444444444424444444444444444444443
1  3 matrix answer
14444424444443
(row 1, column 1) entry
1444444244444443
(row 1, column 2) entry
144444424444443
(row 1, column 3) entry
1444442444443
1  3 matrix
1444444244444443
3  3 matrix
32
21
24 £
4
2
21
1
0
2
3
21
3
§
1442443
1 3 matrix123
4  1 matrix
→
32
3
4
54 ≥
1
2
23
1
0
22
2
3
¥ [2 (1)  3 (3)  4 (0)  5 (2)
2 (2)  3 (1)  4(2)  5 (3)]
 [2  9  0  10
4  3  8  15]
 [3
14]
 [2 (4)  1 (1)  2 (3)
2 (2)  1 (0)  2 (1)
2 (1) 1 (2)  2 (3)]
The first step (above) is written out to clearly demonstrate what is happening. Your work,
however, should look like this:
5 33
2
24
 32
21
24 £
4
2
21
1
0
2
3
21
3
§ 5 38 2 1 1 6
4 1 0 2 2
22 2 2 1 64
One of the principal advantages of using matrix multiplication to solve systems
of equations is the ease with which matrix multiplication can be done using a
calculator that handles matrices. You should check the following calculations us-
ing a calculator.
COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
Example
2
Find matrix products
Find [A][B] and [B][A].
a. Let [A] 
and [B] 
.
b. Let [A] 
and [B] 
.
£
5
1
21
2
3
22
0
3
4
§
£
3
21
4
2
1
0
21
3
2
§
≥
23
1
22
0
21
5
24
3
21
2
3
22
¥
c1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8d
→
→
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
a.
[B] and [A] are not conformable. Note that [A][B]  [B][A].
b.
Once again, note that [A][B]  [B][A].
3B43A4 5 £
5
1
21
2
3
22
0
3
4
§  £
3
21
4
2
1
0
21
3
2
§ 5 £
18
27
18
14
25
4
2
15
8
§
 5 £
13
12
15
12
5
24
1
14
3
§
 5 £
3152 1 1212 122 1 4102
3112 1 1212 132 1 4132
31212 1 1212 1222 1 4142
2152 1 112 122 1 0102
2112 1 112 132 1 0132
21212 1 112 1222 1 0142
1212 152 1 3122 1 2102
1212 112 1 3132 1 2132
1212 1212 1 31222 1 2142
§
3A4 3B4 5 £
3
21
4
2
1
0
21
3
2
§  £
5
1
21
2
3
22
0
3
4
§
3B43A4 5 ≥
23
1
22
0
21
5
24
3
21
2
3
22
¥  c1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8d
 5 c 27
20
23
227
44
23d
 5 c11232 1 2102 1 31242 1 4122
1112 1 21212 1 3132 1 4132
11222 1 2152 1 31212 1 41222
51232 1 6102 1 71242 1 8122
5112 1 61212 1 7132 1 8132
51222 1 6152 1 71212 1 81222 d
3A4 3B4 5 c1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8d  ≥
23
1
22
0
21
5
24
3
21
2
3
22
¥
786
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Historical
Arthur Cayley 
(1821–1895)
The English mathematician Arthur
Cayley was responsible for matrix
theory. Cayley began his career as
a lawyer when he was admitted to
the bar in 1849, but he was always
a mathematician at heart, publish-
ing over 200 papers in mathemat-
ics while he was practicing law. In
1863 he gave up law to accept a
chair in mathematics at Cambridge
University. He originated the
notion of matrices in 1858, and did
a great deal of study in matrix the-
ory over the next several years. His
work was entirely theoretical, and
was not used for any practical pur-
pose until 1925 when matrices
were used in quantum mechanics.
Since 1950, matrices have played
an important role in the social sci-
ences and business.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Example
3
Write a matrix equation
Let [A] 
, [X]  
, and [B] 
. What is [A][X]  [B]?
Solution
[A][X] 
so [A][X]  [B] is a matrix equation 
representing the system •
x 1 2y 1 3z 5 3
4x 2 y 1 5z 5 16
3x 1 2y 2 z 5 5
.
£
x 1 2y 1 3z
4x 2 y 1 5z
3x 1 2y 2 z
§
£
3
16
5
§
£
x
y
z
§
£
1
2
3
4
21
5
3
2
21
§
Zero-One Matrices
A zero-one matrix (sometimes called a communication matrix) is a square matrix in
which the entries symbolize the occurrence of some facet or event with a 1 and the
nonoccurrence with a 0. Consider the following example.
Mental Step:
Mental Step:
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.4
Inverse Matrices
787
Example
4
Diplomatic relations problem
Use matrix notation to summarize the following information: 
The United States has diplomatic relations with Russia and with Mexico, but not
with Cuba. Mexico has diplomatic relations with the United States and Russia, but
not with Cuba. Russia has diplomatic relations with the United States, Mexico, and
Cuba. Finally, Cuba has diplomatic relations with Russia, but not with the United
States and not with Mexico. Note that a country is not considered to have diplomatic
relations with itself.
a. Write a matrix showing direct communication possibilities.
b. Write a matrix showing the channels of communication that are open to the various
countries if they are willing to speak through an intermediary.
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Part a is fairly easy to understand, so we will do this first:
For part b, we want to find a matrix that will tell us the number of ways the coun-
tries can communicate through an intermediary. For example, the United States can talk
to Cuba by talking through Russia. A country can also communicate with itself (to test
security, perhaps) if it does so through an intermediary.
Devise a Plan. We begin with a simplified example.
Let 
Consider the product: 
Can we attach any meaning to this product? Note that the 1 in the first row, first column
means that the United States can communicate with the United States one way (via Rus-
sia). The 0 in the first row, second column means that the United States cannot commu-
nicate with Russia through an intermediary. The 1 in the first row, third column means
that the United States can communicate with Cuba 1 way (via Russia). This explanation
corresponds to the real-life possibilities. What do you think the 2 in row 2, column
2 means? It would mean that Russia can communicate with Russia via one intermediary
in 2 ways (via United States and via Cuba).
 5 £
1
0
1
0
2
0
1
0
1
§
 5 £
0 1 1 1 0
0 1 0 1 0
0 1 1 1 0
0 1 0 1 0
1 1 0 1 1
0 1 0 1 0
0 1 1 1 0
0 1 0 1 0
0 1 1 1 0
§
3B42 5 £
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
§ £
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
§
3B4 5
U.S.
Russia
Cuba
 £
U.S.
Russia
Cuba
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
§
3A4 5
U.S.
Russia
Cuba
Mexico
≥
U.S.
Russia
Cuba
Mexico
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
¥
Pólya’s 
Method
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Since this seems to make sense, we now look at the same product for the matrix [A].
Carry Out the Plan. The plan could list all possibilities by considering one possibility at
a time, but instead we will use matrix multiplication to find [A]2; we will then verify
that this is the desired matrix. This means, for example, that Mexico can talk to Cuba
one way (row 4, column 3). Mexico talks to Cuba using Russia as an intermediary.
Look Back. We see that the United States can communicate with Cuba (entry in the first
row, third column) through an intermediary. The zeros indicate that Russia and Cuba can-
not communicate through intermediaries (they can communicate only directly). Matrix
[A]3 tells us how many ways the countries can communicate if they use two intermediaries.
 5 ≥
2
1
1
1
1
3
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
2
¥
 5 ≥
0 1 1 1 0 1 1
0 1 0 1 0 1 1
0 1 1 1 0 1 0
0 1 1 1 0 1 0
0 1 0 1 0 1 1
1 1 0 1 1 1 1
0 1 0 1 0 1 0
1 1 0 1 0 1 0
0 1 1 1 0 1 0
0 1 0 1 0 1 0
0 1 1 1 0 1 0
0 1 1 1 0 1 0
0 1 1 1 0 1 0
1 1 0 1 0 1 0
0 1 1 1 0 1 0
1 1 1 1 0 1 0
¥
3A42 5 ≥
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
¥ ≥
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
¥
788
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Algebraic Properties of Matrices
Properties for an algebra of matrices can also be developed. The 
zero matrix,
denoted by [0], is the matrix with m rows and n columns in which each entry is 0. The
identity matrix for multiplication, denoted by 
is the square matrix with n rows and
n columns consisting of a 1 in each position on the main diagonal (entries
) and zeros elsewhere:
Notice that identity matrices are zero-one matrices. The additive inverse of a matrix [M]
is denoted by [M] and is defined by (1)[M]; the multiplicative inverse of a matrix
[M] is denoted by [M]1 if it exists. Table 16.1 summarizes the properties of matrices.
Assume that [M], [N], and [P] all have order n  n, which forces them to be conformable
for the given operations. If the context makes the order of the identity obvious, we some-
times write [I] to denote the identity matrix; that is, we assume that [I] means [In].
3I24 5 c1
0
0
1d , 3I34 5 £
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
§ , 3I44 5 ≥
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
¥
m11, m22, m33, c, mnn
3In4,
m 3 n
TABLE 16.1
Properties of Matrices
Property
Addition
Multiplication
Commutative
[M]  [N]  [N]  [M]
[M][N]  [N][M]
Associative
([M]  [N])  [P]  [M]  ([N]  [P])
([M][N])[P]  [M]([N][P])
Identity
[M]  [0]  [0]  [M]
[I][M]  [M][I]  [M]
Inverse
[M]  [M]  [M]  [M]  [0]
[M][M]1  [M]1[M]  [I]
Distributive
[M]([N]  [P])  [M][N]  [M][P]
Distributive
([N]  [P])[M]  [N][M]  [P][M]
[M]1  1
[M]
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Inverse Property
The property from this list that is particularly important for us in solving systems of equa-
tions is the inverse property. There are two unanswered questions about the inverse property.
Given a square matrix [M], when does [M]1 exist? And if it exists, how do you find it?
Section 16.4
Inverse Matrices
789
If [A] is a square matrix and if there exists a matrix [A] such that
where [I] is the identity matrix for multiplication, then [A]1 is called the inverse
of [A] for multiplication.
3A4213A4 5 3A43A421 5 3I4
Inverse of a Matrix
Usually, in the context of matrices, when we talk simply of the inverse of [A] we mean
the inverse of [A] for multiplication, and when we talk of the identity matrix we mean the
identity matrix for multiplication.
Example
5
Show that matrices are inverses
Show that [A] and [B] are inverses, given:
a. [A] 
; [B] 
b. [A] 
; [B] 
Solution
a. We must show that [A][B]  [I] and [B][A]  [I].
[A][B] 
[B][A] 
Since [A][B]  [B][A]  [I], we see that [B]  [A]1.
b.
3B43A4 5 £
1
21
0
3
2
2
21
21
21
§ £
0
1
2
21
1
2
1
22
25
§
 5 £
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
§ 5 3I4
 5 £
0 1 3 2 2
0 1 2 2 2
0 1 2 2 2
21 1 3 2 2
1 1 2 2 2
0 1 2 2 2
1 2 6 1 5
21 2 4 1 5
0 2 4 1 5
§
3A4 3B4 5 £
0
1
2
21
1
2
1
22
25
§ £
1
21
0
3
2
2
21
21
21
§
c
2
21
23
2d c2
1
3
2d 5 c
4 2 3
2 2 2
26 1 6
23 1 4d 5 c1
0
0
1d 5 3I4
c2
1
3
2d c
2
21
23
2d 5 c4 2 3
22 1 2
6 2 6
23 1 4d 5 c1
0
0
1d 5 3I4
£
1
21
0
3
2
2
21
21
21
§
£
0
1
2
21
1
2
1
22
25
§
c
2
21
23
2d
c2
1
3
2d
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Since [A][B]  [I]  [B][A], then [B]  [A]1.
 5 £
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
§ 5 3I4
 5 £
0 1 1 1 0
1 2 1 1 0
2 2 2 1 0  
0 2 2 1 2
3 1 2 2 4
6 1 4 2 10
0 1 1 2 1
21 2 1 1 2
22 2 2 1 5  
§
790
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
If a given matrix has an inverse, we say it is nonsingular. The unanswered question,
however, is how to find an inverse matrix.
If you have a calculator that
does matrix operations, use
a 
function and 
MATRIX
then press 
to find the
inverse of a matrix [A]. We
will show this step in the
margin as we find the in-
verse matrix in the next two
examples.
[A]1
COMPUTATIONAL
WINDOW
Input 
[A] and the 
press 
to obtain the
output:
32
214
320.5
0.54
[A]1
MATRIX
COMPUTATIONAL
WINDOW
Example
6
Inverse of a 2nd order matrix
Find the inverse of 
.
Solution
Find a matrix [B], if it exists, so that [A][B]  [I]; since we do not know
[B], let its entries be variables: 
. Then 
By definition of equality of matrices, we see that
Solve each of these systems simultaneously to find
, 
 . 
Thus, the inverse is 3B4 5 cx1
x2
y1
y2
d 5 c
2
21
21
2
1
2
d
1
2
y2
5 21
2
y1
x1 5 2, x2 5 21,
e x1 1 2y1 5 1
x1 1 4y1 5 0  and  e x2 1 2y2 5 0
x2 1 4y2 5 1
 cx1 1 2y1
x2 1 2y2
x1 1 4y1
x2 1 4y2
d 5 c1
0
0
1d
 c1
2
1
4d cx1
x2
y1
y2
d 5 c1
0
0
1d
 3A43B4 5 3I4
3B4 5 cx1
x2
y1
y2
d
3A4 5 c1
2
1
4d
Example
7
Inverse of a 3rd order
Find the inverse for [A] 
.
Solution
We need to find a matrix 
so that
£
x1
x2
x3
y1
y2
y3
z1
z2
z3
§
£
1
21
0
3
2
2
21
21
21
§
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.4
Inverse Matrices
791
Use the 
function
and input [A]. Then press
to find:
30
1
24
321
     1
   24
31
22
254
[A]1
MATRIX
COMPUTATIONAL
WINDOW
→
*Row(3, [B], 1, 2)
*Row(1, [Ans], 1, 3)
→
*Row(1, [Ans], 2, 1)
*Row(2, [Ans], 2, 3)
→
*Row(2, [Ans], 3, 2)
→
*Row(1, [Ans], 3)
The definition of equality of matrices gives rise to three systems of equations:
We could solve these as three separate systems using Gauss-Jordan elimination; how-
ever, all the steps would be identical since the coefficients are the same in each system.
Therefore, suppose we augment the matrix of the coefficients by the three columns of
constants and do all three at once. Write the augmented matrix as [B]  [A I].
Now, if we relate this to the original three systems, we see that the inverse matrix is
By studying Example 7, we are led to a procedure for finding the inverse of a nonsingular
matrix.
£
0
1
2
21
1
2
1
22
25
§
£
1
0
0
0
1
2
0
1
0
21
1
2
0
0
1
1
22
25
§
£
1
0
0
0
1
2
0
1
0
21
1
2
0
0
21
21
2
5
§
£
1
21
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
21
1
2
0
22
21
1
0
1
§
£
1
21
0
1
0
0
0
5
2
23
1
0
0
22
21
1
0
1
§
3B4 5 £
1
21
0
1
0
0
3
2
2
0
1
0
21
21
21
0
0
1
§
•
x1 2 y1 1 0z1 5 1
3x1 1 2y1 1 2z1 5 0
2x1 2 y1 2 z1 5 0
 •
x2 2 y2 1 0z2 5 0
3x2 1 2y2 1 2z2 5 1
2x2 2 y2 2 z2 5 0
 •
x3 2 y3 1 0z3 5 0
3x3 1 2y3 1 2z3 5 0
2x3 2 y3 2 z3 5 1
 
5 £
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
§
£
x1
x2
x3
y1
y2
y3
z1
z2
z3
§
£
1
21
0
3
2
2
21
21
21
§
The procedure for finding the inverse of a square matrix A:
Step 1
Augment [A] with [I]; that is, write [AI], where [I] is the identity matrix of
the same order as [A].
Step 2
Perform elementary row operations using Gauss-Jordan elimination to
change the matrix [A] into the identity matrix [I], if possible.
Step 3
If at any time you obtain all zeros in a row or column to the left of the
dividing line, then there will be no inverse.
Step 4
If steps 1 and 2 can be performed, the result in the augmented part is the in-
verse of [A].
Inverse of a Matrix
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

792
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Example
8
Use an augmented matrix to find an inverse
Find the inverse, if possible, of 
. 
Solution
Write the augmented matrix [ A I ]:
We want to make the left-hand side look like the corresponding identity matrix. This is
impossible since there are no elementary row operations that will put it into the required
form. Thus, there is no inverse. If you use a calculator to try to find the inverse of a
singular matrix (one that does not have an inverse), you will obtain an error message.
c1
2
1
0
0
0
0
1d
3A4 5 c1
2
0
0d
Example
9
Use matrix methods to find an inverse; 2  2
Use matrix methods to find the inverse of 
. Compare with Example 6.
Solution
Begin with the augmented matrix [B]  [A I].
The inverse is on the right of the dividing line: 
; this result agrees with
Example 6.
When a matrix has fractional entries, it is often rewritten with a fractional coefficient
and integer entries to simplify the arithmetic. For example, we could rewrite this inverse
matrix as
3A421 5 1
2 c
4
22
21
1d
c
2
21
21
2
1
2
d
 S c1
0
2
21
0
1
21
2
1
2
d
 S c1
2
1
0
0
1
21
2
1
2
d
c1
2
1
0
1
4
0
1d S c1
2
1
0
0
2
21
1d
3A4 5 c1
2
1
4d
Example 10 Use matrix methods to find an inverse; 3  3
Find the inverse, if possible, of 
.
3A4 5 £
0
1
2
2
21
1
21
1
0
§
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
Write the augmented matrix [ AI ] and make the left-hand side look like
the corresponding identity matrix (if possible):
Thus 3A421 5 £
21
2
3
21
2
4
1
21
22
§
S £
1
21
0
0
0
 21
0
1
1
0
1
2
0
1
2
1
0
0
§ S £
1
0
1
0
1
 1
0
1
1
0
1
2
0
0
1
1
21
22
§ S £
1
0
0
21
2
 3
0
1
0
21
2
4
0
0
1
1
21
22
§
£
0
1
2
1
0
 0
2
21
1
0
1
0
21
1
0
0
0
1
§ S £
21
1
0
0
0
 1
2
21
1
0
1
0
0
1
2
1
0
0
§ S £
1
21
0
0
0
 21
2
21
1
0
1
0
0
1
2
1
0
0
§
Section 16.4
Inverse Matrices
793
The answer to Example 10 was “nice,” but most matrices will have “ugly” entries.
If you are using a calculator, those fractions will be shown in decimal form. For 
example, the inverse of 
is found by calculator to be 
(approximately)
Most real-life applications will involve inverses such as the one shown here.
3A421 5 £
.0526315789
.3684210526
2.1052631579
2.1052631579
.2631578947
.2105263158
.1842105263
2.2105263158
.1315789474
§
3A4 5 £
3
21
4
2
1
0
21
3
2
§
COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
Historical
James Sylvester 
(1814–1897)
A second mathematician responsi-
ble for much of what we study in
this section is James Sylvester.
He was a contemporary and good
friend of Cayley (see Historical
Note on page 786). Cayley would
try out many of his ideas on
Sylvester, and Sylvester would
react and comment on Cayley’s
work. Sylvester originated many
of the ideas that Cayley used, and
even suggested the term matrix to
Cayley. It should also be noted
that he founded the American
Journal of Mathematics while he
taught in the United States at
Johns Hopkins University (from
1877 to 1883).
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Systems of Equations
In Example 3 we saw how a system of equations can be written in matrix form. We can now
see how to solve a system of linear equations by using the inverse. Consider a system of 
n linear equations with n unknowns whose matrix of coefficients [A] has an inverse [A]1:
[A][X]  [B]
Given system
[A]1[A][X]  [A]1[B]
Multiply both sides by [A]1.
([A]1[A])[X]  [A]1[B]
Associative property
[I][X]  [A]1[B]
Inverse property
[X]  [A]1[B]
Identity property
In other words: To solve a system of equations, look to see whether the number of equa-
tions is the same as the number of unknowns. If so, find the inverse of the matrix of the
coefficients (if it exists) and multiply it (on the right) by the matrix of the constants.
Example 11 Use an inverse matrix to solve a system
Solve:
•
y 1 2z 5 0
2x 2 y 1 z 5 21
y 2 x 5 1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
Write in matrix form: [A]  
, [X]  
, [B]  
.
From Example 10, [A]1  
. Thus,
Therefore, the solution to the system is (x, y, z)  (1, 2, 1).
3X4 5 3A4213B4 5 £
21
2
3
21
2
4
1
21
22
§ £
0
21
1
§ 5 £
1
2
21
§
£
21
2
3
21
2
4
1
21
22
§
£
0
21
1
§
£
x
y
z
§
£
0
1
2
2
21
1
21
1
0
§
794
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
The calculator, of course, is what really makes this inverse method worthwhile. 
It makes the solution of any system that has the same number of equations and
variables almost trivial. For this example, simply enter [A] and [B] and then 
press [A]1[B]. The output is:
[
1]
[ 2]
[1]
That is all there is! Does this make the method worthwhile?
COMPUTATIONAL WINDOW
The method of solving a system by using the inverse matrix is very efficient if you
know the inverse. Unfortunately, finding the inverse for one system is usually more work
than using another method to solve the system. However, there are certain applications
that yield the same system over and over, and the only thing to change is the constants. In
this case you should think about the inverse method. And, finally, computers and calcula-
tors can find approximations for inverse matrices quite easily, so this method becomes
the method of choice if you have access to this technology.
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
When are two matrices equal?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the process for adding
matrices.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe the process for multiplying
matrices.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the inverse of a matrix?
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a nonsingular matrix?
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe a procedure for finding the
inverse of a square matrix.
7. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe a procedure for using the
inverse of a matrix to solve a system of equations.
8. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a communication matrix?
In Problems 9–16, find the indicated matrices if possible.
9. a. [E]  [F]
b. 2[E]  [G]
10. a. [E][F]
b. [E][G]
3G4 5 £
8
1
6
3
5
7
4
9
2
§
3F4 5 £
1
4
0
3
21
2
22
1
5
§
3E4 5 £
1
0
2
3
21
2
4
1
0
§
3D4 5 c
4
1
3
6
21
0
22
3d
3C4 5 ≥
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
¥
3B4 5 c
4
2
21
3d
3A4 5 ≥
1
2
4
0
21
3
2
1
¥
Problem Set 16.4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

31.
32.
Problems 33–38 use the inverse found in Problem 22.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
Problems 39–44 all use the same inverse.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
Problems 45–50 use the inverse found in Problem 23.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
Problems 51–54 use the inverse found in Problem 24.
51.
52.
53.
54.
Level 3
55. If we take the first few rows of Pascal’s triangle and arrange
them into a lower triangular matrix, we form what is called 
a Pascal matrix:
a. Find the inverse of this matrix.
b. Make a general statement about the inverse of any order
Pascal’s matrix. 
3P4 5 E
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
2
1
0
0
1
3
3
1
0
1
4
6
4
1
U
•
6x 1 y 1 20z 5 57
x 2 y 5 1
y 1 3z 5 5
•
6x 1 y 1 20z 5 212
x 2 y 5 6
y 1 3z 5 27
•
6x 1 y 1 20z 5 14
x 2 y 5 1
y 1 3z 5 1
•
6x 1 y 1 20z 5 27
x 2 y 5 0
y 1 3z 5 4
•
x 1 2z 5 5
2x 1 y 5 8
22y 1 9z 5 9
•
x 1 2z 5 12
2x 1 y 5 0
22y 1 9z 5 10
•
x 1 2z 5 7
2x 1 y 5 1
22y 1 9z 5 28
•
x 1 2z 5 4
2x 1 y 5 0
22y 1 9z 5 31
•
x 1 2z 5 4
2x 1 y 5 0
22y 1 9z 5 19
•
x 1 2z 5 7
2x 1 y 5 16
22y 1 9z 5 23
e 2x 1 3y 5 12
x 2 6y 5 224
e 2x 1 3y 5 222
x 2 6y 5 49
e 2x 1 3y 5 9
x 2 6y 5 42
e 2x 1 3y 5 2
x 2 6y 5 214
e 2x 1 3y 5 2
x 2 6y 5 16
e 2x 1 3y 5 9
x 2 6y 5 23
e8x 1 6y 5 236
22x 1 4y 5 22
e 8x 1 6y 5 226
22x 1 4y 5 12
e 8x 1 6y 5 228
22x 1 4y 5 18
e 8x 1 6y 5 26
22x 1 4y 5 226
e 8x 1 6y 5 16
22x 1 4y 5 18
e 8x 1 6y 5 12
22x 1 4y 5 214
e 4x 2 7y 5 23
2x 1 2y 5 8
e 4x 2 7y 5 5
2x 1 2y 5 4
11. a. [F][G]
b. [G][F]
12. a. [A][B]
b. [B][D]
13. a. [B]2
b. [C]3
14. a. [E]([F]  [G])
b. [E][F]  [E][G]
15. a. ([B]  [C])[A]
b. [B][A]  [C][A] 
16. a. ([E][F])[G]
b. [E]([F][G])
Write [A][X]  [B], if possible, for the matrices given in 
Problems 17–18.
17. [A] 
,
[X] 
,
and
[B] 
.
18.
[X] 
,
and
[B] 
.
Show that the given matrices are inverses in Problems 19–20.
19. [A] 
;
[B] 
20. [A]  
;
[B]  
Level 2
Find the inverse of each matrix in Problems 21–26, if exists.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
Solve the systems in Problems 27–54 by solving the corresponding
matrix equation with an inverse, if possible.
Problems 27–32 use the inverse found in Problem 21.
27.
28.
29.
30. e 4x 2 7y 5 2
2x 1 2y 5 3
e 4x 2 7y 5 48
2x 1 2y 5 213
e 4x 2 7y 5 265
2x 1 2y 5 18
e 4x 2 7y 5 22
2x 1 2y 5 1
≥
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
3
0
2
4
0
0
¥
≥
1
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
1
0
¥
£
6
1
20
1
21
0
0
1
3
§
£
1
0
2
2
1
0
0
22
9
§
c
8
6
22
4d
c
4
27
21
2d
£
1
2
21
2
5
1
3
6
22
§
£
216
22
7
7
1
23
23
0
1
§
c
4
27
21
2d
c2
7
1
4d
£
2
11
21
§
£
x
y
z
§
3A4 5 £
4
1
0
3
21
2
2
3
1
§ ,
£
13
11
0
§
£
x
y
z
§
£
1
2
4
23
2
1
2
0
1
§
Section 16.4
Inverse Matrices
795
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

796
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
56. If we add Pascal’s matrix (Problem 55) and the identity matrix,
we find [P]  [I]. For the order shown in Problem 55, 
Find the inverse of this matrix.
57. How many channels of communication are open to each coun-
try in Example 4 if the countries are willing to speak to each
other through two intermediaries?
58. Consider the map of airline routes shown in Figure 16.4.
FIGURE 16.4 Travel routes for four cities
a. Fill in the blanks in the following zero-one matrix
representing the airline routes:
b. Write a matrix showing the number of routes among these
cities if you make exactly one intermediate stop. Use this ma-
trix to state in how many ways you can travel from Kansas
City to San Francisco making exactly one intermediate stop.
c. Write a matrix showing the number of routes among these
cities if you make exactly two intermediate stops. Use this
matrix to state in how many ways you can travel from San
Francisco to Kansas City making two intermediate stops.
Problem Solving  3
59. The Seedy Vin Company produces Riesling, Charbono, and
Rosé wines. There are three procedures for producing each
wine (the procedures for production affect the cost of the final
product). One procedure allows an outside company to bottle
3T4 5
SF
D
A
KC
 
≥
SF
D
A
KC
¥
Kansas City
Atlanta
Dallas
San Francisco
3P4 1 3I4 5 E
2
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
0
1
2
2
0
0
1
3
3
2
0
1
4
6
4
2
U
the wine; a second allows the wine to be produced and bottled
at the winery; a third allows the wine to be estate bottled. The
amount of wine produced by the Seedy Vin Company by each
method is shown by the matrix
Riesling Charbono Rosé
Suppose the cost for each method of production is given by the
matrix
Suppose the production cost of a unit of each type of wine is
given by the matrix
a. Find the cost of producing each of the three types of wine.
Hint: This is [C][W].
b. Find the dollar amount for producing each unit of the
different types of wine for these methods of production.
Hint: This is [W][D]
c. Find ([C][W])[D] and [C]([W][D]). Give a verbal
interpretation for these products.
60. Sociologists often study the dominance of one group over
another. Suppose in a certain society there are four classes,
which we will call abigweel, aweel, upancomer, and pon. Hint:
These are pronounced “A big wheel,” “A wheel,” “Up and
comer,” and “pea-on.” Abigweel dominate aweel, upancomer,
and pon. Aweel dominate upancomer and pon. Upancomer
dominate pon.
a. Write a zero-one matrix, [D], representing these dominance
relationships.
b. We say that an individual has two-stage dominance over
another if 1 appears in the matrix  [D]2 for those individu-
als. Write the two-stage dominance matrix.
c. We define the power of an individual as the sum of the
entries in the appropriate row of the matrix
[P]  [D]  [D]2
Determine the power of abigweel, aweel, upancomer, and pon.
d. Rank the abigweel, aweel, upancomer, and pon.
3D4 5 £
40
60
30
§   
Riesling
Charbono
Rosé
 5 31
4
64
3C4 5 3outside
winery
estate4
3W4 5 £
2
1
3
4
3
6
1
2
4
§   
outside bottling
produced and bottled at winery
estate bottled
16.5  Modeling with Linear Programming
This section gives us the opportunity to use mathematical modeling to solve an important
type of real-life problem. The problem of interest is to maximize or minimize a linear
expression subject to a set of limitations. This type of problem was first analyzed by G. B. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Dantzig during World War II to investigate the logistics in the war effort. It developed
into a modeling procedure known as linear programming. It is used to maximize prof-
its, minimize costs, find efficient shipping schedules, minimize waste, secure the proper
mix of ingredients, control inventories, and efficiently assign tasks to personnel.
We begin with a preliminary idea. In previous sections, we have discussed the simul-
taneous solution of a system of equations. In this section, we discuss the graphical solu-
tion of a simultaneous system of inequalities. The solution of a system of inequalities
refers to the intersection of the solutions of the individual inequalities in the system. The
procedure for graphing the solution of a system of inequalities is to graph the solution of
the individual inequalities and then shade in the intersection of all the graphs.
Section 16.5
Modeling with Linear Programming
797
Example
1
Use graphing to solve a system of linear inequalities
Solve:
Solution
Graph each half-plane, but instead of shading, mark the appropriate regions
with arrows. For this example, the two inequalities
give the first quadrant, which is marked with arrows as shown in Figure 16.5a. Next,
graph 
and use a test point, say, (0, 0), to determine the half-plane.
Finally, draw 
and mark it with arrows to show that 
. The last step is to shade
the intersection, as shown in Figure 16.5b.
x # 8
x 5 8
y 5 220x 1 110
y $ 0
x $ 0
μ
y . 220x 1 110
x $ 0
y $ 0
x # 8
FIGURE 16.5 Graph of a system of inequalities
y
x
10
5
y = 0
100
50
x = 8
x = 0
y = –20x + 110
a. Graphs of boundary lines
y
x
10
5
y = 0
100
50
x = 8
x = 0
y = –20x + 110
b. Shade half-planes
Example
2
Graph the solution of a system of inequalities
Graph the solution of the system:
Solution
The graph of the individual inequalities and their intersection is shown in
Figure 16.6. Note the use of arrows to show the solutions of the individual inequalities.
This device replaces the use of a lot of shading, which can be confusing if there are
μ
2x 1 y # 3
x 2 y . 5
x $ 0
y $ 210
System of Inequalities
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

many inequalities in the system. In this book we show the intersection (solution) in
color. You can show the intersection in your work in a variety of different ways, but a
color highlighter works well.
798
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
FIGURE 16.6 System of inequalities
y
x
10
5
y = –10
–5
x = 0
2x + y = 3
x – y = 5
Linear Programming
With the idea of solving systems of inequalities in mind, we return to the linear program-
ming problem, which is used to compute solutions to large-scale linear optimization prob-
lems. In order to formulate and solve a linear programming problem, we need a few more
terms. A convex set is a set that contains the line segment joining any two of its points.
The expression to be maximized or minimized is called the objective function, and the
limitations are called constraints. In linear programming, these constraints are specified
by a system of linear inequalities whose solution forms a convex set S. Each point in the
set S is called a feasible solution, and a point at which the objective function takes on a
maximum or a minimum value is called an optimum solution. We begin with an example.
Maximize T  4x  5y subject to:
The objective function is the function to be maximized or minimized; for this example, it
is 
. Next, graph the set of constraints. The solution of the system of inequal-
ities is the feasible region and is shown in Figure 16.7.
T 5 4x 1 5y
μ
2x 1 5y # 25
6x 1 5y # 45
x $ 0
y $ 0
y
x
10
5
y = 0 
(0, 5)
(2, 3)
(7, 0)
(4, 2)
(5, 1)
x = 0
2x + 5y = 25
6x + 5y = 45
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 16.7 Graph of feasible solutions
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The goal of this linear programming problem is to find that point in the feasible
set that gives the largest possible value of T. Consider the following list of possible
solutions.
T  4x  5y
A Point in the Feasible Set
Value of Objective Function
(2, 3)
T  4(2)  5(3)  23
(4, 2)
T  4(4)  5(2)  26
(5, 1)
T  4(5)  5(1)  25
(7, 0)
T  4(7)  5(0)  28
(0, 5)
T  4(0)  5(5)  25
The point from the table that makes the objective function the largest is 
. But is
this the largest for all feasible solutions? How about 
or 
? George Dantzig
proved a remarkable theorem, which we state here.
15, 32
16, 12
17, 02
Section 16.5
Modeling with Linear Programming
799
A linear expression in two variables
defined over a convex set S whose sides are line segments takes on its maximum
value at a corner point of S and its minimum value at a corner point of S. If S is
unbounded,  there may or may not be an optimum value, but if there is, then it must
occur at a corner point.
c1x 1 c2y
Linear Programming Theorem
This theorem tells us that the maximum value occurs at a corner point of the feasible
region. The corner points are labeled A, B, C, and D in Figure 16.7. Some corner points
can be found by inspection—for example, 
. And 
. Other corner
points may require some work with boundary lines.
Point A:
Solve the system 
Point B:
Solve the system 
We now have the coordinates of all the corner points. This is the entire list of all the
points we need to check from the feasible set.
T  4x  5y
Corner Point
Value of Objective Function
T 5 4a15
2 b 1 5102 5 30
A: a15
2 , 0b
e 2x 1 5y 5 25
6x 1 5y 5 45
e y 5 0
6x 1 5y 5 45
C 5 10, 52
D 5 10, 02
Solve by substitution to find 
and y  0.
Solve by adding to find x  5 
and y  3.
x 5 15
2
B: 15, 32
T  4152  5132  35
C: 10, 52
T  4102  5152  25
D: 10, 02
T  4102  5102  0
Look for the maximum value of T on this list; it is 35, so the maximum value of T is 35. We
now state a procedure for solving linear programming problems.
Use the equations (not
the inequalities) for the
boundaries.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In practice, linear programming problems are, by their very nature, complicated. In
order to understand the process, we consider an example that has been greatly simplified
but nevertheless is interesting.
800
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
To solve a linear programming problem, use the following procedure.
Step 1
Find the objective function (the quantity to be maximized or minimized).
Step 2
Graph the constraints defined by a system of linear inequalities; this graph
is called the set S.
Step 3
Find the corners of S; for each corner, this may require the solution of a
system of two equations with two unknowns.
Step 4
Find the value of the objective function for the coordinates of each corner
point. The largest value is the maximum; the smallest value is the minimum.
Linear Programming
Example
3
Formulate a problem
A farmer has 100 acres on which to plant two crops, corn and wheat, and
the problem is to maximize the profit. There are several considerations; the first is the
expense:
Cost per Acre
Expenses
Corn
Wheat
Seed
$12
$40
Fertilizer
$58
$80
Planting/care/harvesting
$50
$90
Total
$120
$210
After the harvest, the farmer must store the crops while awaiting proper market
conditions. Each acre yields an average of 110 bushels of corn or 30 bushels of wheat.
The limitations of resources are as follows:
Available capital:
$15,000
Available storage facilities:
4,000 bushels
If the net profit (after all expenses have been subtracted) per bushel of corn is 
and for
wheat is 
, how should the farmer plant the 100 acres to maximize the profits?
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. First, you might try to solve this problem by using your intuition.
Plant 100 acres in wheat
Production:
100 acres @ 30 bu/acre  3,000 bushels
Net profit:
3,000 bu  $2.00/bu  $6,000
Costs:
100 acres @ $210/acre  $21,000
These costs are more than the $15,000 available, so the farmer
cannot plant 100 acres in wheat.
Plant 100 acres in corn
Production:
100 acres @ 110 bu/acre  11,000 bushels
Net profit:
11,000 bu  $1.30/bu  $14,300
$2.00
$1.30
Pólya’s 
Method
In 1984, a 28-year-old 
mathematician at Lucent 
Technologies made a startling 
theoretical breakthrough in the 
solving of systems of equations, 
which often grow too vast and 
complex for even the powerful 
computers.  Dr. Narendra 
Karmarkar devised a radically new 
procedure that avoids the inevitable 
computer slowdowns with linear 
programming problems.  "This is a 
path-breaking result," said Dr. 
Ronald L. Graham, director of 
mathematical sciences for Lucent 
Technologies in Murray Hill, N.J.  
"Science has its moments of great 
progress, and this may well be one 
of them."
     Real-life linear programming 
problems can involve about 
800,000 variables, and Karmarkar's 
algorithm can solve such a problem 
in about 10 hours of computer 
time.  This same problem would 
have taken weeks to solve if the 
usual process, known as the 
simplex method, were used.
Narendra Karmarkar
 (1955 –        )
Courtesy of AT&T Archives and History Center
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Costs: 
100 acres @ $120/acre  $12,000
These costs can be met with the available $15,000, but the
production of 11,000 bushels exceeds the available storage
capacity of 4,000 bu.
Clearly, some mix of wheat and corn is necessary. Let us build a mathematical
model.
Devise a Plan. Let
;
y  number of acres to be planted in wheat.
With a mathematical model, we must make certain assumptions. For this example, we
assume:
The number of acres of corn cannot be negative.
The number of acres of wheat cannot be negative.
The amount of available land is 100 acres. We do not assume
that x  y  100, because it might be more profitable to leave
some land unplanted.
The total expenses cannot exceed $15,000. We also know:
EXPENSES  EXPENSE FOR CORN  EXPENSE FOR WHEAT
 120x  210y
Thus, this constraint (in terms of x and y) is
120x  210y  15,000
The total yield cannot exceed the storage capacity of
4,000 bushels. We also know:
TOTAL YIELD  YIELD FOR CORN  YIELD FOR WHEAT
 110x  30y
Thus, this constraint (in terms of x and y) is
110x  30y  4,000
The farmer wants to maximize the profit. Let P  TOTAL PROFIT.
TOTAL PROFIT 
PROFIT FROM CORN

PROFIT FROM WHEAT
T
T
64444744448
64444744448
 CORN VALUE  CORN AMOUNT  WHEAT VALUE  WHEAT AMOUNT

1.30  110x

2.00  30y
 143x  60y
We have formulated the following linear programming problem:
Maximize:
P  143x  60y
Subject to:
Carry Out the Plan. To solve this problem, we must graph the constraints (see 
Figure 16.8).
e
x $ 0
y $ 0
x 1 y # 100
120x 1 210y # 15,000
110x 1 30y # 4,000
x 5 number of acres to be planted in corn
Section 16.5
Modeling with Linear Programming
801
These first two
assumptions
(constraints) will apply
in almost every linear
programming model.
x  0
y  0
x  y  100
EXPENSES  15,000
TOTAL YIELD  4,000
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 16.8 Farmer problem 
Note that the corner points are labeled A, B, C, and D. Find the coordinates of these
points:
A(0, 0)
By inspection
Solve the system
Solve the system
D(20, 60)
Solve the system
Use the linear programming theorem to check these corner points:
Corner Point
Objective Function, P  143x  60y
A(0, 0)
P  143(0)  60(0)  0
D(20, 60)
P  143(20)  60(60)  6,460
Look Back. The maximum value of P is at (20, 60). This means that, to maximize
the profit subject to the constraints, the farmer should plant 20 acres in corn, plant
60 acres in wheat, and leave 20 acres unplanted.
P 5 143A400
11 B 1 60102 5 5,200
Ca400
11 , 0b
P 5 143102 1 60A500
7 B < 4,286
Ba0, 500
7 b
e 110x 1 30y 5 4,000
120x 1 210y 5 15,000
e 110x 1 30y 5 4,000
y 5 0
CA400
11 , 0B
e 120x 1 210y 5 15,000
x 5 0
BA0, 500
7 B
y
x
50
y = 0
110x + 30y = 4,000
100
x = 0
x + y = 100
A
D
B
120x + 210y = 15,000
802
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Notice from Figure 16.8 that some of the constraints could be eliminated from the prob-
lem and everything else would remain unchanged. For example, the boundary x  y  100
was not necessary in finding the maximum value of P. Such a condition is said to be a
superfluous constraint. It is not uncommon to have superfluous constraints in a linear
programming problem. Suppose, however, that the farmer in Example 3 contracted to have
the grains stored at a neighboring farm and now the contract calls for at least 4,000 bushels
to be stored. This change from 110x  30y  4,000 to 110x  30y  4,000 now makes the
condition x  y  100 important to the solution of the problem (see Problem 57). Therefore,
you must be careful about superfluous constraints even though they do not affect the solu-
tion at the present time.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.5
Modeling with Linear Programming
803
Example
4
Maximize the profit
The Sticky Widget Company makes two types of widgets: regular and
deluxe. Each widget is produced at a station consisting of a machine and a person who
finishes the widgets by hand. The regular widget requires 2 hr of machine time and 1 hr
of finishing time. The deluxe widget requires 3 hr of machine time and 5 hr of finishing
time. The profit on the regular widget is 
; on the deluxe widget it is 
. If the work-
day is 8 hr, how many of each type of widget should be produced at each station to max-
imize the profit?*
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. We are trying to find the number of regular and deluxe widg-
ets that should be produced to maximize the profits.
Devise a Plan. Let
x  NUMBER OF REGULAR WIDGETS PRODUCED
y  NUMBER OF DELUXE WIDGETS PRODUCED
Maximize profit:
P  25x  30y
Subject to:
The workday is no more than 8 hr.
The set of feasible solutions is found by graphing this system of inequalities, as shown
in Figure 16.9.
FIGURE 16.9 Maximizing profit 
The corner points are found by considering the intersections of the boundary lines. 
Carry Out the Plan. The linear programming theorem requires the values summarized
with the following table.
8
7
16
7
C
’
(
(
y
x
5
y = 0
x + 5y = 8
5
x = 0
A(0, 0)
D(4, 0)
B
’
8
5
(
(
0
2x + 3y = 8
μ
x $ 0
y $ 0
2x 1 3y # 8
x 1 5y # 8
$30
$25
Pólya’s 
Method
*It is difficult to set up textbook problems to model real-life problems, but our goal in this book is to teach you a process of
problem solving. Remember that, in real life, you cannot be sure of what information to use and what information is not neces-
sary. This problem, for example, would be stated in real life as: Maximize the profit. All of the other information would be part
of the assumptions you would gather for the solution of the problem. Deciding on the assumptions often requires a great deal
of work when solving real-life problems.
The next example is solved more succinctly to show you the way your work will
probably look.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

804
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a system of linear 
inequalities?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe a procedure for solving a
system of linear inequalities.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a linear programming 
problem?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is an objective function? What
do we mean by constraints?
Graph the solution of each system given in Problems 5–18.
5. a.
b.
6. a.
b.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12. e y # 3x 2 4
y $ 22x 1 5
e2x 1 y . 3
3x 2 y , 2
e 24 # x # 22
25 # y # 9
e29 , x , 6
2 # y # 4
μ
x $ 0
y $ 0
x , 500
y # 1,000
μ
x $ 0
y $ 0
x , 5
y # 6
e x # 0
y $ 0
ex # 0
y # 0
e x $ 0
y $ 0
ex $ 0
y # 0
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19. Decide whether the given point is a feasible solution for the
constraints
a. (1, 3)
b. (2, 1)
c. (1, 2)
d. (1, 4)
e. (2, 2)
f. (0, 4)
20. Decide whether the given point is a corner point for the
constraints 
a. (0, 0)
b. (0, 80)
c. (80, 0)
d. (60, 0)
e. (30, 20)
f. (20, 30)
μ
x $ 0
y $ 0
2x 1 3y $ 120
2x 1 y $ 80
μ
x $ 0
y $ 0
3x 1 2y # 10
2x 1 4y # 8
e x 1 5 $ 0
x # 0
e x 2 y $ 0
y # 0
e y 2 25 # 0
y $ 0
e x 2 10 # 0
x $ 0
e y 2 5 # 0
y $ 0
e 3x 2 2y $ 6
2x 1 3y # 6
Problem Set 16.5
Corner Point System to Solve
Solution
Objective Function, 25x  30y
Comment
A
(0, 0)
25(0)  30(0)  0
minimum
B
C
D
(4, 0)
25(4)  30(0)  100
maximum
Look Back. Profits are maximized if only regular widgets are produced. The company
should produce four regular widgets per day at each station.
e y 5 0
2x 1 3y 5 8
25A16
7 B 1 30A8
7B < 91.43
A16
7 , 8
7B
e 2x 1 3y 5 8
x 1 5y 5 8
25102 1 30A8
5B 5 48
A0, 8
5B
e x 5 0
x 1 5y 5 8
e x 5 0
y 5 0
The method discussed here can be generalized to higher dimensions by means of
more sophisticated methods for solving these linear programming problems. The general
method for solving a linear programming problem is called the simplex method and is
usually discussed in a course called linear programming or finite mathematics.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.5
Modeling with Linear Programming
805
Level 2
Graph the solution of each system given in Problems 21–34.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
Find the corner points for the set of feasible solutions for the
constraints given in Problems 35–46.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40. e
x $ 0
y $ 0
x 1 y $ 6
22x 1 y $ 216
y # 9
e
x $ 0
y $ 0
x 1 y # 8
y # 4
x # 6
e
x $ 0
y $ 0
x # 10
y # 8
3x 1 2y $ 12
μ
x $ 0
y $ 0
3x 1 2y # 12
x 1 2y # 8
μ
x $ 0
y $ 0
2x 1 5y # 20
2x 1 y # 12
μ
x $ 0
y $ 0
2x 1 y # 12
x 1 2y # 9
μ
x 1 y 2 10 # 0
x 1 y 1 4 $ 0
x 2 y # 6
y 2 x # 4
μ
2x 2 3y 1 30 $ 0
3x 2 2y 1 20 # 0
x # 0
y $ 0
μ
2x 1 3y # 30
3x 1 2y $ 20
x $ 0
y $ 0
μ
2x 1 y # 8
y # 5
x 2 y # 2
3x 2 y $ 5
e
x $ 0
y $ 0
x 1 y # 8
y # 4
x # 6
e
x $ 0
y $ 0
x 1 y # 9
2x 2 3y $ 26
x 2 y # 3
μ
x 1 y 2 9 # 0
x 1 y 1 3 $ 0
x 2 y # 7
y 2 x # 5
•
8x 1 3y # 9
y 2 4 $ 28
31x 1 22
25 # y # 6
μ
5x 2 2y 1 30 $ 0
5x 2 2y 1 20 # 0
x # 0
y $ 0
μ
5x 1 2y # 30
5x 1 2y $ 20
x $ 0
y $ 0
•
y $ 3
2x 1 3
y # 3
2x 1 6
3 # y # 6
•
y $ 3
4x 2 4
y # 23
4x 1 11
x $ 6
μ
25 , x
3 $ x
5 . y
2 # y
μ
210 # x
x # 6
23 , y
y , 8
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
Find the optimum value for each objective function given
in Problems 47–51.
47. Maximize 
subject to the constraints
of Problem 35.
48. Maximize 
subject to the constraints of
Problem 36.
49. Maximize 
subject to the constraints of
Problem 37.
50. Minimize 
subject to the constraints 
of Problem 38.
51. Minimize 
subject to the constraints 
of Problem 39.
Level 3
Write a linear programming model, including the objective
function and the set of constraints, for Problems 52–55. DO NOT
SOLVE, but be sure to define all your variables.
52. The Wadsworth Widget Company manufactures two types of
widgets: regular and deluxe. Each widget is produced at a
A 5 2x 2 3y
K 5 6x 1 18y
P 5 100x 1 100y
T 5 100x 1 10y
W 5 30x 1 20y
f
x $ 0
y $ 0
2x 1 y $ 8
x 2 2y # 7
x 2 y $ 23
x # 9
f
x $ 0
y $ 0
2x 1 y $ 8
y # 5
x 2 y # 2
3x 2 2y $ 5
e
x $ 0
y $ 0
x 1 y # 9
2x 2 3y $ 26
x 2 y # 3
e
x $ 0
y $ 0
10x 1 5y $ 200
2x 1 5y $ 100
3x 1 4y $ 120
f
x $ 0
y $ 0
x # 8
y $ 2
x 1 y # 10
x # 3y
μ
x $ 0
y $ 0
3x 1 2y # 8
x 1 5y # 8
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

806
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
station consisting of a machine and a person who finishes
each widget by hand. The regular widget requires 3 hr of
machine time and 2 hr of finishing time. The deluxe widget
requires 2 hr of machine time and 4 hr of finishing time. The
profit on the regular widget is 
; on the deluxe widget it is
. If the workday is 8 hours, how many of each type of
widget should be produced at each station per day to
maximize the profit?
53. A convalescent hospital wishes to provide, at a minimum cost,
a diet that has a minimum of 200 g of carbohydrates, 100 g of
protein, and 20 g of fat per day. These requirements can be met
with two foods, A and B:
Food
Carbohydrates
Protein
Fats
A
10 g
2 g
3 g
B
5 g
5 g
4 g
If food A costs 
per gram and food B costs 
per
gram, how many grams of each food should be purchased for
each patient per day to meet the minimum requirements at the
lowest cost?
54. Karlin Enterprises manufactures two games. Standing orders
require that at least 24,000 space-battle games and 5,000 foot-
ball games be produced per month. The Gainesville plant can
produce 600 space-battle games and 100 football games per
day; the Sacramento plant can produce 300 space-battle games
and 100 football games per day. If the Gainesville plant costs
per day to operate and the Sacramento factory costs
per day, find the number of days per month each fac-
tory should operate to minimize the cost. (Assume each month
is 30 days.)
55. Brown Bros., Inc. is an investment company doing an analysis
of the pension fund for a certain company. The fund has a max-
imum of 
million to invest in two places: no more than 
million in stocks yielding 
, and at least 
million in
long-term bonds yielding 
The stock-to-bond investment
ratio cannot be more than 3 to 1. How should Brown Bros.
advise its client so that the investments yield the maximum
yearly return?
Problem Solving  3
Solve the linear programming problems in Problems 56–59.
56. Suppose the net profit per bushel of corn in Example 3
increased to 
and the net profit per bushel of wheat
dropped to 
. Maximize the profit if the other conditions
in the example remain the same.
$1.50
$2.00
8%
$2
12%
$8
$10
$15,000
$20,000
$0.15
$0.29
$30
$25
berniedheere/istockphoto.com
Corn storage bin
57. Suppose the farmer in Example 3 contracted to have the grain
stored at a neighboring farm and the contract calls for at least
4,000 bushels to be stored. How many acres should be planted
in corn and how many in wheat to maximize profit if the other
conditions in Example 3 remain the same?
58. The Thompson Company manufactures two industrial
products, standard (
profit per item) and economy 
(
profit per item). These items are built using machine 
time and manual labor. The standard product requires 
3 hr of machine time and 2 hr of manual labor. The economy
model requires 3 hr of machine time and no manual labor. 
If the week’s supply of manual labor is limited to 800 hr 
and machine time to 15,000 hr, how much of each type 
of product should be produced each week to maximize 
the profit?
59. Your broker tells you of two investments she thinks are worth-
while. She advises that you buy a new issue of Pertec stock,
which should yield 
over the next year, and then to balance
your account she advises Campbell Municipal Bonds with a
yearly yield. The bond-to-stock ratio should not be
greater than 3 to 1. If you have no more than 
to
invest and do not want to invest more than 
in Pertec 
or less than 
in bonds, how much should be invested in
each to maximize your return?
60. The following carbohydrate information is given on the side of
the respective cereal boxes (for 1 oz of cereal with cup of
whole milk):
Starch/
Sucrose/
Cereal
Carbohydrates
Sugar
Kellogg’s Corn Flakes
23 g
7 g
Post Honeycombs
14 g
15 g
What is the minimum cost to receive at least 322 g starch
and 119 g sucrose by consuming these two cereals if Corn
Flakes cost 
per ounce and Honeycombs cost 
per ounce?
$0.19
$0.07
1
2
$20,000
$70,000
$100,000
10%
20%
$30
$45
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.6
Chapter Summary
807
16.6
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Solving systems of equations (graphing, substitution, and addition) [16.1]
Four elementary row operations [16.3]
Process of pivoting [16.3]
Gauss-Jordan elimination [16.3]
Matrix operations [16.4]
Properties of matrices [16.4]
Inverse of a matrix [16.4]
Systems of inequalities [16.5]
Linear programming theorem [16.5]
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online,
you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of
problems that were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by
working the problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test
help in studying for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
How can students
compete in a mathemati-
cal society when they
leave school knowing so
little mathematics?
LESTER THUROW,
IN EVERYBODY COUNTS
Chapter 16
Review Questions
In Problems 1–5, perform the indicated matrix operations, 
if possible, where
1. [C][B]  3[D]
2. [A][B][C]
3. [B][A][D]
4. [C][A][B]
5. [A]1
3C4 5 £
2
0
1
2
21
1
§ 3D4 5 £
0
1
0
21
0
0
0
1
21
§
3A4 5 c1
0
2
21d 3B4 5 c2
21
0
1
0
1d
Find the inverse of each matrix in Problems 6–7.
6.
7.
Solve the systems in Problems 8–12 by the indicated method.
8. By graphing:
9. By addition:
10. By substitution:
e y 5 1 2 2x
5x 1 2y 5 1
e x 1 3y 5 3
4x 2 6y 5 26
e 2x 2 y 5 2
3x 2 2y 5 1
£
1
3
3
1
4
3
1
3
4
§
c
2
1
23
2
21
2
d
Section 16.6
Chapter Summary
807
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11. By Gauss-Jordan:
12. By using an inverse matrix:
Solve the systems in Problems 13–16 by graphing, adding,
substitution, Gauss–Jordan, or inverse matrix methods.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17. Graph the solution of the system:
18. To manufacture a certain alloy, it is necessary to use 33 oz 
of metal A and 56 oz of metal B. It is easier for the manu-
facturer to buy and mix two products that come as metal
bars: Product I, each bar of which contains 3 oz of metal 
A and 5 oz of metal B, and Product II, each bar of which
contains 4 oz of metal A and 7 oz of metal B. How many
bars of each product should be used to produce the 
desired alloy?
19. A manufacturer of auto accessories uses three basic parts, A,
B, and C, in its three products, in the following proportions:
μ
2x 2 y 1 2 # 0
2x 2 y 1 12 $ 0
3x 1 2y 1 10 . 0
3x 1 2y 2 18 , 0
e5x 1 3y 5 82
4x 2 6y 5 210
•
x 1 y 1 z 5 5
x 2 2y 1 z 5 21
3x 1 y 2 2z 5 16
ex 5 5 2 3y
5x 1 7y 5 25
e3x 2 y 5 210
x 1 y 5 22
e 2x 1 y 5 13
23
2x 2 1
2y 5 10
•
x 1 y 1 z 5 2
x 1 2y 2 2z 5 1
x 1 y 1 3z 5 4
808
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
A
B
C
Product I
2
1
1
Product II
2
2
1
Product III
3
2
2
The inventory shows 1,250 of part A, 900 of part B, 
and 750 of part C on hand. How many of each product 
may be manufactured using all the inventory on 
hand?
Cost per Acre
Expenses
Corn
Wheat
Seed
$12
$10
Fertilizer
$58
$20
Planting/care/harvesting
$50
$30
TOTAL
$120
$60
After the harvest, the farmer must store the crops while
awaiting proper market conditions. Each acre yields an aver-
age of 100 bushels of corn or 40 bushels of wheat. The
farmer has available capital of 
and is not able to
store more than 18,000 bushels. If the net profit (after all ex-
penses have been subtracted) per bushel of corn is 
and
for wheat is 
how should the farmer plant the 500 acres
to maximize the profit, and what is the maximum profit?
$2.50,
$2.10
$24,000
20. A farmer has 500 acres on which to plant two crops: corn and
wheat. To produce these crops, there are certain expenses:
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on this book:
On the Shoulders of Giants: New Approaches to
Numeracy, Lynn Arthur Steen, Editor (Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 1990).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.6
Chapter Summary
809
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G51. Suppose your group conducts an experiment at a local department store. You walk up
a rising escalator and you take one step per second to reach the top in 20 seconds.
Next, you walk up the same rising escalator at the rate of two steps per second and
this time it takes 32 steps. How many steps would be required to reach the top on a
stopped escalator?
G52. Two ranchers sold a herd of cattle and received as many dollars for each animal as
there were cattle in the herd. With the money they bought a flock of sheep at $10 a
head and then a lamb with the rest of the money (less than $10). Finally, they divided
the animals between them, with one rancher obtaining an extra sheep and the other
the lamb. The rancher who got the lamb was given his friend’s new watch as
compensation. What is the value of the watch?
G53. Suppose your group has just been hired by a company called Alco. You are asked to
analyze its operations and make some recommendations about how it can comply at
a minimum cost with recent orders of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
To prepare your report, you study the operation and obtain the following
information:
Alco Cement Company produces cement.
The EPA has ordered Alco to reduce the amount of emissions released into the
atmosphere during production.
Alco wants to comply, but wants to do so at the least possible cost.
Present production is 2.5 million barrels of cement, and 2 pounds of dust are
emitted for every barrel of cement produced.
The cement is produced in kilns that are presently equipped with mechanical
collectors.
To reduce the emissions to the required level, the mechanical collectors must be
replaced either by four-field electrostatic precipitators, which would reduce emis-
sion to 0.5 pound of dust per barrel of cement, or by five-field precipitators,
which would reduce emission to 0.2 pound per barrel.
The capital and operating costs for the four-field precipitator are 14¢ per barrel
of cement produced; for the five-field precipitator, costs are 18¢ per barrel.
To comply with the EPA, Alco must reduce particulate emission by at least 
4.2 million pounds.*
Use mathematical modeling to write your paper. Mathematical modeling involves
creating equations and procedures to make predictions about the real world. Typical
textbook problems focus on limited, specific skills, but in the real world you need to
sift through the given information to decide what information you need and what in-
formation you do not need. You may need to do some research to gather data not
provided.
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
*This research project is adapted from R. E. Kohn, “A Mathematical Programming Model for Air Pollution Control,” Science
and Mathematics, June 1969, pp. 487–499.
Section 16.6
Chapter Summary
809
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

810
CHAPTER 16
The Nature of Mathematical Systems
G54. Knot Theory
Get a piece of string with two free ends, and tie those ends together
with a knot. Some knots that you can tie will hold the ends of the string together and
other knots will not (no pun intended!). In mathematics, there is a branch of mathe-
matics known as knot theory. Mathematically, a knot is defined as a closed piecewise
linear curve in 3. Two or more knots together is known as a link. Knots can be cata-
loged according to the number of crossings (ignoring mirror reflections). There is
only one knot with crossing number three (called the cloverleaf knot), and one knot
with crossing number four, and there are two with crossing number five, and three
with crossing number six.
a. How many knots are possible with crossing number seven?
b. How many knots are possible with crossing number eight?
Write a paper on knot theory. (See Section 16.5, reference links for an excellent site
with links.)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas discussed in this chapter. You can find
references to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 16.1 Historical Quest In the Boston Museum of Fine Arts is a display of care-
fully made stone cubes found in the ruins of Mohenjo-Daro of the Indus. The stones
are a set of weights that exhibit the binary pattern, 1, 2 4, 8, 16, 
The fundamen-
tal unit displayed is just a bit lighter than the ounce in the U.S. measurement system.
The old European standard of 16 oz for 1 pound may be a relic of the same idea.
Write a paper showing how a set of such stones can successfully be used to measure
any reasonable given weight of more than one unit.
PROJECT 16.2 Five identical containers (shoe boxes, paper cups, etc.) must be prepared
for this problem, with contents as follows: There are five boxes containing red and
white items (such as marbles, poker chips, or colored slips of paper).
Box
Contents
#1
15 red and 15 white
#2
30 red and 0 white
#3
23 red and 5 white
#4
20 red and 10 white
#5
10 red and 20 white
Select one of the boxes at random so that you don’t know its contents.
Step 1 Shake the box.
Step 2 Select one marker, note the result, and return it to the box.
Step 3 Repeat the first two steps 20 times with the same box.
a. What do you think is inside the box you have sampled?
b. Could you have guessed the contents by repeating the experiment five times? Ten times?
Do you think you should have more than 20 observations per experiment?
PROJECT 16.3 Read the “What In the World?” at the beginning of this chapter. Rank
teams A, B, C, D, E, and F if you are given the following information. Team A beats
F, and ties C; team B beats A, C, and F; team C beats E and F; team D ties A and
beats F; team E beats A and F; team F beats C and ties D. If two teams tie, enter 0.5
in the zero-one matrix instead of 1.
. . . .
Section 16.6
Chapter Summary
811
www.mathnature.com 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
17
Outline
What in the World?
“Heather, how was Girls’ State?” asked Bill. “I’ll bet
you met a lot of neat people, but was it as great as
advertised?”
“It was a mountain-top event for me!” exclaimed
Heather. “We met senators, representatives, and
even the governor! And I learned a lot about how
our government works. What I didn’t expect was
the subtleties of voting, and the many different
ways there are for voting. I’ll bet you didn’t know
that there is no perfect voting method. . . .”
Overview
This chapter investigates the question of how groups
can best arrive at decisions. We refer to the study of the
decision making process as social choice theory. This study
considers the possibilities by which individual preferences
are translated into a single group choice. Social choice
theory arose to help explain the processes of voting, or indi-
cating an individual’s preferences. You have no doubt
participated as a voter in many contexts, but you may not
realize that the voting method used can significantly affect
the outcome of the election.
Historically, certain voting inconsistencies were dis-
cussed by Jean-Charles de Borda (1733–1799) and Marie
Jean Antoine Nicolas Caritat, the Marquis of Condorcet
(1743–1794). It was not until 1951 that the mathematician
Kenneth Arrow (1921– ) proved that all attempts to arrive at
a suitable technique for voting are doomed to failure!
Since all voting methods have inherent fallacies, we will
investigate in this chapter different voting methods, as well
as some reasons why we need to carefully consider the elec-
tion process. We also look at the process of selecting a repre-
sentative government using the apportionment of votes.
THE NATURE OF VOTING
AND APPORTIONMENT
17.1 Voting
813
Majority rule, plurality method, 
Borda count, Hare method, pairwise
comparison method, tournament
method, approval voting
17.2 Voting Dilemmas
824
Majority criterion, Condorcet criterion,
monotonicity criterion, irrelevant
alternatives criterion
17.3 Apportionment
841
Introduction, Adams’ plan, Jefferson’s
plan, Hamilton’s plan, Webster’s plan,
Huntington-Hill plan
17.4 Apportionment 
Paradoxes
858
Alabama paradox, population paradox,
new states paradox, Balinski and
Young’s impossibility theorem
17.5 Chapter Summary
865
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports, group
research projects, individual research
projects
Courtesy Charlie Daniels, Arkansas Secretary of State
     Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.1
Voting
813
17.1  Voting
I think that society must choose among a number of alternative
policies. These policies may be thought of as quite comprehensive,
covering a number of aspects: foreign policy, budgetary policy, 
or whatever. Now, each individual member of the society has a
preference, or a set of preferences, over these alternatives. I guess
that you can say one alternative is better than another.
KENNETH J. ARROW
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
T
T
c
2
S
4
S
8
S
11
S
19
S
19
S ?
c
T
c
If the number of votes is n and n is even, then a majority is
If the number of votes is odd, then a majority is
n 1 1
2
n
2 1 1
Majority Rule
2008 Democratic National
Convention
The process of selection can be accomplished in many different ways. If one person alone
makes the decision, we call it a dictatorship. If the decision is made by a group, it is
called a vote. The different methods of selection using a vote, such as voting on a pro-
posal, resolution, law, or a choice between candidates, is an area of study called social
choice theory. In this section we will discuss several ways of counting the votes to declare
a winner.
Majority Rule
One common method of voting is by majority rule. By majority rule, we mean voting to
find an alternative that receives more than 
of the vote. Be careful how you interpret
this. If there are 11 voters with two alternatives A and B, then 6 votes for A is a majority.
If there are 12 voters and A receives 6 votes, then A does not have a majority. Finally, if
there are more than two alternatives, say, A, B, and C, with 12 voters and A receives
5 votes, B receives 3 votes, and C receives 4 votes, then no alternative has a majority. We
summarize with the following box.
50%
STAN HONDA/AFP/Getty Images
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

814
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Example
1
Find a winner using the majority rule
Consider an election with three alternatives. These might be Republican, Democrat, and
Green party candidates. To keep our notation simple, we will designate the candidates
as A, B, and C. There are 6 possible rankings, regardless of the number of voters. We
list these using the following notation:
Choices:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
The symbol “(ACB)” means that the ranking of a voter is candidate A for first place, C
for second place, and B for third place. The six sets of three letters here indicate all pos-
sible ways for a voter to rank three candidates. Now, suppose there are 12 voters and we
list the rankings of these voters using the following notation:
Choices:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
No. of Votes:
5
0
2
1
0
4
This means that 5 of the 12 voters ranked the candidates ABC, while none of the voters
ranked the candidates in the order ACB. Notice that we have accounted for all 6 possi-
bilities even though in some cases some possibilities have no voters. The sum of the
number of votes for all possibilities equals the number of voters—12 for this example.
Use the majority rule to find a winner.
Solution
For the election we look only at first choices (even though the voters ranked
all the candidates). We see A received 5 votes (5  0  5), B received 3 votes
(2  1  3), and C received 4 votes (0  4  4). If we use the majority rule, 
votes, and we see that there is no winner.
12
2 1 1 5 7
Each voter votes for one candidate. 
The candidate receiving the most votes is declared the winner.
Plurality Method
Example
2
Find a winner using the plurality rule
Reconsider the Republican, Democrat, and Green Party vote from Example 1.
Choices:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
No. of Votes:
5
0
2
1
0
4
Who is the winner using the plurality method?
Notice from Example 1 that with three candidates, we listed 6 possibilities. In social
choice theory, the principle that asserts that any set of individual rankings is possible is
called the principle of unrestricted domain. If there are n candidates, then there are n first
choices, 
second choices, and so on. So, by the fundamental counting principle, the
total number of choices is
We denote this product by writing n!. That is, 
.
The majority rule satisfies a principle called symmetry. This principle ensures that if
one voter prefers choice A to choice B and another prefers choice B to A, then their votes
should cancel each other out.
5! 5 5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1
n1n 2 12 1n 2 22 #  c# 3 # 2 # 1
n 2 1
Plurality Method
In the case of no winner by majority rule, we often want to have an alternative way to se-
lect a winner. With the plurality method, the winner is the candidate with the highest
number of votes.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
A: 5  0  5 votes; B: 2  1  3 votes; C: 0  4  4 votes. The winner is
the candidate with the most votes, namely, candidate A.
Section 17.1
Voting
815
Example
3
Find a winner using the plurality method
Consider the following voting situation:
Choices:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
No. of Votes:
3
2
2
0
1
4
Who is the winner using the plurality method?
Solution
We see the outcome is A: 5 votes (3  2  5), B: 2 votes (2  0  2), and
C: 5 votes (1  4  5). There is no majority winner, and there is no winner using the
plurality method.
Somehow we cannot be satisfied with the result of Example 3. The very nature of
voting seems to imply that we want a winner, so we need some set of tie-breaking rules.
In situations governed by Robert’s Rules of Order, the chairperson is allowed to vote to
make or break a tie. Social choice theory calls this the principle of decisiveness.
Borda Count
A common way of determining a winner when there is no majority is to assign a point
value to each voter’s ranking. The last-place candidate is given 1 point, each next-to-the-
last candidate is given 2 points, and so on. This counting scheme, called a Borda count,
is defined in the following box.
Each voter ranks the candidates. If there are n candidates, then n points are assigned
to the first choice for each voter, with 
points for the next choice, and so on.
The points for each candidate are added and if one has more votes, that candidate is
declared the winner.
n 2 1
Borda Count
We illustrate this process with the following example.
Example
4
Find a winner using a Borda count
Consider the following election with four candidates, A, B, C, and D. There are
possible rankings for these four candidates, so instead of
listing all those possibilities as we did with the previous examples of this section, we
ask the voters to rank their choices.
Voter
Ranking
#1
B, D, C, A
#2
D, C, A, B
#3
B, A, C, D
#4
B, A, D, C
#5
D, A, B, C
#6
A, B, C, D
Note the results: A: 1 vote; B: 3 votes; C: 0 votes; D: 2 votes. There is a total of 6 voters, so
a majority would require 62  1  4 votes, so there is no majority. Declare a winner 
using a Borda count.
4! 5 4 3 3 3 2 3 1 5 24
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
A Borda count with 4 candidates awards 4 points for each first-place rank-
ing, 3 points for each second-place ranking, followed by 2 points and 1 point. We sum-
marize the voters’ ranking in table form:
Voter
Candidate
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
Total
A
1
2
3
3
3
4
16
B
4
1
4
4
2
3
18
C
2
3
2
1
1
2
11
D
3
4
1
2
4
1
15
The winner is B, since this candidate has the highest total.
816
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
An example of voting using the Borda method with which you may be familiar is the
annual voting for the Heisman Trophy in collegiate football. In 2010, the winner Mark
Ingram of the University of Alabama was selected after 870 ballots were mailed to media
personnel across the country, 55 still-living Heisman winners, and 1 fan ballot for a total
of 926 electors. Each elector votes for three choices and a point total is reached by a sys-
tem of three points for a first place vote, two for a second, and one for a third. It was re-
ported that Ingram received 1,304 points, with the runner-up Toby Gerhart of Stanford
University garnering 1,276 points is the closest Heisman race ever.
The principle of decisiveness forces us to consider a structure for selecting a winner
when the method we use does not produce a winner. One such method is to hold a runoff
election. A runoff election is an attempt to obtain a majority vote by eliminating one or
more alternatives and voting again on the remaining choices.
Each voter votes for one candidate. If a candidate receives a majority of the votes,
that candidate is declared to be a first-round winner. If no candidate receives a major-
ity of the votes, then with the Hare method, also known as the plurality with an elim-
ination runoff method, the candidate(s) with the fewest number of first-place votes is
(are) eliminated.
Each voter votes for one candidate in the second round. If a candidate receives a
majority, that candidate is declared to be a second-round winner. If no candidate receives
a majority of the second-round votes, then eliminate the candidate(s) with the fewest
number of first-place votes. Repeat this process until a candidate receives a majority.
Hare Method
Hare Method
The first runoff method we will consider was proposed in 1861 by Thomas Hare
(1806–1891). In this method, votes are transferred from eliminated candidates to remain-
ing candidates. We summarize this method in the following box.
Example
5
Find a winner using the Hare method
Reconsider Example 3.
Choices:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
No. of Votes:
3
2
2
0
1
4
There is neither a majority winner nor a plurality winner. Find a solution using the Hare
method.
Solution
We see that A received 5 (3  2  5) first-round votes; B received 2 votes;
and C received 5 votes. We hold a runoff election by eliminating the alternative with the
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

fewest votes; this is choice B. For convenience, in this book we assume that a voter’s or-
der of preference will remain the same for subsequent rounds of voting. Thus, we now
have the following possibilities, where we have crossed out candidate B:
Choices:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
No. of Votes:
3
2
2
0
1
4
T
T
T
T
T
T
Choices:
(AC)
(CA)
No. of Votes:
3  2  2  7
0  1  4  5
We now declare a second-round winner, A, using the majority rule.
μ
μ
Section 17.1
Voting
817
The assumption that we made in Example 5 about consistent voting has a name in so-
cial choice theory. It is called the principle of independence of irrelevant alternatives. In
other words, we assume consistent voting, which means that if a voter prefers A to B with
C a possible choice, then the voter still prefers A to B when C is not a possible choice. 
In countries with many political parties, such as France, the Hare method is used for
electing their president.
In the pairwise comparison method of voting, the voters rank the candidates by
making a series of comparisons in which each candidate is compared to each of the
other candidates. If choice A is preferred to choice B, then A receives 1 point. If B is
preferred to A, then B receives 1 point. If the candidates tie, each receives point.
The candidate with the most points is declared the winner.
1
2
Pairwise Comparison Method
Historical
Vilfredo Pareto 
(1848–1923)
Pareto was an economist and
sociologist known for his applica-
tion of mathematics to economic
analysis and for his theory of the
“circulation of elites.” This theory
says there will always be new Bill
Gateses in the world to replace the
old Bill Gateses of the world. The
Pareto principle we use in this
book is not the same as “Pareto’s
principle,” known as the “80:20
rule.” The latter has many forms
and asserts, “A minority of input
produces the majority of results.”
For example, “80% of the work
is usually done by 20% of the
people,” or “80% of the
problems are usually caused 
by 20% of the people.”
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Example
6
Find the winner using the pairwise comparison method
Consider the election described by Example 1:
Choices:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
No. of Votes:
5
0
2
1
0
4
Find the winner using the pairwise comparison method.
Solution
A over B:
5  0  0  5; B over A: 2  1  4  7;
B obtains 1 point.
A over C:
5  0  2  7; C over A: 1  0  4  5;
A obtains 1 point.
B over C:
5  2  1  8; C over B: 0  0  4  4;
B obtains 1 point.
Totals:
A: 1 point
B: 1  1  2 points
C: 0 points
Candidate B wins the election by the pairwise comparison method.
Pairwise Comparison Method
Runoff elections are not always appropriate. It seems reasonable that if everyone in a
group of voters prefers candidate X over candidate Y, then under its voting method, the
group should prefer X to Y. Social choice theory calls this the Pareto principle. Thus, it is
desirable that the pairwise methods we consider satisfy this principle. The characteristic
property of these pairwise methods is that they pair up the competitors, two at a time. Such
methods are called binary voting. We begin with the most important of these methods.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Tournament Method
Another form of binary voting is a king-of-the-hill situation in which the competitors are
paired, the winner of one pairing taking on the next competitor. This type of runoff elec-
tion is sometimes called sequential voting.
One of the most common examples of sequential voting is called the tournament
method, or tournament elimination method. With this method, candidates are teamed
head-to-head, with the winner of one pairing facing a new opponent for the next election.
Tennis matches and other sporting events are often decided in this fashion.
818
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Example
7
Find a winner using the tournament method
Consider the following election:
Choices:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
No. of Votes:
5
0
3
0
0
4
Find the winner using the tournament method.
Solution
A
Do you see how this vote of 5:7 is found? (5:7 means 5 for A and 7 for B.)
B
5 people voted (ABC), A over B.
B
5:7
B
3 people voted (BAC), B over A, and 4 people voted (CBA), B over A; this
C
8:4
is a total of 3  4  7.
A
B
A
B
C
8:4
B
C
8:4 B
B
5:7
A
7:5
Since all three possible tournaments result in B as the winner, we see that the tourna-
ment method finds B to be the winner. We will see later that different pairings may re-
sult in different winners.
In Example 7 there were three candidates, and the number of comparison charts was
three (A with B, A with C, and B with C). In general, the number of necessary compar-
isons for n candidates is
In this book we will not have examples with more than 5 candidates, so Table 17.1 shows
the number of choices for n between 3 and 6 (inclusive).
Even though we can use some tie-breaking voting procedures, ties may still exist.
Decisiveness requires that we specify some method for breaking ties. Sometimes break-
ing a tie can be accomplished by using another voting method, by choosing the candidate
with the most first-place votes, by voting by the presiding officer, or even by flipping a
coin. If the voting process is to be fair, the tie-breaking procedure should be specified be-
fore the vote.
n1n 2 12
2
TABLE 17.1
Number of Pairwise 
Comparisons
n
Number
3
3
4
6
5
10
6
15
Example
8
Declare a winner with the possibility of a tie
Consider the following voting situation:
Choices:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
No. of Votes:
2
0
0
2
1
0
a. Is there a majority winner?
b. Is there a plurality winner?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

c. If there is a tie, break it by deleting the candidate with the fewest first-place votes.
d. If there is a tie, break it by deleting the candidate with the most last-place votes.
Solution
a. A majority of the 5 votes is 3 votes; there is no majority.
b. There is no plurality.
c. There is a tie; we drop the candidate with the fewest first-place votes. (Recall that this
is called the Hare method.) Number of first-place votes:
A:
2  0  2
B:
0  2  2
C:
1  0  1
Choice C has the fewest first-place votes; compress the ratings:
Choices:
(AB)
(BA)
No. of Votes:
2  0  1  3
0  2  0  2
The winner is A.
d. There is a tie; we drop the candidate with the most last-place votes.
A is in last place for 2  0  2 of the votes;
B is in last place for 0  1  1 of the votes;
C is in last place for 2  0  2 of the votes.
There is a tie, so we use this rule again; drop the candidate with the most last-place
votes or next-to-last-place votes.
A has 0  1  1 next-to-last-place votes and 2 last-place votes, for a total of
3 votes.
B has 2  0  2 next-to-last-place votes and 1 last-place vote, for a total 
of 3 votes.
C has 0  2  2 next-to-last-place votes and 2 last-place votes, for a total 
of 4 votes.
Delete C and compress the ratings:
Choices:
(AB)
(BA)
No. of Votes:
2  0  1  3
0  2  0  2
The winner is A.
Section 17.1
Voting
819
Approval Voting
Historically, the most recent voting method replaces the “one person, one vote” method
with which we are familiar in the United States with a system that allows a voter to cast
one vote for each of the candidates. There is no limit on the number of candidates for
whom an individual can vote.
The approval voting method allows each voter to cast one vote for each candidate that
meets with his or her approval. The candidate with the most votes is declared the winner.
Approval Voting Method
This is the method used to select the secretary general of the United Nations and is
popular in those countries in which there are many candidates. It was designed, in part, to
prevent the election of minority candidates in multicandidate contests.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

820
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Example
9
Find a winner using approval voting
The Milwaukee Booster Club (7 members) is meeting to decide ways to bring people
to the downtown area, and its members are brainstorming ideas. Here is a list of their
suggestions:
A:
Hold an art show.
B:
Hire a big-time consultant.
C:
Hold a contest.
R:
Advertise on the radio.
N:
Advertise in the newspaper.
Here are the members’ rankings and the number of choices within each ranking that
they intend to vote for.
Choices:
(ABCRN)
(RNCAB)
(NRACB)
(CANRB)
No. of Votes:
1
2
1
3
Intent:
vote for 5
vote for 3
vote for 5
vote for 2
a. What is the maximum number of votes that can be cast?
b. What is the outcome if each voter votes for his or her top three?
c. What is the outcome if each voter votes the number shown by his or her intent? 
Solution
a. Since there are 7 members and 5 choices, the maximum number of possible votes
occurs if every member votes for every choice; namely, 7  5  35.
b.
Total
A:
1
1
3
5
B:
1
1
C:
1
2
3
6
R:
2
1
3
N:
2
1
3
6
We see that advertising in the newspaper (N) and holding a contest (C) is a tie with 
6 votes each.
c.
Total
A:
1
1
3
5
B:
1
1
2
C:
1
2
1
3
7
R:
1
2
1
4
N:
1
2
1
4
We see that holding a contest (C) wins with 7 votes.
We conclude with an example comparing some of the voting methods introduced in
this section. These methods are summarized in Table 17.2.
Example 10 Find a winner—compare methods
The town of Ferndale has four candidates running for mayor: the town barber, Darrell;
the fire chief, Clough; the grocer, Abel; and a homemaker, Belle. A poll of 1,000 of the
voters shows the following results:
Choices:
(DABC)
(CABD)
(CADB)
(BADC)
No. of Votes:
225
190
210
375
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.1
Voting
821
TABLE 17.2
Summary of Voting Methods
Method
Description
Majority Method
Each voter votes for one candidate.
If the number of voters is n and n is even, then the candidate with 
or more 
votes wins.
If the number n is odd, then the candidate with 
or more votes wins.
n 1 1
2
n
2 1 1
Plurality Method
Each voter votes for one candidate.
The candidate receiving the most votes wins.
Borda Count Method
Each voter ranks the candidates.
Each last-place candidate is given 1 point, each next-to-last candidate is given 
2 points, and so on.
The candidate with the highest number of points wins.
Hare Method
Each voter votes for one candidate.
If a candidate receives a majority of the votes, that candidate is the winner.
If no candidate receives a majority, eliminate the candidate with the fewest first-place 
votes and repeat the process until there is a majority candidate, who wins.
Pairwise Comparison
Method
Each voter ranks the candidates.
Each candidate is compared to each of the other candidates. If choice A is preferred 
to choice B, then A receives 1 point. If B is preferred to A, then B receives one 
point. If the candidates tie, then each receives point.
The candidate with the most points wins.
1
2
Tournament Method
This method compares the entire slate of candidates two at a time, in a 
predetermined order.
The first and second candidates are compared, the candidate with the fewer votes 
is eliminated, and the winner is then compared with the third candidate.
These pairwise comparisons continue until the final pairing, which selects the winner.
Approval Method
Each voter casts one vote for all the candidates that meet with his or her approval.
The candidate with the most votes is declared the winner.
a. How many different votes are possible (4 are shown)? What is the vote for the possi-
bilities not shown?
b. Is there a majority winner?
c. Is there a winner using the plurality method?
d. What is the Borda count, and is there a winner using this method?
Solution
a. There are 4!  24 possibilities; there are no votes for the 20 possibilities not shown.
b. A: 0 votes; B: 375 votes; C: 190  210  400 votes; D: 225 votes. A majority is
or more votes; there is no majority winner. 
c. The plurality winner is C (because it has the most votes).
d. We show the Borda count in the following table:
Total
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
225:
3
2
1
4
675
450
225
900
190:
3
2
4
1
570
380
760
190
210:
3
1
4
2
630
210
840
420
375:
3
4
1
2
1,125
1,500
375
750
TOTAL:
3,000
2,540
2,200
2,260
The Borda count declares A the winner.
1,000
2
1 1 5 501
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

822
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe and discuss the plurality
voting method.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe and discuss the Borda count
voting method.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe and discuss the Hare voting
method.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe and discuss the pairwise
comparison method.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe and discuss the tournament
method.
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe and discuss the approval
voting method.
7. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give one example in which you have
participated in voting where the count was tabulated by the
plurality voting method. Your example can be made up or fac-
tual, but you should be specific.
8. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give one example in which you have
participated in voting where the count was tabulated by the
Borda count method. Your example can be made up or factual,
but you should be specific.
9. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give one example in which you have
participated in voting where the count was tabulated by the
Hare voting method. Your example can be made up or factual,
but you should be specific.
10. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give one example in which you have
participated in voting where the count was tabulated by using
the tournament method. Your example can be made up or fac-
tual, but you should be specific.
11. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Give one example in which you have
participated in voting where the count was tabulated by the ap-
proval voting method. Your example can be made up or
factual, but you should be specific.
In voting among three candidates, the outcomes are reported as:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
8
4
3
0
2
5
Use this information to answer the questions in Problems 12–17.
12. What is the total number of votes?
13. How many votes would be necessary for a majority?
14. a. What does the notation (CAB) mean?
b. What does the “5” under (CBA) mean?
15. a. What does the notation (ACB) mean?
b. What does the “4” under (ACB) mean?
16. a. If a person ranks A as their first choice, B as their second
choice, and C last, how would this be written?
b. How many voters have this preference?
17. a. What does the notation (BCA) mean?
b. What does the “0” under (BCA) mean?
In voting among four candidates, the outcomes are reported as:
(ADBC)
(DACB)
(BADC)
(BDCA)
(DCAB)
8
5
3
1
2
Use this information to answer the questions in Problems 18–23.
18. What is the total number of votes?
19. How many votes would be necessary for a majority?
20. a. What does the notation (DACB) mean?
b. What does the “5” under (DACB) mean?
21. a. What does the notation (ADBC) mean?
b. What does the “8” under (ADBC) mean?
22. a. If a person ranks B as his first choice, C as his second
choice, D as his third choice, and A last, how would this be
written?
b. How many voters have this preference?
23. a. How many possibilities are there for voter preferences with
four candidates?
b. Name those possibilities that have 0 voter preferences.
24. Which of the following are examples of a dictatorship?
a. Dad comes home with a surprise for the family—he just
bought tickets for the family to vacation in Hawaii.
b. The choice of selecting the champagne for the toast is left
to the cellar master at the restaurant.
c. The chairperson makes a decision to poll the members of
the committee regarding their opinion about the
impeachment vote.
d. The department chair decides that the meeting will be held
at 4:00 P.M. on Thursday.
25. a. How many different ways can a voter rank 3 candidates 
(no ties are allowed)?
b. How many different ways can a voter rank 4 candidates 
(no ties are allowed)?
c. How many different ways can a voter rank 5 candidates 
(no ties are allowed)?
Level 2
26. a. If there are 10 voters and 5 candidates, how many total
points would there be in a Borda count?
b. If there are 20 voters and 4 candidates, how many total
points would there be in a Borda count?
c. If there are 200 voters and 3 candidates, how many total
points would there be in a Borda count?
Problem Set 17.1
WendellandCarolyn/istockphoto.com
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

27. How many different ways can a voter rank n candidates 
(no ties are allowed)?
28. It can be shown that 
Use this formula to determine how many total points there
would be in a Borda count with n voters and m candidates.
In voting among three candidates, the outcomes are reported as:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
8
4
3
0
2
5
Determine the winner, if any, using the voting methods in Problems
29–34.
29. Majority rule
30. Plurality method
31. Borda count method
32. Hare method
33. Pairwise comparison method
34. Tournament method
35. Twelve board members are voting on after-meeting activities,
and they are asked to check any that they might like. The out-
come of their choices is shown here:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Snacks
✓✓✓✓✓✓
✓✓
✓
✓
Drinks
✓✓
✓✓✓
✓
✓
✓
Travel talk
✓
✓
✓
Speaker
✓✓
✓✓
✓✓✓
✓
✓
What is the outcome using approval voting?
36. Twelve board members are voting on admitting two new
board members. They interview 5 candidates and vote “x” for
an acceptable candidate and no vote for an unacceptable can-
didate. The outcome of their choices is shown here:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
A
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
B
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
C
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
D
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
E
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
What is the outcome using approval voting?
37. In the 2000 race for the governor of Vermont, the state vote
was as follows:
Marilyn Christian
1,054
Howard Dean
148,059
Ruth Dwyer
111,359
Richard Gottlieb
337
Hardy Macia
785
Anthony Pollina
28,116
Phil Stannard
2,148
Joel Williams
1,359
Others
255
TOTAL
293,472
Was there a majority winner in this election, and if so, who
was it?
1 1 2 1 3 1 c1 m 5
m1m 1 12
2
38. In the 2000 race for the 36th Congressional District of
California, the vote was as follows:
Jane Harman
106,975
John Konopka
3,297
Steven Kuykendall
103,142
Matt Ornati
2,078
Daniel Sherman
5,615
TOTAL
221,107
Was there a majority winner in this election, and, if so, who
was it?
Twelve people serve on a board and are considering three alter-
natives: A, B, and C. Here are the choices followed by vote:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
2
4
2
1
2
1
Determine the winner, if any, using the voting methods in Problems
39–44.
39. Majority rule
40. Plurality method
41. Borda count method
42. Hare method
43. Pairwise comparison method
44. Tournament method
Seventeen people serve on a board and are considering 
three alternatives: A, B, and C. Here are the choices followed 
by vote:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
1
3
4
3
5
1
Determine the winner, if any, using the voting methods in Problems
45–50.
45. Majority rule
46. Plurality method
47. Borda count method
48. Hare method
49. Pairwise comparison method
50. Tournament method
Level 3
Suppose your college transcripts show the following distribution 
of grades:
A: 2
B: 6
C: 5
D: 1
F: 0
If all of these grades are in three-unit classes, use this information
to answer the questions in Problems 51–52.
51. a. Which grade is the most common?
b. Which voting method describes how you answered 
part a?
52. a. What is your GPA?
b. Which voting method describes how you answered 
part a?
Section 17.1
Voting
823
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Suppose your college transcripts show the following distribution 
of grades:
A: 14
B: 21
C: 35
D: 5
F: 2
If all of these grades are in three-unit classes, use this information
to answer the questions in Problems 53–54.
53. a. Which grade is the most common?
b. Which voting method describes how you answered part a?
54. a. What is your GPA?
b. Which voting method describes how you answered part a?
In Problems 55–59, consider the following situation. A political party
holds a national convention with 1,100 delegates. At the convention,
five persons (which we will call A, B, C, D, and E) have been nomi-
nated as the party’s presidential candidate. After the speeches and
hoopla, the delegates are asked to rank all five candidates according
to choice. However, before the vote, caucuses have narrowed the
choices down to six different possibilities. The results of the first
ballot are shown (choices, followed by the number of votes):
(ADEBC)
(BEDCA)
(CBEDA)
360
240
200
(DCEBA)
(EBDCA)
(ECDBA)
180
80
40
Answer the following questions and give reasons for your
responses.
55. How many possible rankings are there?
56. a. Is there a majority winner? If so, who?
b. Is there a plurality winner? If so, who?
57. Who would win in a runoff election using the principle 
of eliminating the candidate with the fewest first-place 
votes?
58. Who would win in a runoff election using the principle 
of eliminating the candidate with the most last-place 
votes?
59. What is the Borda count for each person? Who wins the Borda
count?
Problem Solving 3   
60. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
By looking at your answers to
Problems 55–59, who would you say should be declared 
the winner? Look at the title of the next section. Relate 
your answer to this question for the need to study the next 
section.
824
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
If a candidate receives a majority of the first-place votes, then that candidate should
be declared the winner.
Majority Criterion
Only a Borda count method can violate this criterion. Consider the following example.
17.2  Voting Dilemmas
Principles in social choice theory do not behave in the same fashion as principles of
mathematics. In mathematics, a correctly stated principle has no exceptions. On the
other hand, we frequently find exceptions to voting principles. In the last section,
we considered four reasonable and often-used voting methods. In this section, we
will consider four voting principles that most would agree are desirable, and 
then we will show that all of the voting methods will fail one or more of the princi-
ples. We will call these fair voting principles: majority criterion, Condorcet crite-
rion, monotonicity criterion, and irrelevant alternatives criterion. Let us consider
these voting principles, one at a time.
Majority Criterion
The first and most obvious criterion is called the majority criterion.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a. Which organization is selected for collective bargaining?
b. Does the choice in part a violate the majority criterion?
Solution
a. Here is a tally of the Borda count: 
Total
A
B
C
A
B
C
(ABC) 16:
3
2
1
48
32
16
(BCA) 8:
1
3
2
8
24
16
(CBA) 7:
1
2
3
7
14
21
TOTAL:
63
70
53
The highest Borda count number goes to choice B, the American Federation of
Teachers.
b. Choice A received 16 votes, which is a majority of the 31 votes that were cast, so
the Borda count violates the majority criterion.
Section 17.2
Voting Dilemmas
825
Example 1 shows that the Borda count method can violate the majority criterion. How-
ever, all the other methods must satisfy this criterion. Suppose that a candidate X is the first
choice for more than half the voters. It follows that X will have more first-place votes than
any other single candidate and must win by the plurality method. If the Hare method is used,
then X would always have at least the votes that it started with, and since that is more than
half the votes, X could never be eliminated and would wind up the winner. And finally, since
X has the majority of the votes in each of its pairwise matchups, X would win in each of those
matchups. So no other candidate can win as many pairs as X does, so X wins the election.
Thus we conclude that the Borda count method presents a dilemma. Although it
takes into account voters’ preferences by having all candidates ranked, a candidate with a
majority of first-place votes can lose an election!
If a candidate is favored when compared one-on-one with every other candidate, then
that candidate should be declared the winner.
Condorcet Criterion
Before most major elections in the United States, we hear the results of polls for each
of the political parties pairing candidates and telling preferences in a one-on-one election.
Is this a valid way of considering the candidates? Consider the following example.
Example
1
Find a winner using the majority criterion
The South Davis Faculty Association is using the Borda count method to vote for its col-
lective bargaining representative. Members’ choices are the All Faculty Association (A),
American Federation of Teachers (B), and California Teachers Association (C). Here
are the results of the voting:
Choices:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
No. of Votes:
16
0
0
8
0
7
Condorcet Criterion
About a decade after Borda proposed his counting procedure, the mathematician Marquis
de Condorcet became interested in some of the apparent dilemmas raised by the Borda
count methods. He proposed a head-to-head election to rank the candidates. The candidate
who wins all the one-to-one matchups is the Condorcet candidate. The Condorcet crite-
rion asserts that the Condorcet candidate should win the election. Some elections do not
yield a Condorcet candidate because none of the candidates can win over all the others.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

826
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
*This is for A with B; this means that A and B are matched.
Example
2
Compare the Condorcet criterion with other methods
The seniors at Weseltown High School are voting on where to go for their senior trip.
They are deciding on Angel Falls (A), Bend Canyon (B), Cedar Lake (C), or Danger
Gap (D). The results of the preferences are:
Choices:
(DABC)
(ACBD)
(BCAD)
(CBDA)
(CBAD)
No. of Votes:
120
100
90
80
45
a. Who is the Condorcet candidate?
b. Is there a majority winner? If not, is there a plurality winner? Does this violate the
Condorcet criterion?
c. Who wins the Borda count? Does this violate the Condorcet criterion?
d. Who wins using the Hare method? Does this violate the Condorcet criterion?
e. Who wins using the pairwise comparison method? Does this violate the Condorcet
criterion?
Solution
a. The best way to examine the one-on-one matchups is to construct a table with all
possibilities listed as the row and column headings.*
A
B
C
D
A
—
*
B
*
—
C
—
D
—
(DABC)(ACBD)
(BCAD)(CBDA)(CBAD)
1442443
14444244443
A wins.
B wins.
Look at the line right under the preferences.
120  100  220
90  80  45  215
A wins, since 220  215, so we fill in these entries in the table.
A
B
C
D
A
—
A
B
A
—
C
—
D
—
We similarly fill in the rest of the table by comparing the items, one-on-one:
A with C:
A: 120  100  220; C: 90  80  45  215; A wins.
A with D:
A: 100  90  45  235; D: 120  80  200; A wins.
B with C:
B: 120  90  210; C: 100  80  45  225; C wins.
B with D:
B: 100  90  80  45  315; D: 120; B wins.
C with D:
C: 100  90  80  45  315; D: 120; C wins.
We complete the table as shown:
A
B
C
D
A
—
A
A
A
B
A
—
C
B
C
A
C
—
C
D
A
B
C
—
We see that the Condorcet choice is A (Angel Falls) since the column headed A (and
the row headed A) each have all entries of A.
Historical
Marquis de Condorcet
(1743–1794)
Condorcet, also known as Marie
Nicolas de Caritat, was a
mathematician who wrote an
important book on probability. 
He was a friend of Anne Robert
Turgot, a French economist and
Controller General of Finance in
France, and was considerably
influenced by him. He is known
for the Condorcet paradox, which
points out that it is possible that 
a majority prefers A over B, and B
over C, and yet the majority
prefers C over A. In mathematical
terms, “majority prefers” is not a
transitive operation. Condorcet
died in a prison cell on March 27,
1794. He was imprisoned for his
political beliefs, and it is not
known whether he died from
natural causes, suicide, or was
murdered.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b. The first-place votes are:
A:
100
B:
90
C:
80  45  125
D:
120
Since there were 435 votes cast, a majority would be
There is no majority. The winner of the plurality vote is C, Cedar Lake. This exam-
ple shows that the plurality method can violate the Condorcet criterion.
c. The Borda count is shown in the following table:
Total
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
120:
3
2
1
4
360
240
120
480
100:
4
2
3
1
400
200
300
100
90:
2
4
3
1
180
360
270
90
80:
1
3
4
2
80
240
320
160
45:
2
3
4
1
90
135
180
45
TOTAL:
1,110
1,175
1,190
875
Location C, Cedar Lake, wins the Borda count. This example shows that the Borda
count can violate the Condorcet criterion.
d. Using the Hare method, there is no majority, so we eliminate the candidate with the
fewest first-place votes; this is choice B. The remaining tally is
A: 100
C: 90  80  45  215
D: 120
Since a majority vote is 216, there is still no majority, so we now eliminate A. The
result now is:
C: 100  90  80  45  315
D: 120
The declared winner is C, Cedar Lake. This example demonstrates that the Hare
method can violate the Condorcet criterion.
e. For the pairwise comparison method, we can use the table of pairings we had in part
a to award the points:
A is favored over B, C, and D, giving A 3 points.
B is favored over D, giving B 1 point.
C is favored over B and D, giving C 2 points.
D is not favored. 
The choice is A, Angel Falls. Note that if a certain choice is favored over all other
candidates, then this candidate will have the largest point value. Thus, the pairwise
comparison method can never violate the Condorcet criterion.
435  1
2
 218 votes
Section 17.2
Voting Dilemmas
827
Monotonicity Criterion
Another property of voting has to do with elections that are held more than once. Histori-
cally, there have been many pairings of the same two candidates, and at a personal level,
we are often part of a process in which a nonbinding vote is taken before all the discus-
sion takes place. Such a vote is known as a straw vote. It would seem obvious that if a
winning candidate in the first election gained strength before the second election, then
that candidate should win the second election. A statement of this property is called the
monotonicity criterion.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As obvious as this criterion may seem, the following example introduces another
voting dilemma by showing it is possible for the winner of the first election to gain addi-
tional support before a second election, and then lose that second election.
828
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Example
3
Use the monotonicity criterion
In 1995 the 105th International Olympic Committee (IOC) met in Budapest to select the
2002 Winter Olympic site. The cities in the running were Québec (Q), Salt Lake City
(L), Ostersund (T) and Sion (S). Consider the following fictional account of how the
voting might have been conducted. The voting takes place over a two-day period using
the Hare method. The first day, the 87 members of the IOC take a nonbinding vote, and
then on the second day they take a binding vote.
a. On the first day, the rankings of the IOC members were
(TLSQ)
(LQTS)
(QSTL)
(TQSL)
(TSLQ)
21
24
30
6
6
What are the results of the election using the Hare method for the first (nonbinding)
day of voting?
b. On the evening of the first day of voting, representatives from Salt Lake City offered
bribes to the 12 members with the bottom votes. They were able to convince these IOC
members to move Québec to the top of their list, because, after all, Québec won the day’s
straw votes anyway. Now for the second day, the rankings of the IOC committee were:
(TLSQ)
(LQTS)
(QSTL)
(QTSL)
(QTSL)
21
24
30
6
6
What are the results of the election using the Hare method for the second (binding)
day of voting?
Solution
a. A majority is 
On the first day, Round 1:
T: 21  6  6  33
L: 24
Q: 30
S: 0
No city has a majority (44) of votes, so Sion is eliminated from the voting.
Round 2:
T: 21  6  6  33
L: 24
Q: 30
No city has a majority, so now Salt Lake City is eliminated from the voting.
Round 3:
T: 21  6  6  33
Q: 24  30  54
Québec has a majority of the votes and is the winner from the first (nonbinding) day
of voting using the Hare method.
b. On the second day, Round 1:
T: 21
L: 24
Q: 30  6  6  42
S: 0
No city has a majority (44) of votes, so Sion is eliminated from the voting.
87 1 1
2
5 44 votes.
A candidate who wins a first election and then gains additional support, without
losing any of the original support, should also win a second election.
Monotonicity Criterion
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Round 2:
T: 21
L: 24
Q: 30  6  6  42
No city has a majority, so now Ostersund (T) is eliminated from the voting.
Round 3:
L: 21  24  45 votes
Q: 30  6  6  42 
Salt Lake City has a majority of the votes and is the winner from the second (binding)
day of voting using the Hare method.
Section 17.2
Voting Dilemmas
829
As you can see from this remarkable example, it is possible for the winning candi-
date on a first vote (Québec) to receive more votes and end up losing the election! We see
(from Example 3) that the Hare method can violate the monotonicity criterion. It is also
possible to find examples showing that the pairwise comparison method can also violate
the monotonicity criterion. The plurality and Borda count methods cannot violate the mo-
notonicity criterion.
TABLE 17.3
2000 U.S. Presidential Election Results
Candidate
Party
Vote
Percentage
Electoral College Vote
Harry Browne
Libertarian
386,024
0.37
0
Pat Buchanan
Reform
448,750
0.42
0
George W. Bush Republican
50,456,167
47.88
271
Al Gore
Democrat
50,996,277
48.39
267
Ralph Nader
Green
2,864,810
2.72
0
14 others
238,300
0.23
0
TOTAL
105,390,328
538
Suppose the president were selected by popular vote (rather than the Electoral Col-
lege). As close as the election was, if we use the numbers in Table 17.3, we see that the
winner would have been Al Gore. Now, suppose that another election were held, and this
time Ralph Nader dropped out before the vote. Since Nader really had no chance of win-
ning, we might conclude this action should not have any effect on the outcome. But as
you can see from these numbers, such is not the case. The Nader voters could have swung
the election either way. We might consider this a voting dilemma because it would vio-
late the following criterion, called the irrelevant alternatives criterion.
If a candidate is declared the winner of an election, and in a second election one or
more of the other candidates is removed, then the previous winner should still be
declared the winner.
Irrelevant Alternatives Criterion
Irrelevant Alternatives Criterion
In the controversial 2000 presidential election, there was much talk about the final vote
of the election. Although there is no such thing as an official final figure, the numbers in
Table 17.3 are an aggregate of state numbers that appear to be final.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

830
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Example
4
Illustrate the irrelevant alternatives criterion
The mathematics department (22 members) has interviewed five candidates for a new
instructor position. They are Alicia (A), Benito (B), Carmelia (C), Doug (D), and Erin
(E). There are 
possible rankings, but the voting process has narrowed the vot-
ing to seven possible rankings:
(BDCEA) (BDEAC) (EDACB) (ACEBD) (DECBA) (CBDEA) (CEDBA)
6
4
4
4
2
1
1
Just before the voting, Carmelia withdraws from the hiring process.
a. Is there a majority winner? If not, who is the plurality winner?
b. Who is the Borda count winner?
c. Who wins using the Hare method?
d. Use the pairwise comparison method to determine the winner.
e. Suppose one of the department members convinces the others that voting should take
place without excluding Carmelia. Who wins the pairwise comparison method?
Solution
If we delete Carmelia from the process, the vote becomes:
(BDEA)
(BDEA)
(EDAB)
(AEBD)
(DEBA)
(BDEA)
(EDBA)
6
4
4
4
2
1
1
We now combine those shown in color (6  4  1  11) to record the vote as:
(BDEA)
(EDAB)
(AEBD)
(DEBA)
(EDBA)
11
4
4
2
1
a. The first place votes are
A: 4
B: 11
D: 2
E: 4  1  5
A majority is 
so there is no majority winner. We see that Benito is the
plurality winner.
b. The Borda count numbers are
Total
A
B
D
E
A
B
D
E
11:
1
4
3
2
11
44
33
22
4:
2
1
3
4
8
4
12
16
4:
4
2
1
3
16
8
4
12
2:
1
2
4
3
2
4
8
6
1:
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
TOTAL:
38
62
60
60
Benito is the Borda count winner.
c. The fewest first-place votes are for Doug, so when he is eliminated for the second
round, the results of this round are
A: 4
B: 11
E: 4  2  1  7
There is still no majority, so on this round Alicia is eliminated. The third-round
results are:
B: 11
E: 4  4  2  1  11
22
2 1 1 5 12,
5! 5 120
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

There is a tie. The chairperson could break the tie, or another method could be cho-
sen to break the tie.
d. A over B: 4  4  8; and B over A: 11  2  1  14; B wins 1 point.
A over D: 4; and D over A: 11  4  2  1  18; D wins 1 point.
A over E: 4; and E over A: 11  4  2  1  18; E wins 1 point.
B over D: 11  4  15; and D over B: 4  2  1  7; B wins 1 point.
B over E: 11; and E over B: 4  4  2  1  11; Tie; B wins 12 point and E wins
12 point.
D over E: 11  2  13; and E over D: 4  4  1  9; D wins 1 point.
The tally of points is
A: 0
B: 
points
D: 2 points
E: 
points
Benito is the winner using the pairwise comparison method.
e. From the solutions to parts a–d, it certainly appears that Benito should be the victor. But
what effect did Carmelia’s withdrawal from the process have on the outcome? The
irrelevant alternatives criterion says it should have no effect. However, this example
shows us otherwise. Consider the original rankings, and calculate the winner using
the pairwise comparison method.
A over B: 4  4  8; and B over A: 6  4  2  1  1  14; B wins 1 point.
A over C: 4  4  4  12; and C over A: 6  2  1  1  10; A wins 1 point.
A over D: 4; and D over A: 6  4  4  2  1  1  18; D wins 1 point.
A over E: 4; and E over A: 6  4  4  2  1  1  18; E wins 1 point.
B over C: 6  4  10; and C over B: 4  4  2  1  1  12; C wins 1 point.
B over D: 6  4  4  1  15; and D over B: 4  2  1  7; B wins 1 point.
B over E: 6  4  1  11; and E over B: 4  4  2  1  11; Tie; B wins 12
point and E wins 12 point.
C over D: 4  1  1  6; and D over C: 6  4  4  2  16; D wins 1 point.
C over E: 6  4  1  1  12; and E over C: 4  4  2  10; C wins 1 point.
D over E: 6  4  2  1  13; and E over D: 4  4  1  9; D wins 1 point.
The tally of points is
A: 1
B: 
points
C: 2 points
D: 3 points
E: 
points
Doug is the winner using the pairwise comparison method, and this violates the irrele-
vant alternatives criterion.
11
2
21
2
11
2
21
2
Section 17.2
Voting Dilemmas
831
An outstanding factual example illustrating this dilemma occurred in the 1991
Louisiana gubernatorial race. The candidates were the incumbent Governor “Buddy”
Roemer and his challengers, former governor Edwin Edwards and David Duke. Now,
David Duke was a former leader of the Ku Klux Klan, and the former governor was in-
dicted for corruption, so it is reasonable to assume that Roemer would have beaten either
of his opponents in a one-on-one race, but instead he came in last.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem
We have now considered four criteria that would seem to be desirable properties of any
voting system. We refer to these four criteria as the fairness criteria.
832
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Spend a few minutes with
these criteria. Read, then
reread; create some small
examples and test them.
Majority criterion
If a candidate receives a majority of the first-place votes, then that candidate should
be declared the winner.
Condorcet criterion
If a candidate is favored when compared one-on-one with every other candidate, then
that candidate should be declared the winner.
Monotonicity criterion
A candidate who wins a first election and then gains additional support, without
losing any of the original support, should also win a second election.
Irrelevant alternatives criterion
If a candidate is declared the winner of an election, and in a second election one or
more of the other candidates is removed, then the previous winner should still be
declared the winner.
Fairness Criteria
We compare these criteria with the voting methods we have considered in Table 17.4.
TABLE 17.4
Comparison of Voting Methods and Fairness Criteria
Voting Method: 
Plurality
Hare
Borda Count
Pairwise Comparison
Majority criterion:
Satisfied
Satisfied
Not satisfied 
(See Example 1)
Satisfied
Condorcet criterion:
Not satisfied 
(Example 2b)
Not satisfied 
(Example 2d)
Not satisfied 
(Example 2c)
Satisfied
Monotonicity 
criterion:
Satisfied
Not satisfied 
(Example 3)
Satisfied
Not satisfied
Irrelevant alternatives
criterion:
Not satisfied
Not satisfied
Not satisfied
Not satisfied 
(Example 4)
In 1951, the economist Kenneth Arrow (1921– ) proved that there is exactly one
method for voting that satisfies all four of these principles, and this method is a dictator-
ship. Stated in another way, it is known as Arrow’s paradox: Perfect democratic voting is,
not just in practice but in principle, impossible.
Essentially this says
that there is no perfect
voting method.
Example
5
Compare voting methods
In the voting for the 2004 Olympics site, five cities were in the running: Athens (A),
Buenos Aires (B), Cape Town (C), Rome (R), and Stockholm (S). Four rounds of vot-
ing by the 107 IOC members are summarized here:
City
Round #1
Round #2
Round #3
Round #4
A:
32
38
52
66
B:
16
C:
16
22
20
R:
23
28
35
41
S:
20
19
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Who wins by the
a. majority plurality methods?
b. Hare method?
c. pairwise comparisons method?
(Note: The voters’ rankings are not available, so we can’t do the Borda count.)
Solution
a. A majority would require 
votes. There is no majority. The plurality vote
goes to Athens.
b. The Hare method eliminates the choice with the smallest number of first-place votes.
There is a tie (16), so a runoff election is held between Buenos Aires and Cape Town.
Suppose the result of this election is B: 45, C: 62, so Buenos Aires is eliminated from
round 2. In the round 2 votes, there is no majority, so Stockholm is eliminated. The
results from round 3 also show no majority, so Cape Town is eliminated. In round 
4 voting, the majority choice is Athens.
c. For the pairwise matchings, A wins 4 points because it has more votes than any of
the other choices. No other choice can beat 4 points, so Athens is the choice.
107 1 1
2
5 54
/
Section 17.2
Voting Dilemmas
833
The previous example illustrates that it is not necessary to have a vote with contra-
dictions. It is possible to satisfy all of the fairness criteria. However, the following exam-
ple illustrates a situation in which any of the candidates A, B, or C could be declared the
winner using the tournament method!
Example
6
Find a winner using the tournament method
Consider the following election:
Choices:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
No. of Votes:
1
0
0
1
1
0
Determine the winner using the tournament method.
Solution
The pairing AB gives A one point; the pairing AC gives C one point; and
the pairing BC gives B one point. All three are tied in points.
A
A
B
A
C
B
B
2:1
C
C
1:2
B
C
2:1
A
C
2:1
B
1:2
A
1:2
C wins
B wins
A wins
However, if we play this as a tournament, we see that any of A, B, or C could win, de-
pending on the initial pairing. This shows that there is tremendous power in the hands
of the tournament director or committee chair who has the opportunity to set the agenda,
if the group choice is to be made using a tournament (pairwise) voting method.
Different agendas may
produce different
winners. This is called
the agenda effect.
A variation of the agenda effect is insincere voting, or the offering of amendments
with the purpose of changing an election. Consider the following example.
Assume that Tom, Ann, and Linda each have the choice of voting on whether to lower
the drinking age to 18. The current law sets the drinking age at 21. Voting against the new
law (age 18) means that the old law (age 21) will prevail. Let’s assume that Tom and Ann
are in favor of the new law, but Linda is against it. Here is a table of their preferences:
First Choice
Second Choice
Tom:
new law (age 18)
old law (age 21)
Ann:
new law (age 18)
old law (age 21)
Linda:
old law (age 21)
new law (age 18)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Let’s also assume that this law will pass or fail, depending on the outcome of the
votes of these three people. If the vote is taken now, all three persons know the vote will
be 2 for the new law and 1 against the new law. However, Linda decides to defeat the new
law by insincere voting, and she introduces an amendment that she knows Tom would
like most of all, but Ann likes least of all. Suppose that Linda knows Tom would like to
have no law regarding drinking, but that Ann would find that offensive. Linda offers an
(insincere) amendment (no age limit). Now here are the choices:
First Choice
Second Choice
Third Choice
Tom:
amendment (no age)
new law (age 18)
old law (age 21)
Ann:
new law (age 18)
old law (age 21)
amendment (no age)
Linda:
old law (age 21)
amendment (no age)
new law (age 18)
The vote is taken first for the amendment, and it passes with a vote of 2 to 1 because
Tom votes for it and Linda votes insincerely by voting for the amendment. Now, the vote
on the floor is for no age limitation or for the old law. Tom votes for no age limitation and
Linda and Ann vote for the old law, which carries by a vote of 2 to 1.
What does this say? If you are sitting through a meeting conducted by Robert’s Rules
of Order, it may be better to enter the more preferred outcomes at a later stage of the dis-
cussion. The chances of success are better when there are fewer remaining votes.
There is a curious possibility that seems to violate the transitive law in mathematics.
The transitive law states:
If A beats B, and B beats C, then A should beat C.
Example 6 violates this law and leads to a paradox. Notice that A beats B by a vote of 2
to 1; B beats C by a vote of 2 to 1. The transitive law says that A should beat C, but that is
NOT the case! C beats A by a vote of 2 to 1. This paradox was first described by Marquis
de Condorcet. He wrote a treatise, Essay on the Application of Analysis to the Probability
of Majority Decisions, in 1785, and he described this paradox, which today is known as
Condorcet’s paradox or the paradox of voting.
We now state the result known as Arrow’s impossibility theorem, which Kenneth
Arrow proved in 1951.
834
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
No social choice rule satisfies all of the following conditions.
1. Unrestricted domain
Any set of rankings is possible; if there are n candidates,
then there are n! possible rankings.
2. Decisiveness
Given any set of individual rankings, the method produces 
a winner.
3. Symmetry and transitivity
The voting system should be symmetric and 
transitive over the set of all outcomes.
4. Independence of irrelevant alternatives If a voter prefers A to B with C as a
possible choice, then the voter still prefers A to B when C is not a possible choice.
5. Pareto principle
If each voter prefers A over B, then the group chooses A over B.
6. There should be no dictator.
Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem
We conclude with an example that forces “everyone to get along” because everyone
wins!
Example
7
Illustrate Arrows impossibility theorem
Example 5 used the historical vote of the International Olympic Committee to select the
site for the 2004 Olympics. Remember, there were five cities in the running: Athens (A),
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Buenos Aires (B), Cape Town (C), Rome (R), and Stockholm (S). In this example, we
replace the actual vote with a fictitious preference schedule:
Choices:
(ARSCB) (BSRCA) (CBSRA) (RCSBA) (SBRCA) (SCRBA)
No. of Votes:
36
24
20
18
8
4
a. How many preference schedules received 0 votes?
b. Who is the majority plurality winner?
c. What is the Borda count, and who is the winner from this method?
d. Who is the winner using the Hare method?
e. Who wins from the pairwise comparison method?
f. Suppose there is a runoff in which the top two contenders of the plurality method
face each other. (What, you say . . . we have not previously considered this method!
You are right, but we didn’t want one of the cities to feel left out.)
Solution
a. Since there are 5 cities, there are 
possible prefer-
ence schedules. Since we have shown 6 of them, it follows that there are 114 that
received 0 votes.
b. There are 110 votes, so a majority is 
votes; there is no majority. The
plurality winner is Athens (A), with 36 votes.
c. We set up a table for the Borda count:
Total
A
B
C
R
S
A
B
C
R
S
36:
5
1
2
4
3
180
36
72
144
108
24:
1
5
2
3
4
24
120
48
72
96
20:
1
4
5
2
3
20
80
100
40
60
18:
1
2
4
5
3
18
36
72
90
54
8:
1
4
2
3
5
8
32
16
24
40
4:
1
2
4
3
5
4
8
16
12
20
TOTAL:
254
312
324
382
378
The Borda count winner is Rome (R).
d. There is no majority winner; the fewest first-place votes are for Stockholm, so the
second-round vote is
Athens:
36
Buenos Aires:
24  8  32
Cape Town:
20  4  24
Rome:
18
The least number of votes is for Rome, so that city is eliminated. The third-round vote is
Athens:
36
Buenos Aires:
24  8  32
Cape Town:
20  18  4  42
The least number of votes for this round is for Buenos Aires, so the final-round votes are
Athens:
36
Cape Town:
24  20  18  8  4  74
The Hare method winner is Cape Town (C).
e. For the pairwise comparison method, there are 
matchups. The vote is (the
details are left for you)
A: 0 points
R: 3 points
B: 1 point
S: 4 points
C: 2 points
Stockholm (S) is the winner from the pairwise comparison method.
(5) (4)
2
 10
110/2 1 1 5 56
5! 5 5 3 4 3 3 3 2 3 1 5 120
/
Section 17.2
Voting Dilemmas
835
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

f. A faces off against B:
A: 36
B: 24  20  18  8  4  74
Buenos Aires (B) wins the election.
836
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Admittedly, the numbers used in Example 7 were contrived to make a point, but never-
theless this example shows that we used five different common voting procedures to come
up with five different winners. You can see that those with the power to select the voting
method may have the power to determine the outcome of the election.
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the majority criterion?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the Condorcet criterion? 
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the monotonicity 
criterion?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the irrelevant alternatives
criterion?
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What are the fairness criteria? 
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
If you could have only one of 
the fairness criteria, which one would you choose and 
why?
7. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
If you could have only two 
of the fairness criteria, which ones would you choose
and why?
8. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is insincere voting?
9. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Why is Arrow’s impossibility 
theorem important?
10. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the Pareto principle?
11. The South Davis Faculty Association is using the Hare method
to vote for its collective bargaining representative. Member’s
choices are the All Faculty Association (A), American Federa-
tion of Teachers (B), and California Teachers Association (C).
Here are the results of the voting:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
11
1
3
6
3
7
a. Which organization is selected for collective bargaining
using the Hare method?
b. Does the choice in part a violate the majority
criterion? 
12. An election with three candidates has the following rankings:
(ABC)
(BCA)
(CBA)
5
4
3
a. Is there a majority? If not, who wins the plurality
vote?
b. Who wins using the Borda count method?
c. Does the Borda method violate the majority criterion?
13. An election with three candidates has the following rankings:
(BAC)
(ACB)
(CAB)
5
6
3
a. Is there a majority? If not, who wins the plurality 
vote?
b. Who wins using the Borda count method?
c. Does the Borda method violate the majority criterion?
14. The South Davis Faculty Association is using the Borda 
count method to vote for its collective bargaining unit. 
Member’s choices are the All Faculty Association (A),
© Michael Newman/PhotoEdit
Problem Set 17.2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

American Federation of Teachers (B), and California Teachers
Association (C). Here are the results of the voting:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
16
0
0
5
0
9
a. Is there a majority? If not, who wins the plurality 
vote?
b. Who wins using the Borda count method?
c. Does the Borda method violate the majority criterion?
15. Consider the following voting situation:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
2
0
0
2
1
0
Notice that there is no winner using the majority or plurality
rules. 
a. Who would win in a runoff election by dropping the choice
with the fewest first-place votes?
b. Who would win if B withdraws before the election?
c. Does this violate any of the fairness criteria?
16. Consider the following voting situation:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CAB)
(CBA)
9
0
9
0
0
7
Notice that there is no winner using the majority or plurality rules.
a. Who would win in a runoff election by dropping the choice
of the fewest first-place votes?
b. Who would win if C withdraws before the election?
c. Does this violate any of the fairness criteria?
17. The philosophy department is selecting a chairperson, and the
candidates are Andersen (A), Bailey (B), and Clark (C). Here
are the preferences of the 27 department members:
(ABC)
(BCA)
(BAC)
(CAB)
8
5
8
6
a. Who is the Condorcet candidate, if there is one?
b. Is there a majority winner? If not, who wins the plurality
vote? Does this violate the Condorcet criterion?
18. The philosophy department is selecting a chairperson, and the
candidates are Andersen (A), Bailey (B), and Clark (C). Here
are the preferences of the 27 department members:
(ABC)
(BCA)
(BAC)
(CAB)
8
5
8
6
a. Who is the Condorcet candidate, if there is one?
b. Who wins according to the Borda count method? Does this
violate the Condorcet criterion?
19. The Adobe School District is hiring a vice principal and has
interviewed four candidates: Andrew (A), Bono (B), Carol (C),
and Davy (D). The hiring committee has indicated their
preferences:
(ACDB)
(CBAD)
(BCDA)
(DBCA)
7
5
3
2
a. Who is the winner using the plurality method?
b. Suppose that Carol drops out of the running before the vote
is taken. Who is the winner using the plurality method?
c. Do the results of parts a and b violate the irrelevant
alternatives criterion?
Level 2
The seniors at Weseltown High School are voting for where to go
for their senior trip. They are deciding on Angel Falls (A), Bend
Canyon (B), Cedar Lake (C), or Danger Gap (D). The results of
the preferences are:
(DABC)
(ACBD)
(BCAD)
(CBDA)
(CBAD)
30
25
22
20
11
Use this information for Problems 20–24.
20. Who is the Condorcet candidate, if there is one?
21. Is there a majority winner? If not, is there a plurality winner?
Does this violate the Condorcet criterion?
22. Who wins the Borda count? Does this violate the Condorcet
criterion?
23. Who wins using the Hare method? Does this violate the
Condorcet criterion?
24. Who wins using the pairwise comparison method? Does this
violate the Condorcet criterion?
The seniors at Weseltown High School are voting for where to go
for their senior trip. They are deciding on Angel Falls (A), Bend
Canyon (B), Cedar Lake (C), or Danger Gap (D). The results of
the preferences are:
(DABC)
(ACBD)
(BCAD)
(CBDA)
(CBAD)
80
45
30
10
50
Use this information for Problems 25–29.
25. Who is the Condorcet candidate?
26. Is there a majority winner? If not, is there a plurality winner?
Does this violate the Condorcet criterion?
27. Who wins the Borda count? Does this violate the Condorcet
criterion?
28. Who wins using the Hare method? Does this violate the
Condorcet criterion?
29. Who wins using the pairwise comparison method? Does this
violate the Condorcet criterion?
A focus group of 33 people for ABC TV were asked to rank the
government spending priorities of education (E), military spending
(M), health care (H), immigration (I), and lowering taxes (T). Here
are the preferences:
(EIHTM)
(MIEHT)
(HMETI)
(TMEIH)
15
6
6
6
Use this information to answer Problems 30–35.
30. Who is the winner using the pairwise comparison method?
31. Who is the winner using a Borda count?
32. Suppose that the losing issues of health care and lowering
taxes are removed from the table. Now, who is the winner
using the pairwise comparison method? Does this violate 
the irrelevant alternatives criterion?
Section 17.2
Voting Dilemmas
837
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

33. Suppose that the losing issues of health care and lowering
taxes are removed from the table. Now, who is the winner
using the Borda count method? Does this violate the 
irrelevant alternatives criterion?
34. Suppose that the losing issues of health care, lowering taxes,
and immigration are removed from the table. Now, who is the
winner using the pairwise comparison method? Does the
pairwise comparison method violate the irrelevant 
alternatives criterion?
35. Suppose that the losing issues of health care, lowering 
taxes, and immigration are removed from the table. Now, 
who is the winner using the Borda count method? Does
the Borda count method violate the irrelevant alternatives 
criterion?
HISTORICAL QUEST
In 1988 the 94th International
Olympic Committee (IOC) met in Seoul to select the 1994
Winter Olympics site. The cities in the running were
Anchorage (A), Lillehammer (L), Ostersund (T), and Sofia (S).
Consider the following fictional account of how the voting
might have been conducted. The voting takes place over a two-
day period using the Hare method. The first day the 93 mem-
bers of the IOC take a nonbinding vote, and then on the second
day they take a binding vote. Use this information for
Problems 36 and 37.
36. On the first day, the rankings of the IOC members were:
(TLSA)
(LATS)
(ASLT)
(ASTL)
(STLA)
31
35
20
4
3
What is the result of the election using the Hare method for the
first (nonbinding) day of voting?
37. On the evening of the first day of voting (see Problem 36), rep-
resentatives from Ostersund wined, dined, and sweet-talked the
7 members with the bottom votes. They were able to convince
seven of those IOC members to move Lillehammer to the top
of their list. After all, they argued, Lillehammer won the straw
vote anyway—everyone likes to vote for the winner. Also, one
of the (TLSA) voters changed to (LTSA). The second day, the
rankings of the IOC committee were:
(TLSA)
(LTSA)
(LATS)
(ASLT)
(LAST)
(LSTA)
30
1
35
20
4
3
What is the result of the election using the Hare method for the
second binding day of voting? Does this vote count violate the
monotonicity criterion?
HISTORICAL QUEST
In 1993 the 101st International
Olympic Committee met in Monaco to select the 2000 Winter
Olympics site. The cities in the running were Beijing (B),
AP/Wide World Photos
Berlin (L), Istanbul (I), Manchester (M), and Sydney (S).
Suppose we look at their voting preferences:
(BLIMS)
(LBSIM)
(IBLSM)
(MSBLI)
32
3
5
8
(LSBIM)
(SBLMI)
(IMSBL)
(MBSLI)
6
30
2
3
Use this information to answer the questions in Problems 38 and 39.
38. a. Is there a majority winner? If not, which city wins the
plurality vote?
b. Find the results of the election using the Hare method. Just
after the third vote, one of the committee members voting for
Manchester was accused of cheating and was disqualified.
Because of that scandal, one member admitted she was vot-
ing insincerely, and changed her vote from Manchester to
Sydney. What is the result of using the Hare method?
c. Do the results of parts a and b violate any of the fairness
criteria?
39. a. Find the result of the election using a Borda count.
b. Using the result of part a, determine whether any of the
fairness criteria have been violated.
40. The U.S. president is elected with a vote of the Electoral
College. However, if the vote were conducted using the
Hare method, what would be the outcome? Use the data
in Table 17.3, and assume that the second choice of the
Browne voters is Gore, and the second choice of the Buchanan
voters is Bush. Assume that the second choice of 80% of the
Nader voters is Gore and for 20% of them the second choice 
is Bush. Finally, assume that the other voters split the second
choice 50%–50% between Gore and Bush. Who is the winner
of this election?
41. HISTORICAL QUEST
Article 7 of the French constitution
states, “The President of the Republic is elected by an absolute
majority of votes cast. If this is not obtained on the first ballot,
a second round of voting must be held, to take place two Sun-
days later. Only two candidates may stand for election on the
second ballot, these being the two that obtained the greatest
number of votes in the first round.”
The 2002 French presidential election incumbent president
Jacques Chirac (center-right political party) and Prime Minister
Musee de la Revolution Francaise, Vizille, France/The Bridgeman Art Library International
838
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
ILL_P17_007N
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Lionel Jospin (Socialist party) were shoo-ins for the second
round, but the strength of the extreme right candidate Jean-Marie
Le Pen was unanticipated. Here are the results of the first-round
voting (rounded to the nearest percent):
Jacques Chirac:
20%
Jean-Marie Le Pen:
17%
Lionel Jospin:
16%
Others:
47%
These percents are of the votes cast. It was estimated that 28%
of the voters abstained.
a. Who are the two candidates in the runoff election?
b. Jean-Marie Le Pen is described as a racist. Here is a state-
ment from À la française forum:
“Today, the strongest feeling I have is SHAME. For the
first time in my life, I’m ashamed to be French. All of the
values that I believe in (culture, tolerance, integration . . . )
have been scorned and denounced by 17% of my
country’s voters.” 
Comment on this quotation in light of the fairness criteria.
c. The vote in the second round of the election was:
Jacques Chirac:
82%
Jean-Marie Le Pen:
18%
It was estimated that 19% of the voters abstained for 
this ballot. Give at least one possible change in the 
voting preferences to account for both the first and the
second votes.
A group of fun-loving people have decided to play a practical joke
on one of their friends, but they can’t decide which friend, Alice
(A), Betty (B), or Connie (C). Their preferences are
(ABC)
(CBA)
(BCA)
6
5
4
Use this information to answer the questions in Problems 42–45.
42. a. Is there a Condorcet candidate?
b. Is there a majority? If not, who wins the plurality vote?
Does this violate the Condorcet criterion?
43. Who wins using the Borda count method? Does this violate the
Condorcet criterion?
44. Who wins the election using the Hare method? Does this
violate the Condorcet criterion?
45. Who wins the election using the pairwise comparison method?
Does this violate any of the conditions in Arrow’s impossibil-
ity theorem?
The fraternity  is electing a national president, and there are
four candidates: Alberto (A), Bate (B), Carl (C), and Dave (D).
The voter preferences are:
(BDCA)
(BDAC)
(CDAB)
(ADCB)
100
120
130
150
Use this information to answer the questions in Problems 46–49.
46. a. How many votes were cast?
b. Is there a majority? If not, who wins the plurality 
vote?
c. Is there a Condorcet candidate?
47. Who wins using the Borda count method? Does this violate
any of the fairness criteria?
48. Who wins the election using the Hare method? Does this violate
any of the fairness criteria?
49. Who is the winner by using the pairwise comparison method?
Does this violate any of the fairness criteria?
50. Consider an election with three candidates with the following
results:
(ABC)
(BCA)
(CBA)
5
3
3
a. Is there a majority winner? If not, who is the plurality 
winner?
b. Who wins using the pairwise comparison method?
c. Is the ordering for the choices for candidates in part b
transitive?
51. Consider an election with four candidates with the following
results:
(ABCD)
(ABDC)
(CDAB)
(CDBA)
(DACB)
10
9
8
7
6
a. Is there a winner using the pairwise comparison 
method?
b. Is there a winner using the tournament method?
c. Do either of these methods violate any conditions of
Arrow’s impossibility theorem?
52. Repeat Problem 50, with 10 votes for each listed 
possibility.
53. Consider an election with four candidates with the following
results:
(ABCD)
(BCAD)
(CABD)
20
20
10
a. Who wins the election using a Borda count method?
b. Does the Borda count method violate the irrelevant
alternative criterion?
54. Consider an election with three candidates with the following
results:
(ACB)
(BAC)
(CAB)
4
2
5
a. Is there a majority winner? If not, who is the plurality
winner?
b. If a majority is required for election, there must be a runoff
between the second and third choices. Who will win that
runoff?
c. How can the voters who support C vote insincerely to
enable C to win the election?
55. Consider an election with three candidates with the following
results:
(ACB)
(BAC)
(CBA)
(CAB)
2
5
4
2
a. Is there a majority winner? If not, who is the plurality 
winner?
b. Who wins the election using the Borda count method?
c. Who wins if he or she first eliminates the one with the 
most last-place votes and then has a runoff between the
other two?
Section 17.2
Voting Dilemmas
839
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

d. Could the two voters with preference (CAB) change the
outcome of the election in part c if they voted insincerely and
pretended to have the preference (CBA)?
56. Suppose that 100 Senators must vote on an appropriation: 
a new bridge in Alabama (A), a new freeway interchange in
California (C), or a grain subsidy for Iowa (I). The Senate
Whip estimates that the preferences of the senators is
(ACI)
(CIA)
(ICA)
10
38
52
a. Which project wins using the Borda count method?
b. Iowa argues that it should win because it has a majority vote.
However, since the vote is to be by Borda count, those who
favor California believe that Iowa could win and thus they
vote insincerely for Alabama as their second choice. How
would this affect the Borda count?
c. If those who favor Iowa believe that the insincere voting in
part b might take place, should they still vote so as to cause
the funds to go to Iowa?
Level 3
57. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Suppose that Jane, Linda, Ann, and
Melissa are members of a committee of the Tuesday Afternoon
Club and Jane, Linda, and Ann all prefer a new rule that says
the meeting time will change to the evenings. Jane proposed
this new rule because she absolutely cannot come if it is not in
the evening, and Linda prefers it because Jane picks her up
for the meetings, but she could drive herself if Jane were not
available. Ann, on the other hand, says she will go along with
anything that does not interfere with her Wednesday morning
golf lessons. Melissa argues that if they adopt the new rule,
they will need to change the name of their club, which will
require a by-law change, so she is opposed to the new rule.
Can you suggest an amendment that Melissa could offer to
force the vote in her favor? Note that for a new rule to pass,
three votes are required, and on a tie vote of two to two, the 
old rule stands. 
58. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Make up an example of a vote that is
not transitive.
59. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Suppose there are ten serious, 
but almost indistinguishable, candidates for a U.S. 
presidential primary. Also suppose that at the last possible
minute a very radical candidate enters the race. He is so
radical, in fact, that 90% of the voters rank this candidate 
at the bottom. Show how it might be possible for voters to
elect this candidate. 
Problem Solving 3   
60. The Game of WIN.
Construct a set of nonstandard dice as
shown in Figure 17.1.
FIGURE 17.1 Faces on the dice for a game of WIN
Suppose that one player picks die A and that the other picks
die B, the dice are rolled, and the higher number wins. We can
enumerate the sample space as shown here.
B \ A
0
0
4
4
4
4
3
(3, 0)
(3, 0)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
3
(3, 0)
(3, 0)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
3
(3, 0)
(3, 0)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
3
(3, 0)
(3, 0)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
3
(3, 0)
(3, 0)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
3
(3, 0)
(3, 0)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
(3, 4)
1442443
1444442444443
B wins
A wins
We see that A’s probability of winning is 
or 
There are, 
of course, many other possible choices for the dice played. If
you were to play the game of WIN, would you choose your die
first or second? What is your probability of winning at WIN?
This problem reminds you of which concept introduced in this
section?
2
3.
24
36,
A
C
B
D
840
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.3
Apportionment
841
17.3  Apportionment
The framing of the United States Constitution during the Constitutional Convention in
1787 has been the subject of books, movies, and plays. Many issues of grave importance
were introduced and debated, but one of the most heated and important debates con-
cerned how the states would be represented in the new legislature. The large states
wanted proportional representation based on population, and the smaller states wanted
representation by state. From this debate came the Great Compromise, which led to the
formation of two sides of the legislative branch of government. The compromise allowed
the Senate to have two representatives per state (advantageous for the smaller states) and
the House of Representatives to determine the number of representatives for a particular
state by the size of the population (advantageous for the larger states). The accompany-
ing gives the exact wording from the United States Constitution, and if you read it you
will notice that it does not specify how to determine the number of representatives for
each state. The process of making this decision is called apportionment. To apportion
means to divide or share according to a plan. It usually refers to dividing representatives
in Congress or taxes to the states, but it can refer to judicial decisions or to the assign-
ment of goods or people to different jurisdictions. In this section, we will consider five
apportionment plans: Adams’ plan, Jefferson’s plan, Hamilton’s plan, Webster’s plan,
and Huntington-Hill’s plan (HH plan). You recognize, no doubt, some of these names
from American history.
Apportionment of the U.S. House of Representatives
for the 108th Congress
State gaining 2 seats in the House
State gaining 1 seat in the House
No change
State losing 1 seat in the House
State losing 2 seats in the House
Change from 1990 to 2000
AK
1
HI
2
WA
9
OR
5
CA
53
NV
3
AZ
8
ID
2
MT
1
WY
1
UT
3
CO
7
NM
3
ND
1
SD
1
NE
3
KS
4
MN
8
IA
5
MO
9
WI
8
IL
19
MI
15
IN
9
OH
18
OK
5
TX
32
AR
4
LA
7
WV
3
VA
11
NC
13
KY
6
TN
9
MS
4
AL
7
FL
  25
GA
13
SC
6
DE  1
MD  8
ME
2
VT
1NH
2
NY
29
PA
19
MA  10
RI  2
CT  5
NJ  13
Helping You Make Informed Decisions
Total U.S. Representatives: 435
Numbers represent reapportioned
totals of U.S. Representatives.
The Approtionment Process
We begin with a simple example to introduce us to some of the terminology used with ap-
portionment. Table 17.5 shows the population (in thousands) over the years for five New
York Boroughs.
Source: U. S. Census Bureau
ARTICLE 1, SECTION 2
United States Consitution
Representation and
direct taxes shall be
apportioned among the
several states which 
may be included in the
Union, according to the
respective numbers . . . .
The number of
Representatives shall
not exceed one for
every thirty thousand,
but each state shall
have at least one 
representative.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

One of the recurring problems with apportionment is working with approximate data
and the problems caused by rounding. For example, if you look at the total population for
the five New York Boroughs in the year 2000, you will find the total to be 8,008,000. If
you add the numbers in Table 17.5, you will find the total to be 8,007,000. The discrep-
ancy is caused by rounding, and we should not just sweep it under the rug and ignore such
discrepancies. How we handle rounding is a large part of distinguishing apportionment
problems. Consider the following example.
842
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
TABLE 17.5
Populations of New York Boroughs
Year
Total
Manhattan
Bronx
Brooklyn
Queens
Staten Island
1790
49
32
2
5
6
4
1800
81
61
2
6
7
5
1840
697
516
8
139
19
15
1900
3,438
1,850
201
1,167
153
67
1940
7,454
1,890
1,395
2,698
1,297
174
1990
7,324
1,488
1,204
2,301
1,952
379
2000
8,007
1,537
1,333
2,465
2,229
443
Example
1
Apportionment in 1790
In 1790 the population in New York City was 49,000. Suppose the city council at that
time consisted of 8 members.
a. How many people did each city council member represent?
b. If the assignment of council seats is proportional to the borough’s population, use
Table17.5 to allocate the council seats.
Solution
a. Since the population was 49,000, each council member should represent
This number is called the standard divisor.
b. To find the appropriate representation, we need to divide the population of each bor-
ough by the standard divisor; the resulting number is known as the standard quota.
Round your results to the nearest hundredth. We show rounding the standard quota
to the nearest whole number, and we also show the result of rounding up and of
rounding down. The result of rounding up is called the upper quota and the result of
rounding down is called the lower quota.
Standard Quota
Nearest
Upper Quota
Lower Quota
Manhattan:
5
6
5
Bronx:
0
1
0
Brooklyn:
1
1
0
Queens:
1
1
0
Staten Island:
1
1
0
TOTAL:
8
10
5
4,000
6,125 < 0.65
6,000
6,125 < 0.98
5,000
6,125 < 0.82
2,000
6,125 < 0.33
32,000
6,125 < 5.22
49,000
8
5 6,125
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now, seats on a city council must be whole numbers, so we should use the numbers from
one of the columns of rounded numbers. But which column? Since we need to fill 8 seats,
we see for this example that if we round to the nearest unit, we will fill the 8 seats.
Section 17.3
Apportionment
843
Example 1 raises some questions. First, how would you like it if you lived in the
Bronx? You would have no representation. On the other hand, if you rounded each of the
numbers up, the number of seats would increase to 10, and certainly rounding down for
this example would not satisfy anyone (except perhaps those from Manhattan). There are
other difficulties caused by the rounding in Example 1, but before we take a closer look,
we need the following definitions.
The standard divisor is defined to be the quotient
Standard Quota
The standard quota is defined to be the quotient
STANDARD QUOTA 5 TOTAL POPULATION
STANDARD DIVISOR
STANDARD DIVISOR 5 TOTAL POPULATION
NUMBER OF SHARES
Standard Divisor
Example
2
Find the standard divisor and standard quota
Use the data for New York City in 1790 to find the standard divisor and standard quota
for each borough for the number of seats requested. Round these standard quotas to the
nearest integer, up (upper quota), and down (lower quota).
a. 12 seats
b. 13 seats
Solution
The total population is 49,000. Let d be the standard divisor and q be the
standard quota for each borough.
a. 12 seats; standard divisor: 
Standard Quota
Nearest
Upper Quota
Lower Quota
Manhattan:
8
8
7
Bronx:
0
1
0
Brooklyn:
1
2
1
Queens:
1
2
1
Staten Island:
1
1
0
TOTAL:
11
14
9
b. 13 seats; 
Standard Quota
Nearest
Upper Quota
Lower Quota
Manhattan:
8
9
8
32,000
d
< 8.49
d 5 49,000
13
< 3,769.23
4,000
d
< 0.98
6,000
d
< 1.47
5,000
d
< 1.22
2,000
d
< 0.49
32,000
d
< 7.84
d 5 49,000
12
< 4,083.33
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Standard Quota
Nearest
Upper Quota
Lower Quota
Bronx:
1
1
0
Brooklyn:
1
2
1
Queens:
2
2
1
Staten Island:
1
2
1
TOTAL:
13
16
11
4,000
d
< 1.06
6,000
d
< 1.59
5,000
d
< 1.33
2,000
d
< 0.53
844
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Take a look at the results of Example 2, and you will see that if the required number
of seats is 12, none of the rounding methods shown will work. Also note that if there are
fewer than 13 seats, there is no representation for the Bronx. You may also have noticed
that the apportionment we seek must be either the upper quota or the lower quota. This is
known as the quota rule.
Before we decide on a rounding scheme, we will consider one more historical exam-
ple from the United States Congress. The first congressional apportionment was to occur
after the 1790 census. (It actually occurred in 1794.) The results of the census of 1790 are
shown in Table 17.6.
TABLE 17.6
U.S. Population in the 1790 Census State Population
State
Population
Connecticut
237,655
Delaware
59,096
Georgia
82,548
Kentucky
73,677
Maryland
319,728
Massachusetts
475,199
New Hampshire
141,899
New Jersey
184,139
New York
340,241
North Carolina
395,005
Pennsylvania
433,611
Rhode Island
69,112
South Carolina
249,073
Vermont
85,341
Virginia
747,550
TOTAL
3,893,874
Note: We are using demographic information from the Consortium for Political and Social Re-
search, Study 00003. The population numbers actually used for the 1794 apportionment were
slightly different from these, so the historical record does not exactly match these academic
examples. Among the reasons for this discrepancy is that prior to 1870, the population
base included the total free population of the states and three-fifths of the number of
slaves, and it excluded American Indians who, as a group, were not taxed.
The number assigned to each represented unit must be either the standard quota
rounded down to the nearest integer or the standard quota rounded up to the nearest
integer.
Quota Rule
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.3
Apportionment
845
Example
3
Find the standard divisor and standard quota
Use the results of Table 17.6, and the fact that the number of seats in the House of Rep-
resentatives was to be raised from 65 to 105. Find the standard divisor and the standard
quota for each state. Round each of the standard quotas to the nearest number, as well
as to give the lower and upper quotas.
Solution
Standard divisor: 
Standard Quota
Nearest
Upper Quota
Lower Quota
Connecticut:
6
6
7
Delaware:
2
1
2
Georgia:
2
2
3
Kentucky:
2
1
2
Maryland:
9
8
9
Massachusetts:
13
12
13
New Hampshire:
4
3
4
New Jersey:
5
4
5
New York:
9
9
10
North Carolina:
11
10
11
Pennsylvania:
12
11
12
Rhode Island:
2
1
2
South Carolina:
7
6
7
Vermont:
2
2
3
Virginia:
20
20
21
TOTAL:
106
96
111
The quota rule tells us that the actual representation for each state must be the lower
quota or the upper quota.
747,550
d
< 20.16
85,341
d
< 2.30
249,073
d
< 6.72
69,112
d
< 1.86
433,611
d
< 11.69
395,005
d
< 10.65
340,241
d
< 9.17
184,139
d
< 4.97
141,899
d
< 3.83
475,199
d
< 12.81
319,728
d
< 8.62
73,677
d
< 1.99
82,548
d
< 2.23
59,096
d
< 1.59
237,655
d
< 6.41
d 5 3,893,874
105
< 37,084.51
The First Congress of the United States needed to decide how to round the standard
quotas, q, of Example 3. There were three plans proposed initially, and we will consider
them one at a time. One of them rounded up, one rounded down, and a third rounded
down with some additional conditions.
Adams’ Plan
The first plan we will consider was proposed by the sixth president of the United States,
John Quincy Adams, so it is known as Adams’ plan.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Back in 1790 the process of finding the modified quota was quite a task, but with the
help of spreadsheets today it is not very difficult. Look at Example 3 and note that the up-
per quotas total 111 and we are looking for a total of 105 seats. Look at the spreadsheet
in Figure 17.2. Note that 
(from Example 3) and if we raise this to
, the total number of seats is 108, so we raised d too little. Next, we raise d to
, and the total number of seats is now 103, so we raised d too much. (Remem-
ber, the goal is 105.) Finally, you will see that if we choose 
, we obtain the
target number of seats, which is 105. The number of seats for each of the original states
according to Adams’ apportionment plan is shown in Figure 17.2.
D 5 39,600
D 5 40,000
D 5 38,000
d 5 37,084.51
846
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Round up!
Any standard quota with a decimal portion must be rounded up to the next whole
number. To find the appropriate number of seats, use the following procedure.
Step 1
Compute the standard divisor, d.
Step 2
Compute the standard quota, q, for each state.
Step 3
Round the standard quotas up and add these quotas to find the total number
of seats. It will be correct, or it will be too large. Raise the standard divisor
in small increments until the rounded quotas provide the appropriate total;
this divisor is called a modified divisor, D. The number Q for each state is
called the modified quota.
Adams’ Plan
FIGURE 17.2 Apportionment calculations for Adams’ apportionment plan
Spreadsheet Application
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
CN
DE
GA
KY
MD
MS
NH
NJ
NY
Population
237,655
59,096
82,548
73,677
319,728
475,199
141,899
184,139
340,241
q
6.41
1.59
2.23
1.99
8.62
12.81
3.83
4.97
9.17
Nearest
6
2
2
2
9
13
4
5
9
Round up
7
2
3
2
9
13
4
5
10
Round dn
6
1
2
1
8
12
3
4
9
Trial 1
7
2
3
2
9
13
4
5
9
Q
6.25
1.56
2.17
1.94
8.41
12.51
3.73
4.85
8.95
Trial 2
6
2
3
2
8
12
4
5
9
Q
5.94
1.48
2.06
1.84
7.99
11.88
3.55
4.60
8.51
Adams
6
2
3
2
9
13
4
5
9
Q
6.00
1.49
2.06
1.86
8.07
12.00
3.58
4.65
8.59
NC
PA
RI
SC
VT
VA
TOTAL
No. of Seats
d
Population
395,005
433,611
69,112
249,073
85,341
747,550 3,893,874
105 37,084.51
q
10.65
11.69
1.86
6.72
2.30
20.16
105
Nearest
11
12
2
7
2
20
106
Round up
11
12
2
7
3
21
111
Round dn
10
11
1
6
2
20
96
D
Trial 1
11
11
2
7
3
20
106 Raise d to:
38,000 too little
Q
10.39
11.41
1.82
6.55
2.25
19.67
Trial 2
10
11
2
7
3
19
103 Raise d to:
40,000 too much
Q
9.88
10.84
1.73
6.23
2.13
18.69
Adams
10
11
2
7
3
19
105 Raise d to:
39,600 just right
Q
9.97
10.95
1.75
6.29
2.16
18.88
Example
4
Find the apportionment for students
Advanced mathematics is taught at five high schools in the Santa Rosa Unified School
District. The district has just received a grant of 200 TI-NspireTM calculators that are to be
distributed to the five high schools. If these calculators are distributed according to
Adams’ plan, how should they be apportioned to the schools? Use the data in Table 17.7.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.3
Apportionment
847
Historical
John Quincy Adams
(1767–1848)
John Quincy Adams was the sixth
president of the United States. His
best-known achievement was the
formation of the Monroe Doctrine
in 1823. He was the son of the
second president, as well as the
minister to the Netherlands, Prus-
sia, and Russia. He was also a
U.S. senator and, after his presi-
dency, served in the House of
Representatives. He proposed a
method of apportionment, but it
was never adopted for use.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Table 17.7
Statistics for Santa Rosa Unified School District High Schools
School
No. of Students 
No. Advanced Math Students
Elsie Allen
1,524
72
Maria Carrillo
1,687
131
Montgomery
1,755
243
Piner
1,519
95
Santa Rosa
1,797
71
TOTAL:
8,282
612
Solution
The standard divisor is 
The standard and upper quotas are
Population
Standard Quota, q
Upper Quota
Elsie Allen
72
24
Maria Carrillo
131
43
Montgomery
243
80
Piner
95
32
Santa Rosa
71
24
TOTAL:
203
We now find the modified divisor, D, by raising d until the sum of the upper quotas
gives us 200. Suppose we raise d  3.06 to D  3.1. Now, the modified quotas are
Modified Quota, Q
Adams’ Plan
Elsie Allen
24
Maria Carrillo
43
Montgomery
79
Piner
31
Santa Rosa
23
TOTAL:
200
71
D < 22.90
95
D < 30.65
243
D < 78.39
131
D < 42.26
72
D < 23.23
71
d < 23.20
95
d < 31.05
243
d < 79.41
131
d < 42.81
72
d < 23.53
d 5 612
200 5 3.06.
Jefferson’s Plan
Since the second plan was proposed by the third president of the United States, Thomas
Jefferson, it is known as Jefferson’s plan. It is the same as Adams’ plan, except you
round down instead of rounding up.
Round down!
Any standard quota with a decimal portion must be rounded down to the next whole
number. To find the appropriate number of seats, use the following procedure.
Step 1
Compute the standard divisor, d.
Step 2
Compute the standard quota, q, for each state.
Step 3
Round the standard quotas down and add these quotas to find the total
number of seats. It will be correct, or it will be too small. Lower the
standard divisor in small increments to find a modified divisor that will 
give modified quotas that provide the appropriate total.
Jefferson’s Plan
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We again turn to Example 3 and note that the lower quotas total 96 and we are look-
ing for a total of 105 seats. Look at the spreadsheet in Figure 17.3. This time we look at
the lower quotas. Note that 
(from Example 3) and if we lower this to
, the total number of seats is 104, so we lowered d too little. (Remember, the
goal is 105.) Next, we lower d to 
, and the total number of seats is now 111,
so we lowered d too much. Finally, if we choose 
, we obtain the target num-
ber of seats, which is 105. The number of seats for each of the original states according to
Jefferson’s apportionment plan is shown in Figure 17.3.
D 5 35,000
D 5 33,000
D 5 36,000
d 5 37,084.51
848
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
FIGURE 17.3 Apportionment calculations for Jefferson’s apportionment plan
Spreadsheet Application
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
CN
DE
GA
KY
MD
MS
NH
NJ
NY
Population
237,655
59,096
82,548
73,677
319,728
475,199
141,899
184,139
340,241
q
6.41
1.59
2.23
1.99
8.62
12.81
3.83
4.97
9.17
Nearest
6
2
2
2
9
13
4
5
9
Round up
7
2
3
2
9
13
4
5
10
Round dn
6
1
2
1
8
12
3
4
9
Trial 1
6
1
2
2
8
13
3
5
9
Q
6.80
1.64
2.29
2.05
8.88
13.20
3.94
5.11
9.45
Trial 2
7
1
2
2
9
14
4
5
10
Q
7.20
1.79
2.50
2.23
9.69
14.40
4.30
5.58
10.31
Jefferson
6
1
2
2
9
13
4
5
9
Q
6.79
1.69
2.36
2.11
9.14
13.58
4.05
5.26
9.72
NC
PA
RI
SC
VT
VA
TOTAL
No. of Seats
d
Population
395,005
433,611
69,112
249,073
85,341
747,550 3,893,874
105 37,084.51
q
10.65
11.69
1.86
6.72
2.30
20.16
105
Nearest
11
12
2
7
2
20
106
Round up
11
12
2
7
3
21
111
Round dn
10
11
1
6
2
20
96
D
Trial 1
10
12
1
6
2
20
100 Lower d to:
36,000 too little
Q
10.97
12.04
1.92
6.92
2.37
20.77
Trial 2
11
13
2
7
2
22
111 Lower d to:
33,000 too much
Q
11.97
13.14
2.09
7.55
2.59
22.65
Jefferson
11
12
1
7
2
21
105 Lower d to:
35,000 just right
Q
11.29
12.39
1.97
7.12
2.44
21.36
Example
5
Distribute calculators to five high schools
Use Table 17.7 and Jefferson’s plan to distribute the 200 calculators to the five high
schools based on the number of advanced math students.
Solution
The standard divisor is 
The standard and upper quotas are:
Population
Standard Quota, q
Lower Quota
Elsie Allen
72
23
Maria Carrillo
131
42
Montgomery
243
79
Piner
95
31
Santa Rosa
71
23
TOTAL:
198
71
d < 23.20
95
d < 31.05
243
d < 79.41
131
d < 42.81
72
d < 23.53
d 5 612
200 5 3.06.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Suppose we lower d  3.06 to D  3.01 (this is the modified divisor). Now, the
standard and lower quotas are calculated.
Modified Quota, Q
Jefferson’s Plan
Elsie Allen
23
Maria Carrillo
43
Montgomery
80
Piner
31
Santa Rosa
23
TOTAL:
200
71
D < 23.59
95
D < 31.56
243
D < 80.73
131
D < 43.52
72
D < 23.92
Section 17.3
Apportionment
849
Historical
Thomas Jefferson
(1743–1826)
Jefferson was the third president
and the author of the first appor-
tionment plan used in the United
States. One of the most influential
statesmen in the formation of 
our government, he was acknowl-
edged as the primary author of the
Declaration of Independence.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
To find the appropriate number of seats, use the following procedure.
Step 1
Compute the standard divisor, d.
Step 2
Compute the standard quota, q, for each state.
Step 3
Round the standard quotas down to the nearest integer, but each must be at
least one.
Step 4
Give any additional seats, one at a time (until no seats are left), to the states
with the largest fractional parts of their standard quotas.
Hamilton’s Plan
Round down, but c
Note that Hamilton took into account the problem we discovered in Example 1. It
just does not seem right that a district should have no representation, so if Hamilton’s plan
is used, all voters will have some representation.
Once again, look at Example 3 and note that the lower quotas total 96 and we are
looking for a total of 105 seats. In the spreadsheet in Figure 17.4, we show you all three
methods for easy comparison.
To carry out Hamilton’s plan, start by looking at the value of q in the second row.
Look across and locate the one with the greatest decimal portion; it is Kentucky (1.99,
but look just at the decimal portion, 0.99); add one seat to Kentucky (see 
). Next, pick
New Jersey (0.97); add one seat to New Jersey (see 
). Next, pick Rhode Island because
it has the next largest decimal portion, (0.86); add one seat to Rhode Island (see 
). Con-
tinue to add seats in order (see 
to 
). Note that now the total is 105 seats, so the
process is complete.
#9
#4
#3
#2
#1
Hamilton’s Plan
As you might have guessed by now, both Adams’ and Jefferson’s plans are a bit compli-
cated. Historically, many complained that using this “modified divisor” to “tweak” the
numbers is a bit “like magic.” Alexander Hamilton, secretary of the treasury under
George Washington, proposed the next plan we will consider, which is called, of course,
Hamilton’s plan. It is easier and more straightforward than the previous two plans we
have considered.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

850
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
FIGURE 17.4 Apportionment calculations for Adams’, Jefferson’s, and Hamilton’s apportionment plans
Spreadsheet Application
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
CN
DE
GA
KY
MD
MS
NH
NJ
NY
Population
237,655
59,096
82,548
73,677
319,728
475,199
141,899
184,139
340,241
q
6.41
1.59
2.23
1.99
8.62
12.81
3.83
4.97
9.17
Nearest
6
2
2
2
9
13
4
5
Round up
7
2
3
2
9
13
4
5
Round dn
6
1
2
1
8
12
3
4
Adams
6
2
3
2
9
13
4
5
Jefferson
6
1
2
2
9
13
4
5
9
10
9
9
9
Hamilton
6
1
2
2
9
13
4
5
9
#1
#9
#5
#4
#2
NC
PA
RI
SC
VT
VA
TOTAL
No. of Seats
d
Population
395,005
433,611
69,112
249,073
85,341
747,550
3,893,874
105
37,084.51
q
10.65
11.69
1.86
6.72
2.30
20.16
105
Nearest
11
12
2
7
2
20
106
Round up
11
12
2
7
3
21
111
Round dn
10
11
1
6
2
20
96
Adams
10
11
2
7
3
19
105
Jefferson
11
12
1
7
2
21
105
Hamilton
11
12
2
7
2
20
105
#8
#7
#3
#6
Example
6
Use Hamilton’s plan to distribute calculators
Use Table 17.7 and Hamilton’s plan to distribute the 200 calculators to the five high
schools based on the number of advanced mathematics students.
Solution
The standard divisor is 
The standard and lower quotas, along
with Hamilton’s plan, are shown:
Population
Standard Quota, q
Lower Quota
Hamilton’s Plan
Elsie Allen
72
23
24
#2 (0.53)
Maria Carrillo
131
42
43
#1 (0.81)
Montgomery
243
79
79
Piner
95
31
31
Santa Rosa
71
23
23
TOTAL:
198
200
71
d < 23.20
95
d < 31.05
243
d < 79.41
131
d < 42.81
72
d < 23.53
d 5 612
200 5 3.06.
The following example projects these mathematical methods of apportionment into the
political process.
Example
7
Compare small state and large state compromise
Take a good look at Figure 17.4 to answer the following questions.
a. If you were from a small state, which plan would you probably favor?
b. If you were from a large state, which plan would you probably favor?
c. Which plan do you think was the first plan to be adopted by the First Congress?
(Hint: remember, the First Congress was the congress of compromise.)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
a. There are seven states (out of 15) for which the representation changes depending on
the adopted plan. Adams’ plan favors Delaware and Georgia, but hurts North Car-
olina and Pennsylvania. Jefferson’s plan hurts Rhode Island. It seems as if Adams’
plan favors the smaller states.
b. By the analysis in part a, it seems that the larger states would favor Jefferson’s plan.
It is not a coincidence that Jefferson’s plan favors the larger states and that Jefferson
was from Virginia.
c. It would seem that the plan to compromise the positions should be Hamilton’s plan.
Section 17.3
Apportionment
851
By considering Example 7, we can understand why the first apportionment plan
to pass was Hamilton’s plan. When the bill that would have adopted Hamilton’s plan
reached President Washington’s desk, it became the first presidential veto in the his-
tory of our country. Washington objected to the fourth step in Hamilton’s plan.
Congress was not able to override the veto, so with a second bill Congress adopted
Jefferson’s plan, which was used until 1840 when it was replaced because flaws in
Jefferson’s plan showed up after the 1820 and 1830 censuses. We will discuss these
flaws in the next section.
Use the arithmetic
mean to round. 
Any standard quota with a decimal portion must be rounded to the nearest whole
number. To find the appropriate number of seats, use the following procedure.
Step 1
Compute the standard divisor, d.
Step 2
Compute the standard quota, q, for each state.
Step 3
Round the standard quotas down if the fractional part is less than 0.5 and up
if the fractional part is greater than or equal to 0.5. The total will be correct,
or it will not.
Step 4
If it is not, lower or raise the standard divisor in small increments to find a
modified divisor that will give modified quotas that provide the appropriate
total.
Webster’s Plan
Example
8
Use Webster’s plan to apportion cameras
The city St. Louis, Missouri, passed a ballot measure to provide and pay for 130 sur-
veillance cameras for high crime areas. The city council mandated that these cameras
be apportioned among the five highest crime areas, based on the 2001 crime statistics,
summarized in Table 17.8. Use Webster’s plan.
Webster’s Plan
Daniel Webster, a senator from Massachusetts, ran for president on the Whig party, and
was appointed secretary of state by President William H. Harrison. When the reappor-
tionment based on the 1830 census was done, New York had a standard quota of 38.59
but was awarded 40 seats using Jefferson’s plan. Webster argued that this was unconstitu-
tional (violated the quota rule) and suggested a compromise, which became known as
Webster’s plan. His plan is similar to both Adams’ and Jefferson’s plans. Instead of
rounding up or down from the modified quota, Webster proposed that any quota with a
decimal portion must be rounded to the nearest whole number. This method is based on
the arithmetic mean; round down if the standard quota is less than the arithmetic mean
and round up otherwise.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
In this case, the “population” is the total number of crimes per 100 resi-
dents. This is 62.68, and the number of items is 130. Thus, the standard divisor is
The standard quotas are shown in tabular form.
Precinct
Standard Quota, q
Rounded Value
Downtown
51
Fairground
21
Columbus Square
20
Downtown West
20
Peabody
19
TOTAL:
131
The total of the standard quotas is too large, so we should raise the standard divisor to
form a modified divisor. By trial and error we find that three-decimal-place rounding is
necessary in order to give the correct number of cameras. The modified quotas are
shown for a modified divisor D  0.484.
Precinct
Modified Quota, Q
Rounded Value
Downtown
51
Fairground
21
Columbus Square
20
Downtown West
19
Peabody
19
TOTAL:
130
9.01
D < 18.62
9.43
D < 19.48
9.75
D < 20.14
10.04
D
< 20.74
24.45
D
< 50.52
9.01
d < 18.69
9.43
d < 19.56
9.75
d < 20.22
10.04
d
< 20.82
24.45
d
< 50.71
d 5 62.68
130 < 0.48.
852
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
TABLE 17.8
Serious Crimes in St. Louis, Missouri, in 2001
Precinct
Number of Violent Crimes (per 100 residents)
Downtown
24.45
Fairground
10.04
Columbus Square
9.75
Downtown West
9.43
Peabody
9.01
TOTAL
62.68
Historical
Daniel Webster 
(1782–1852)
Daniel Webster was a U.S. senator
and secretary of state under
Presidents Harrison and Fillmore.
He was a leader of the Whig party.
He was known as one of the best
orators of his time, as well as one
of the staunchest patriots of his
time. We remember him here as
the author of the method of appor-
tionment used following the 1840
census and then again from 1900
to 1941.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
At the time that Webster’s plan was adopted, no one suspected that it had the same
flaw as Jefferson’s plan. It was used after the 1840 census and from 1900 to 1941, when
it was replaced by Huntington-Hill’s plan. Oddly enough, from 1850 to 1900 Hamilton’s
plan was used, so the only method never actually used in Congress was Adams’ plan.
Huntington-Hill’s Plan
Edward Huntington, a professor of mechanics and mathematics at Harvard University,
and Joseph Hill, chief statistician for the Bureau of the Census, devised a rounding
method currently used by the U.S. legislature. From 1850 to 1911, the size of the House
of Representatives (number of seats) changed as states were added. In 1911, the House
size was fixed at 433, with a provision for the addition of one seat each for Arizona and
New Mexico. The House size has remained at 435 since, except for a temporary increase
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

to 437 at the time of admission of Alaska and Hawaii. The seats went back to 435 after
the subsequent census. In 1910, a plan called Huntington-Hill’s plan, which we will ab-
breviate as the HH’s plan, was adopted. It is the same as Webster’s plan except it rounds
using the geometric mean, rather than the arithmetic mean used by Webster’s plan. First,
we present an example reviewing the concept of geometric mean.
Section 17.3
Apportionment
853
Example
9
Compare the arithmetic and geometric means
The following modified quotas are given. Find the upper and lower quotas, and the
arithmetic and geometric means of the upper and lower quotas. Then round the modi-
fied quota by comparing it to the arithmetic mean and then to the geometric mean.
a. 9.49
b. 1.42
c. 4.53
d. 6.42
Solution
If a and b are two numbers, then
arithmetic mean (A.M.)
geometric mean (G.M.)
Q
Down Up
A.M.
A.M. Round
G.M.
G.M. Round
a. 9.49
9
10
9
10
b. 1.42
1
2
1
2
c. 4.53
4
5
5
5
d. 6.42
6
7
6
6
"6 3 7 < 6.48
6 1 7
2
5 6.5
"4 3 5 < 4.472
4 1 5
2
5 4.5
"1 3 2 < 1.414
1 1 2
2
5 1.5
"9 3 10 < 9.486
9 1 10
2
5 9.5
5 "ab
5 a 1 b
2
Use the geometric mean
to round.
To find the appropriate number of seats, use the following procedure.
Step 1
Compute the standard divisor, d.
Step 2
Compute the standard quota, q, for each state. Let 
and
for each state.
Step 3
Round the standard quotas down if the fractional part is less than 
and
up if the fractional part is greater than or equal to 
Add these rounded
numbers; the total will be correct, or it will not.
Step 4
If it is not, lower or raise the standard divisor in small increments to find 
a modified divisor that will give modified quotas that provide the 
appropriate total.
!ab.
!ab
b 5 upper quota
a 5 lower quota
Huntington-Hill’s Plan
Example 10 Apportion using Huntington-Hill’s plan
Disney World has several resorts with lakes:
Grand Floridian, 904 rooms
Contemporary Resort, 1,041 rooms
Polynesian Resort, 853 rooms
Yacht Club Resort, 630 rooms
Beach Club Resort, 584 rooms
If Disney World purchases 400 paddle boats, how many boats would each resort be as-
signed if they were assigned according to the number of rooms using HH’s plan?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution
There are 4,012 rooms. The standard divisor is 
. The
standard quotas are found and rounded according to the geometric mean.
Resort
Standard Quota, q
Geometric Mean
Rounded Value
Contemporary
104
Polynesian
85
Grand Floridian
90
Yacht Club
63
Beach Club
58
TOTAL:
400
"58 3 59 < 58.498
584
d < 58.23
"62 3 63 < 62.498
630
d < 62.81
"90 3 91 < 90.499
904
d < 90.13
"85 3 86 < 85.499
853
d < 85.04
"103 3 104 < 103.499
1,041
d
< 103.79
d 5 4012
400 5 10.03
854
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
TABLE 17.9
Summary of Apportionment Methods
Method
Divisor
Apportionment
Adams’ Plan
Round up; raise the standard divisor
to find the modified divisor.
Round the standard quotas up. Apportion to each group its
modified upper quota. It favors the smaller states.
Jefferson’s Plan
Round down; lower the standard
divisor to find the modified divisor.
Round the standard quotas down. Apportion to each group
its modified lower quota. It favors the larger states.
Hamilton’s Plan
Use the standard divisor. Round
down.
Round the standard quotas down. Distribute additional
seats one at a time until all items are distributed.
Webster’s Plan
Use modified divisors. May round
up or down.
Round by comparing with the arithmetic mean of the
upper and lower quotas.
HH’s Plan
Use modified divisors. May round
up or down.
Round by comparing with the geometric mean of the upper
and lower quotas.
We conclude this section with an example that allows us to compare and contrast
the apportionment methods introduced in this section. We have summarized these in
Table 17.9.
Example 11
Compare apportionment plans
Consider College Town with district populations as follows:
North: 8,600
South: 5,400
East: 7,200
West: 3,800
Suppose there are exactly 10 council seats. Apportion the current seats according to the
indicated method.*
a. Adams’ plan
b. Jefferson’s plan
c. Hamilton’s plan
d. Webster’s plan
e. HH’s plan
Solution
We use Pólya’s problem-solving guidelines for this example.
Understand the Problem. Suppose that 10 years ago the population of College Town
was 24,000. At that time, the standard divisor was
d 5 24,000
10
5 2,400
Pólya’s 
Method
*This problem and solution are adapted from the article “Decimals, Rounding, and Apportionment,” by Kay I. Meeks,
The Mathematics Teacher, October 1992, pp. 523–525.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Over time, populations change, and the ten seats must be divided fairly for the four dis-
tricts. Let’s begin by doing some simple arithmetic. The present population is 25,000
and the number of seats is 10, so we begin by calculating the standard divisor:
Next, calculate the standard quotas for the revised population:
North:
South:
East:
West:
Devise a Plan. Historically, there were five plans devised, and this example asks us to
use each of these plans.
Carry Out the Plan. The results using the standard quota for each of these five plans are
shown in the following table.
Results of City Council Apportionment
District
Population
Std Quota
Adams
Jefferson
Webster
Hamilton
HH
North
8,600
3.44
4
3
3
3
3
South
5,400
2.16
3
2
2
2
2
East
7,200
2.88
3
2
3
3
3
West
3,800
1.52
2
1
2
2
2
TOTAL
25,000
12
8
10
10
10
We see that the results from Adams’ and Jefferson’s plans require that we consider mod-
ified quotas.
a. Adams’ plan: The modified divisor should be greater than the standard divisor. Try
D  3,000. The modified quotas are shown in the following table.
b. Jefferson’s plan: The modified divisor should be less than the standard divisor. Try
D  2,000. The modified quotas are shown in the following table.
Additional Results of City Council Apportionment
Std Quota
Adams
Jefferson
District
Population
d  2,400
D  3,000
D  2,000
Adams
Jefferson
North
8,600
3.44
2.87
4.30
3
4
South
5,400
2.16
1.80
2.70
2
2
East
7,200
2.88
2.40
3.60
3
3
West
3,800
1.52
1.27
1.90
2
1
TOTAL
25,000
10
10
c. Hamilton’s plan: Rank the original standard quotas:
North:
Decimal rank is 3.
South:
Decimal rank is 4.
East:
Decimal rank is 1.
West:
Decimal rank is 2.
Hamilton’s plan adds one seat to the East (highest decimal, so it is rank 1) and one to 
the West (second highest decimal, so it is rank 2).
d. Webster’s plan: The results of rounding to the nearest whole number (that is, round-
ing by comparing with the arithmetic mean) provided the correct apportionment.
3,800
25,000 # 10 < 1.52
7,200
25,000 # 10 < 2.88
5,400
25,000 # 10 < 2.16
8,600
25,000 # 10 < 3.44
3,800
2,500 5 1.52
7,200
2,500 5 2.88
5,400
2,500 5 2.16
8,600
2,500 5 3.144
standard divisor 5 25,000
10
5 2,500
Section 17.3
Apportionment
855
Historical
Alexander Hamilton
(1757–1804)
In 1780, Hamilton outlined a plan
with a strong central government
to replace the weak Articles of
Confederation. He was the first
secretary of the treasury and had
a great deal of influence on the
formation of our government in its
first decade. He was a political ad-
versary of Jefferson, and was part
of the formation of two politically
opposing parties: the Federalists,
led by Hamilton and John Adams,
and the Democratic Republicans,
led by Jefferson and James Madi-
son. Hamilton’s proposal for ap-
portionment was the first one
passed, but it was the victim of
the first presidential veto.
NOTE
Karl Smith library
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

e. Huntington–Hill’s plan: Consider the calculations shown in the table:
Geometric Mean (G.M.)
Compare with G.M.
Round
Seats
North:
G.M.
less
down
3
South:
G.M.
less
down
2
East:
G.M.
greater
up
3
West:
G.M.
greater
up
2
TOTAL:
10
Notice that the total equals the required number of city council seats.
Look Back. Do all the methods provide the appropriate number of seats? Do any violate
the quota rule?
5 "1 # 2 < 1.41
5 "2 # 3 < 2.45
5 "2 # 3 < 2.45
5 "3 # 4 < 3.46
856
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
In the next section we will see that since Adams’, Jefferson’s, Webster’s, and HH’s
methods all use modified quotas, they can, under certain circumstances, violate the quota
rule. We also see in the next section that every apportionment process will have some sort
of anomaly under certain conditions.
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the idea of apportionment.
Describe some different apportionment schemes.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Discuss the ideas of arithmetic mean
and geometric mean.
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Which apportionment schemes for the
U.S. Congress favor the smaller states? Which ones favor the
larger states? Are any neutral as far as state size is concerned?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the quota rule? Does this
rule make sense to you? Discuss.
5. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
If you round the standard quotas
down, how do you need to change the standard divisor to find
the modified quotas?
6. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
If you round the standard quotas up,
how do you need to change the standard divisor to find the
modified quotas?
Modified quotas are given in Problems 7–14. Round your answers
to two decimal places.
a. Find the lower and upper quotas.
b. Find the arithmetic mean of the lower and upper quotas.
c. Find the geometric mean of the lower and upper quotas.
d. Round the given modified quota by comparing it with first the
arithmetic mean, and then with the geometric mean.
7. 3.81
8. 1.24
9. 1.46
10. 3.48
11. 2.49
12. 2.51
13. 1,695.4
14. 1,695.6
Find the standard divisor (to two decimal places) for the given pop-
ulations and number of representative seats in Problems 15–22.
Population
# seats
Population
# seats
15. 52,000
8
16. 135,000
8
17. 630
5
18. 540
7
19. 1,450,000
12
20. 8,920,000
12 
21. 23,000,000
125 
22. 62,300,000
225 
For the given year, find the standard quotas for the New York City
boroughs given in Table 17.5 in Problems 23–28. Assume there are
eight council seats. 
23. 1800
24. 1840
25. 1900
26. 1940
27. 1990
28. 2000
Consider the populations given in Problems 29–32.
a. Find the standard divisor.
b. Find the standard quota for each precinct.
c. Total, rounding the standard quotas down.
d. Find a modified divisor that will give modified quotas 
to produce the desired number of seats.
Problem Set 17.3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

29. 10 seats
Population
1st Precinct
35,000
2nd Precinct
21,000
3rd Precinct
12,000
4th Precinct
48,000
TOTAL
116,000
30. 12 seats
Population
1st Precinct
35,000
2nd Precinct
21,000
3rd Precinct
12,000
4th Precinct
48,000
TOTAL
116,000
31. 10 seats
Population
1st Precinct
135,000
2nd Precinct
231,000
3rd Precinct
118,000
4th Precinct
316,000
TOTAL
800,000
32. 12 seats
Population
1st Precinct
135,000
2nd Precinct
231,000
3rd Precinct
118,000
4th Precinct
316,000
TOTAL
800,000
Consider the populations given in Problems 33–36.
a. Find the standard divisor.
b. Find the standard quota for each precinct.
c. Total, rounding the standard quotas up.
d. Find a modified divisor that will give modified quotas 
to produce the desired number of seats.
33. 10 seats
Population
1st Precinct
35,000
2nd Precinct
21,000
3rd Precinct
12,000
4th Precinct
48,000
TOTAL
116,000
34. 12 seats
Population
1st Precinct
35,000
2nd Precinct
21,000
3rd Precinct
12,000
4th Precinct
48,000
TOTAL
116,000
35. 10 seats
Population
1st Precinct
135,000
2nd Precinct
231,000
3rd Precinct
118,000
4th Precinct
316,000
TOTAL
800,000
36. 12 seats
Population
1st Precinct
135,000
2nd Precinct
231,000
3rd Precinct
118,000
4th Precinct
316,000
TOTAL
800,000
Level 2
HISTORICAL QUEST
In the apportionment of the House
of Representatives based on the 1790 Census (Example 3),
there are 15 states. At that time Maine was still considered
part of Massachusetts. If Maine had been a separate state, it
would have shared in the distribution of the seats in the House.
In the 1790 census, Maine’s population was 96,643. Subtract
this number from Massachusetts’ population and then answer
the questions in Problems 37–40 based on 16 states.
Section 17.3
Apportionment
857
Rupert’s Land
(United Kingdom)
Disputed between Massachusetts and
Colony of New Brunswick (UK)
New
Hampshire
Vermont
Republic
Connecticut
Western
Reserve Ene
Triangle
New
York
Rhode
Island
Massachusetts
Pennsylvania
Virginia
Northwest
Territory
North
Carolina
South
Carolina
Georgia
East Florida
(Spain)
West Florida
(Spain)
Disputed between United States
and West Florida
Colony of
Louisiana
(Spain)
Viceroyalty of
New Spain
(Spain)
Russian
America
(Russia)
Hawaiian
Islands
Unclaimed
Territory
Connecticut
New Jersey
Delaware
Maryland
Disputed between Northwest Territory
and Rupert’s Land (UK)
States
Territories
Other Countries
Disputed Areas
Unorganized
Territory
GNU Free Documentation License
www.commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:United_States_1790
United States in 1790
37. What are the standard quotas for the 16 states?
38. What is the total of the quotas rounded to the nearest number?
39. What is the sum of the lower quotas?
40. What is the sum of the upper quotas?
Consider the following apportionment problem for College Town:
North:
8,700
East:
7,200
South:
5,600
West:
3,500
Suppose each council member is to represent approximately 2,500
citizens. Use the apportionment plan requested in Problems 41–45
assuming that there must be 10 representatives.
41. Adams’ plan
42. Jefferson’s plan
43. Hamilton’s plan
44. Webster’s plan
45. HH plan
Consider the following apportionment problem:
North:
18,200
East:
17,600
South:
12,900
West:
13,300
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Use the apportionment plan requested in Problems 46–50
assuming that there must be 26 representatives.
46. Adams’ plan
47. Jefferson’s plan
48. Hamilton’s plan
49. Webster’s plan
50. HH’s plan
Consider the following apportionment problem:
North:
18,200
South:
12,900
East:
17,600
West:
13,300
Use the apportionment plan requested in Problems 51–55
assuming that there must be 16 representatives.
51. Adams’ plan
52. Jefferson’s plan
53. Hamilton’s plan
54. Webster’s plan
55. HH’s plan
Level 3
Consider the following apportionment problem:
North:
1,820,000
Northeast:
2,950,000
East:
1,760,000
Southeast:
1,980,000
South:
1,200,000
Southwest:
2,480,000
West:
3,300,000
Northwest:
1,140,000
If there are to be 475 representatives, use the apportionment plan
requested in Problems 56–60.
56. Adams’ plan
57. Jefferson’s plan
58. Hamilton’s plan
59. Webster’s plan
60. HH’s plan
858
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
17.4  Apportionment Paradoxes
As we saw in the last section, the U.S. Constitution mandated that representation in the
House of Representatives be based on proportional representation by state. The first three
apportionment plans, Adams’, Jefferson’s, and Hamilton’s plans, were debated in Con-
gress with regard to implementing this mandate using the population numbers from the
1790 census. The easiest to apply was Hamilton’s plan, which, as we saw, was vetoed by
Washington. This left two plans that relied on modified divisors. Remember, the quota
rule states that the actual number of seats assigned to each state must be the lower or the
upper quota. Consider the following historical example.
Example
1
Apportionment in 1830
In the 1830 election, New York’s population was 1,918,578 and the U.S. population was
11,931,000. At that time, there were 240 seats in the House of Representatives. Deter-
mine the standard, upper, and lower quotas for New York in the 1830 election.
Solution
; the standard quota was 
. The lower
quota is 38 and the upper quota is 39.
1,918,578
d
< 38.59
d 5 11,931,000
240
Remember, in 1830 Jefferson’s plan was in place and the modified divisor used for that elec-
tion produced a number with a standard quota that rounded down to 40 (see Example 1; this
violated the quota rule). Daniel Webster was outraged, and he argued that the result was
unconstitutional. Unfortunately, he proposed a method that had the same flaw (namely, it
violated the quota rule). Any plan that uses a modified divisor can violate the quota rule.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.4
Apportionment Paradoxes
859
The same kind of inconsistencies can happen with any of the methods that use modi-
fied divisors and modified quotas to form the sum. Only Hamilton’s plan is immune to
this behavior, and all the other plans may violate the quota rule. You might ask, Why,
then, don’t we use Hamilton’s plan? We have another paradox to consider.
Alabama Paradox
A serious inconsistency in Hamilton’s plan was discovered in the 1880 census. Before the
number of seats in the House of Representatives was fixed at 435, there was a debate on
whether to have 299 or 300 seats in the House. Using Hamilton’s method with 299 mem-
bers, Alabama was to receive eight seats. But if the total number of representatives were
increased to 300, Alabama would receive only seven seats!
Example
2
Discover an apportionment paradox
Packard-Hue manufactures testing equipment at four locations and has just hired 200
new employees. Those employees are to be apportioned by production levels at the four
locations using Jefferson’s plan. The locations and production levels per week are
Atlanta:
12,520
Buffalo:
4,555
Carson City:
812
Denver:
947
a. What is the standard divisor?
b. What are the standard quotas?
c. What are the lower and upper quotas?
d. Find a modified divisor that will produce an appropriate modified quota totaling the
200 new employees.
e. Show that this apportionment violates the quota rule.
Solution
a. The total production is the sum of the production levels per week at each of the four
plants: 18,834. The standard divisor is 
.
b. We calculate the production quotas:
Factory
Production/wk
q
Lower Quota
Upper Quota
A:
12,520
132.95
132
133
B:
4,555
48.37
48
49
C:
812
8.62
8
9
D:
947
10.06
10
11
TOTALS:
198
202
c. The lower and upper quotas are found by rounding, as shown in the table in part b.
d. We need to lower d so that the values of q increase to give us a total of 200 when we
round them down. Let 
. We calculate the modified quotients.
Factory
Production/wk
Q
Round Down
A:
12,520
134.62
134
B:
4,555
48.98
48
C:
812
8.73
8
D:
947
10.18
10
TOTALS:
200
e. Notice that factory A’s lower quota is 132 and its upper quota is 133, but the modi-
fied quota produces a rounded-down value that is higher than the upper quota. Thus,
we say this example violates the quota rule.
D 5 93
d 5 18,834
200
< 94.17
Franklin
Lawrence
Morgan
Marion
Hancock
Walker
Fayette
Pickens
Shelby
Talladega
Randolph
Coosa
Bibb
Greene
Perry
Tallapoosa
Chambers
Russell
Barbour
Pike
Butler
Montgomery
Lowndes
Dallas
Wilcox
Clarke
Sumter
Choctaw
Monroe
Washington
Mobile
Covington
Coffee
Jefferson
Blount
Cherokee
Benton
St. Clair
Marshall
Henry
Baldwin
Lauderdale
Madison
Jackson
Limestone
De Kalb
Tuscaloosa
Autauga
Macon
Dale
Marengo
Conecuh
Alabama
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Example 6 of the previous section provides a good example of this paradox.
Example
3
Illustrate the Alabama paradox
Use Hamilton’s plan to distribute 46 computers to five high schools based on the num-
ber of remedial mathematics students. The standard divisor 
, and the
apportionment according to Hamilton’s plan as shown here:
Population
Standard Quota, q Lower Quota Hamilton’s Plan
Elsie Allen
39
3
3
Maria Carrillo
70
5
6
#1 (0.76)
Montgomery
18
1
2
#2 (0.48)
Piner
222
18
18
Santa Rosa
210
17
17
TOTAL:
44
46
Now, suppose that a parent at Montgomery High School heard of the computer distribu-
tion and contributed one additional computer to raise the number to 47 computers. What
is the apportionment according to Hamilton’s plan?
Solution
The standard divisor is 
. We recalculate the apportionment
according to Hamilton’s plan, using this new value of d.
Population
Standard Quota, q Lower Quota Hamilton’s Plan
Elsie Allen
39
3
3
Maria Carrillo
70
5
6
#1 (0.89)
Montgomery
18
1
1
Piner
222
18
19
#2 (0.67)
Santa Rosa
210
17
18
#3 (0.66)
TOTAL:
44
47
As you can see, the extra computer from the Montgomery parent caused that school to
receive one less computer!
210
d < 17.66
222
d < 18.67
18
d < 1.51
70
d < 5.89
39
d < 3.28
d 5 559
47 < 11.89
210
d < 17.28
222
d < 18.27
18
d < 1.48
70
d < 5.76
39
d < 3.21
d 5 559
46 < 12.152
If you look at the preceding example, it is easy to see how this paradox can occur.
Raising the number can cause a decimal part of one number to increase faster than the
decimal part of another, changing their “rank” in their decimal parts.
Population Paradox
Shortly after the discovery of the Alabama paradox, another paradox was discovered
around 1900 while Congress was still using Hamilton’s plan. It is possible for the popula-
tion of one state to be growing at a faster rate than another state, but still lose seats to the
slower-growing state.
860
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
A reapportionment in which an increase in the total number of seats results in a loss
in the seats for some state is known as the Alabama paradox.
Alabama Paradox
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.4
Apportionment Paradoxes
861
Solution
In 1990, 
. The standard quotas are (in thousands)
Borough
Population
q
Lower Quota
Hamilton’s Plan
A
3,755
7.49
7
8 (#1)
B
10,250
20.46
20
20
C
36,100
72.05
72
72
TOTAL
50,105
99
100
In 2000,
.
Borough
Population
q
Lower Quota
Hamilton’s Plan
A
3,800
7.55
7
7
B
10,350
20.58
20
21 (#2)
C
36,150
71.87
71
72 (#1)
TOTAL
50,300
98
100
Now, here are the percent increases:
Borough
1990
2000
Increase
Percent Increase
A
3,755
3,800
45
B
10,250
10,350
100
C
36,100
36,150
50
Anderson Valley had the largest percent increase, but lost one teacher to Bennett Valley.
This is an example of the population paradox.
50
36,100 < 0.14%
100
10,250 < 0.98%
45
3,755 < 1.20%
d 5 50,300
100
5 503
d 5 50,105
100
5 501.05
For an example of the population paradox, consider the following example.
Example
4
Illustrate the population paradox
Suppose there are 100 new teachers to be apportioned to the three boroughs according
to their 1990 population using Hamilton’s plan. The population of each borough is
1990
2000
Anderson Valley
3,755
3,800
Bennett Valley
10,250
10,350
Central Valley
36,100
36,150
TOTAL
50,105
50,300
Show that this example illustrates the population paradox.
When there is a fixed number of seats, a reapportionment that causes a state to lose a
seat to another state even though the percent increase in the population of the state
that loses the seat is larger than the percent increase of the state that wins the seat is
called the population paradox.
Population Paradox
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

862
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Example
5
Illustrate the new states paradox
Suppose a school received a grant of 20 calculators to distribute to two schools:
Elsie Allen
71 advanced math students
Maria Carrillo
119 advanced math students
TOTAL
190 advanced math students
New States Paradox
The last paradox we will discuss was discovered in 1907 when Oklahoma joined the
Union. If a new state is added to the existing states and the number of seats being appor-
tioned is increased to prevent decreasing the existing apportionment, addition may cause
a shift in some of the original allocations.
The following example is a simplified version of Example 3.
The standard divisor is 
. That is, there is one calculator for each 9 or
10 students. The calculators are to be apportioned according to Hamilton’s plan.
School
Number
q
Round Down
Hamilton’s Plan
Elsie Allen
71
7.47
7
7
Maria Carrillo
119
12.53
12
13 (#1)
TOTAL
190
19
20
Now, suppose a parent decides to donate 5 more calculators for Ridgeway High, with
a student population of 51 advanced math students. Shouldn’t that be just right to
accommodate the new school? Show that this example illustrates the new states para-
dox by calculating the new apportionment using this added contribution.
Solution
Elsie Allen
71 advanced math students
Maria Carrillo
119 advanced math students
Ridgeway
51 advanced math students
TOTAL
241 advanced math students
The standard divisor is
. The calculators are to be apportioned according
to Hamilton’s plan.
School
Number
q
Round Down
Hamilton’s Plan
Elsie Allen
71
7.37
7
8 (#1)
Maria Carrillo
119
12.34
12
12
Ridgeway
51
5.29
5
5
TOTAL
241
24
25
Notice that even though the five new calculators went to Ridgeway (as intended), the
addition (new state) caused an adjustment on the prior apportionment. This is an example
of the new states paradox.
d 5 241
25 5 9.64
d 5 190
20 5 9.5
A reapportionment in which an increase in the total number of seats causes a shift in
the apportionment of the existing states is known as the new states paradox.
New States Paradox
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.4
Apportionment Paradoxes
863
Balinski and Young’s Impossibility Theorem
In 1980 two mathematicians proved that if any apportionment plan satisfies the quota
rule, then it must permit the possibility of some other paradox. Here is a statement of
Balinski and Young’s impossibility theorem.
Any apportionment plan that does not violate the quota rule must produce paradoxes.
And any apportionment plan that does not produce paradoxes must violate the 
quota rule.
Balinski and Young’s Impossibility Theorem
There is a footnote, however, to this theorem. The second part of this theorem is true
only when the number of seats to be apportioned is fixed up front, as it is fixed with the
U.S. House of Representatives to be 435.
We conclude with a summary of the paradoxes of this section, along with the quota
rule, in Table 17.10.
TABLE 17.10
Comparison of Apportionment Paradoxes
Paradox
Comment
Adams’
Jefferson’s
Hamilton’s
Webster’s
HH
Quota rule
Apportionment must be either the
lower or upper quota.
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Alabama paradox
An increase in the total may result 
in a loss for a state.
No
No
Yes
No
No
Population 
paradox
One state may lose seats to another
even though its percent increase is
larger.
No
No
Yes
No
No
New states 
paradox
The addition of a new state may
change the apportionment of
another group.
No
No
Yes
No
No
Note: “Yes” means that the apportionment method may violate the stated paradox. “No” means that the apportionment method may not violate the stated paradox.
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the Alabama paradox?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the population paradox?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the new states paradox?
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What does Balinski and Young’s 
impossibility theorem say?
Use Adams’ plan in Problems 5–6. Show that it violates the quota rule.
5. State:
A
B
C
D
Population:
68,500
34,700
14,800
9,500
Number of seats: 100
6. State:
A
B
C
D
Population:
685
347
160
95
Number of seats: 100
Problem Set 17.4
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

864
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Use Jefferson’s plan in Problems 7–10. Show that it violates the
quota rule.
7. State:
A
B
C
D
Population:
68,500
34,700
16,000
9,500
Number of seats: 100
8. State:
A
B
C
D
Population:
17,179
7,500
49,400
5,824
Number of seats: 132
9. State:
A
B
C
D
E
Population:
1,100
1,100
1,515
4,590
2,010
Number of seats: 200
10. State:
A
B
C
D
E
Population:
1,700
3,300
7,000
24,190
8,810
Number of seats: 150
In Problems 11–14, use Hamilton’s plan to apportion the new seats
to the existing states. Then increase the number of seats by one and
decide whether the Alabama paradox occurs. Assume that the pop-
ulations are in thousands. 
11. State:
A
B
C
D
Population:
181
246
812
1,485
Number of seats: 246
12. State:
A
B
C
D
Population:
235
318
564
938
Number of seats: 45
13. State:
A
B
C
D
E
Population:
300
301
340
630
505
Number of seats: 50
14. State:
A
B
C
D
E
Population:
300
700
800
800
701
Number of seats: 82
In Problems 15–18, apportion the indicated number of
representatives to three states, A, B, and C, using Hamilton’s plan.
Next, use the revised populations to reapportion the representatives.
Decide whether the population paradox occurs.
15. State:
A
B
C
Population:
55,200
124,900
190,000
Revised pop.:
61,100
148,100
215,000
Number of seats: 11
16. State:
A
B
C
Population:
90,000
124,800
226,000
Revised pop.:
98,000
144,900
247,100
Number of seats: 13
17. State:
A
B
C
Population:
89,950
124,800
226,000
Revised pop.:
97,950
144,900
247,100
Number of seats: 13
18. State:
A
B
C
Population:
7,510
20,500
72,000
Revised pop.:
7,650
20,800
72,200
Number of seats: 100
In Problems 19–22, apportion the indicated number of representatives
to two states, A and B, using Hamilton’s plan. Next, recalculate the
apportionment using Hamilton’s plan for the three states, C and the
original states. Decide whether the new states paradox occurs.
19. State:
A
B
C
Population:
144,899
59,096
38,240
Number of original seats: 12
Number of additional seats: 2
20. State:
A
B
C
Population:
394,990
753,950
138,550
Number of original seats: 16
Number of additional seats: 1
21. State:
A
B
C
Population:
7,000,500
9,290,500
1,450,000
Number of original seats: 50
Number of additional seats: 4
22. State:
A
B
C
Population:
265,000
104,000
69,000
Number of original seats: 16
Number of additional seats: 2
Level 2
23. Packard-Hue manufactures testing equipment at four locations,
and has just hired 300 new employees. Those employees are to
be apportioned using production levels at the four locations
according to Jefferson’s plan. The locations and production 
are as follows:
Atlanta:
12,520
Buffalo:
4,555
Carson City:
812
Denver:
947
a. What is the standard divisor?
b. What are the standard quotas?
c. What are the lower and upper quotas?
d. Find a modified divisor that will produce appropriate modi-
fied quotas totaling the 300 new employees.
e. Does this violate the quota rule?
24. The English enrollments at five high schools in the Santa Rosa
Unified School District are as follows:
Elsie Allen:
154
Maria Carillo:
142
Montgomery:
165
Piner:
307
Santa Rosa:
231
TOTAL:
999
Suppose that 45 copies of an important instructional video are
to be allocated to the schools by using Hamilton’s plan and the
school population.
a. What is the standard divisor?
b. What are the standard quotas?
c. What are the lower and upper quotas?
d. What are the allocations for the 45 videos?
e. What are the allocations for 46 videos?
f. Does this illustrate the Alabama paradox?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.5
Chapter Summary
865
25. The township of Bella Rosa is divided into two districts,
uptown (pop. 16,980) and downtown (pop. 3,350), and is
governed by 100 council members.
a. What is the standard divisor?
b. What are the standard quotas?
c. How should the seats be apportioned using Hamilton’s
plan?
d. Suppose the township annexes a third district (pop. 2,500).
Using the standard divisor from part a, it was agreed that
the new district should add 12 new seats. Carry out this new
apportionment for the township using Hamilton’s plan.
e. Does this example illustrate the new states paradox?
26. Suppose the annual salaries of three people are 
Employee #1
$43,100
Employee #2
$42,150
Employee #3 (half-time)
$20,000
a. What are their salaries if they are given a 5% raise, and then
the result is rounded to the nearest $1,000 using Hamilton’s
plan with a cap on the total salaries of $111,000?
b. Suppose the salary increase is to be 6% with a cap of
$111,000. What are the salaries if they are rounded to the
nearest $1,000 using Hamilton’s plan?
c. If you compare parts a and b, are any of the paradoxes 
illustrated?
Problem Solving  3
27. A fair apportionment of dividing a leftover piece of cake between
two children is to let child #1 cut the cake into two pieces and
then to let child #2 pick which piece he or she wants. Consider
the following apportionment of dividing the leftover piece of
cake among three children. Let the first child cut the cake into
two pieces. Then the second child is permitted to cut one of those
pieces into two parts. Child #3 can select any of the pieces, fol-
lowed by child #2 selecting one of the remaining pieces,
followed by child #1 who gets the remaining piece. Is this
allocation process fair if each child’s goal is to maximize the size
of hisher own piece of cake?
28. An elderly rancher died and left her estate to her three
children. She bequeathed her 17 prize horses in the 
following manner: 12 to the eldest, 13 to the second child,
and 19 to the youngest. How would you divide 
this estate?
29. The children (see Problem 28) decided to call in a very wise
judge to help in the distribution of the rancher’s estate. The
judge arrived with a horse of his own. He put his horse in with
the 17 belonging to the estate, and then told each child to pick
from among the 18 in the proportions stipulated by the will
(but be careful, he warned, not to pick his horse). The first
child took nine horses, the second child took six, and the third
child, two. The 17 horses were thus divided among the
children. The wise judge took his horse from the corral, took a
fair sum for his services, and rode off into the sunset.
The youngest son complained that the oldest son received 9
horses (but was entitled to only 172  8.5 horses). The judge
was asked about this, and he faxed the children the following
message: “You all received more than you deserved. The eldest
received 12 of an ‘extra’ horse, the middle child received 13
more, and the youngest, 19 of a horse ‘extra.’” Apportion the
horses according to Adams’, Jefferson’s, and Webster’s plans.
Which plan gives the appropriate distribution of horses?
30. The children (see Problem 28) decided to call in a very wise
judge to help in the distribution of the rancher’s estate. They in-
formed the judge that the 17 horses were not of equal value. The
children agreed on a ranking of the 17 horses (#1 being the best
and #17 being a real dog of a horse). They asked the judge to
divide the estate fairly so that each child would receive not only
the correct number of horses but horses whose average rank
would also be the same. For example, if a child received horses
1 and 17, the number of horses is two and the average value is
. How did the judge apportion the horses?
1 1 17
2
5 9
Important Ideas
Voting procedures [17.1]
Summary of voting methods, Table 17.2 [17.1]
Fair voting principles: majority criterion, Condorcet criterion, 
monotonicity criterion, irrelevant alternatives criterion [17.2]
Arrow’s impossibility theorem [17.2]
Legislative seats or other resources [17.3]
Flaws or inconsistencies in the apportionment process [17.4]
Representatives and
direct Taxes shall be
apportioned among the
several States which may
be included in this
Union, according to their
respective numbers . . .
ARTICLE I, SECTION 2 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES
17.5
CHAPTER SUMMARY
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

866
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
these important ideas. Look back at the definition and property boxes. If you look online,
you will find a list of important terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of
problems that were introduced. You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by
working the problems in this section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test help
in studying for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
Chapter 17
Review Questions
A taste test is conducted on the Atlantic City Boardwalk. People
are given samples of Coke, Pepsi, and Safeway brands of cola in
unmarked cups, and are then asked to rank them in order of prefer-
ence. The first cup is labeled A, the second, B, and the third, C.
Here are the results of the voting:
(CBA)
(ABC)
(BAC)
18
15
12
Use this information in Problems 1–5.
1. Does any item have a majority? If not, how about a plurality?
2. How many rankings of the three colas received no votes?
3. Who wins using the Hare method?
4. Who wins a pairwise comparison?
5. Are any of the fairness criteria violated?
In an election with three candidates, A, B, and C, we find the
following results of the voting:
(ABC)
(ACB)
(BAC)
(BCA)
(CBA)
(CAB)
22%
23%
15%
29%
7%
4%
Use this information in Problems 6–7.
6. Does anyone receive a plurality?
7. Is there a Condorcet winner?
8. In 2001 the voting for the Heisman Trophy involved 
925 ballots voting for three college football players. 
The results (in alphabetical order) were as follows:
David Carr (Fresno State): 34, 60, 58
Eric Crouch (Nebraska): 162, 98, 88
Ken Dorsey (Miami): 109, 122, 67
Dwight Freeney (Syracuse): 2, 6, 24
Rex Grossman (Florida): 137, 105, 87
Joey Harrington (Oregon): 54, 68, 66
Bryant McKinnie (Miami): 26, 12, 14
Julius Peppers (North Carolina): 2, 10, 15
Antwaan Randle El (Indiana): 46, 39, 51
Roy Williams (Oklahoma): 13, 36, 35
What was the Borda count for each player? Who was the
winner according to the Borda count?
Consider a vote for four candidates with the following results:
(ADBC)
(CABD)
(BCDA)
(DBAC)
7
5
4
1
Use this information for Problems 9–11. If there is a tie, break
the tie by having a runoff of the tied candidates.
9. Who wins by the Hare method?
10. Who wins by the pairwise comparison method?
11. If B pulls out before the election, who wins? Does this
violate the irrelevant alternatives criterion?
Chemistry is taught at five high schools in the Santa Rosa
Unified School District. The district has just received a grant of
100 microscopes, which are to be apportioned to the five high
schools based on each school’s chemistry population. Use the data
in Table 17.11 for Problems 12–19.
TABLE 17.11
Statistics for Santa Rosa Unified School
District High Schools
School
# Students
# Chemistry
Students
Elsie Allen
1,524
90
Maria Carrillo
1,687
215
Montgomery
1,755
268
Piner
1,519
133
Santa Rosa
1,797
84
TOTAL
8,282
790
12. Find the standard divisor.
13. What are the standard, lower, and upper quotas?
14. Apportion the microscopes using Adams’ plan.
15. Apportion the microscopes using Jefferson’s plan.
16. Apportion the microscopes using Hamilton’s plan.
17. Apportion the microscopes using Webster’s plan.
18. Apportion the microscopes using HH’s plan.
19. Can you point out any apportionment paradoxes?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TABLE 17.12
Serious Crimes in St. Louis, Missouri in 2001
Precinct
Number of Violent Crimes/
100 Residents
Downtown
24.45
Fairground
10.04
Columbus Square
9.75
Downtown West
9.43
Peabody
9.01
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on one of these books:
Voting Procedures, Michael Dummett (Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press, 1984). 
Considerations on Representative Government, John
Stuart Mill (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1862).
20. The city of St. Louis, Missouri, passed a ballot measure to pro-
vide and pay for 180 surveillance cameras for high-crime areas.
The city council mandated that these cameras be apportioned
among the five highest crime areas, based on the 2001 crime
statistics, summarized in Table 17.12. Use Webster’s plan.
Section 17.5
Chapter Summary
867
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

868
CHAPTER 17
The Nature of Voting and Apportionment
Group
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Working in small groups is typical of most work environments, and learning to work with
others to communicate specific ideas is an important skill. Work with three or four other
students to submit a single report based on each of the following questions.
G55. Historical Quest
Write a history of apportionment in the United States House of
Representatives. Pay particular attention to the paradoxes of apportionment.
G56. Of all possible collections of states that yield 270 or more electoral votes—enough to
win a presidential election—which collection has the smallest geographical area?
REFERENCES
Frederick S.Hillier, and Gerald J. Lieberman. Introduction to 
Operations Research. 4th ed. Oakland: Holden Day, 1986. 
Charles Redmond, Michael Federici, and Donald Platte, “Proof by Contradiction and
the Electoral College,” The Mathematics Teacher, Vol. 91, No. 8, November 1998,
pp. 655–658.
G57. Historical Quest
Prepare a list of women mathematicians from the history of
mathematics. Answer the question, “Why were so few mathematicians female?”
REFERENCES
Teri Perl, Math Equals: Biographies of Women Mathematicians
plus Related Activities. (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1978).
Loretta Kelley, “Why Were So Few Mathematicians Female?” The Mathematics
Teacher, October 1996.
Barbara Sicherman and Carol H. Green, eds. Notable American Women: The Modern
Period. A Biographical Dictionary. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, Harvard
University Press, 1980).
Outstanding Women in Mathematics and Science (National Women’s History
Project, Windsor, CA 95492, 1991).
G58. Historical Quest
Prepare a list of black mathematicians from the history of 
mathematics.
REFERENCE
Virginia Newell et al., eds. Black Mathematicians and Their Works
(Ardmore, PA: Dorrance & Company, 1980).
G59 Historical Quest
Prepare a list of mathematicians with the first name of Karl.
G60. Investigate some item of interest to your group. It might be to predict the outcome of
an upcoming election, or your favorite song or movie. Your group should make up a
list of 5 or 6 choices; for example, you might be researching which is the best of the
Star Wars movies. Make up a written ballot and ask at least 50 people to rank the
items on your list. Summarize the outcome of your poll. Was there a majority
winner? A plurality winner? Who wins according to the Borda count and the Hare
methods? What about the pairwise comparison method? Present a summary of your
results.
Go to
www.mathnature.com
for references and links. 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.5
Chapter Summary
869
Individual
RESEARCH PROJECTS
www.mathnature.com 
Learning to use sources outside your classroom and textbook is an important skill, and
here are some ideas for extending some of the ideas discussed in this chapter. You can find
references to these projects in a library or at www.mathnature.com.
PROJECT 17.1 Research how voting is conducted for the following events. Use the termi-
nology of this chapter, not the terminology used in the original sources.
a. Heisman Trophy Award
b. Selecting an Olympic host city
c. The Academy Awards
d. The Nobel Prizes
e. The Pulitzer Prize
PROJECT 17.2 Compare and contrast the voting paradoxes. Which one do you find the
most disturbing, and why? Which do you find the least disturbing, and why?
PROJECT 17.3 Compare and contrast the different apportionment plans. Which method
do you think is best? Support your position with examples and facts.
PROJECT 17.4 Compare and contrast the apportionment paradoxes. Which one of these
do you find the most disturbing, and why? Which one of these do you find the least
disturbing, and why?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
18.1 What Is Calculus?
871
The limit: Zeno’s paradox, the deriva-
tive: tangent problem, the integral: 
area problem, mathematical modeling
18.2 Limits
880
The limit of a sequence, limits to 
infinity, infinite limits
18.3 Derivatives
886
Average rate of change, instantaneous
rate of change, derivative, tangent line,
velocity
18
Outline
What in the World?
“Wow! That is much bigger than I imagined. I think
I’ll let you guys ride and I’ll watch,” said Charlie.
“Come on . . . it will be fun. We have made this
our goal, man! This is Colossus. We studied it in our
math class. It is 120 ft tall and is the world’s tallest
wooden coaster. It’s been open almost 30 years
and thousands have ridden safely,” said Miguel 
with a reassuring tap on the arm. “Remember, 
we calculated its top velocity . . . ”
Overview
In this chapter, we move from elementary mathematics to
presenting an overview of the underpinnings of college
mathematics. Some of the basic building blocks for ad-
vanced mathematics are functions, functional notation, and
limits. These ideas are, in turn, the building blocks for a dis-
cussion of the nature of calculus.
It is not the intent of this chapter to teach calculus, but
to discuss the nature of calculus in a context that will enable
you to see why its invention was not only necessary, but 
inevitable.
THE NATURE OF CALCULUS
18.4 Integrals
897
Area function, antiderivatives as 
areas, the definite integral, areas 
as antiderivatives
18.5 Chapter Summary
905
Important terms, types of problems,
review problems, book reports 
© 2005 Joel Rogers www.CoasterGallery.com
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.1
What Is Calculus?
871
6
7
8
9
10
11
?
18.1  What Is Calculus?
The language of calculus has spread to all scientific fields; the 
insight it conveys about the nature of change is something that 
no educated person can afford to be without.
EVERYBODY COUNTS, NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL
CHAPTER CHALLENGE
See if you can fill in the question mark.
12
5
19
Q a
Q a 
Q
a 
Historical
Isaac Newton
(1642–1727)
NOTE
Karl Smith library
Gottfreid Leibniz 
(1646–1716)
Karl Smith library
The invention of calculus is credited jointly to Isaac Newton and 
Gottfried Leibniz. At the time of their respective break-through publi-
cations using calculus (around 1685), there was a bitter controversy
throughout Europe as to whose work had been done first, along with
accusations that each stole the idea from the other. Part of the expla-
nation for this is the fact that each had done his actual work earlier,
and another part can be attributed to the rivalry between mathemati-
cians in England who championed Newton and those in Europe who
supported Leibniz. The fact is, however, that the intellectual climate
for the invention of calculus was ripe and actually inevitable.
If there is an event that marked the coming of age of mathematics in Western culture, it must
be the essentially simultaneous development of the calculus by Newton and Leibniz in the
17th century. Before this remarkable synthesis, mathematics had often been viewed as
merely a strange but harmless pursuit, indulged in by those with an excess of leisure time.
After the calculus, mathematics became virtually the only acceptable language for describ-
ing the physical universe. This view of mathematics and its association with the scientific
method has come to dominate the Western view of how the world ought to be explained.
What distinguishes calculus from algebra, geometry, and trigonometry is the tran-
sition from static or discrete applications (see Figure 18.1) to those that are dynamic or
continuous (see Figure 18.2). For example, in elementary mathematics we consider the
slope of a line, but in calculus we define the (nonconstant) slope of a nonlinear curve.
In elementary mathematics we find average values of position and velocity, but in cal-
culus we can find instantaneous values of changes of velocity and acceleration. In ele-
mentary mathematics we find the average of a finite collection of numbers, but in
calculus we can find the average value of a function with infinitely many values over
an interval.
T
T
6
7
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Is it possible for Achilles to overtake the tortoise? Zeno pointed out that by the time
Achilles reaches the tortoise’s starting point, 
, the tortoise will have moved ahead
to a new point . When Achilles gets to this next point, 
, the tortoise will be at a new
point, . The tortoise, even though much slower than Achilles, keeps moving forward.
Although the distance between Achilles and the tortoise is getting smaller and smaller,
the tortoise will apparently always be ahead.
Of course, common sense tells us that Achilles will overtake the slow tortoise, but
where is the error in reasoning in the previous paragraph that always gives the tortoise the
lead? The error is in the assumption that an infinite amount of time is required to cover 
a distance divided into an infinite number of segments. This discussion is getting at an 
essential idea in calculus—namely, the notion of a limit.
Consider the successive positions for both Achilles and the tortoise:
↓Starting position
Achilles:
. . .
Tortoise:
. . .
t0, t1, t2, t3,
a0, a1, a2, a3,
t2
a2
t1
a1 5 t0
Calculus is the mathematics of motion and change, which is why calculus is a pre-
requisite for many courses. Whenever we move from the static to the dynamic, we would
consider using calculus.
The development of calculus in the 17th century by Newton and Leibniz was the result
of their attempt to answer some fundamental questions about the world and the way things
work. These investigations led to two fundamental concepts of calculus, namely, the idea of
a derivative and that of an integral. The breakthrough in the development of these concepts
was the formulation of a mathematical tool called a limit.
1. Limit: The limit is a mathematical tool for studying the tendency of a function as its
variable approaches some value. Calculus is based on the concept of limit. We shall
introduce the limit of a function informally in the next section. 
2. Derivative: The derivative is defined as a certain type of limit, and it is used initially
to compute rates of change and slopes of tangent lines to curves. The study of deriva-
tives is called differential calculus. Derivatives can be used in sketching graphs and in
finding the extreme (largest and smallest) values of functions. We shall discuss deriv-
atives in Section 18.3.
3. Integral: The integral is found by taking a special limit of a sum of terms, and the
study of this process is called integral calculus. Area, volume, arc length, work, and
hydrostatic force are a few of the many quantities that can be expressed as integrals.
We shall discuss integrals in Section 18.4.
In this section, let us take an intuitive look at each of these three essential ideas of
calculus.
The Limit: Zeno’s Paradox
In Chapter 6 we first introduced Zeno’s paradox. Zeno (ca. 500 BC) was a Greek philoso-
pher known primarily for his famous paradoxes. One of those concerns a race between
Achilles, a legendary Greek hero, and a tortoise. When the race begins, the (slower) tor-
toise is given a head start, as shown in Figure 18.3.
872
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS
x
y
1. Slope of a line
4. Average position
     and velocity
5. Average of a finite
     collection of numbers
3. Area of a region bounded
     by line segments
2. Tangent line to a circle
x
y
a
b
Tortoise,
Achilles,
t0
t1
t2
a0
a1
a2
a3
FIGURE 18.1 Topics from elemen-
tary mathematics
FIGURE 18.3 Achilles and the tortoise
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.1
What Is Calculus?
873
CALCULUS
2. Tangent line to a general
curve
1. Slope of a curve
x
y
5. Average of an infinite
     collection of numbers
3. Area of a region bounded
     by curves
4. Instantaneous changes in
     position and velocity
x
y
a
b
 P
a. At each point P on a circle,
    there is one line that intersects
    the circle exactly once.
P
b. At a point P on a curve, there
    may be several lines that
    intersect that curve only once.
FIGURE 18.2 Topics from 
calculus
After the start, the positions for Achilles, as well as those for the tortoise, form sets of po-
sitions that are ordered with positive integers. Such ordered listings are called sequences
(see Section 11.3).
For Achilles and the tortoise we have two sequences {
. . . , 
, . . .} and
{
. . . , tn, . . .}, where 

for all values of n. Both the sequence for Achilles’
position and the sequence for the tortoise’s position have limits, and it is precisely at that
limit point that Achilles overtakes the tortoise. The idea of limit will be discussed in the
next section, and it is this limit idea that allows us to define the other two basic concepts
of calculus: the derivative and the integral. Even if the solution to Zeno’s paradox using
limits seems unnatural at first, do not be discouraged. It took over 2000 years to refine
the ideas of Zeno and provide conclusive answers to those questions about limits. The 
following example will provide an intuitive preview of a limit, which we consider in more
detail in Section 18.2.
tn
an
t1, t2, t3,
an
a1, a2, a3,
Example
1
Intuitively find a limit
The sequence 
can be described by writing a general term:
, where
. . . .* Can you guess the limit, L, of this sequence? We will say that L is
the number that the sequence with general term 
tends toward as n becomes large
without bound. We will define a notation to summarize this idea:
Solution
As you consider larger and larger values for n, you find a sequence of fractions:
It is reasonable to guess that the sequence of fractions is approaching the number 1. This
number is called the limit.
1
2, 2
3, 3
4, . . . , 1,000
1,001, 1,001
1,002, .  .  . , 9,999,999
10,000,000, .  .  . 
L 5 lim
nS`
 
n
n 1 1
n
n 1 1
n 5 1, 2, 3, ,4,
n
n 1 1
1
2, 2
3, 3
4, 4
5, c
The Derivative: The Tangent Problem
A tangent line (or, if the context is clear, simply say “tangent”) to a circle at a given
point P is a line that intersects the circle at P and only at P (see Figure 18.4a). This char-
acterization does not apply for curves in general, as you can see by looking at Figure
18.4b. If we wish to have one tangent line, which line shown should be called the tan-
gent to the curve?
FIGURE 18.4 Tangent line
*You might wish to review sequences and general terms in Section 11.3.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To find a tangent line, begin by considering a line that passes through two points P
and Q on the curve, as shown in Figure 18.5a. This line is called a secant line.
874
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
a
a 1 h
ƒ(a)
ƒ(a 1 h)
P
Q
ƒ
x
y
Secant line
ƒ(a 1 h) 2 ƒ(a)
h
FIGURE 18.5 Tangent line is the “limiting line” as Q approaches P
a
a 1 h
ƒ(a)
ƒ(a 1 h)
P
Q
ƒ
x
y
Secant line
Tangent line
The coordinates of the two points P and Q are 
and 
. The
slope of the secant line is
Now imagine that Q moves along the curve toward P, as shown in Figure 18.5b. You can
see that the secant line approaches a limiting position as h approaches zero. We define
this limiting position to be the tangent line. The slope of the tangent line is defined as a
limit of the sequence of slopes of a set of secant lines. Once again, we can use limit nota-
tion to summarize this idea: We say that the slopes of the secant lines, as h becomes
small, tend toward a number that we call the slope of the tangent line. We will define the
following notation to summarize this idea:
Why would the slope of a tangent line be important? That is what we investigate in the
first half of a calculus course, and it forms the definition of derivative, which is the foun-
dation for what is called differential calculus (see Section 18.3).
The Integral: The Area Problem
You probably know the formula for the area of a circle with radius r:
The Egyptians were the first to use this formula over 5,000 years ago, but the Greek
Archimedes (ca. 300 B.C.) showed how to derive the formula for the area of a circle by us-
ing a limiting process. Consider the areas of inscribed polygons, as shown in Figure 18.6.
Since we know the areas of these polygons, we can use them to estimate the area of a
circle. Even though Archimedes did not use the following notation, here is the essence of
what he did, using a method called “exhaustion”:
Let 
be the area of the inscribed equilateral triangle;
be the area of the inscribed square;
be the area of the inscribed regular pentagon.
How can we find the area of this circle? As you can see from Figure 18.6, if we consider
the area of 
, then 
, then 
. . . , we should have a sequence of areas such that each
successive area more closely approximates that of the circle. We write this idea as a limit
statement:
A 5 lim
nS`
 An
A5,
A4
A3
A5
A4
A3
A 5 pr2
lim
hS0 f 1a 1 h2 2 f 1a2
h
5 f 1a 1 h2 2 f 1a2
h
RISE
RUN
m 5
Q1a 1 h, f 1a 1 h2 2
P1a, f 1a2 2
FIGURE 18.6 Approximating the
area of a circle
A5
A12
…
A3
A4
a. Locate points P and Q and draw secant line
b. Let point Q “slide” toward P and draw lines
Check www
.mathnature.com for
some links to interac-
tive sites illustrating
the concept that a
sequence of secant
lines approaches a 
tangent line.
Check www
.mathnature.com for a
link amplifying this idea.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In this course we will use limits in yet a different way to find the areas of regions en-
closed by curves. For example, consider the area shown in color in Figure 18.7.
Section 18.1
What Is Calculus?
875
FIGURE 18.7 Area under a curve
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
y
x
y 5 x2
(1, 1)
1.2
0.4
0.6
0.8 1.0
We can approximate the area by using rectangles. If 
is the area of the nth rectangle,
then the total area can be approximated by finding the sum
The process is shown in Figure 18.8.
A1 1 A2 1 A3 1 c1 An21 1 An
An
FIGURE 18.8 Approximating the area using rectangles
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
y
x
y 5 x2
(1, 1)
1.2
0.4
0.6
0.8 1.0
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
y
x
y 5 x 2
(1,1)
1.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Notice that in the Figure 18.8a, the area of the rectangles approximates the area under the
curve, but there is some error. In Figure 18.8b, there is a little less error than in the first
approximation. As more rectangles are included, the error decreases.
The area problem leads to a process called integration, and the study of integration
forms what is called integral calculus (see Section 18.4). Similar reasoning allows us to
calculate such quantities as volume, the length of a curve, the average value, or the
amount of work required for a particular task.
Mathematical Modeling
A real-life situation is usually far too complicated to be precisely and mathematically de-
fined. When confronted with a problem in the real world, therefore, it is usually neces-
sary to develop a mathematical framework based on certain assumptions about the real
world. This framework can then be used to find a solution to the real-world problem. The
process of developing this body of mathematics is referred to as mathematical model-
ing. Most mathematical models are dynamic (not static) and are continually being revised
(modified) as additional relevant information becomes known.
Some mathematical models are quite accurate, particularly those used in the physical
sciences. For example, one of the first models we will consider in calculus is a model 
for the path of a projectile. Other rather precise models predict such things as the time of
a. 8 approximating rectangles
b. 16 approximating rectangles
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

sunrise and sunset, or the speed at which an object falls in a vacuum. Some mathematical
models, however, are less accurate, especially those that involve examples from the life
sciences and social sciences. Only recently has modeling in these disciplines become pre-
cise enough to be expressed in terms of calculus.
What, precisely, is a mathematical model? Sometimes, mathematical modeling can
mean nothing more than a textbook word problem. But mathematical modeling can also
mean choosing appropriate mathematics to solve a problem that has previously been un-
solved. In this book, we use the term mathematical modeling to mean something be-
tween these two extremes. That is, it is a process we will apply to some real-life problem
that does not have an obvious solution. It usually cannot be solved by applying a single
formula.
The first step of what we call mathematical modeling involves abstraction.
876
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
Source: Illustration by Hank Iken, from “Plateau
Uplift and Climatic Change,” by William F. Rud-
dman and John E. Kutzbach, Scientific American,
March 1991, p. 68. © 1991 by Scientific American,
Inc. All rights reserved.
How Global Climate Is 
Modeled
We find a good example of 
mathematical modeling by 
looking at the work being done 
with weather prediction.  In 
theory, if the correct 
assumptions could be 
programmed into a computer, 
along with appropriate 
mathematical statements of the 
ways global climate conditions 
operate, we would have a 
model to predict the weather 
throughout the world.  In the 
global climate model, a system 
of equations calculates 
time-dependent changes in 
wind as well as temperature 
and moisture changes in the 
atmosphere and on the land.  
The model may also predict 
alterations in the temperature 
of the ocean's surface.  At the 
National Center for 
Atmospheric Research, a 
CRAY supercomputer is used 
to do this modeling.
SOLAR RADIATION
LAND SURFACE
RAINFALL
GLOBAL
MODEL
F  MA
(FORCE 
MASS 
ACCELERATION)
Q  T, V
(HEATING OF AIR
PRODUCES CHANGE
IN TEMPERATURE
AND VOLUME)
GAS LAWS AND
OTHER PHYSICAL
RELATIONS
OCEAN
Mathematical
 Model
  Abstraction
Real-W orld
Problem
Real-World
Problem
Mathematical
 Model
Predictions
  Abstraction
Derive
Results
Real-W orld
Problem
  Abstraction
Derive
Results
Mathematical
Model
Predictions
Compare and Interpret
With the method of abstraction, certain assumptions about the real world are made, vari-
ables are defined, and appropriate mathematics is developed. The next step is to simplify
the mathematics or derive related mathematical facts from the mathematical model.
The results derived from the mathematical model should lead us to some predic-
tions about the real world.  The next step is to gather data from the situation being mod-
eled, and then to compare those data with the predictions.  If the two do not agree, then
the gathered data are used to modify the assumptions used in the model.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mathematical modeling is an ongoing process. As long as the predictions match the
real world, the assumptions made about the real world are regarded as correct, as are the
defined variables. On the other hand, as discrepancies are noticed, it is necessary to con-
struct a closer and a more dependable mathematical model. You might wish to read the
article in Scientific American presented in the News Clip.
Section 18.1
What Is Calculus?
877
Example
2
Formulate a budget to illustrate modeling
Develop a monthly budget for your personal expenses. You can assume any family situ-
ation (for example, number of people and amount of income and expenses), but this
budget requires that you are self-sufficient and that income and expenses must always
be equal. This example is not about budgets, but about the process of modeling.
Solution
The first step in modeling is to understand the problem. Let us assume that we
are budgeting for one person living at home with his or her parents. We begin by setting up
a mathematical model to describe the income and expenses as shown in the margin.
This budget satisfies the condition that income equals expenses. However, this model
does not reflect the real world. We need to compare and interpret the results of this budget
with reality. What about taxes and FICA? Let us make a second attempt at abstraction.
MONTHLY BUDGET
 
INCOME
                  EXPENSES
 
Car payments
 
Savings
 
Movies
 
Gasoline
$125.00
$  50.00
$  40.00
$  60.00
$275.00
$275.00
MONTHLY BUDGET
     INCOME
      Monthly Income before taxes
      From parents
     TOTAL MONTHLY INCOME
      EXPENSES
                                       Fixed
$125.00
$170.00
$85.00
$110.00
$65.00
$35.00
$25.00
$25.00
$640.00
$530.00
$1,170.00
Rent/mortgage
Car payments
Income tax withholding
FICA
Retirement
Contributions
Installments
Wells Fargo
Sears
VISA
Savings
Wells Fargo
Other
Total Fixed Expenses
Total Variable Expenses
TOTAL MONTHLY EXPENSE
Food
Gasoline
Utilities
Electricity
Gas
Water/Sewer
Telephone
Cable TV
Other
Entertainment
Other
Total Variable Expenses
$70.00
$35.00
$30.00
$135.00
$400.00
$1,040.00
$1,175.00
$135.00
Variable
We can see that the budget is a rough estimate of actual real-world spending, but it
is not quite balanced (which it needs to be) and does not include “hidden” income and
expenses, such as value for the room and board at home. “But my parents pay for that!”
is the response.
A model must reflect the true income and expenses for the individual, so we must
go back and create a more realistic model. Even though “cash” is not exchanged for
room and board, “value” is given and must be taken into account. What about income or
expenses that do not occur monthly? How about clothes, car repairs, or a vacation?
Once again, the modeling process compares and interprets, and then refines with an-
other abstraction.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

878
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
                                         MONTHLY BUDGET
     INCOME
      Monthly Income before taxes
      From parents
      Credit cards
      Total other/12
     TOTAL MONTHLY INCOME
$350.00
$125.00
$170.00
$85.00
$110.00
$65.00
$105.00
$35.00
$25.00
$25.00
$65.00
$1,160.00
$475.00
$160.42
$1,795.42
$640.00
$530.00
$125.00
$59.58
$1,354.58
EXPENSES
Rent/mortgage
Car payments
Income tax withholding
FICA
Retirement
Contributions
Insurance
Installments
Wells Fargo
Sears
VISA
Savings
Wells Fargo
Other
Total Fixed Expenses
Total Variable Expenses
1/12 Nonmonthly
TOTAL MONTHLY EXPENSE
Food
Gasoline
Utilities
Electricity
Gas
Water/Sewer
Telephone
Cable TV
Other
Entertainment
Other
Total Variable Expense
$280.00
$70.00
$25.00
$15.00
$35.00
$20.00
$30.00
$475.00
Variable
Car repairs
Home repairs
Car license
Medical
Dental
Clothing
Gifts
Contributions
Vacation
Professional
Insurance:
Other:
Total Nonmonthly
$290.00
$85.00
$350.00
$400.00
$800.00
$1,925.00
Nonmonthly
Fixed
Other nonmonthly income
Total other
$500.00
$215.00
$715.00
Now this iteration of the budget is much more realistic, but it does not “balance.”
Each successive iteration should more closely model the real world, and to complicate
the process, the real-world situation of income and expenses is always changing, which
may require further revisions of the model shown below. As we can see, the process of
modeling is ongoing and may never be “complete.”
     INCOME
      Monthly Income before taxes
      From parents
      Credit cards
      Second job
      Total other/12
     TOTAL MONTHLY INCOME
$350.00
$125.00
$170.00
$85.00
$110.00
$65.00
$105.00
$35.00
$25.00
$25.00
$19.16
$1,114.16
$445.00
$85.42
$1,644.58
$640.00
$580.00
$125.00
$240.00
$59.58
$1,644.58
EXPENSES
Rent/mortgage
Car payments
Income tax withholding
FICA
Retirement
Contributions
Insurance
Installments
Wells Fargo
Sears
VISA
Savings
Wells Fargo
Other
Total Fixed Expenses
Total Variable Expenses
1/12 Nonmonthly
TOTAL MONTHLY EXPENSE
Food
Gasoline
Utilities
Electricity
Gas
Water/Sewer
Telephone
Cable TV
Other
Entertainment
Other
Total Variable Expenses
$250.00
$70.00
$25.00
$15.00
$35.00
$20.00
$30.00
$445.00
Variable
Car repairs
Home repairs
Car license
Medical
Dental
Clothing
Gifts
Contributions
Vacation
Professional
Insurance:
Other
Total Nonmonthly
$290.00
$85.00
$350.00
$300.00
$1,025.00
Nonmonthly
Fixed
Other nonmonthly income
Total other
$500.00
$215.00
$715.00
MONTHLY BUDGET
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.1
What Is Calculus?
879
Level 1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What are the three main topics of
calculus?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a mathematical model? Why
are mathematical models necessary or useful?
3. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
An analogy to Zeno’s tortoise para-
dox can be made as follows.
12.
13.
14.
15.
Level 2
In Problems 16–21, guess the requested limits.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
Estimate the area in each figure shown in Problems 22–27.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
1
–1
–2
2
3
4
5
y
–.5
1.0
2.0
3.0x
1
–1
2
3
4
5
y
–.5
1.0
2.0
3.0 x
–.5
1
2
3
4
–4
–8
8
12
16
20
x
y
–.5
1.0
2.0
3.0
1
–1
–2
2
3
4
5
x
y
lim
nS`
 3n2 1 1
2n
2 2 1
lim
nS`
 
3n
n2 1 2
lim
nS`
 n 1 1
2n
lim
nS`
 n 1 1
n 1 2
lim
nS`
 
2n
3n 1 1
lim
nS`
 
2n
n 1 4
P
P
x
y
P
x
y
P
x
y
1
1
–1
2
–1
–2
2
x
y
1
1
–1
2
–1
–2
2
Problem Set 18.1
A woman standing in a room cannot walk to a wall. To do
so, she would first have to go half the distance, then half
the remaining distance, and then again half of what still
remains. This process can always be continued and can
never be ended.
Suppose I am playing baseball and decide to steal second
base. To run from first to second base, I must first go half
the distance, then half the remaining distance, and then
again half of what remains. This process is continued so
that I never reach second base. Therefore it is pointless to
steal base.
Draw an appropriate figure for this problem and then present
an argument using sequences to show that the woman will, 
indeed, reach the wall.
4. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Zeno’s paradoxes remind us of an 
argument that might lead to an absurd conclusion:
Draw an appropriate figure for this problem and then present a
mathematical argument using sequences to show that the con-
clusion is absurd.
See www.mathnature.com for a link to a site on
Zeno’s paradox.
5. Consider the sequence 0.3, 0.33, 0.333, 0.3333, . . . . What do
you think is the appropriate limit of this sequence?
6. Consider the sequence 6, 6.6, 6.66, 6.666, . . . . What do you
think is the appropriate limit of this sequence?
7. Consider the sequence 0.9, 0.99, 0.999, 0.9999, . . . . What do
you think is the appropriate limit of this sequence?
8. Consider the sequence 0.2, 0.27, 0.272, 0.2727, . . . . What do
you think is the appropriate limit of this sequence?
9. Consider the sequence 3, 3.1, 3.14, 3.141, 3.1415, 3.14159,
3.141592, . . . . What do you think is the appropriate limit of
this sequence?
Copy the figures in Problems 10–15 on your paper. Draw what you
think is an appropriate tangent line for each curve at the point P
by using the secant method.
10.
11.
P
P
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

880
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
18.2  Limits
The making of a motion picture is a complex process, and editing all the film into a movie
requires that all the frames of the action be labeled in chronological order. For example,
R21–435 might signify the 435th frame of the 21st reel. If you have used a movie-making
program, you may look at the frames in a film of a bouncing ball, as shown in Figure 18.9.
FIGURE 18.9 Frames in a film of a bouncing ball
A mathematician might refer to the movie editor’s labeling procedure by saying the
frames are arranged in a sequence. We introduced sequences in Chapter 11, but let’s
briefly review that idea. A sequence is a succession of numbers that are listed according
to a given prescription or rule. Specifically, if n is a positive integer, the sequence whose
nth term is the number 
can be written as
or, more simply,
The number 
is called the general term of the sequence. We will deal only with infinite
sequences, so each term 
has a successor 
and for 
a predecessor 
. For
example, by associating each positive integer n with its reciprocal 
we obtain the
sequence denoted by
which represents the succession of numbers 1, 1
2, 1
3, c, 1
n, c
e 1
n f ,
1
n,
an21
n . 1,
an11
an
an
5an6
a1, a2, c, an, c
an
Level 3
28. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Prepare a personal budget.
29. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Prepare a budget for a family of four
with an annual income of 
.
$100,000
Problem Solving 3   
30. a. Calculate the sum of the areas of the rectangles shown in
Figure 18.8a.
b. Calculate the sum of the areas of the rectangles shown in
Figure 18.8b.
c. Make a guess about the shaded area under the curve.
www.gamai.com/tutorial/fig4.gif
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Limit of a Sequence
It is often desirable to examine the behavior of a given sequence 
as n gets arbitrarily
large. For example, consider the sequence
Because 
we can plot the terms of this sequence on a number
line as shown in Figure 18.10a, or in two dimensions as shown in Figure 18.10b.
a1 5 1
2, a2 5 2
3, a3 5 3
4, c,
an 5
n
n 1 1
5an6
Section 18.2
Limits
881
Example
1
Find terms of a sequence
Find the 1st, 2nd, and 15th terms of the sequence 
where the general term is
Solution
If 
then 
Similarly,
a15 5 a1
2b
1521
5 a1
2b
14
5 2214
a2 5 a1
2b
221
5 1
2
a1 5 A1
2B 121 5 1.
n 5 1,
an 5 a1
2b
n21
5an6
Even though we write
this is a function,
a(n)
for which
the domain is the set
of nonnegative integers.
5
n
n 1 1,
an,
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
a1
a2 a3 a4
a. Graphing a sequence in one dimension
b. Graphing a sequence in two dimensions
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
y
x
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
y 5 1 is a limiting line an
FIGURE 18.10 Graphing the sequence an 5
n
n 1 1
Even though we know these tracks
to be parallel (they do not actually
approach each other), they appear to
meet at the horizon. This concept of
convergence at a point is used in
calculus to give specific values for
otherwise immeasurable quantities.
© Elmtree Images/Alamy
Limits to Infinity
By looking at either graph in Figure 18.10, we can see that the terms of the sequence are
approaching 1. We say that the limit of this sequence is 
In general, we say that the sequence converges to the limit L and write
if L is a unique number that the value of the expression 
is moving ever and ever closer
to as 
The number L is called the limit of the sequence. The value L does not need
to exist. If a limit does not exist, we say the sequence diverges.
n S `.
an
lim
nS` an 5 L
L 5 1.
The general term is denoted by 
The following examples illustrate the notation and
terminology used in connection with sequences.
an 5 1
n.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

882
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
Example
2
Find a limit to infinity
Find the limit, if it exists.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
a.
This sequence is shown in Figure 18.10. We see
b.
This sequence is 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . , and we see that the values are not approaching 
any limit, so we say this limit does not exist.
c.
The values of this expression are: 10,000 (n  1); 5,000 (n  2); 3,333.33 
(n  3); 2,500 (n  4); 2,000 (n  5); . . . . For large n we see that the value of the
sequence is close to 0:
It appears that 
d.
This sequence can be shown with the following table for selected values 
for n:
n
1
10
100
1,000
10,000
100,000
1
1.9
1.99
1.999
1.9999
1.99999
In this case it appears that lim
nS` 2n 2 1
n
5 2.
2n 2 1
n
lim
nS` 2n 2 1
n
lim
nS` 10,000
n
5 0.
(
 n 5 10,000,000: 10,000
n
5
10,000
10,000,000 5 0.001
 n 5 10,000: 10,000
n
5 10,000
10,000 5 1
lim
nS` 10,000
n
lim
nS` n
lim
nS` 
n
n 1 1 5 1
lim
nS` 
n
n 1 1
lim
nS` 2n 2 1
n
lim
nS` 10,000
n
lim
nS` n
lim
nS` 
n
n 1 1
Example 2 leads to some conclusions.
Furthermore, for any A, and k a positive integer,
lim
nS` A
nk 5 0
lim
nS` 1
n 5 0
Limit of to Infinity
1
n
Example
3
Find the limit of a convergent sequence
Find the limit of each of these convergent sequences:
a.
b.
c. e 3n4 1 n 2 1
5n4 1 2n2 1 1 f
e 2n2 1 5n 2 7
n3
f
e 100
n f
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.2
Limits
883
Solution
a. As n grows arbitrarily large, 
gets smaller and smaller. Thus,
A graphical representation is shown in Figure 18.11.
b. We begin by algebraically rewriting the expression:
We now use the limit to infinity property:
If we assume that the limit of a sum is the sum of the limits, then we have
A graph is shown in Figure 18.12.
c. Divide the numerator and denominator by n4 to obtain
Divide each term by n4.
 5 3
5
 5 lim
nS` 
3 1 1
n3 2 1
n4
5 1 2
n2 1 1
n4
lim
nS`
3n4 1 n 2 1
5n4 1 2n2 1 1 5 lim
nS` 
3n4
n4 1 n
n4 2 1
n4
5n4
n4 1 2n2
n4 1 1
n4
 5 0
 5 0 1 0 1 0
lim
nS` 2n2 1 5n 2 7
n3
5 lim
nS` c 2n2
n3 1 5n
n3 1 27
n3 d
2n2 1 5n 2 7
n3
5 2
n 1 5
n2 1 27
n3
lim
nS` 100
n
5 0
100
n
100
0.2
0.4
0.6
1.0
0.8
300 500 700 900
an
n
x
y
FIGURE 18.11 Graphical
representation of
an 5 100/n
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
1.0
0.8
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
an
n
x
y
FIGURE 18.12 Graph of
an 5 2n2 1 5n 2 7
n3
Example
4
Illustrate a divergent sequence
Find the limit (if it exists) of the sequence with general term 
Solution
The sequence defined by 
is 
1, 
1, . . . , and this sequence
diverges by oscillation because the nth term is always either 1 or 
Thus 
cannot
approach one specific number L as n grows large. The graph is shown in Figure 18.13.
We call this a divergent sequence.
n
an
1
1
2
1
3
1
4
1
5
1
6
1
7
1
8
1
9
1
10
1
an
21.
21,
21,
5 1212 n6
5 1212 n6.
0.5
1.0
20.5
21.0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
an
n
FIGURE 18.13 A limit to infinity that diverges
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

884
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
Infinite Limits
A limit to infinity is the limit of a sequence when 
We now consider the possibil-
ity that the limit itself increases without limit.
n S `.
Example
5
Find a limit of a rational expression
Find each limit (if it exists).
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a. For
we see that as n approaches 2 the denominator n  2 approaches 0. As 
this denominator approaches 0, the quotient 
gets infinitely large, so we say 
that 
In words, we say the sequence diverges.
b. The given limit can be written as
c.
The numerator tends toward 1 as 
and the denominator approaches 0. Hence
the quotient gets ever larger and larger, passing by all numbers, so it cannot ap-
proach a specific number L; thus the sequence must diverge. The graph is shown in
Figure 18.14.
n
an
1
0.36
2
0.35
3
0.47
4
0.60
5
0.74
6
0.88
7
1.02
8
1.16
10
1.44
20
2.86
30
4.29
40
5.72
50
7.15
100
14.29
1,000
142.86
n S `,
 lim
nS` n5 1 n3 1 2
7n4 1 n2 1 3 5 lim
nS` 
1 1 1
n2 1 2
n5
7
n 1 1
n3 1 3
n5
lim
nS` 
n
n 1 1 5 lim
nS` 
1
1 1 1
n
5 1
lim
nS2 
1
n 2 2 S `.
1
n 2 2
lim
nS2 
1
n 2 2,
lim
nS` n5 1 n3 1 2
7n4 1 n2 1 3
lim
nS` 
n
n 1 1
lim
nS2 
1
n 2 2
1.5
2.0
an
n
4
8
12
16
1.0
0.5
2.5
FIGURE 18.14 An infinite limit
If 
does not exist because the numbers 
become arbitrarily large as 
write 
We summarize this more precisely in the following box.
lim
nS` an 5 `.
n S `,
an
lim
nS` an
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The answer to Example 5c can be rewritten in this notation as
Also notice that 
(that is,exceeds all bounds), whereas 
does not exist. Thus, the answer to Example 4 is not
or 2`.
`
lim
nS`1212 n
lim
nS`125n2 5 2`
lim  
nS`
n5 1 n3 1 2
7n4 1 n2 1 3 5 `
Section 18.2
Limits
885
Level  1
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What do we mean by the limit of a
sequence?
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Outline a procedure for finding the
limit of a sequence.
Write out the first five terms (beginning with 
) of the
sequences given in Problems 3–6.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Find each limit in Problems 7–10, if it exists.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Compute the limit of the convergent sequences in 
Problems 11–16.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16. e n3 2 6n2 1 85
2n3 2 5n 1 170 f
e
8n2 1 6n 1 4,000
n3 1 1
f
e
100n 1 7,000
n2 2 n 2 1
f
e
8n2 1 800n 1 5,000
2n2 2 1,000n 1 2
f
e
5n
n 1 7 f
e 5n 1 8
n
f
lim
nS` 4 2 7n
8 1 n
lim
nS` 2n 1 1
3n 2 4
lim
nS` 8,000
n 2 1
lim
nS` 8,000n
n 1 1
e n2 2 n
n2 1 n f
e 3n 1 1
n 1 2 f
e a21
2 b
n12
f
51 1 1212 n6
n 5 1
Level  2
Find the limit (if it exists) as 
for each of th e sequences in
Problems 17–28.
17.
18.
19. 0.69, 0.699, 0.6999, 0.69999, . . .
20. 5, 
. . .
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
Level  3
29. Twenty-four milligrams of a drug is administered into the body.
At the end of each hour, the amount of drug present is half what
it was at the end of the previous hour. What amount of the drug is
present at the end of 5 hours? At the end of n hours?
lim
nS` 12n5 1 7n4 2 3n2 1 2n
n5 1 8n3 1 14
lim
nS` 
221n3 1 52
27n3 1 n2 1 20n 2 9
lim
nS` n4 1 5n3 1 8n2 2 4n 1 12
2n4 2 7n2 1 3n
lim
nS` 15 1 9n 2 6n2
2n2 2 4n 1 1
lim
nS` 10n3 1 13
7n2 2 n 1 2
lim
nS` 2n4 1 5n2 2 6
3n 1 8
lim
nS` 
4n4 1 10n 2 1
9n3 2 2n2 2 7n 1 3
lim
nS` 3n2 2 7n 1 2
5n4 1 9n2
54
5,
53
4,
52
3,
51
2,
5 1
2n6
5 1
3n6
n S `
Problem Set 18.2
The infinite limit 
means that for any real number A, we have 
for 
all sufficiently large n. The infinite limit 
means that for any real num-
ber B, we have 
for all sufficiently large n.
bn , B
lim
nS` bn 5 2`
an . A
lim
nS` an 5 `
Infinite Limits
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

886
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
Problem Solving 3   
30. HISTORICAL QUEST
The Fibonacci Rabbit Problem
The general term in a sequence can be defined in a number of
ways. In this problem, we consider a sequence whose nth term
is defined by a recursion formula—that is, a formula in which
the nth term is given in terms of previous terms in the sequence.
The problem was originally examined by Leonardo Pisano
(also called Fibonacci) in the 13th century, and was first intro-
duced in Chapter 11. Recall that we suppose rabbits breed in
such a way that each pair of adult rabbits produces a pair of
baby rabbits each month.
Further assume that young rabbits become adults after two
months and produce another pair of offspring at that time. 
A rabbit breeder begins with one adult pair. Let an denote the
number of adult pairs of rabbits in this “colony” at the end of n
months.
a. Explain why a1  1, a2  1, a3  2, a4  3, and, in
general, an1  an1  an for n  2, 3, 4, . . .
b. The growth rate of the colony during the (n  1)st 
month is 
Compute rn for n  1, 2, 3, . . . , 10.
c. Assume that the growth rate sequence {rn} defined in 
part b converges, and let 
Use the recursion 
formula in part a to show that
and conclude that L must satisfy the equation 
Use this information to compute L.
L 5 1 1 1
L
an11
an
5 1 1 an21
an
L 5 lim
nS` rn.
rn 5 an11
an
Number
of
Months
Number
of
Pairs
Pairs of Rabbits (the pairs shown in color are ready to
reproduce in the next month)
Start
1
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
5
5
8
…
Same pair
(rabbits never die)
…
18.3   Derivatives
Elementary mathematics focuses on formulas and relationships among variables but does
not include the analysis of quantities that are in a state of constant change. For example,
the following problem might be found in elementary mathematics. If you drive at 
55 miles per hour (mph) for a total of 3 hours, how far did you travel? This example uses
a formula, 
(
. However,
this model does not adequately describe the situation in the real world. You could drive
for 3 hours at an average rate of 55 mph, but you probably could not drive for 3 hours at
a constant rate of 55 mph
in reality, the rate would be in a state of constant change.
Other applications in which rates may not remain constant quickly come to mind:
Profits changing with sales
Population changing with the growth rate
Property taxes changing with the tax rate
Tumor sizes changing with chemotherapy
The speed of falling objects changing over time
The slope of a nonlinear curve
—
distance 5 rate # time2, and the answer is d 5 55132 5 165
d 5 rt
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.3
Derivatives
887
The rate at which one quantity changes relative to another is mathematically de-
scribed by using a concept called a derivative. We will see that the rate of change of one
quantity relative to another is mathematically determined by finding the slope of a line
drawn tangent to a curve.
Example
1
Find the average speed
A commuter left home one morning and set the odometer to zero. The times and
distances were noted as shown in Table 18.1.
Find the average speed for the requested time intervals.
a. 6:09 A.M. to 6:39 A.M. (0–30 min)
b. 6:39 A.M. to 7:09 A.M. (30–60 min)
c. 7:01 A.M. to 7:28 A.M. (52–79 min)
Solution
a. 0–30 min:
AVERAGE SPEED 
b. 30–60 min:
AVERAGE SPEED 
c. 52–79 min:
AVERAGE SPEED  50 2 34
79
60 2 52
60
< 35.6 mph
38 2 28.5 
1 2 1
2
5 19 mph
28.5 2 0 
1
2 2 0 
5 57 mph
TABLE 18.1 
Distance and Time for
a Commuter Car
Time
Distance 
from Home
6:09 A.M.
0 miles
6:25
16
6:30
21
6:34
25
6:36
26.7
6:37
27.7
6:39
28.5
7:01
34
7:03
35
7:09
38
7:15
43
7:28
50
We can generalize the work done in Example 1 by writing the following formula:
AVERAGE SPEED 
where the car travels 
miles in 
hours and 
miles in 
hours. The relationship is
shown graphically in Figure 18.15, where the average speed is the slope of the line join-
ing (
) and (
).
t2, d2
t1, d1
t2
d2
t1
d1
d2 2 d1
t2 2 t1
 mph
t
d
f
d1
t1
t2
d2
Distance traveled
Secant line
d2 – d1
Time elapsed
t2 – t1
(t1, d1) 
(t2, d2) 
m = 
 = 
d2 – d1
______
t2 – t1
f (t2) – f (t1)
__________
t2 – t1
FIGURE 18.15 Geometrical interpretation of average speed
Average Rate of Change
We begin with a simple example. Consider the speed of a moving object, say, a car. By
speed we mean the rate at which the distance traveled varies with time. It has magnitude,
but no direction. We can measure speed in two ways: average speed and instantaneous
speed. We begin with the average speed of a commuter driving from home to the office.
To find the average speed, we use the formula 
that is, we divide
the distance traveled by the elapsed time:
AVERAGE SPEED 5 DISTANCE TRAVELED
ELAPSED TIME
d 5 rt or r 5 d
t;
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We consider an example from the social sciences.
The line connecting (
) and (
) in Figure 18.15 is sometimes called the secant
line. We see that the average rate of change is
It is worthwhile to state this formula in terms of the usual variable x. Let 
and let
, which is the length of the time interval over which we are finding an aver-
age. From these substitutions it follows that
h  t2  x
h  x  t2
This leads to a general statement of the average rate of change.
h 5 t2 2 t1
x 5 t1
f 1t22 2 f 1t12
t2 2 t1
d2, t2
d1, t1
888
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
This is called the differ-
ence quotient.
Example
2
Find an average rate of change
Find the average rate of change of f with respect to x between x  3 and x  5 
if f(x)  x2  4x  7.
Solution
Given x  3 and h  5  3  2:
 h2 
3  22 
52  52  4152  7  12
2 
32  32  4132  7  4
AVERAGE RATE OF CHANGE
The slope of the secant line is 4, which is con-
firmed geometrically by looking at Figure 18.16.
5 4
5 12 2 4
2
 5 f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
f 1
f 1x
f 1
f 1
f 1x
FIGURE 18.16 Average rate of change of f, where
, between 
and x 5 5
x 5 3
f 1x2 5 x2 2 4x 1 7
The average rate of change of a function f with respect to x over an interval from x
to x  h is given by the formula
f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
Average Rate of Change
y
x
f(x2)
Secant line
5
5
10
10
 m = 
f (x2) – f (x1)
___________
x2 – x1
8__
2
=
= 4
Change of 
8 units
from y = 4 to 
y = 12
x1
x2
f(x1)
Change of 2 units
(from x = 3 to x = 5)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.3
Derivatives
889
Example
3
Find an average divorce rate
Table 18.2 shows the number of divorces (in millions) for selected years from 1987 to 1996.
Find the average divorce rate for each of the time periods given.
a. 1987–1992
b. 1987–1996
c. 1992–1996
d. 1995–1996
Solution
The average rate of change of f is defined by 
a. x  1987 and h  5:
 0.0116
The average divorce rate (rate of change in number of divorces) between 1987 and
1992 is an average increase of 11,600 per year.
Note: 0.0116 million is 11,600.
b. x  1987 and h  9:
 0.0007–
A negative rate of change indicates a decrease. The average divorce rate between
1987 and 1996 is a decrease of 778 divorces per year.
c. x  1992 and h  4:
 0.01625
The average divorce rate between 1992 and 1996 is an average decrease of 16,250 di-
vorces per year.
d. x  1995 and h  1:
 0.019
Between 1995 and 1996, the number of divorces decreased by 19,000 or
about 2%.
f 119962 2 f 119952
1
5 1.150 2 1.169
f 119962 2 f 119922
4
5 1.150 2 1.215
4
f 119962 2 f 119872
9
5 1.150 2 1.157
9
f 119922 2 f 119872
5
5 1.215 2 1.157
5
f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
TABLE 18.2 
Number of U.S.
Divorces
Year
Number
1987
1.157
1992
1.215
1995
1.169
1996
1.150
Instantaneous Rate of Change
Suppose in Example 3 we are interested in the divorce rate in 1996. To estimate this rate,
we can use the slopes of the secant lines (labeled b, c, and d), as shown in Figure 18.17.
Which one would you use as a more accurate estimate?
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996 1998 
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1992 to 1996
1995 to 1996
1987 to 1996
c
b
d
FIGURE 18.17 U.S. divorces and secant lines at 1996
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Also imagine the roller coaster car moving along the track toward the fixed location.
That is, let 
. As the car moves along the track, we obtain a sequence of secant lanes.
The roller coaster is shown at the left and the curve with the secant lines is shown at the right.
h S 0
To find the rate at a particular time, imagine that a curve called f is defined by a
roller-coaster track. Consider a fixed location on this track; call it (x, f(x)). Now imagine
the front car of the roller coaster at some point on the track a horizontal distance of h units
from x. The slope of the secant line between these points is the average rate of change of
the function f between the two points.
890
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
As the car gets close to the fixed location, the secant lines approach a limiting line
(shown in color). This limiting line for which 
is called the tangent line.
h S 0
s1
s1
Secant line
Secant line
h
Fixed location
x
x + h
x
y
f
s1
s2
s3
s1
s2
s3
x
x + h
x
y
h
s1
s2
s3
s4
s4
s5
s4
s4
s5
s6
s1
s2
s3
x
x
x + h
x
y
h
s1
s2
s3
s1
s2
s3
x
y
Tangent line
lim
h     0
f (x+h) – f (x)
–––––––––––
h
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.3
Derivatives
891
If you look at Figure 18.17, you can measure the slope of the tangent line to approxi-
mate the instantaneous rate of change in 1996 to be 
or about 
.
22%
20.02
Derivative
The concept of the derivative is a very powerful mathematical idea, and the variety of
applications is almost unlimited. The instantaneous rate of change of a function f per unit
of change in x is only one of many applications using that specific limiting idea.
Example
4
Find an instantaneous rate of change
Find the instantaneous rate of change of the function 
with respect to x.
Solution
Find 
We evaluate this expression in small steps.
1. f1x2  5x2 is given.
2. f1x  h2  51x  h22  5x2  10xh  5h2
3. f1x  h2  f1x2  15x2  10xh  5h22  5x2  10xh  5h2
4.
 10x  5h
1h  02
5.
We will refer to the small steps (shown in boldface) as the five-step process for finding
the instantaneous rate of change.
lim 
hS0 f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
5  lim
hS0  110x 1 5h2 5 10x
f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
5 10xh 1 5h2
h
lim
hS0 f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
.
f 1 x2 5 5x2
This is one of the most
important definitions in
all of mathematics.
If the limit does not exist, we say that f is not differentiable at x. We have now devel-
oped all of the techniques necessary to apply the definition of derivative to a variety of
functions. Also note that as 
, 
, so we assume 
without stating so when
using the five-step process for finding the derivative.
h 2 0
h 2 0
h S 0
Given a function f and the graph of y  f(x), the tangent line at the point (x, f(x))
is the line that passes through this point with slope
if this limit exists. The slope of the tangent line is also referred to as the 
instantaneous rate of change of the function f with respect to x.
lim
hS0 f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
Instantaneous Rate of Change
For a given function f, we define the derivative of f at x, denoted by f(x), to be
provided this limit exists. If the limit exists, we say f is a differentiable function
of x.
f r1x2 5 lim
hS0 f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
Derivative
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Tangent Line
Given a function 
(x), we know the slope of the tangent line is 
(x). Recall,
from Problem 58, Section 15.1, that a line with slope m passing through the point (
) is
This gives us the following tangent-line formula.
y 2 k 5 m1x 2 h2
h, k
y 5 f r
y 5 f
892
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
In more advanced courses, it is shown that the exponential function has a very im-
portant property involving derivatives. The exponential function is its own derivative.
Example
5
Use the definition to find a derivative
Use the definition to find the derivative of 
.
Solution
We carry out the five-step process:
1. f1x2  2x2 is given.
2. f1x  h2  21x  h22
Evaluate f at x  h.
 2x2  4xh  2h2
3. f1x  h2  f1x2  12x2  4xh  2h22  2x2
Subtract f(x) from f(x  h).
 4xh  2h2
4.
Now, divide by h.
 4x  2h
5.
Finally, take the limit.
 4x
The derivative of y  2x2 is 4x. Sometimes we write y  4x or f (x)  4x.
lim 
hS0  f1x 1 h2 2 f1x2
h
5  lim
hS0  14x 1 2h2
 5 h14x 1 2h2
h
 f 1x 1 h2 2 f1x2
h
5 4xh 1 2h2
h
y 5 2x2
Example
6
Find the derivative on an exponential
Find the derivative of the given functions:
a. y  e3x
b. y  e5x.
Solution
a. If y  e3x, then y  3e3x.
b. If y  e5x, then y  5e5x
The equation of the line tangent to the curve defined by y  f(x) at the point 
(h, k) is
y 2 k 5 f r1x2 1x 2 h2
Tangent Line
If 
, then 
, and if 
, then 
.
f r1x2 5 aeax
f 1x2 5 eax
fr1x2 5 ex
f 1x2 5 ex
Definition of ex
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.3
Derivatives
893
Example
7
Find the equation of a tangent line
Find the standard-form equation of the line tangent to the graph of 
at the point
where 
.
Solution
First, find the coordinates of the point where 
:
y  2x2
 21122
 2
The point is (
). The slope at this point is y  f (x) and from Example 5, the
derivative of y(x)
is y(x)
. Thus, at the point 
, we find the derivative
y  4x
 4112
 4
The equation of the tangent line is
.
 4x 1 y 1 2 5 0
 y 5 24x 2 2
 y 2 2 5 24x 2 4
 y 2 2 5 241x 1 12
 y 2 2 5 241x 2 1212 2
 y 2 k 5 f r1x2 1x 2 h2
x 5 21
5 4x
5 2x2
21, 2
x 5 21
x 5 21
y 5 2x2
It is worth noting that if the derivative of a function is positive, then the curve is ris-
ing at that point (since the slope of the tangent line is positive); and if the derivative is 
negative at a point, then the curve is falling at that point. If the derivative is 0, then the
tangent line is horizontal. In Example 7, we found the equation of the tangent line of the
function 
at (
). This tangent line is shown in Figure 18.18.
21, 2
y 5 2x2
y = 2x2
(–1, 2)
m = –4
Slope of
tangent line is
negative, so 
curve y = 2x2 
is falling at
(–1, 2).
–4 –3 –2 –1
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
–4
–3
–2
–1
x
y
FIGURE 18.18 Graph of 
with tangent line at (
)
21, 2
y 5 2x2
Example
8
Find an instantaneous rate
Consider a “free-fall” ride at an amusement park that involves falling 100 feet in 2.5
seconds. As you are falling, you pass the 16-ft mark at one second and the 64-ft mark at
two seconds. What is the velocity at the instant the ride passes the 100-ft mark (as meas-
ured from the top)?
Solution
Let s(t) be the distance in feet from the top t seconds after release. Also as-
sume that s(t)  16t2.*
 5 48 ft/s
 s122 2 s112
1
5 16142 2 16
1
 5 16ft/s
 s112 2 s102
1
5 16 2 0
1
*This is the formula for free fall in a vacuum; it is sufficiently accurate for our purposes in this problem.
Velocity
A final application of derivative we will consider is the velocity, which is defined as an
instantaneous rate of change. Consider the following example.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In general, the average velocity from time t  t1 to 
t  t1  h is given by the following formula (where h  0).
Now, to find the velocity at a particular instant in time, we simply need to consider
the limit as h S 0:
INSTANTANEOUS VELOCITY 
 32t1
We can now use these formulas to find various average and instantaneous velocities.
(We do this to show you how to apply the formula we have just derived as practice be-
fore answering the question asked in this example.)
Time
Average Velocity
Instantaneous-Velocity
t
32t  16h
32t
t  0
h  1
32(0)  16(1)  16
32(0)  0
From t  0 to t  1
t  1
h  2
32(1)  16(2)  64
32(1)  32
From t  0 to t  2
h  1
32(1)  16(1)  48
From t  1 to t  2
t  2
h  3
32(2)  16(3)  112
32(2)  64
From t  0 to t  3
h  2
32(2)  16(2)  96
From t  1 to t  3
h  1
32(2)  16(1)  80
From t  2 to t  3
We are given that the ride passes 100 ft at 2.5 seconds, so the instantaneous velocity
at that instant is
32(2.5)  80 ft/s
(By the way, 80 ft/s is approximately 55 mph.)
(
5 lim
hS0 132t1 1 16h2
lim
hS0 s1t1 1 h2 2 s1t12
h
 5 32t1 1 16h
 5 32t1h 1 16h2
h
 5 16t1
2 1 32t1h 1 16h2 2 16t1
2
h
 5 161t1 1 h2 2 2 16t1
2
h
 5 s1t1 1 h2 2 s1t12
h
 5 80 ft/s
 s132 2 s122
1
5 16192 2 16142
1
894
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
144 ft
100 ft
64 ft
16 ft
0 ft
t = 3
t = 2.5
t = 2
t = 1
t = 0
Paramount’s Great America
CHANGE IN POSITION
CHANGE IN TIME
AVERAGE VELOCITY 5
© 2005 Joel Rogers/www.CoasterGallery.com
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.3
Derivatives
895
Level  1
1. The graph in Figure 18.19 shows the height h of a projectile 
after t seconds. Find the average rate of change of height 
(in feet) with respect to the requested changes in time t
(in seconds). 
FIGURE 18.19 Height of a projectile in feet t seconds after fired 
a. 1 to 8
b. 1 to 5
c. 1 to 2
d. What do you think the rate of change is at t  1?
2. The graph in Figure 18.20 shows company output as a function
of the number of workers. Find the average rate of change of
output for the given change in the number of workers.
FIGURE 18.20 Output in production relative to the number of
employees at Kampbell Construction
a. 100 to 800
b. 100 to 500
c. 100 to 300
d. What do you think the rate of change is at n  100?
3. Table 18.1 gives some distances and commute times for a typi-
cal daily commute. Find the average speed for the requested
time intervals.
a. 6:09 to 6:36
b. 6:36 to 7:03
c. 7:03 to 7:28
d. 6:09 to 7:28
500
100
1000
1000
2000
n
(100, 1000)
(300, 1500)
(500, 1750)
(800, 2000)
Number of workers
Output
5
10
50
100
(1, 40)
(2, 80)
(5, 100)
(8, 80)
(9, 40)
h
t
4. The SAT scores of entering first-year college students are
shown in Figure 18.21. Find the average yearly rate of change
of the scores for the requested periods. 
FIGURE 18.21 SAT scores at Riveria College
a. 1997 to 2001
b. 1998 to 2001
c. 1999 to 2001
d. 2000 to 2001
5. Table 18.3 shows the Gross National Product (GNP) 
in trillions of dollars for the years 1960–1996. Find 
the average yearly rate of change of the GNP for the 
requested years.
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
t
s
Year
SAT score
500
550
600
580
572
560
548
540
530
Problem Set 18.3
TABLE 18.3 
Gross National Product
Year
Dollars
1960
0.5153
1970
1.0155
1980
2.7320
1990
5.5461
1995
7.2654
1996
7.6360
a. 1960 to 1996
b. 1970 to 1996
c. 1980 to 1996
d. 1990 to 1996
e. 1995 to 1996
f. How fast do you think the GNP is changing in 1996?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14. f(x)  3x2
a. for x  1 to x  3
b. at x  1
15. f(x)  2x2  x  4
a. for x  4 to x  9
b. at x  4
Find the derivative, f(x), of each of the functions in 
Problems 16–21 by using the derivative definition or the derivative
of the exponential function.
16.
17. f(x) 
18.
19.
20. y  25  250x
21. f(x)  3  2x  3x2
Find an equation of the line tangent to the curves in
Problems 22–25 at the given point.
22. y  5x2 at x 3
23. y  2x2 at x  4
24. y  4  5x at x  2
25. y  3x2  4x at x  0
26. A freely falling body experiencing no air resistance falls 
s(t)  16t2 feet in t seconds. Express the body’s velocity at
time t  2 as a limit. Evaluate this limit.
27. If you toss a ball from the top of the Tower of Pisa directly
upward with an initial speed of 96 ft/s, the height h at time t
is given by
h1t2  16t2  96t  176
Figure 18.22 shows h and the velocity, v, at various times, t.
FIGURE 18.22 Tower of Pisa 
a. What is the height of the tower?
b. Find the velocity as a function of time.
t = 0
h = 176
v = 96
t = 7.5
h = 0
v = –143
t = 3
h = 320
v = 0
176 ft
y  e6x
f(x)  e1.2x
1
3x3
f 1x2 5 1
2x2
Trace the curves in Problems 6–11 onto your own paper and draw
the secant line passing through P and Q. Next, imagine 
h S 0 and draw the tangent line at P assuming that Q moves along
the curve to the point P. Finally, estimate the slope of the curve at
P using the slope of the tangent line you have drawn.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
Level 2
Find the average and instantaneous rates of change of the
functions in Problems 12–15.
12. f(x)  4  3x
a. for x  3 to x  2
b. at x  3
13. f(x)  5
a. for x  3 to x  3
b. at x  3
5
Q
P
5
10
y
x
m
h
5
Q
P
5
10
y
h
x
m
10
5
P
Q
y
g
x
5
h
10
5
P
Q
y
g
x
5
h
10
5
P
Q
y
x
5
h
10
5
P
Q
y
x
5
h
896
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.4
Integrals
897
Also suppose that the present production is 20 units. 
a. What is the per-unit increase in profit if production is
increased from 20 to 30 units?
b. Repeat for 20 to 25 units.
c. Repeat for 20 to 21 units.
d. What is the rate of change at x  20?
29. The cost, C, in dollars, for producing x items is given by
C1x2  30x2  100x
a. Find the average rate of change of cost as x increases from
100 to 200 items.
b. Repeat for 100 to 110 items.
c. Repeat for 100 to 101 items.
d. Repeat for 100 to (100  h) items.
Level  3
30. Suppose the number (in millions) of bacteria present in a cul-
ture at time t is given by the formula
N1t2  2t2  200t  1,000
a. Derive a formula for the instantaneous rate of change of the
number of bacteria with respect to time.
b. Find the instantaneous rate of change of the number of
bacteria with respect to time at time t  3.
c. Find the instantaneous rate of change of the number of
bacteria with respect to time at the beginning of this
experiment.
18.4   Integrals
We considered several simple area formulas in Chapter 9. We found those formulas
by filling regions with square units and then counting them in some convenient man-
ner. Sir Isaac Newton (see page 871) described area by using calculus. We will use
his ideas, along with modern notation, to give you a glimpse of what we mean by in-
tegral calculus.
Area Function
We begin by defining an area function.
The area function, A(t), is the area bounded below by
the x-axis, above by a function y  f(x), on the left by
the y-axis, and on the right by the vertical line x  t.
Area Function
The area function is shown in Figure 18.23.
t
x
y
A(t)
y = f (x)
FIGURE 18.23 Area function
Study this definition 
until you understand this
function.
28. Suppose the profit, P, measured in thousands of dollars, 
for a manufacturer is a function of the number of units
produced, x, and behaves according to the model
P1x2  50x  x2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

898
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
1
2
3
4
5
2
4
3
1
5
y
x
Example
1
Evaluate the area function
Let y  4. Find:
a. A(5)
b. A(6)
c. A(50)
d. A(x)
Solution
a. We draw the region as shown in Figure 18.24.
The number A(5) is the area below the line y  4, above the x-axis, to the right
of the y-axis, and to the left of the line x  5. This is a rectangle, so we know 
A152  4152  20
b. A162  4162  24
c. A1502  41502  200
d. A1x2  4x
FIGURE 18.24 Area function
The task before us is to find 
for any function 
.
y 5 f1x2
A1x2
Example
2
Find the area function for a given line
Let y  4x. Find:
a. A(5)
b. A(10)
c. A(50)
d. A(x)
Solution
Begin by drawing the region as shown in Figure 18.25.
a. Figure 18.25 shows the area function for A(5). We see the area we seek is a triangle:
Area of a triangle
The base is b  5. For the height, use y  4x for x  5; h  4(5)  20.
b. For A(10), x  10, so b  10 and h  4(10)  40 and
c.
d. A1x2 5 1
21x2 14x2 5 2x2
A1502 5 1
21502 12002 5 5,000
A 5 1
2 bh 5 1
2 1102 1402 5 200
 5 50
 5 1
2 152 1202
 A 5 1
2 bh
The answer to Example 2d, namely, 
, is called the antiderivative of the
original function 
because if we take the derivative of 
we obtain 4x
(see Example 5 of Section 18.3). An antiderivative of the function defined by 
is writ-
ten as f(x) dx.
f
 1x2
A1x2 5 2x 2
f
 1x2 5 4x
A1x2 5 2x 2
If the derivative of a function defined by y  F1x2 is
f1x2, then the antiderivative of f1x2 is
This means that F1x2  f1x2.
3 f 1x2 dx 5 F1x2
Antiderivative
y
x
1
2
3
4
5
4
8
12
16
20
FIGURE 18.25 Area of a triangle
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We have not yet discussed a procedure for finding an antiderivative, but we can check
to see whether a particular function is an antiderivative, as shown by the following example.
Section 18.4
Integrals
899
Example
3
Find an antiderivative
Show: 
a.
b.
Solution
We use the five-step process:
a.
b.
Thus, 3dx 5 x.
Thus, 3x dx 5 x 2
2 .
 5 1
 5 x
 lim
hS0 f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
5 lim
hS0 1
 lim
hS0 f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
5 lim
hS0 ax 1 h
2b
 f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
5 1
 f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
5 x 1 h
2
 f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2 5 h
 f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2 5 2xh 1 h2
2
 5 x 2 1 2xh 1 h2
2
 f 1x 1 h2 5 x 1 h
 f 1x 1 h2 5
1x 1 h22
2
 Let f 1x2 5 x.
 Let f 1x2 5 x 2
2 .
3dx 5 x
3x dx 5 x 2
2
The next example shows that a given function may have more than one antiderivative.
Example
4
Show that a function may have more than 
one antiderivative
Show that 
and 
are antiderivatives of 
.
Solution
We carry out the five-step process for both functions.
1. f1x2:
x 3  8
x 3  2
2. f1x  h2
1x  h23  8
1x  h23  2
3. f1x  h2  f1x2:
1x  h23  8  1x3  82
1x  h23  2  1x3  22
 x3  3x2h  3xh2  h3  8  x3  8
 x3  3x2h  3xh2  h3  2  x3  2
4.
5.
We see that both of the given functions are antiderivatives of 3x2. We write this as
33x 2 dx 5 x 3 1 8 and 33x 2 dx 5 x 3 2 2
lim
hS0 13x2 1 3xh 1 h22 5 3x2
lim
hS0 13x2 1 3xh 1 h22 5 3x2
lim
hS0 f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
3x 2h 1 3xh2 1 h3
h
5 3x 2 1 3xh 1 h2
3x 2h 1 3xh2 1 h3
h
5 3x 2 1 3xh 1 h2
f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
:
3x 2
x 3 2 2
x 3 1 8
Notice from Example 4 that antiderivatives are not unique. If we study the steps of
this example, we see that antiderivatives are the same except for a constant that is added
or subtracted.
Pay attention to the
statement shown in 
italics.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

More advanced courses derive some properties of antiderivatives, which we summa-
rize in the following box.
If we represent this constant as C, we write
where C is any constant. This says if you select any constant value for C and find the de-
rivative of 
, the result will be 
.
The exponential function 
is the function that is equal to its own derivative,
so it follows that it is a function that is its own antiderivative. We state this result in 
formula form.
f 1x2 5 ex
3x 2
f 1x2 5 x3 1 C
33x 2 dx 5 x 3 1 C
900
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
y
x
1
2
3
4
5
4
8
12
16
20
If f1x2  ex, then 
3e x dx 5 e x 1 C and 3eax dx 5 eax
a 1 C
Antiderivative of ex
Constant multiple:
Antiderivative (integral) of a sum:
3 3 f1x2 1 g1x2 4 dx 5 3f 1x2  dx 1 3g1x2  dx
3a f 1x2  dx 5 a3 f 1x2  dx
Properties of Antiderivatives
Newton found that the derivative of the area function 
is 
. In other words,
the area function is an antiderivative of f; we write
Antiderivatives as Areas
We can find an antiderivative by using areas, as illustrated by the following example.
3f 1x2 dx 5 A1x2
f 1x2
A1x2
Example
5
Find the antiderivative of a linear function
Find 
.
Solution
Let f(x)  2x  3; consider the region bounded by the x-axis, the y-axis,
the line y  2x  3, and the vertical line x units to the right of the origin, as shown in
Figure 18.26. We recognize this as a trapezoid, so we can write
 5 x 2 1 3x
 5 1
2x33 1 12x 1 32 4
 3 12x 1 32 dx 5 1
2h1b 1 B2
e 12x 1 32dx
FIGURE 18.26 Trapezoid with
h 5 x, b 5 3, B 5 2x 1 3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.4
Integrals
901
Since we know that antiderivatives are not unique, but differ only by a constant, we
write
We can also use properties of an antiderivative, as shown here:
Antiderivative of a sum
Constant multiple
Antiderivative of x is 
(Example 3a) and antiderivative 
of 1 is x (Example 3b).
 x2  3x
1
2x2
 5 2x 2
2 1 3x
 5 23x dx 1 33dx
 3 12x 1 32dx 5 32xdx 1 33dx
3 12x 1 32dx 5 x 2 1 3x 1 C
The Definite Integral
We note that the antiderivative of a function is a function. We now consider a concept
called the definite integral, which although it can be related to an antiderivative, is an im-
portant concept in its own right. We introduce the definite integral with an example.
Suppose that between 2000 and 2005, the rate of oil consumption (in billions of bar-
rels) is given by the formula
where t is measured in years after 2000. If we use this consumption rate, we can predict
the amount of oil that will be consumed from 2005 to 2010. Since the derivative is the
rate of change of a function, we can say that the total consumption since 2000 is given by
a function we will call T with the property that 
. Then
Constant multiple property
From the formula for antiderivative of ex.
We can find C because if t  0, then oil consumption is also 0, so
Thus, 
is the total consumption for t years after 2000.
This means that T(5) is the total consumption from 2005 to 2010, and T(10) is the total
consumption from 2000 to 2010.
We can find the total consumption from 2000 to 2005 by subtraction:
T1102 2 T152 < 694 2 363 5 331
T152 5 24,108e20.0185152 1 4,108 < 362.945
T1102 5 24,108e20.01851102 1 4,108 < 693.824
T1t2 5 24,108e20.0185t 1 4,108
 C 5 4,108
 T102 5 24,108e20.0185t 1 C 5 0
 < 24,108e20.0185t 1 C
 5 76 e20.0185t
20.0185 1 C
 5 763e20.0185tdt
 5 376e20.0185tdt
 T1t2 5 3Tr1t2  dt 5 3R1t2  dt
Tr1t2 5 R1t2
R1t2 5 76e20.0185t
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The function f is called the integrand and the constants a and b are called the limits of
integration. The letter x is called a dummy variable because the definite integral is a
fixed number and not a function of x. To contrast a definite integral with its correspon-
ding antiderivative, an antiderivative is sometimes called an indefinite integral.
Areas as Antiderivatives
In Example 5 we found an antiderivative by using a known area formula, but the real
power of calculus is to use an antiderivative to find an area.
We would predict approximately 331 billion barrels to be consumed, assuming the rate of
consumption does not change.
Let us take a closer look at what we have done. Since T(t) is an antiderivative of R(t)
over the interval from 2000 to 2010, we see that T(10)  T(5) is the net change of the func-
tion T over the interval. In general, if F(x) is any function and a and b are real numbers with
a  b, then the net change of F(x) over the interval [a, b] is the number
F1b2  F1a2
The quantity F1b2  F1a2 is often abbreviated by 
. This discussion leads to the 
following definition.
F1x2 0b
a
902
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
a
b
x
A
y = f (x)
y
FIGURE 18.27 Area under a curve
Let f be a function defined over the interval [a, b]. Then
the definite integral of f over the interval is denoted by
and is the net change of an antiderivative of f over that
interval. Thus, if F(x) is an antiderivative of f(x), then
3
b
a
f 1x2dx 5 F1x2 0 b
a 5 F1b2 2 F1a2
3
b
a
f 1x2 dx
Definite Integral
The area under a curve is defined to be the area of the re-
gion bounded by the graph of a function f and the x-axis
and the vertical lines x  a and x  b, and is given by 
A 5 3
b
a
f 1x2 dx
Area Under a Curve
The definite integral is a
real number. The
antiderivative is a 
function.
This area function is illustrated in Figure 18.27.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.4
Integrals
903
Example
6
Find the area under a parabola in more than one way
Find the area under the curve y  x2 on [1, 5].
Solution
We now have two ways for finding this area; the first is to use an antideriv-
ative, and the second is to approximate the actual area using known area formulas.
(1) Using an Antiderivative
Suppose you know that the derivative of 
is x2 (for example, from Problem 17, Prob-
lem Set 18.3). Then, 
(2) Using Areas
We do not have a known area formula for the region shown in Figure 18.28, but we can
approximate this area using rectangles.
3
5
1
x2dx 5 x3
3 `
5
1
5 125
3
2 1
3 5 124
3
< 41.3
1
3x 3
x
y
1
5
10
20
Height of
rectangle f (1)
b = 4
b =     = 4
4–1
x
f
y
1
5
10
20
A1
One rectangle
FIGURE 18.28 Area bounded by 
, 
the x-axis, and the lines 
and x 5 5
x 5 1
y 5 x2
If we draw one rectangle determined by the left endpoint of the region (namely,
), we obtain an approximation we call 
:
A1
x 5 1
This rectangle has area 
, where 
and 
:
If we draw two rectangles determined by the left endpoints we obtain:
3
5
1
x2dx < A1 1 A2 5 b # f   112 1 b # f   132 5 2 # 12 1 2 # 32 5 20
3
5
1
x2dx < A1 5 4 # f   112 5 4 # 12 5 4
h 5 f   112 5 1
b 5 4
A 5 bh
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We continue the process; for example, draw four rectangles:
If we continue for 8 rectangles, we would approximate the area as 35.5. In fact, using a com-
puter, we could generate the following table of values for a given number (#) of subintervals:
Type
#
Estimate Over [1, 5]
Left endpt
4
30.0000000000
Left endpt
8
35.5000000000
Left endpt
16
38.3750000000
Left endpt
32
39.8437500000
Left endpt
64
40.5859375000
Left endpt
128
40.9589843750
Left endpt
256
41.1459960938
Left endpt
512
41.2396240234
Left endpt
1024
41.2864685059
Left endpt
2048
41.3098983765
Left endpt
4096
41.3216152191
Left endpt
10000
41.3285334400
If we take the limit as the number of rectangles increases, we would find this number
approaches
.
41.3 5 124
3
 5 30
 5 1 # 12 1 1 # 22 1 1 # 32 1 1 # 42
 5 b # f 112 1 b # f 122 1 b # f  132 1 b # f  142
 3
5
1
x 2dx < A1 1 A2 1 A3 1 A4
904
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
b =      = 2
4_
2
x
f
y
10
20
A1
A2
1
5
3
(3, f (3))
Height = f (3)
Two rectangles
Level  1
Evaluate the area function for the functions given in 
Problems 1–6.
1. Let y  5; find A(8).
2. Let y  8.3; find A(x).
3. Let y  3x; find A(4).
4. Let y  2x; find A(x).
5. Let y  3x  2; find A(3).
6. Let y  x  5; find A(x).
Find the antiderivative by using areas in Problems 7–12.
7.  6 dx
8.  3 dx
Problem Set 18.4
b =      = 1
4_
4
x
f
y
10
20
A1
A2
A2
A4
1
2
4
5
3
Four rectangles
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.5
Chapter Summary
905
9.  (x  5) dx
10.  (x  6) dx
11.  (3x  4) dx
12.  (2x  5) dx
Level  2
13. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is a derivative?
14. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is an integral?
15. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
What is the area function?
16. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Contrast a definite integral and an
indefinite integral.
17. Show that x2 is an antiderivative of 2x.
18. Show that 
is an antiderivative of x.
19. Show that 2x3 is an antiderivative of 6x2.
20. Show that 2x3  3 is an antiderivative of 6x2.
Find the area under the curves in Problems 21–24 on the given 
intervals.
21. y  x2 on [1, 9]
22. y  x2 on [2, 5]
23. y  3x on [3, 8]
24. y  2x  1 on [1, 4]
Evaluate the integrals given in Problems 25–28.
25.
26. 
3
1
(9  x2) dx

2
0
e0.5x dx
1
2x 2 2 5
Level  3
29. A culture is growing at an hourly rate of
R(t)  200e0.5t
for 0  t  10. Find the area between the graph of this equa-
tion and the t-axis. What do you think this area represents?
Problem Solving 3   
30. Suppose the accumulated cost of a piece of equipment is C(t)
and the accumulated revenue is R(t), where both of these are
measured in thousands of dollars and t is the number of years
since the piece of equipment was installed. If it is known that
C(t)  18
and
R(t)  21e0.01t
find the area (to the nearest unit) between the graphs of C
and R. Do not forget that t  0. What do you think this area
represents?
27.
28. 3
2
0
1ex 1 e22 dx
3
5
1
11 1 6x2 dx
18.5
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Important Ideas
Nature of calculus [18.1]
Mathematical modeling [18.1]
Limit of a sequence [18.2]
Limits to infinity [18.2]
Derivative [18.3]
Derivative of ex [18.3]
Area function [18.4]
Antiderivative [18.4]
Antiderivative of ex [18.4]
The development of the
calculus represents one
of the great intellectual
accomplishments in
human history.
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF TEACHERS
OF MATHEMATICS STANDARDS
Take some time getting ready to work the review problems in this section. First review
the important ideas listed at the beginning of this chapter (see page 872). Look back at
the definition and property boxes. If you look online, you will find a list of important
terms introduced in this chapter, as well as the types of problems that were introduced.
You will maximize your understanding of this chapter by working the problems in this
section only after you have studied the material.
You will find some review help online at www.mathnature.com. There are links giving general test
help in studying for a mathematics examination, as well as specific help for reviewing this chapter.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

906
CHAPTER 18
The Nature of Calculus
Chapter 18
Review Questions
1. What are the main ideas of calculus? Briefly describe each of
these main ideas.
2. There are three pictures in Figure 18.29 that can be used to
find the growth rate of the boy. Explain what is being
illustrated with this sequence of drawings. Why do you think
we might title this sequence of illustrations “instantaneous
growth rate”?
0
0
5
10
15
20
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Inches tall
HEIGHT MEASURED
EVERY FIVE YEARS
A rough estimate of a man's growth from childhood to 
maturity is obtained by measuring his height every 
five years.  The straight lines between heads show the 
rate of growth.
Years old
0
5
10
15
20
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Inches tall
HEIGHT MEASURED
EVERY  YEAR
A more accurate approximation of growth is obtained 
by taking yearly measurements.  The straight lines 
connecting the heads now begin to blend into a 
continuous curve.
Years old
0
5
10
15
20
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Inches tall
HEIGHT MEASURED
EVERY SIX MONTHS
Measurements taken every six months give a still more 
accurate rate-of-growth line.  With increasingly smaller 
intervals, the lines merge into an ever-smoother curve.
Years old
FIGURE 18.29 Predicting the growth rate of an adult by looking at a child‘s growth
Evaluate the limits in Problems 3–7.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Use the definition of derivative to find the derivatives in
Problems 8–12.
8. f1x2  9
9. f1x2  10  2x
10. f1x2  x  10
11. f1x2  6  4x2
12. f1x2  44e0.5x
Find the antiderivative in Problems 13–14.
13.
14. 3p dx
316x dx
lim
nS`
 11 1 1
n2 n
lim
nS`
 12n 1 32
lim
nS`
 3n4 1 20
7n4
lim
nS`
 1212 n
lim
nS`
 1
n
Evaluate the integrals in Problems 15–17.
15.
16.
17.
(correct to two decimal places)
18. Find the equation of the line tangent to y  x2 at x  1.
19. An object moving in a straight line travels d miles in t hours
according to the formula 
What is the object’s velocity when t  5?
20. The rate of consumption (in billions of barrels per year) for
oil conforms to the formula
for t years after 2000. If the total oil still left in the earth is
estimated to be 670 billion barrels, estimate the length of
time before all available oil is consumed if the rate does not
change and no new oil reserves are discovered.
R1t2 5 32.4e6t/125
d1t2 5 1
5t 2 1 5t
3
2
1
ex
 dx
3
2
0
1x 2 3x22  dx
3
3
2
16x2 2 2x2  dx
BOOK REPORTS
Write a 500-word report on this book:
To Infinity and Beyond: A Cultural History of the 
Infinite. Eli Maor (Boston: Birkhauser, 1987).
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Epilogue: Why Not Math?
MATHEMATICS IN THE NATURAL
SCIENCES, SOCIAL SCIENCES,
AND HUMANITIES
W
e began this book with a prologue that asked the
question, “Why study math?” so it seems appro-
priate that we end the book with an epilogue ask-
ing, “Why not study math?” Mathematics is the foundation
and lifeblood of nearly all human endeavors. The German
philosopher John Frederick Herbart (1776–1841) summarizes
this idea:
Like music, mathematics resists definition. Bertrand
Russell had this to say about mathematics: “Mathematics
may be defined as the subject in which we never know what
we are talking about, nor whether what we are saying is
true.” Einstein, with his customary mildness, tells us, “So far
as the theorems of mathematics are about reality, they are not
certain; so far as they
are certain, they are not
about reality.” Aristotle,
who was as sure of
everything as anyone
can be of anything,
thought mathematics to
be the study of quantity,
whereas Russell, in a
less 
playful 
mood,
thinks of it as the “class
of all propositions of
the type ‘p implies q,’ which seems to have little to do with
quantity.” Willard Gibbs thought of mathematics as a lan-
guage; Hilbert thought of it as a game. Hardy stressed its
uselessness, Hogben its practicality. Mill thought it an em-
pirical science, whereas to Sullivan it was an art, and to the
wonderful J. J. Sylvester, it was “the music of reason.”
This ambiguity should be consoling. It suggests that
mathematics has so many mansions that there is room for
everyone. In this epilogue we will discuss mathematics in the
natural sciences, in the social sciences, and in the humanities.
Mathematics in the Natural
Sciences
When most of us think about applications of mathematics,
we think of those in the natural sciences, or those sciences
that deal with matter, energy, and the interrelations and trans-
formations. Some of the major categories include (alphabeti-
cally) astronomy, biology, chemistry (and biochemistry),
computer science, ecology, geology, medicine, meteorology,
physics (and biophysics), statistics, and zoology.
We began this text by looking at reasoning, both induc-
tive and deductive reasoning. Inductive reasoning in the nat-
ural sciences is called the scientific method. With this type
of reasoning, we are trying to recognize and formulate
Historically, mathematics has always been at the core of a
liberal arts education. This is a book of mathematics for the
liberal arts. Karl Gauss, one of the greatest mathematicians
of all time, called mathematics the “Queen of the Sciences,”
but mathematics goes beyond the sciences. Bertrand Russell
claimed, “Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only
truth, but supreme beauty. . . . ” And finally, Maxine Bôcher
concludes, “I like to look at mathematics almost more as an
art than as a science. . . . ” If fact, the mathematics degree at
UCLA is classified as an art, not a science. Mathematics
seems to be part of the structure of our minds, more akin to
memory than to a learnable discipline. Enjoyment and use
of mathematics are not dependent on “book learning,” and
even a casual perusal of the topics in this book will clearly
illustrate that mathematics is many things to many people.
All quantitative determinations are in the hands of
mathematics, and it at once follows from this that all
speculation which is heedless of mathematics, which
does not enter into
partnership with it,
which does not seek
its aid in distin-
guishing between
the manifold modi-
fications that must
of necessity arise
by a change of
quantitative deter-
minations, is either
an empty play of
thoughts, or at
most a fruitless
effort.
MATHEMATICS
+
7
2
E1
This is what it is.
math • e • mat • ics\'math-  -'mat-iks \
n pl but usu sing in constr 1: the
science of numbers and their oper-
ations, interrelations, combina-
tions, generalizations, and abstrac-
tions and of space configurations
and their structure, measurement,
transformations, and generaliz-
ations 2: a branch of, operation in,
or use of mathematics
e
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

hypotheses, and then collect data through observation and ex-
perimentation in an effort to test our hypotheses and to make
further conclusions or conjectures based on the obtained data.
Using mathematics to make real-life predictions
involves a process known as mathematical modeling,
which we discussed in Chapter 18. Since most models are
dynamic, a feedback and reevaluation process is part of the
formulation of a good model. It involves abstraction, deriv-
ing results, interpretation, and then verification. An illustra-
tion of what we mean is shown in Figure 1.
The first use of a cannon was primarily to demoralize the
enemy by its overwhelming power with little hope of actually
hitting a specific target. In World War I, the trajectory of a
cannon was trial and error, and we all remember old World
War II movies where a “spotter” would phone directions to a
gunner to adjust the angle of the cannon. We now need to
make some assumptions; this is called abstraction. We as-
sume that we are on earth (the earth’s gravitational accelera-
tion is 
or 
we also assume that the density of
the cannonball is constant, and that wind and friction are neg-
ligible). When we look at the path of a cannonball, we recog-
nize it as having a parabolic shape, so our first attempt at
modeling the path is to guess that it has an equation like
for an appropriate a. We also know that it opens
downward, so a is negative. We now need to derive some re-
sults for the modeling process. We begin with the equation of
a parabola that opens down (from Section 15.4): 
This equation assumes that the vertex of the parabola is at (0,
0). It can be shown that if the vertex is at a point (h, k), then
the equation has the form
The vertex of the parabola formed by the path of the can-
nonball has a vertex at (192, 144), so the equation we seek
has the form
We also see that the curve passes through (0, 0), so
We guess that the equation for the path of the cannonball
can be described by the equation
The graph is shown in Figure 3.
1x 2 1922 2 5 22561y 2 1442
 c 5 64
 36,864 5 576c
 10 2 1922 2 5 24c10 2 1442
1x 2 1922 2 5 24c1y 2 1442
1x 2 h2 2 5 24c1y 2 h2
x2 5 24cy.
y 5 ax2
9.8 m/s2;
32 ft/s2
E2
Epilogue
Real-World
Problem
  Abstraction
Derive
Results
Mathematical
Model
Predictions
Compare and Interpret 
FIGURE 1 Mathematical modeling
A good example of mathematics modeling in the natu-
ral sciences, but with implications to history and the social
sciences (not to mention golf!), is modeling the path of a
cannonball. The real-world problem is to hit a target.
Fire a cannonball at 
at a 
angle. We might
begin by using trial and error. One possible trial is shown in
Figure 2.
57°
63 m/s
FIGURE 2 Trying to hit a target by trial and error
64
128
192
256
320
384
80
128
144
Height (feet)
Time (seconds)
Distance (feet)
1
2
3
4
5
6
You can try this experiment (it s fun!) at www
.mathnature. com. Choose “Epilogue links.
FIGURE 3 Path of a cannonball
50 100 150 200 250 300 350
25
50
75
100
125
x
y
Modeling is an iterative process, so we now must inter-
pret and compare. Even though the path of the cannonball
seems correct (it passes through all of the appropriate
points), it does not correctly model the given information.
The path should somehow be dependent on the angle of ele-
vation as well as the speed of the cannonball.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mathematics in the Natural Sciences, Social Sciences, and Humanities
E3
In order to model the path as a function of the angle of
trajectory and initial velocity, we need some concepts from
calculus, specifically Newton’s laws of motion. Even though
the derivation of these equations is beyond the scope of this
course, we can understand these equations once they are
stated as follows:
x  1v0 cos u2t
y  h0  1v0 sin u2t  16t2
where 
is the initial height off the ground, and 
is the
initial velocity of the projectile in the direction of 
with
the horizontal 
You might wish to re-
view the meaning of 
and 
discussed in Section
7.5. The variables x and y represent the horizontal and
vertical distances, respectively, measured in feet, and the
variable t represents the time, in seconds, after firing the
projectile.
sin u
cos u
10° # u # 180°2.
u
v0
h0
We compare Figure 4 with the real-world problem and
it seems to model the situation correctly. In modeling, it
may be necessary to go back and modify the assumptions
several times before obtaining a result that appropriately
models what we seek to find.
Astronomy is the study of objects and matter outside
the earth’s atmosphere, their motions and paths, as well as
their physical and chemical properties. Science often deals
with the very small (such as cells, atoms, and electrons) or
the very large (as with planets and galaxies). In the text, we
defined scientific notation and developed the laws of expo-
nents to help us deal with large and small numbers.
Example
1
Graph of a projectile
Graph the equations
where 
and 
Solution
The desired equations are
We can set up a table of values (as shown in the margin) or
use a graphing calculator to sketch the curve as shown in
Figure 4.
t
x
y
0
0
0
1
34
48
2
69
86
3
103
114
4
137
133
5
172
142
6
206
141
7
240
130
8
274
109
9
309
79
10
343
38
x 5 A63 cos 57°Bt  y 5 A63 sin 57°Bt 2 4.9t2
h0 5 0.
u 5 57°, v0 5 63 ft/s,
x 5 1v0 cos u2t  y 5 h0 1 Av0 sin uBt 2 4.9t2
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
25
50
75
100
125
y
x
FIGURE 4 Graph of the path of a cannonball
Example
2
Number of miles in a light year
One light-year is approximately
The closest star is Alpha Centauri, a distance of 4.35 light-
years from the sun. How far is this in miles?
Solution
We use the properties of exponents:
Note: Because we are working with approximate numbers,
all of these equal signs would generally be “
” meaning
“approximately equal to,” but common usage is to write
equal signs.
<,
 5 2.55 3 1013 miles
 5 25.5345 3 1012 miles
 5 4.35 3 15.87 3 1012 miles2
 4.35 light-years 5 4.35 3 11 light-year2
5.87 3 1012 miles.
5,870,000,000,000 5
Example
3
Investigate the orbit of a planet
Describe the meaning of the equation
which models the path of the earth’s orbit around the sun.
The given distances are in miles. Find the eccentricity. The
closer the eccentricity is to zero, the more circular the orbit.
Solution
We compare this with the equation of a stan-
dard-form ellipse centered at the origin.
x2
a2 1 y2
b2 5 1
x2
8.649 3 1015 1  
y2
8.647 3 1015 5  1
The subsection on scientific notation and estimation (Sec-
tion 1.3) is particularly important in astronomy. These large
numbers are necessary in Example 8, p. 739, Section 15.4,
which finds the equation for the earth’s orbit around the sun.
This example is revisited in the following example.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

E4
Epilogue
We note that 
and 
Since 
we note
that the elliptic orbit is almost circular. The measure of the
circularity of the orbit is the eccentricity, which is defined as
Note: In reality, for the earth is about 0.016678, which
we could obtain with better accuracy on the measurement
of the lengths of the sides. The aphelion (the greatest
distance from the sun) is 
miles and
the perihelion (the closest distance from the sun) is
b < 92,990,000.
a < 93,000,000
P
 5 Å1 2 8.647 3 1015
8.649 3 1015 < 0.015
 P 5 c
a 5 Å1 2 b2
a2
a < b
< 92,990,000.
b 5 "8.647 3 1015
< 93,000,000
a 5 "8.649 3 1015
Another area of biology that relates closely with mathe-
matics is the issue of scale. For example, we say that to predict
a child’s height as an adult, use a scaling factor of 2, which
means if a two-year-old is 31 in. tall, then we predict that this
child will be 62 in. tall as an adult. If we scale up a linear
measure by a factor of two, then a two-dimensional measure
will increase by a factor of 
and a three-dimensional
measure will increase by a factor of 
We considered
this idea relative to scaling on graphs in Section 14.1.
23 5 8.
22 5 4,
Biology is defined as that branch of knowledge that
deals with living organisms and vital processes and includes
the study of the plant and animal life of a region or environ-
ment. In Section 6.3, we considered a significant example
from biology, specifically an application from genetics.
Example
4
Find the proportion of
genotypes and phenotypes
Suppose a certain population has two eye color genes: B
(brown eyes, dominant) and b (blue eyes, recessive). Sup-
pose we have an isolated population in which 60% of the
genes in the gene pool are dominant B, and the other 
are recessive b. What fraction of the population has
each genotype? What percent of the population has each
phenotype?
Solution
Let p  0.6 and q  0.4. Since p and q give 
us 100% of all the genes in the gene pool, we see that 
p  q  1. Since
1p  q22  p2  2pq  q2
we can find the percents:
Genotype BB:
p2  10.622  0.36,
so 36% have BB genotype.
Genotype bB or Bb:
2pq  210.6210.42  0.48,
so
48% have this genotype.
Genotype bb:
q2  10.422  0.16,
so 16% have bb genotype.
Check genotypes:
0.36  0.48  0.16  1.00
As for the phenotypes, we look only at outward appear-
ances, and since brown is dominant, BB, bB, and Bb all
have brown eyes; this accounts for 
leaving 
with
blue eyes.
16%
84%,
40%
Example
5
Discuss the effect of area due
to scaling factor changes
Consider a tissue sample as shown in Figure 5.
FIGURE 5 Small tissue sample
If this sample is scaled up by a factor of 2, how does the
area of the new sample compare with the area of the origi-
nal? Repeat for scaling up by a factor of 3.
Solution
Since the area function is a square 
we know that the area of the sample is scaled up by a fac-
tor of 
when doubled or 
when tripled.
Tripling the width and length results
in increasing the area by 9.
Doubling the width and length results
in increasing the area by 4.
32 5 9
22 5 4
1A 5 s22,
Chemistry is the science that deals with the composi-
tion, structure, and properties of substances and with the
transformations that they undergo. A popular and exciting
natural science called biochemistry deals with the chemical
compounds and processes occurring in organisms.
Computer science is the study of computers, their de-
sign, and programming and includes artificial intelligence,
networking, computer graphics, and computer languages.
Computers, calculators, and spreadsheets are discussed
throughout the text.
Geology is the science that deals with the history of the
earth and its life, especially as recorded in rocks. Ecology is
the science that is concerned with the interrelationship of
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mathematics in the Natural Sciences, Social Sciences, and Humanities
E5
organisms and their environments. Medicine is the science
and art dealing with the maintenance of health and the pre-
vention, alleviation, or cure of disease. Meteorology is the
science that deals with the atmosphere and its phenomena,
and especially with weather and weather forecasting.
Physics is the science that deals with matter and energy
and their interactions. Biophysics deals with the application
of physical principles and methods to biological systems
and problems.
Statistics is a branch of mathematics dealing with the
collection, analysis, interpretation, and presentation of
masses of numerical data. Chapter 14 of this text introduces
some topics in statistics—namely, frequency distributions
and graphs; measures of central tendency, position, and dis-
persion; normal curves; and correlation and regression
analysis.
And last, but not least, on our list of major categories of
the natural sciences is zoology, which is concerned with
classification and properties of animals, including their
structure, function, growth, origin, evolution, and distribu-
tion. Zoology is often considered to be a branch of biology.
An excellent discussion of mathematics in modeling a
projectile’s path can be found in the following article in the
classic book, World of Mathematics (New York, Simon and
Schuster, 1956): “Mathematics of Motion,” by Galileo
Galilei. You will find other references to mathematics in the
natural sciences on the World Wide Web at
marker to differentiate between numbers such as 123 and
1230. The first documented use of the number 0 is found
around the first century A.D. in the Mayan numeration sys-
tem. The Hindus customarily wrote numbers in columns
and used a zero symbol to represent a blank column, which
is necessary for our present place-value numeration system.
www.mathnature.com
Mathematics in the Social 
Sciences
The social sciences are the study of human society and of
individual relationships in and to society. Some of the major
categories include (arranged alphabetically) anthropology,
archaeology, civics, history, languages, political science,
psychology, and sociology.
Anthropology refers to the study of human beings in
relation to distribution, origin, classification, and relation-
ship of races, physical character, environmental and social
relations, and culture. In its broadest sense, it also includes
theology.
Example
6
Discussion
Discuss the invention of the zero symbol.
Solution
The term zero, written 0, is defined to be the ad-
ditive identity, which is that number with the property that
for any number x. The Babylonians used
written symbols for thousands of years before they invented
a symbol for 0, which was initially introduced as a position
x 1 0 5 0 1 x
Example
7
Age of Shroud of Turin
In 1988, a small sample of the Shroud of Turin was taken
and scientists from Oxford University, the University of
Arizona, and the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
were permitted to test it. Suppose the cloth contained
of the original amount of carbon. According to this
information, how old is the Shroud?
Solution
We use the decay formula A  A0ert, where
AA0  0.907 and r  1.209680943E  4 (from Exam-
ple 5, p. 492, Section 10.3):
Decay formula
Divide both sides by A0.
Remember, t is the unknown; r is known.
Definition of logarithm
r  1.209680943E  4
This is the most probable age (in years).
The probable date for the Shroud is about A.D. 1200. Since
the first recorded evidence of the Shroud is about 1389, we
see that A.D. 1200 is not only possible, but plausible.
 < 806.9
 t 5 ln 0.907
r
 rt 5 ln 0.907
 0.907 5 ert
 A
A0
5 ert
 A 5 A0ert
90.7%
“Human sacrifices and human compassion. Greek
artists and American cannibals. The birth of language and
the death of civilizations. Mongol hordes and ancient toys.
Missing aviators and sunken ships. Egyptian politicians and
modern saints. The first human and the latest war. The past
hides the key to the future. Find it in. . . .” This advertise-
ment for the periodical Discovering Archaeology does a
good job of describing archaeology.
Civics is the subject that deals with the rights and duties
of citizens. History refers to a chronological record of sig-
nificant events, often including an explanation of their
causes. (The prologue of this book focused on mathematical
history.) Linguistics is the study of human speech, including
the units, nature, structure, and modification of language,
Another application of mathematics to anthropology is
carbon dating of artifacts using the decay formula. Problem
57 of Problem Set 10.3, p. 499 asked you to use the gathered
data to set a probable date for the Shroud of Turin. If you
worked this problem, you found that it is not dated from the
time of Christ.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

E6
Epilogue
whereas language refers to the actual knowledge of the words
and vocabulary used to communicate ideas and feelings.
Political science is a branch of social science that is the
study of the description and analysis of political and especially
governmental institutions and processes. Related to this idea is
the problem of representation in government, namely, the issue
of voting and apportionment. In the text we examined different
forms of representative government, including dictatorship,
majority, and plurality rules. What effect does a runoff election
or a third party have on the results of an election?
Apportionment was an important issue for the framers
of the U.S. Constitution, and historically there were four
plans that are important to government planning today.
These plans were advanced by Thomas Jefferson, John
Quincy Adams, Daniel Webster, and Alexander Hamilton.
We discussed apportionment at length in the text.
Psychology, broadly defined, refers to the science of
mind and behavior. Mathematical tools used in psychology
include sets, statistics, and the analysis of data, which we
discuss at length in Chapter 14. The organization of data and
surveys using Venn diagrams is introduced in Chapter 2.
Sociology is the study of society, social institutions,
and social relationships, specifically the systematic study of
the development, structure, interaction, and collective be-
havior of organized groups of human beings. Throughout
the book, we encountered a secret sect of intellectuals called
the Pythagoreans. Every evening each member of the
Pythagorean Society had to reflect on three questions:
sizes for different growth rates. Recall the growth
formula:
which gives the future population A after t years for an ini-
tial population 
and a growth rate of r; this relationship
was considered extensively in Chapter 10.
The principal use of mathematics in the social sciences
is in its heavy use of statistics. In the text, we studied surveys
and sampling, which are important to social scientists. To
choose an unbiased sample from a target population, we must
ask two questions: Is the procedure random? and Does the
procedure take into account the target population? Finally,
matrices, an important topic in mathematics, are used to or-
ganize and manipulate data in the social sciences. This topic
is introduced and discussed extensively in the text.
Social Choice
The study of the decision-making process by which individ-
ual preferences are translated into a single group choice is
known as social choice theory. It is an important topic in
mathematics (see Chapter 17) and culminates with the sur-
prising mathematical result that it is impossible to find a
suitable technique for voting.
Related to voting is the process by which a representa-
tive government is chosen, called apportionment, which is
also discussed in Chapter 17.
Stable Marriages
Suppose there are n graduates of a well-known medical
school, and those graduates will be matched to n medical
centers to serve their internship programs. Each graduate
must select his or her preferences for medical school, and
in turn, each medical school must make a list of prefer-
ences for graduates. We will call this pairing a marriage.
A pairing is called unstable if there are a graduate and a
school who have not picked each other and who would
prefer to be married to each other rather than to their cur-
rent selection. Otherwise, the pairing is said to be stable.
A0
A 5 A0ert
PYTHAGOREAN CREED
1. What good have I done today?
2. What have I failed at today?
3. What have I not done today that I should 
have done?
Example
8
Show that 28 is perfect
The Pythagoreans studied perfect numbers. A perfect
number is a counting number that is equal to the sum of all
its divisors that are less than the number itself. Show that
28 is a perfect number.
Solution
We first find all divisors of 28 that are less
than 28: 1, 2, 4, 7, and 14. Their sum is
So we see that 28 is perfect!
1 1 2 1 4 1 7 1 14 5 28
Understanding population growth is an essential part
of understanding the underlying principles used in the
social sciences. Population growth, along with a working
knowledge of the number e, is used to predict population
Example
9
Showing that a marriage 
possibility is stable
Suppose there are three graduates, a, b, c, and three
schools, A, B, C, with choices as follows:
a(ABC) means that a ranks the schools as A, first
choice; B, second choice; and C, third choice.
b(ACB) means that b ranks the schools A, C, and B,
respectively.
c(ABC) means that c ranks the schools A, B, and 
then C.
On the other hand, the schools’ rankings of candidates are: 
A(cab),
B(cba),
and
C(bca)
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mathematics in the Natural Sciences, Social Sciences, and Humanities
E7
How many possible marriages are there, and how many of
these are stable?
Solution
We begin by representing the choices for this
example in matrix form (we considered matrices in Sec-
tion 16.3): 
A
B
C
The entry (1, 2) means that a picks A as its 1st choice, 
and A picks a as its 2nd choice.
To answer the first question, we use the fundamental
counting principle. Person a can be paired with any of three
schools, and then (since the matching is one school to one
student) there are two schools left for person b, and finally
one for person c:
Number of possibilities:
We show these choices using a tree diagram in Figure 6.
3 # 2 # 1 5 6
a
b
c 
£
11, 22
12, 32
13, 32
11, 32
13, 22
12, 12
11, 12
12, 12
13, 22
§
Let’s move to the second pairing shown in Figure 6. It
is aA, bC, and cB. We show this pairing:
A
B
C
Row a is OK because a is paired with his or her first
choice.
Row b is OK because b is paired with his or her second
choice, but C is paired with a first choice.
Row c shows that c is paired with his or her second
choice, but would rather be with A. A would also rather
be with c, so this marriage is unstable.
The other possibilities are listed here:
A
B
C
Not stable; a prefers A, and A prefers a to b.
A
B
C
a prefers A, but A is paired with first choice. 
b prefers A, but A is paired with first choice. 
Stable
A
B
C
c prefers A, and A prefers c, so this is unstable.
A
B
C
b prefers C, and C prefers b, so this is unstable.
a
b
c 
£
11, 22
12, 32
13, 32
11, 32
13, 22
12, 12
11, 12
12, 12
13, 22
§
a
b
c 
£
11, 22
12, 32
13, 32
11, 32
13, 22
12, 12
11, 12
12, 12
13, 22
§
a
b
c 
£
11, 22
12, 32
13, 32
11, 32
13, 22
12, 12
11, 12
12, 12
13, 22
§
a
b
c 
£
11, 22
12, 32
13, 32
11, 32
13, 22
12, 12
11, 12
12, 12
13, 22
§
a
b
c 
£
11, 22
12, 32
13, 32
11, 32
13, 22
12, 12
11, 12
12, 12
13, 22
§
bB →cC
aA
bC →cB
bA →cC
aB
bC →cA
bA →cB
aC
bB →cA
FIGURE 6 Possible pairings
→
→
→
→
→
→
We need to consider each of these six possibilities,
one at a time. The first one listed is aA, bB, and cC. We
repeat the above matrix, this time with these highlighted
pairings:
A
B
C
We look for a pairing in which both partners would rather
be paired with someone else. This will not occur for a row
in which the pairing shows a first choice, so we do not look
at row a to find dissatisfaction; instead we look at row b.
The pairing (3, 2) tells us that b is associated with his or her
third choice. We are looking for another pair in the same
row where the second component is smaller than its corre-
sponding choice in its column. Note that in row b the entry
(2, 1) has a second component of 1, which means that C
would rather be paired with b than with its current pairing
of c. We also see that person b would also prefer to be mar-
ried to c (second choice) than with its current pairing, so this
is unstable.
a
b
c 
£
11, 22
12, 32
13, 32
11, 32
13, 22
12, 12
11, 12
12, 12
13, 22
§
Example 9 has five unstable pairings and one stable
one. It can be proved that every marriage has at least one
stable pairing. In the problem set you are asked to consider
the situation where the number of candidates is greater than
the number of schools.
An excellent discussion of mathematics and the social
sciences can be found in the following list of articles in the
classic book, World of Mathematics (New York, Simon and
Schuster, 1956):
“Gustav Theodor Fechner,” a commentary on the founder
of psychophysics, by Edwin G. Boring. Fechner’s contri-
bution was to introduce measurement as a tool.
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

E8
Epilogue
In order to draw realistic-looking drawings, mathemati-
cal ideas from projective geometry are necessary. Early at-
tempts at three-dimensional art failed miserably because
they did not use projective geometry. We cite as examples
Duccio’s Last Supper (Figure 7.63, p. 376) or the Egyptian
art shown in Figure 7.
FIGURE 7 Judgment of the Dead-Pai on papyrusca.
14th century B.C.
Projective geometry was an early mathematical attempt
to represent three-dimensional objects on a canvas (see
Dürer’s Recumbent Woman on page 377). Finally, a plan for
perspective was developed, as shown in Figure 8.
FIGURE 8 Perspective in Art
You will find other references to 
mathematics in the social sciences on 
the World wide at www.mathnature.com
“Mathematics of Population and Food,” by Thomas
Robert Malthus, explores the thesis that all animated life
tends to increase beyond the nourishment prepared for it.
“A Mathematical Approach to Ethics,” by George
Birkhoff
Example 10 Verify a golden ratio
An unfinished canvas by Leonardo da Vinci entitled St.
Jerome was painted about 1481. Find a golden rectangle
that fits neatly around a prominent part of this painting.
Measure the length and width of the rectangle and then
find the ratio of the width to length.
Solution
A portion of the work of art is shown below
(with a rectangle superimposed). The width and length of
the rectangle will vary with the size of the reproduction,
but the ratio of width to length is about 0.61.
© Scala/Art Resource, NY
St. Jerome by Leonardo da Vinci, 1481
A golden rectangle
© Scala/Art Resource, NY
© Historical Picture/Archive/CORBIS
Mathematics in the Humanities
By humanities we mean art, music, and literature. One of
the major themes of this book has been the analysis of
shapes and patterns, and shapes and patterns are the basis
for a great deal of art and music.
There is an interdependence of mathematics and art (see
Chapter 7). The shape that seems to be the most appealing to
human intellect is the so-called golden rectangle, which was
used in the design of the Parthenon in Athens and in La
Parade by the French impressionist Georges Seurat.
A
B
C
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mathematics in the Natural Sciences, Social Sciences, and Humanities
E9
The rule of optical perspective begins with the horizon
One point B on 
is selected to be the
vanishing point, and all other lines recede directly from the
viewer and converge at the vanishing point. All other lines
(except verticals and parallels to the horizon) have their own
vanishing points, governed by their particular angle to the
plane of the picture. The vanishing point for the rectangle in
Figure 8 is point A, and for the cube at the right, it is point C.
Music is very mathematical, and the Greeks included
music when studying arithmetic, geometry, and astronomy.
Today, with a great deal of music created on a synthesizer, it
is not uncommon for a computer programmer to be a musi-
cian and for a musician to be a computer programmer. The
modern musical scale is divided into 13 tones, as shown in
Figure 9.
FIGURE 9 Piano keyboard showing one octave
The Greeks plucked strings and found what types of
string vibrations made pleasing sounds. They found that the
sound was pleasing if it was plucked at a location that was
in the ratio of 1 to 2 (which we call an octave), 2 to 3 (a
fifth), 3 to 4 (a fourth), and so on. You might notice that the
piano keyboard is divided into 8 white keys (diatonic scale)
and 5 black keys (pentatonic scale). These numbers 5 and 8
are two consecutive Fibonacci numbers. The middle C is
tuned so the string vibrates 264 times per second, whereas
the note A above middle C vibrates 440 times per second.
Note that the ratio of 440 to 264 reduces to 5 to 3, two other
Fibonacci numbers.
A mathematical concept known as the sine function
(see Section 7.5) can be used to record the motion of the vi-
brations over time. These vibrations (known as sound) are
shown in the following example.
C#
D#
F#
G#
A#
D
C
E
F
G
A
B
C
line AC
g
1line AC
g2.
obtain many different looking graphs, depending on the
window values.
FIGURE 10 Graph of a musical note described 
by y  0.0050 sin(528 . 360x)
The Selmer Bandwagon, 1961, 9(2).
Example 11 Graph tuning fork sound wave
A tuning fork vibrates at 264 Hz [frequency 
and
Hz is an abbreviation for Hertz meaning “cycles per unit
of time,” after the physicist Heinrich Hertz (1857–1894)].
This sound produces middle C on the musical scale and
can be described by an equation of the form
y  0.0050 sin 528 . 360x
Use a graphing calculator to look at this curve.
Solution
The graph is shown in Figure 10, along with
the necessary input values. Technology does not do a good
job of graphing an equation such as this, and you may
2
1
f 5 264
A composition by Mozart is interesting not only for its
music, but also because it illustrates the mathematical idea
of an inversion transformation, introduced in Section 7.1.
This unique piece for violin, reproduced in Figure 11, can
be played simultaneously by two musicians facing each
other and reading the music, laid flat between them, in op-
posite directions. The two parts, though different, will be in
perfect harmony, without violating a single rule of classical
composition. Another piece, Bach’s Art of the Fugue, made
use of mirror reflections in passages between the upper tre-
ble and lower bass figures.
FIGURE 11 Mozart composition
An excellent discussion of mathematics and the human-
ities can be found in the following list of articles from the
classic book, World of Mathematics (New York, Simon and
Schuster, 1956):
“Mathematics of Aesthetics,” by George David Birkhoff
“Mathematics as an Art,” by John William Navin Sullivan
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

E10
Epilogue
“Mathematics and Music,” by James Jeans
“Geometry in the South Pacific,” by Sylvia Townsend
Warner. The story is an example of mathematics in lit-
erature.
An excellent discussion of mathematics in business and eco-
nomics can be found in the following list of articles from the
classic book, World of Mathematics (New York, Simon and
Schuster, 1956):
“Mathematics of Value and Demand,” by Augustin
Cournot
“Theory of Political Economy,” by William Stanley
Jevons. This essay begins with the declaration, “It is
clear that economics, if it is to be a science at all, must
be a mathematical science. . . . Wherever the things
treated are capable of being greater or less, there the
laws and relations must be mathematical in nature.”
“The Theory of Economic Behavior,” by Leonid Hur-
wicz, introduces the important application of theory of
games and economic behavior. Game theory is prima-
rily concerned with the logic of strategy and was first
envisioned by the great mathematician Gottfried Leib-
niz (1646–1716). However, the theory of games as we
know it today was developed in the 1920s by John von
Neumann and Emile Borel. It gained wide acceptance in
1944 in a book entitled Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior by von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern.
“Theory of Games,” by S. Vajda provides further study
in game theory.
You will find other references to
mathematics in the humanities on the
World Wide Web at www.mathnature.com
Mathematics in Business 
and Economics
The focus of Chapter 11 in the text forms the foundations for
business and economics. A fundamental, and essential, idea
in business and economics is the concept of interest. Interest
is an amount paid for the use of someone else’s money. It can
be compounded once, or it can be compounded at regular in-
tervals. Related to interest are annuities (future value of in-
terest and deposits), sinking funds (monthly payment when
the future value is known), present value of an annuity (the
amount you can borrow, given the monthly payment), and
amortization (the monthly payment when the present value
is known). All of these concepts are essential ideas for un-
derstanding the processes of business, borrowing, and eco-
nomics, and they are all important topics in mathematics.
Epilogue Problem Set
1. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Describe some similarities between
the scientific method and mathematical modeling.
2. IN YOUR OWN WORDS
Pick one of the areas that is of most
interest to you: natural sciences, social sciences, humanities,
or business and economics. Write a paper discussing at least
one application of mathematics to this area that was not
discussed in this epilogue.
3. Classify each of the disciplines as humanities, a natural
science, or a social science.
a. psychology
b. physics
c. meteorology
d. music
e. history
4. Classify each of the disciplines as humanities, a natural
science, or a social science.
a. chemistry
b. art
c. French
d. geology
e. computer programming
5. Classify each of the disciplines as humanities, a natural
science, or a social science.
a. civics
b. medicine
c. anthropology
d. political science
e. biology
f. ecology
6. Classify each of the disciplines as humanities, a natural
science, or a social science.
a. dance
b. theology
c. women’s studies
d. social work
e. linguistics
f. conflict studies
7. Classify each of the disciplines as humanities, a natural
science, or a social science.
a. plant pathology
b. geography
c. horticulture
d. food science
e. entomology
f. forestry
8. Classify each of the disciplines as humanities, a natural
science, or a social science.
a. literature
b. Jewish studies
c. human nutrition
d. agriculture
e. gender studies
f. kinesiology
9. If a star is located at a distance of 858,000,000,000,000,000,000
miles, what is this distance in light-years?
10. If a star is located at a distance of 5.61 light-years, what is this
distance in miles?
11. The eccentricities of the planets are given in the following table:
Mercury, 0.21
Venus, 0.01
Earth, 0.02
Mars, 0.09
Jupiter, 0.04
Saturn, 0.06
Uranus, 0.05
Neptune, 0.01
Pluto, 0.24
Which planet has the most circular orbit?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mathematics in the Natural Sciences, Social Sciences, and Humanities
E11
12. Each person has 23 pairs of chromosomes. If we inherit
one of each pair from each parent, what is the number of
possibilities?
13. An average chicken egg is 2 in. from top to bottom, and an
ostrich egg is 6 in. from top to bottom. What is the scaling
factor? If a chicken egg weighs 2 oz, what is the expected
weight of an ostrich egg?
14. Eggs are graded for both quantity and size. Jumbo eggs must
have a minimum weight of 56 lb per 30-doz case, and small
eggs must have a minimum weight of 34 lb per 30-doz case.
What is the scaling factor for the weight of one small egg
compared to one jumbo egg?
15. Suppose a pea has two skin characteristics: S (smooth, domi-
nant) and w (wrinkled, recessive). Suppose we have an iso-
lated population in which 55% of the genes in the gene pool
are dominant S and the other 45% are recessive w. What
fraction of the population has each genotype?
16. Suppose a pea has two skin characteristics: S (smooth, domi-
nant) and w (wrinkled, recessive). Suppose we have an iso-
lated population in which 48% of the genes in the gene pool
are dominant S and the other 52% are recessive w. What
fraction of the population has each genotype?
17. The area of a cell magnified 2,000 times is about 20 cm2.
What is the area of the unmagnified cell?
18. a. If you change the angle in Example 1 to 45º, would you
expect the cannonball to go farther or shorter than shown
in the example?
b. Use a calculator to sketch the path of a cannonball with
initial velocity 63 ft/s at a 45º angle. Was your conjecture
in part a correct?
19. What is the path of a cannonball fired at 64 ft/s at an angle 
of 60º?
20. Describe the meaning of the equation
which models the path of Venus’ orbit around the sun. The
given distances are in miles.
a. What is the eccentricity?
b. Graph this equation.
21. Describe the meaning of the equation
which models the path of Mars’ orbit around the sun. The
given distances are in miles.
a. What is the eccentricity?
b. Graph this equation.
22. Four professors, A, B, C, and D, are each going to hire a stu-
dent. Six students have applied. How many possible marriages
are there?
x2
2.015 3 1016 1
y2
1.995 3 1016 5 1
x2
4.5837 3 1015 1
y2
4.5835 3 1015 5 1
23. Each of four women is going to marry one of four men. How
many possible marriages are there?
24. Four professors, A, B, C, and D, are each going to hire 
a student. Six students have applied. Here are the 
preferences:
A(a, f, b, c, d, e)
a(C, B, D, A)
B(a, b, f, e, d, c)
b(C, D, B, A)
C(b, a, e, c, d, f)
c(B, A, C, D)
D(a, b, e, f, c, d)
d(A, B, D, C)
e(A, B, C, D)
f(B, D, A, C)
a. Show the matrix of their choices.
b. List one pairing and state whether it is stable or 
unstable.
25. Four women are going to marry four men. Here are their
preferences:
a(A, D, B, C)
A(d, a, b, c)
b(D, A, C, B)
B(a, d, c, b)
c(D, A, B, C)
C(a, b, d, c)
d(D, B, A, C)
D(b, a, c, d)
a. Show the matrix of their choices.
b. List one pairing and state whether it is stable or unstable.
26. An equation for middle C with frequency f  261.626 and
amplitude 8 is
y  8 sin(360fx)
Use a calculator to graph this note.
27. Graph the sound wave with equation
y  8 sin(360fx)  4 sin(720fx) 
for f  261.626.
28. Suppose there are three graduates, a, b, c, and three schools,
A, B, C, with choices as follows:
a(CAB)
b(CAB)
c(CBA)
A(abc)
B(bac)
C(acb)
a. How many possible marriages are there?
b. How many of these are stable?
29. Suppose there are three graduates, a, b, c, and three schools A,
B, C, with choices as follows:
a(BCA)
b(CAB)
c(ABC)
A(abc)
B(bca)
C(cab)
a. How many possible marriages are there?
b. How many of these are stable?
30. The moon’s orbit is elliptical with the earth at one focus. 
The point at which the moon is farthest from the earth is
called the apogee, and the point at which it is closest is 
called the perigee. If the moon is 199,000 miles from the 
earth at apogee and the length of the major axis of its orbit 
is 378,000 miles, what is the eccentricity of the moon’s 
orbit?
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix
A
Glossary
Abelian group
A group that is also commutative.
Abscissa
The horizontal coordinate in a two-dimensional
system of rectangular coordinates, usually denoted by x.
Absolute value
The absolute value of a number is the distance
of that number from the origin. Symbolically,
Accuracy
One speaks of an accurate statement in the sense that
it is true and correct, or of an accurate computation in the
sense that it contains no numerical error. Accurate to a certain
decimal place means that all digits preceding and including the
given one are correct.
Acre
A unit commonly used in the United States system for
measuring land. It contains 
Acute angle
An angle whose measure is smaller than a right angle.
Acute triangle
A triangle with three acute angles.
Adams’ apportionment plan
An apportionment plan in which
the representation of a geographical area is determined by
finding the quotient of the number of people in that area
divided by the total number of people and then rounding the
result as follows: Any quotient with a decimal portion must 
be rounded up to the next whole number.
Addition
One of the fundamental undefined operations applied
to the set of counting numbers.
Addition law of exponents
To multiply two numbers with like
bases, add the exponents; that is,
Addition law of logarithms
The log of the product of two
numbers is the sum of the logs of those numbers. In symbols,
Addition method
The method of solution of a system of
equations in which the coefficients of one of the variables are
opposites so that when the equations are added, one of the
variables is eliminated.
Addition of integers
If the integers to be added have the same
sign, the answer will also have that same sign and will have a
magnitude equal to the sum of the absolute values of the given
integers. If the integers to be added have opposite signs, the
answer will have the sign of the integer with the larger absolute
value, and will have a magnitude equal to the difference of the
absolute values. Finally, if one or both of the given integers is 0,
use the property that 
for any integer n.
Addition of matrices
if and only if [M] and
[N] are the same order and the entries of [S] are found by
adding the corresponding entries of [M] and [N].
3M4 1 3N4 5 3S4
n 1 0 5 n
logb 1AB2 5 logb  A 1 logb  B
bm # bn 5 bm1n
43,560 ft2.
0 n 0 5 e
n if n $ 0
2n if n , 0
Addition of rational numbers
Addition principle
A method of representing numbers by
repeating a symbol in a numeration system and repeatedly
adding the symbol’s value. For example, 
means
Addition property (of equations)
The solution of an equation
is unchanged by adding the same number to both sides of the
equation.
Addition property of inequality
The solution of an inequality
is unchanged if you add the same number to both sides of the
inequality.
Addition property of probabilities
For any events E and F, the
probability of their union can be found by
Additive identity
The number 0, which has the property that
for any number a.
Additive inverse
See Opposites. The additive inverse of a
matrix [M] is denoted by [M] and is defined by (1)[M].
Add-on interest
A method of calculating interest and
installments on a loan. The amount of interest is calculated
according to the formula I  Prt and is then added to the
amount of the loan. This sum, divided by the number of
payments, is the amount of monthly payment.
Address
Designation of the location of data within internal
memory or on a magnetic disk or tape.
Adjacent angles
Two angles are adjacent if they share a
common side.
Adjacent side
In a right triangle, an acute angle is made up of
two sides; one of those sides is the hypotenuse, and the other
side is called the adjacent side.
Adjusted balance method
A method of calculating credit card
interest using the formula I  Prt in which P is the balance
owed after the current payment is subtracted.
Alabama paradox
An increase in the total numbers of items 
to be apportioned resulting in a loss for a group is called the
Alabama paradox.
Algebra
A generalization of arithmetic. Letters called variables
are used to denote numbers, which are related by laws that
hold (or are assumed) for any of the numbers in the 
set. The four main processes of algebra are (1) simplify, 
(2) evaluate, (3) factor, and (4) solve.
Algebraic expression
Any meaningful combination of
numbers, variables, and signs of operation.
a 1 0 5 a
 5 P1E2 1 P1F2 2 P1E d F2
 P1E ´ F2 5 P1E or F2
10 1 10 1 10 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1.
d d d 0 0 0 0
a
b 1 c
d 5 ad
bd 1 bc
bd 5 ad 1 bc
bd
G1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Alternate exterior angles
Two alternate angles are angles on
opposite sides of a transversal cutting two parallel lines, each
having one of the lines for one of its sides. They are alternate
exterior angles if neither lies between the two lines cut by the
transversal.
Alternate interior angles
Two alternate angles are angles on
opposite sides of a transversal cutting two parallel lines, each
having one of the lines for one of its sides. They are alternate
interior angles if both lie between the two lines cut by the
transversal.
Alternating series
A series that alternates in sign.
Amortization
The process of paying off a debt by systematically
making partial payments until the debt (principal) and interest
are repaid.
Amortization schedule
A table showing the schedule of
payments of a loan detailing the amount of each payment that
goes to repay the principal and how much goes to pay interest.
Amortized loan
A loan that is fully paid off with the last
periodic payment.
Analytic geometry
The geometry in which position is
represented analytically (or by coordinates) and algebraic
methods of reasoning are used for the most part.
And
See Conjunction. In everyday usage, it is used to join
together elements that are connected in two sets
simultaneously.
AND-gate
An electrical circuit that simulates conjunction; that
is, the circuit is on when two switches are on.
Angle
Two rays or segments with a common endpoint.
Angle of depression
The angle between the line of sight to an
object below measured from a horizontal.
Angle of elevation
The angle between the line of sight to an
object above measured from a horizontal.
Annual compounding
In the compound interest formula, it is
when 
Annual percentage rate
The percentage rate charged on a 
loan based on the actual amount owed and the actual time it is
owed. The approximation formula for annual percentage rate
(APR) is
Annuity
A sequence of payments into or out of an interest-bearing
account. If the payments are made into an interest-bearing
account at the end of each time period, and if the frequency of
payments is the same as the frequency of compounding, the
annuity is called an ordinary annuity.
Antecedent
See Conditional.
Antiderivative
If the derivative of a function defined by
is f(x), then the antiderivative of f (x) is
This means that 
Apportionment
process of dividing the representation in a
legislative body according to some plan.
Approval voting
The approval voting method allows each 
voter to cast one vote for each candidate who meets with his or
her approval. The candidate with the most votes is declared the
winner.
APR
Abbreviation for annual percentage rate. See Annual
percentage rate.
Fr1x2 5 f 1x2.
3f 1x2 dx 5 F1x2
y 5 F1x2
APR 5
2Nr
N 1 1
n 5 1.
Arc
(1) Part of the circumference of a circle. (2) In networks, it
is a connection between two vertices.
Area
A number describing the two-dimensional content of a set.
Specifically, it is the number of square units enclosed in a
plane figure.
Area formulas
Square, 
rectangle, w; parallelogram, bh;
triangle, 
circle, 
trapezoid, 
Area function
The function that is the area bounded below by
the x-axis, above by a function 
on the left by the 
y-axis, and on the right by the vertical line 
Area under a curve
The area of the region bounded by the
graph of a function f, the x-axis, and the vertical lines 
and 
is given by
Argument
(1) The statements and conclusion as a form of
logical reasoning. (2) In a logarithmic expression 
it is
the number N.
Arithmetic mean
The arithmetic mean of the numbers a and b
is 
Arithmetic sequence
A sequence, each term of which is 
equal to the sum of the preceding term and a constant, written 
a1, a2  a1  d, a3  a1  2d, . . . ; the nth term of an
arithmetic sequence is
where 
is the first term and d is the common difference. Also
called an arithmetic progression. See also Sequence.
Arithmetic series
The indicated sum of the terms of an
arithmetic sequence. The sum of n terms is denoted by 
and
or 
Arrangement
Same as Permutation.
Array
An arrangement of items into rows and columns. See
Matrix.
Arrow’s impossibility theorem
No social choice rule satisfies
all six of the following conditions.
1. Unrestricted domain
Any set of rankings is possible; if
there are n candidates, then there are n! possible rankings.
2. Decisiveness
Given any set of individual rankings, the
method produces a winner.
3. Symmetry and transitivity
The voting system should be
symmetric and transitive over the set of all outcomes.
4. Independence of irrelevant alternatives
If a voter
prefers A to B with C as a possible choice, then the voter
still prefers A to B when C is not a possible choice.
5. Pareto principle
If each voter prefers A over B, then the
group chooses A over B.
6. There should be no dictator.
Artificial intelligence
A field of study devoted to computer
simulation of human intelligence.
ASCII code
A standard computer code used to facilitate the
interchange of information among various types of computer
equipment.
Assignment
A computer term for setting the value of one
variable to match the value of another.
An 5 n
232a1 1 1n 2 12d4
An 5 n
21a1 1 an2
An
a1
a1 1 1n 2 12d
a 1 b
2
.
logb N,
A 5 3
b
a
f 1x2dx
x 5 b
x 5 a
x 5 t.
y 5 f 1x2,
1
2 h1b1 1 b22.
pr2;
1
2 bh;
s2;
G2
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Associative property
A property of grouping that applies to
certain operations (addition and multiplication, for example,
but not to subtraction or division): If a, b, and c are real
numbers, then
and
Assuming the antecedent
Same as direct reasoning.
Assuming the consequent
A logical fallacy; same as the fallacy
of the converse.
Augmented matrix
A matrix that results after affixing an
additional column to an existing matrix.
Average
A single number that is used to typify or represent a set
of numbers. In this book, it refers to the mean, median, or
mode.
Average daily balance method
A method of calculating credit
card interest using the formula 
in which P is the
average daily balance owed for a current month, and t is the
number of days in the month divided by 365.
Average rate of change
The average rate of change of a
function f from x to 
is
Axes
The intersecting lines of a Cartesian coordinate system.
The horizontal axis is called the x-axis, and the vertical axis is
called the y-axis. The axes divide the plane into four parts
called quadrants.
Axiom
A statement that is accepted without proof.
Axis of a parabola
The line through the focus of a parabola
drawn perpendicular to the directrix.
Axis of symmetry
A curve is symmetric with respect to a line,
called the axis of symmetry, if for any point P on the curve,
there is a point Q also on the curve such that the axis of
symmetry is the perpendicular bisector of the line segment 
Balinski and Young’s impossibility theorem
Any
apportionment plan that does not violate the quota rule must
produce paradoxes. And any apportionment method that does
not produce paradoxes must violate the quota rule.
Balloon payment
A single larger payment made at the end of
the time period of an installment loan that is not amortized.
Bar graph
See Graph.
Base
(1) See Exponent. (2) In a percent problem, it is the whole
quantity.
Base angles
In an isosceles triangle, the angles formed by the
base with each of the equal sides.
Base b numeration system
A numeration system with b
elements.
Base of an exponential
In 
the base is 
Base of a triangle
In an isosceles triangle, the side that is not
the same length as the sides whose lengths are the same.
Because
A logical operator for p because q, which is defined to
mean
Bell-shaped curve
See Normal curve.
Belong to a set
To be an element of a set.
1p ¿ q2 ¿ 1q S p2.
b1b 2 12.
y 5 bx,
PQ.
f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
x 1 h
I 5 Prt
1ab2c 5 a1bc2
1a 1 b2 1 c 5 a 1 1b 1 c2
Bernoulli trial
A Bernoulli trial is an experiment with two
possible, mutually exclusive outcomes (usually called success
and failure).
Biconditional
A logical operator for simple statements p and q
which is true when p and q have the same truth values, and is
false when p and q have different truth values.
Billion
A name for 
Bimodal
A distribution with two modes.
Binary numeration system
A numeration system with two
numerals, 0 and 1.
Binary voting
Selecting a winner by pairing two competitors
and then pairing up the winners to select the final victor.
Binomial A polynomial with exactly two terms.
Binomial distribution theorem
Let X be a random variable 
for the number of successes in n independent and identical
repetitions of an experiment with two possible outcomes,
success and failure. If p is the probability of success, 
then
where 
Binomial experiment
A binomial experiment is an experiment
that meets four conditions:
1. There must be a fixed number of trials. Denote this number
by n.
2. There must be two possible mutually exclusive outcomes
for each trial. Call them success and failure.
3. Each trial must be independent. That is, the outcome of a
particular trial is not affected by the outcome of any other
trial.
4. The probability of success and failure must remain constant
for each trial.
Binomial random variable
A random variable that counts the
number of successes in a binomial experiment.
Binomial theorem
For any positive integer n,
Birthday problem
The probability that two unrelated people
will have their birthdays on the same day (not counting the
year of birth).
Bisect
To divide into two equal or congruent parts.
Bit
Binary digit, the smallest unit of data storage with a value of
either 0 or 1, thereby representing whether a circuit is open or
closed.
Bond
An interest-bearing certificate issued by a government or
business, promising to pay the holder a specified amount
(usually 
on a certain date.
Boot
To start a computer. To do this the computer must have
access to an operating system on a CD or hard disk.
Borda count
A common way of determining a winner 
when there is no majority is to assign a point value to each
voter’s ranking. If there are n candidates, then n points are
assigned to the first choice for each voter, with 
points
for the next choice, and so on. The points for each candidate
are added and if one has more votes, that candidate is declared
the winner.
Boundary
See Half-plane.
n 2 1
 $1,0002
1a 1 b2n 5 a
n
k50
an
kban2kbk
k 5 0, 1, c, n.
P1X 5 k2 5 an
kbpk11 2 p2 n2k
109 5 1,000,000,000.
Glossary
G3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Box plot
A rectangular box positioned above a numerical scale
associated with a given set of data. It shows the maximum
value, the minimum value, and the quartiles for the data.
Braces
See Grouping symbols.
Brackets
See Grouping symbols.
Bug
An error in the design or makeup of a computer program
(software bug) or a hardware component of the system
(hardware bug).
Bulletin boards
An online means of communicating with others
on a particular topic.
Byte
The fundamental block of data that can be processed by a
computer. In most microcomputers, a byte is a group of eight
adjacent bits and the rough equivalent of one alphanumeric
symbol.
Calculus
The field of mathematics that deals with
differentiation and integration of functions, and related
concepts and applications.
Canceling
The process of reducing a fraction by dividing the
same number into both the numerator and the denominator.
Canonical form
When a given number is written as a product of
prime factors in ascending order, it is said to be in canonical
form.
Capacity
A measurement for the amount of liquid a container
holds.
Cardinal number
A number that designates the manyness of a
set; the number of units, but not the order in which they are
arranged.
Cardinality
The number of elements in a set.
Cards
A deck of 52 matching objects that are identical on one
side and on the other side are divided into four suits (hearts,
diamonds, spades, and clubs). The objects, called cards, are
labeled A, 2,
9, 10, J, Q, and K in each suit.
Cartesian coordinate system
Two intersecting lines, called
axes, used to locate points in a plane called a Cartesian plane.
If the intersecting lines are perpendicular, the system is called
a rectangular coordinate system.
Cartesian plane
See Cartesian coordinate system.
CD-ROM
A form of mass storage. It is a cheap read-only
device, which means that you can only use the data stored on it
when it was created, but it can store a massive amount of
material, such as an entire encyclopedia.
Cell
A specific location on a spreadsheet. It is designated using
a letter (column heading) followed by a numeral (row
heading). A cell can contain a letter, word, sentence, number,
or formula.
Celsius
A metric measurement for temperature for which the
freezing point of water is 
and the boiling point of water is
Center of a circle
See Circle.
Center of an ellipse
The midpoint of the line segment
connecting the foci of the ellipse.
Center of a hyperbola
The midpoint of the line segment
connecting the foci of the hyperbola.
Centi-
A prefix that means 
Centigram
One hundredth of a gram.
Centiliter
One hundredth of a liter.
Centimeter
One hundredth of a meter.
Change of base theorem
loga x 5
logb x
logb a
1/100.
100°.
0°
c,
Ciphertext
A secret or coded message.
Circle
The set of points in a plane that are a given distance from
a given point. The given point is called the center, and the
given distance is called the radius. The diameter is twice the
radius. The unit circle is the circle with center at (0, 0) and
Circle graph
See Graph.
Circuit
A complete path of electrical current including a power
source and a switch. It may include an indicator light to show
when the circuit is complete.
Circular definition
A definition that relies on the use of the
word being defined, or other words that rely on the word being
defined.
Circumference
The distance around a circle. The formula for
finding the circumference is 
or 
Classes
One of the groupings when organizing data. The
difference between the lower limit of one class and the lower
limit of the next class is called the interval of the class. The
number of values within a class is called the frequency.
Closed
See Closure property.
Closed curve
A curve that has no endpoints.
Closed-ended loan
An installment loan.
Closed half-plane
See Half-plane.
Closed network
A network that connects each point.
Closed set
A set that satisfies the closure property for some
operation.
Closing
The process of settlement on a real estate loan.
Closing costs
Costs paid at the closing of a real estate loan.
Closure property
A set S is closed for an operation  if a  b is
an element of S for all elements a and b in S. This property is
called the closure property.
Coefficient
Any factor of a term is said to be the coefficient of
the remaining factors. The numerical coefficient is the
numerical part of the term, usually written before the variable
part. In 3x, it is the number 3, in 
it is the number 9.
Generally, the word coefficient is taken to be the numerical
coefficient of the variable factors.
Column
A vertical arrangement of numbers or entries of a
matrix. It is denoted by letters A, B, C,
on a spreadsheet.
Combination
A selection of objects from a given set without
regard to the order in which they are selected. Sometimes it
refers to the number of ways this selection can be done and is
denoted by 
or (n
r) and is pronounced “n choose r.” The
formula for finding it is
Common denominator
For two or more fractions, a common
multiple of the denominators.
Common difference
The difference between successive terms
of an arithmetic sequence.
Common factor
A factor that two or more terms of a
polynomial have in common.
Common fraction
Fractions written in the form of one integer
divided by a whole number are common fractions. For
example, 
is common fraction representation and 0.1 is the
decimal representation of the same number.
Common logarithm
A logarithm to the base 10; written log N.
Common ratio
The ratio between successive terms of a
geometric sequence.
1/10
an
rb 5
n!
r!1n 2 r2!
nCr
c
9x2y3
C 5 2pr.
C 5 pD
r 5 1.
G4
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Communication matrix
A square matrix in which the entries
symbolize the occurrence of some facet or event with a 1 and
the nonoccurrence with a 0.
Communications package
A program that allows one
computer to communicate with another computer.
Commutative group
A group that also satisfies the property
that
for some operation  and elements a and b in the set.
Commutative property
A property of order that applies to
certain operations (addition and multiplication, for example,
but not to subtraction and division). If a and b are real
numbers, then
and
Comparison property
For any two numbers x and y, exactly
one of the following is true: (1) 
x is equal to y (the same
as) (2) 
x is greater than y (bigger than) (3) 
x is
less than y (smaller than). This is sometimes known as the
trichotomy property.
Comparison rate for home loans
A formula for comparing
terms of a home loan. The formula is
Compass
An instrument for scribing circles or for measuring
distances between two points.
Compiler
An operating system program that converts an entire
program written in a higher-level language into machine
language before the program is executed.
Complement
(1) Two numbers less than 1 are called
complements if their sum is 1. (2) The complement of a set is
everything not in the set relative to a given universe.
Complementary angles
Two angles are complementary if the
sum of their measures is 
Complementary probabilities
that is, two probabilities are complementary if
Completely factored
An expression is completely factored if it
is a product and there are no common factors and no difference
of squares—that is, if no further factoring is possible.
Complex decimal
A form that mixes decimal and fractional
form, such as 0.
Complex fraction
A rational expression 
where a or b 
(or both) have fractional form.
Components
See Ordered pair.
Composite number
Sometimes simply referred to as a
composite; it is a positive integer that has more than two
divisors.
Compound interest
A method of calculating interest by adding
the interest to the principal at the end of the compounding
period so that this sum is used in the interest calculation for the
next period.
a/b
121
2.
P1E2 1 P1E2 5 1
P1E2 5 1 2 P1E2
90°.
APR 1 0.125 APOINTS 1 ORIGINATION  FEE
AMOUNT OF LOANB
x , y;
x . y;
x 5 y;
ab 5 ba
a 1 b 5 b 1 a
a + b 5 b + a
Compound interest formula
where 
future value; 
present value (or principal); 
annual interest rate (APR); 
number of years; 
number of times compounded per year; 
and 
Compound statement
A statement formed by combining
simple statements with one or more operators.
Compounding
The process of adding interest to the principal so
that in the next time period the interest is calculated on this sum.
Computer
A device which, under the direction of a program,
can process data, alter its own program instructions, and
perform computations and logical operations without human
intervention.
Computer abuse
A misuse of a computer.
Computer program
A set of step-by-step directions that
instruct a computer how to carry out a certain task.
Conclusion
The statement that follows (or is to be proved to
follow) as a consequence of the hypothesis of the theorem.
Also called a logical conclusion.
Conditional
The statement “if p, then q,” symbolized by 
The statement p is called the antecedent and q is called the
consequent.
Conditional equation
See Equation.
Conditional inequality
See Inequality.
Conditional probability
A probability that is found on the
condition that a certain event has occurred. The notation
is the probability of event E on the condition that
event F has occurred.
Condorcet candidate
A candidate who wins all the one-to-one
matchups.
Condorcet criterion
If a candidate is favored when compared
one on one with every other candidate, then that candidate
should be declared the winner.
Condorcet’s paradox
There are three citizens, A, B, and C, and
each citizen ranks three different policies as shown:
A: 
B: 
C: 
Then two citizens prefer x to y, two prefer y to z, and two
prefer z to x, which is not transitive. Each voter is consistent,
but the social choice is inconsistent. This is known as
Condorcet’s paradox.
Cone
A solid with a circle for its base and a curved surface
tapering evenly to an apex so that any point on this surface is in a
straight line between the circumference of the base and the apex.
Congruent
Of the same size and shape; if one is placed on top
of the other, the two figures will coincide exactly in all their
parts.
Congruent angles
Two angles that have the same measure.
Congruent modulo m
Two real numbers a and b are congruent
modulo m, written 
(mod m), if a and b differ by a
multiple of m.
Congruent triangles
Two triangles that have the same size and
shape.
Conic sections
The set of points that results from the
intersection of a cone and a plane is a two-dimensional curve
known as a conic section. The conic sections include the
parabola, ellipse (special case, circle), and hyperbola.
a ; b
z . x . y
y . z . x
x . y . z
P1E 0 F2
p S q.
N 5 nt.
i 5 r
n;
n 5
t 5
r 5
P 5
A 5
A 5 P11 1 i2N
Glossary
G5
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Conjecture
A guess or prediction based on incomplete or
uncertain evidence.
Conjugate axis
The line passing through the center
perpendicular to the transverse axis of a hyperbola.
Conjunction
The conjunction of two simple statements p and q
is true whenever both p and q are true, and is false otherwise.
The common translation of conjunction is “and.”
Connected network
A network that connects each point.
Connective
A rule that operates on one or two simple statements.
Some examples of connectives are and, or, not, and unless.
Consecutive integers
Integers that differ by 1.
Consequent
See Conditional.
Consistent system
If a system of equations has at least one
solution, it is consistent; otherwise it is said to be inconsistent.
Constant
Symbol with exactly one possible value.
Constant function
A function of the form 
Constant multiple
The following property of integrals:
Constraint
A limitation placed on an objective function. See
Linear programming.
Construct
The process of drawing a figure that will satisfy
certain given conditions.
Contained in a set
An element is contained in a set if it is a
member of the set.
Continuous compounding
If we let the number of compounding
periods in a year increase without limit, the result is called
continuous compounding. The formula is
for a present value of P, future value A at a rate of r for t years.
Continuous distribution
A probability distribution that
includes all x-values (as opposed to a discrete distribution,
which allows a finite number of x-values).
Contradiction
An open equation for which the solution set is
empty.
Contrapositive
For the implication 
the contrapositive is
q S p.
Converge
To draw near to. A series is said to converge when the
sum of the first n terms approaches a limit as n increases
without bound. We say that the sequence converges to a limit L
if the values of the successive terms of the sequence get closer
and closer to the number L as 
Converse
For the implication 
the converse is 
Convex set
A set that contains the line segment joining any two
of its points.
Coordinate plane
See Cartesian coordinate system.
Coordinates
A numerical description for a point. Also see
Ordered pair.
Correlation
The interdependence between two sets of numbers.
It is a relationship between two quantities, such that when one
changes the other does (simultaneous increasing or decreasing
is called positive correlation; and one increasing, the other
decreasing, negative correlation).
Corresponding angles
Angles in different triangles that are
similarly related to the rest of the triangle.
Corresponding parts
Points, angles, lines, etc., in different
figures, similarly related to the rest of the figures.
Corresponding sides
Sides of different triangles that are
similarly related to the rest of the triangle.
q S p.
p S q,
n S `.
p S q,
A 5 Pert
3af 1x2dx 5 a3f 1x2dx
f 1x2 5 c.
Cosine
In a right triangle ABC with right angle C,
cos A 
LENGTH OF ADJACENT SIDE OF A
LENGTH OF HYPOTENUSE
Countable set
A set with cardinality 0. That is, a set that can
be placed into a one-to-one correspondence with the set of
counting numbers.
Count-down property
Counterclockwise
In the direction of rotation opposite to that in
which the hands move around the dial of a clock.
Counterexample
An example that is used to disprove a
proposition.
Counting numbers
See Natural numbers.
CPU
Central Processing Unit, the primary section of the
computer that contains the memory, logic, and arithmetic
procedures necessary to process data and perform
computations. The CPU also controls the functions performed
by the input, output, and memory devices.
Credit card
A card signifying that the person or business issued
the card has been approved for open-ended credit. It can be
used at certain restaurants, airlines, and stores accepting that
card.
Cryptography
The writing or deciphering of messages 
in code.
Cube
(1) A solid with six equal square sides. (2) In an
expression such as 
which is pronounced “x cubed,” it
means xxx.
Cube root
See Root of a number.
Cubed
See Cube.
Cubic unit
A three-dimensional unit. It is the result of cubing a
unit of measurement.
Cumulative frequency
A frequency that is the total number of
cases having any given score or a score that is lower.
Cup
A unit of measurement in the United States measurement
system that is equivalent to 8 fluid ounces.
Cursor
Indicator (often flashing) on a computer or calculator
display to designate where the next character input will be
placed.
Cylinder
Suppose we are given two parallel planes and two
simple closed curves 
and 
in these planes for which lines
joining corresponding points of 
and 
are parallel to a
given line L. A cylinder is a closed surface consisting of two
bases that are plane regions bounded by such curves 
and 
and a lateral surface that is the union of all line segments
joining corresponding points of 
and 
Daily compounding
In the compound interest formula, it is
when 
(exact interest) or when 
(ordinary
interest). In this book, use ordinary interest unless otherwise
indicated.
Data processing
The recording and handling of information by
means of mechanical or electronic equipment.
Database
A collection of information. A data-base manager is a
program that is in charge of the information stored in a
database.
Database manager
A computer program that allows a user to
interface with a database.
Dealer’s cost
The actual amount that a dealer pays for the goods
sold.
Debug
The organized process of testing for, locating, and
correcting errors within a program.
Decagon
A polygon having ten sides.
n 5 360
n 5 365
C2.
C1
C2
C1
C2
C1
C2
C1
x3,
n! 5 n1n 2 12!
G6
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Decay formula
Refers to exponential decay. It is described by
the equation
where r is the annual decay rate (and consequently is
negative), t is the time (in years), 
is the amount present
initially (present value), and A is the future value. If r is
positive, this formula models growth, and if r is negative, the
formula models decay.
Deci-
A prefix that means 
Decibel
A unit of measurement for measuring sounds. It is
defined as a ratio of the intensity of one sound, I, and another
sound 
the intensity of a barely audible
sound for a person with normal hearing.
Deciles
Nine values that divide a data set into ten equal parts.
Decimal
Any number written in decimal notation. The digits
represent powers of ten with whole numbers and fractions
being separated by a period, called a decimal point. Sometimes
called a Hindu-Arabic numeral.
Decimal fraction
A number in decimal notation that has
fractional parts, such as 23.25. If a common fraction 
is
written as a decimal fraction, the result will be either a
terminating decimal as with 
or a repeating decimal as
with 
Decimal notation
The representation of a number using the
decimal number system. See Decimal.
Decimal numeration system
A numeration system with base 10.
Decimal point
See Decimal.
Decisiveness
Given any set of individual rankings, the method
produces a winner when voting.
Decoding key
A key that allows one to unscramble a coded
message.
Deductive reasoning
A formal structure based on a set of
axioms and a set of undefined terms. New terms are defined in
terms of the given undefined terms and new statements, or
theorems, are derived from the axioms by proof.
Definite integral
Let f be a function defined over the interval 
[a, b]. Then the definite integral of f over the interval is
denoted by
and is the net change of an antiderivative of f over that interval.
Thus, if F(x) is an antiderivative of f(x), then
Degree
(1) The degree of a term in one variable is the exponent
of the variable, or it is the sum of the exponents of the variables
if there are more than one. The degree of a polynomial is the
degree of its highest-degree term. (2) A unit of measurement of
an angle that is equal to 
of a revolution.
Deka-
A prefix that means 10.
Deleted point
A single point that is excluded from the domain.
De Morgan’s laws
For sets X and Y,
and
X d Y 5 X ´ Y
X ´ Y 5 X d Y
1/360
3
b
a
f 1x2dx 5 F1x2 0 b
a 5 F1b2 2 F1a2
3
b
a
f 1x2dx
2
3 5 0.6666 c.
1
4 5 0.25
p/q
I0 < 10216 watt/cm2,
1/10.
A0
A 5 A0ert
Demand
The number of items that can be sold at a given price.
Denominator
See Rational number.
Dense set
A set of numbers with the property that between any
two points of the set, there exists another point in the set that is
between the two given points.
Denying the antecedent
A logical fallacy; same as the fallacy
of the inverse.
Denying the consequent
Same as indirect reasoning.
Dependent events
Two events are dependent if the occurrence
of one influences the probability of the occurrence of the other.
Dependent system
If every ordered pair satisfying one equation
in a system of equations also satisfies every other equation of
the given system, then we describe the system as dependent.
Dependent variable
The variable associated with the second
component of an ordered pair.
Derivative
One of the fundamental operations of calculus; it is
the instantaneous rate of change of a function with respect to
the variable. Formally, for a given function f, we define the
derivative of f at x, denoted by 
to be
provided this limit exists. If the limit exists, we say f is a
differentiable function of x.
Description method
A method of defining a set by describing
the set (as opposed to listing its elements).
Descriptive statistics
Statistics that is concerned with the accumu-
lation of data, measures of central tendency, and dispersion.
Diagonal form
A matrix with the terms arranged on a diagonal,
from upper left to lower right, and zeros elsewhere.
Diameter
See Circle.
Dice
Plural for the word die, which is a small, marked cube used
in games of chance.
Dictatorship
A selection process where one person alone makes
a decision.
Die
See Dice.
Difference
The result of a subtraction.
Difference quotient
If f is a function, then the difference
quotient is defined to be the function
Difference of squares
A mathematical expression in the form
Differentiable function
See Derivative.
Differential calculus
That branch of calculus that deals with the
derivative and applications of the derivative.
Dimension
(1) A configuration having length only is said to be
of one dimension; area and not volume, two dimensions;
volume, three dimensions. (2) In reference to matrices,
dimension is the numbers of rows and columns.
Direct reasoning
One of the principal forms of logical
reasoning. It is an argument of the form
Directrix
See Parabola.
Discount
A reduction from a usual or list price.
Discrete mathematics
That part of mathematics that deals with
sets of objects that can be counted or processes that consist of
a sequence of individual steps.
3 1p S q2 ¿ p4 S q
a2 2 b2.
f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
fr1x2 5 lim 
hS0
f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
fr1x2,
Glossary
G7
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Disjoint sets
Sets that have no elements in common.
Disjunction
The disjunction of two simple statements p and q is
false whenever both p and q are false, and is true otherwise.
The common translation of disjunction is “or.”
Disk drive
A mechanical device that uses the rotating surface of
a magnetic disk for the high-speed transfer and storage of data.
Distinguishable permutation
The number of distinguishable
permutations of n objects in which n1 are of one kind, n2 are of
another kind, . . . , and nk are of a further kind, so that 
n  n1  n2  . . .  nk is denoted by 
and is
defined by 
Distributive law of exponents
Distributive property (for multiplication over addition)
If a,
b, and c are real numbers, then 
and
for the basic operations. That is, the
number outside the parentheses indicating a sum or difference
is distributed to each of the numbers inside the parentheses.
Diverge
A sequence that does not converge is said to diverge.
Dividend
The number or quantity to be divided. In 
the
dividend is a.
Divides
See Divisibility.
Divine proportion
If two lengths h and w satisfy the proportion
then the lengths are said to be in a divine proportion.
Divisibility
If m and d are counting numbers, and if there is a
counting number k so that 
we say that d is a divisor
of m, d is a factor of m, d divides m, and m is a multiple of d.
Division
is 
and means 
Division by zero
In the definition of division, 
because if
then 
regardless of the value of x. If 
then
there is no such number. On the other hand, if 
then
checks from the definition, and so also does 
which means that 
another contradiction. Thus, division
by 0 is excluded.
Division of integers
The quotient of two integers is the quotient
of the absolute values, and is positive if the given integers have
the same sign, and negative if the given numbers have opposite
signs. Furthermore, division by zero is not possible and
division into 0 gives the answer 0.
Division of rational numbers
Division property (of equations)
The solution of an equation is
unchanged by dividing both sides of the equation by the same
nonzero number.
Division property of inequality
See Multiplication property of
inequality.
Divisor
The quantity by which the dividend is to be divided. In
b is the divisor.
a/b,
a
b 4 c
d 5 ad
bc 1c 2 02
1 5 2,
0/0 5 2,
0/0 5 1
a 5 0,
a 2 0,
bx 5 0,
b 5 0,
b 2 0,
a 5 bx.
a 4 b 5 x
a
b 5 x
m 5 d # k,
h
w 5
w
h 1 w
a/b,
1a 1 b2c 5 ac 1 bc
a1b 1 c2 5 ab 1 ac
112 1ab2m 5 ambm;  122 aa
bb
m
5 am
bm
5
n!
n1! n2! # # # # # nk!
a
n
n1, n2, . . . , nk
b
a
n
n1, n2, . . . , nk
b
Dodecagon
A polygon with 12 sides.
Domain
The domain of a variable is the set of replacements for
the variable. The domain of a graph of an equation with two
variables x and y is the set of permissible real-number
replacements for x.
Double negative
Double subscripts
Two subscripts on a variable as in 
(Do not read this as “twelve.”)
Down payment
An amount paid at the time a product is
financed. The purchase price minus the down payment is equal
to the amount financed.
Download
The process of copying a program form the network
to your computer.
Dummy variable
A variable in a mathematical expression
whose only function is as a placeholder.
e
Euler’s number, defined by
Eccentricity
For a conic section, it is defined as the ratio
For the ellipse, 
where measures the amount of
roundness. If 
then the conic is a circle. For the
parabola, 
and for the hyperbola, 
Edge
A line or a line segment that is the intersection of two
plane faces of a geometric figure, or that is in the boundary of
a plane figure.
Either . . . or
A logical operator for “either p or q,” which is
defined to mean
Element
One of the individual objects that belong to a set.
Elementary operations
Refers to the operations of addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division.
Elementary row operations
There are four elementary row
operations for producing equivalent matrices: (1) RowSwap:
Interchange any two rows. (2) Row: Row addition—add a
row to any other row. (3) *Row: Scalar multiplication—multiply
(or divide) all the elements of a row by the same nonzero real
number. (4) *Row: Multiply all the entries of a row (pivot
row) by a nonzero real number and add each resulting product to
the corresponding entry of another specified row (target row).
Ellipse
The set of all points in a plane such that, for each point
on the ellipse, the sum of its distances from two fixed points
(called the foci) is a constant.
Elliptic geometry
A non-Euclidean geometry in which a
Saccheri quadrilateral is constructed with summit angles
obtuse.
e-mail
Electronic mail sent from one computer to another.
Empirical probability
A probability obtained empirically by
experimentation.
Empty set
See Set.
Encoding key
A key that allows one to scramble, or encode a
message.
Encrypt
To scramble a message so that it cannot be read by an
unwanted person.
Equal angles
Two angles that have the same measure.
(p ¡ q) ¿ (q ¿ p)
P . 1.
P 5 1;
P 5 0,
P
0 # P , 1,
P 5 c
a
e 5 lim
nS` a1 1 1
nb
n
a12.
212a2 5 a
G8
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Equal matrices
Two matrices are equal if they are the same
order (dimension) and also the corresponding elements are the
same (equal).
Equal sets
Sets that contain the same elements.
Equal to
Two numbers are equal if they represent the same
quantity or are identical. In mathematics, a relationship that
satisfies the axioms of equality.
Equality, axioms of
For a, b, c  ,
Reflexive:
a  a
Symmetric:
If a  b, then b  a.
Transitive:
If a  b and b  c, then a  c.
Substitution:
If a  b, then a may be replaced throughout by
b (or b by a) in any statement without
changing the truth or falsity of the statement.
Equally likely outcomes
Outcomes whose probabilities of
occurring are the same.
Equation
A statement of equality. If always true, an equation is
called an identity; if always false, it is called a contradiction. If
it is sometimes true and sometimes false, it is called a
conditional equation. Values that make an equation true are
said to satisfy the equation and are called solutions or roots of
the equation. Equations with the same solutions are called
equivalent equations.
Equation of a graph
Every point on the graph has coordinates
that satisfy the equation, and every ordered pair that satisfies
the equation has coordinates that lie on the graph.
Equation properties
There are four equation properties:
(1) Addition property: Adding the same number to both sides
of an equation results in an equivalent equation.
(2) Subtraction property: Subtracting the same number
from both sides of an equation results in an equivalent
equation.
(3) Multiplication property: Multiplying both sides of a 
given equation by the same nonzero number results in 
an equivalent equation.
(4) Division property: Dividing both sides of a given equation
by the same nonzero number results in an equivalent 
equation.
Equilateral triangle
A triangle whose three sides all have the
same length.
Equilibrium point
A point for which the supply and demand
are equal.
Equivalent equations
See Equation.
Equivalent matrices
Matrices that represent equivalent
systems.
Equivalent sets
Sets that have the same cardinality.
Equivalent systems
Systems that have the same solution set.
Estimate
An approximation (usually mental) of size or value
used to form an opinion.
Euclidean geometry
The study of geometry based on the
assumptions of Euclid. These basic assumptions are called
Euclid’s postulates.
Euclid’s postulates
1. A straight line can be drawn from any
point to any other point. 2. A straight line extends infinitely in
either direction. 3. A circle can be described with any point as
center and with a radius equal to any finite straight line drawn
from the center. 4. All right angles are equal to each other.
5. Given a straight line and any point not on this line, there is
one and only one line through that point that is parallel to the 
given line.
Euler circles
The representation of sets using interlocking
circles.
Euler circuit
Begin at some vertex of a graph, travel on each
edge exactly once, and return to the starting vertex. The path
that is a trace of the tip is called an Euler circuit.
Euler’s circuit theorem
Every vertex on a graph which is an
Euler circuit has an even degree, and conversely, if in a
connected graph every vertex has an even degree, then the
graph is an Euler circuit.
Euler’s number
It is the number e.
Evaluate
To evaluate an expression means to replace the
variables by given numerical values and then simplify the
resulting numerical expression. To evaluate a trigonometric
ratio means to find its approximate numerical value. To
evaluate a summation means to find its value.
Even vertex
In a network, a vertex with even degree—that is,
with an even number of arcs or line segments connected at that
vertex.
Event
A subset of a sample space.
Exact interest
The calculation of interest assuming that there
are 365 days in a year.
Exact solution
The simplified value of an expression before
approximation by calculator.
Exclusive or
A translation of p or q which includes p or q, but
not both. In this book we translate the exclusive or as “either 
p or q.”
Expand
To simplify by carrying out the given operations.
Expand a summation
To write out a summation notation
showing the individual terms without a sigma.
Expanded notation
A way of writing a number that lists the
meaning of each grouping symbol and the number of items in
that group. For example, 382.5 written in expanded notation is
Expectation
See Mathematical expectation.
Expected value
See Mathematical expectation.
Experiment
An observation of any physical occurrence.
Exponent
Where b is any nonzero real number and n is any
natural number, exponent is defined as follows:
bn  b  b  . . .  b
b0  1
14243
n factors
b is called the base, n is called the exponent, and bn is called a
power or exponential.
Exponential
See Exponent.
Exponential curve
The graph of an exponential equation. It
indicates an increasingly steep rise, and passes through the
point (0, 1).
Exponential equation
An equation of the form 
where b
is positive and not equal to 1.
Exponential function
A function that can be written as
where 
Exponential notation
A notation involving exponents.
Exponentiation
The process of raising a number to some
power. See Exponent.
Expression
Numbers, variables, functions, and their arguments
that can be evaluated to obtain a single result.
Extended order of operations
1. Perform any operations
enclosed in parentheses. 2. Perform any operations that
involve raising to a power. 3. Perform multiplications and
b . 0, b 2 1.
f 1x2 5 bx,
y 5 bx,
bn  1
bn
3 3 102 1 8 3 101 1 2 3 100 1 5 3 1021
Glossary
G9
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

divisions as they occur by working from left to right.
4. Finally, perform additions and subtractions as they occur by
working from left to right.
Exterior angle
An exterior angle of a triangle is the angle on
the other side of an extension on one side of the triangle.
Extraneous root
A number obtained in the process of solving
an equation that is not a root of the equation to be solved.
Extremes
See Proportion.
Factor
(noun) Each of the numbers multiplied to form a product
is called a factor of the product. (verb) To write a given
number as a product.
Factor tree
The representation of a composite number showing
the steps of successive factoring by writing each new pair of
factors under the composite.
Factorial
For a natural number n, the product of all the positive
integers less than or equal to n. It is denoted by 
and is
defined by
n!  n(n  1)(n  2)  . . .  4  3  2  1
Also, 
Factoring
The process of determining the factors of a product.
Factorization
The result of factoring a number or an
expression.
Fahrenheit
A unit of measurement in the United States system
for measuring temperature based on a system where the freezing
point of water is 
and the boiling point of water is 
Fair coin
A coin for which heads and tails are equally likely.
Fair game
A game for which the mathematical expectation 
is zero.
Fair voting principles
See Fairness criteria.
Fairness criteria
Properties that would seem to be desirable in
any voting system.
Majority criterion:
If a candidate receives a majority of 
the first-place votes, then that candidate should be declared 
the winner.
Condorcet criterion:
If a candidate is favored when
compared one-on-one with every other candidate, then that
candidate should be declared the winner.
Monotonicity criterion:
A candidate who wins a first election
and then gains additional support, without losing any of the
original support, should also win a second election.
Irrelevant alternatives criterion:
If a candidate is declared
the winner of an election, and in a second election one or more
of the other candidates is removed, then the previous winner
should still be declared the winner.
Fallacy
An invalid form of reasoning.
Fallacy of exceptions
Reasoning or forming a conclusion by
looking at one particular case, which may be an exception.
Fallacy of the converse
An invalid form of reasoning that has
the form 
and reaches the incorrect conclusion p.
Fallacy of the inverse
An invalid form of reasoning that has the
form
and reaches the incorrect conclusion 
False chain pattern
An invalid form of reasoning that has 
the form
and reaches the incorrect conclusion q S r.
3 1p S q2 ¿ 1p S r2 4
q.
[( p S  q) ¿ (p)]
3 1p S q2 ¿ q4
212°.
32°
0! 5 1.
n!
Feasible solution
A set of values that satisfies the set of
constraints in a linear programming problem.
Fibonacci sequence
The sequence 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, . . . .
The general term is sn  sn1  sn2, for any given s1 and s2.
Fibonacci-type sequence
A sequence with general term 
sn  sn1  sn2, for any given s1 and s2. The Fibonacci
sequence has first terms 1, 1, . . . , but a Fibonacci-type
sequence can have any two first terms.
Field
A set with two operations satisfying the closure,
commutative, associative, identity, and inverse properties for
both operations. A field also satisfies a distributive property
combining both operations.
Finance charge
A charge made for the use of someone else’s
money.
Finite series
A series with n terms, where n is a counting
number.
Finite set
See Set.
First component
See Ordered pair.
First-degree equation
With one variable, an equation of the
form 
with two variables, an equation of the form
Five-percent offer
An offer made that is 
of the price paid
by the dealer. That is, it is an offer that is 
over the cost.
Fixed-point form
The usual decimal representation of a
number. It is usually used in the context of writing numbers in
scientific notation or in floating-point form. See Floating-point
form.
Floating-point form
A calculator or computer variation of
scientific notation in which a number is written as a number
between one and ten times a power of ten where the power of
ten is understood. For example, 
is scientific
notation and 2.678E 11 or 
are floating-point
representations. The fixed-point representation is the usual
decimal representation of 267,800,000,000.
Floor-plan problem
Given a floor plan of some building you
wish to find a path from room to room that will proceed
through all of the rooms exactly once.
Floppy disk
Storage medium that is a flexible platter 
or 
inches in diameter) of mylar plastic coated with 
a magnetic material. Data are represented on the disk by
electrical impulses.
Foci
Plural for focus.
Focus
See Parabola, Ellipse, and Hyperbola.
FOIL
(1) A method for multiplying binomials that requires First
terms, Outer terms
Inner terms, Last terms:
(2) A method for factoring a trinomial into the product of two
binomials.
Foot
A unit of linear measure in the United States system that is
equal to 12 inches.
Foreclose
If the scheduled payments are not made, the lender
takes the right to redeem the mortgage and keeps the collateral
property.
Formula
A general answer, rule, or principle stated in
mathematical notation.
Fractal
A family of shapes involving chance whose
irregularities are statistical in nature. They are shapes used, for
example, to model coastlines, growth, and boundaries of
clouds. Fractals model curves as well as surfaces. The term
fractal set is also used in place of the word fractal.
1a 1 b2 1c 1 d2 5 ac 1 1ad 1 bc2 1 bd
1
51
4
131
2
2.678 1 11
2.678 3 1011
5%
105%
y 5 mx 1 b.
ax 1 b 5 0;
G10
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Fractal geometry
The branch of geometry that studies the
properties of fractals.
Fraction
See Rational number.
Frequency
See Classes.
Frequency distribution
For a collection of data, the tabulation
of the number of elements in each class.
Function
A rule that assigns to each element in the domain a
single (unique) element.
Function machine
A device used to help us understand the
nature of functions. It is the representation of a function as a
machine into which some number is input and “processed”
through the machine; the machine then outputs a single value.
Functional notation
The representation of a function f using the
notation f(x).
Fundamental counting principle
If one task can be performed
in m ways and a second task can be performed in n ways, then
the number of ways that the tasks can be performed one after
the other is mn.
Fundamental operators
In symbolic logic, the fundamental
operators are the connectives and, or, and not.
Fundamental property of equations
If P and Q are algebraic
expressions, and k is a real number, then each of the following
is equivalent to 
Addition
P  k  Q  k
Subtraction
P  k  Q  k
Nonzero multiplication
kP  kQ, k  0
Nonzero division
Fundamental property of fractions
If both the numerator and
denominator are multiplied by the same nonzero number, the
resulting fraction will be the same. That is, 
Fundamental property of inequalities
If P and Q are algebraic
expressions, and k is a real number, then each of the following
is equivalent to P  Q:
Addition
P  k  Q  k
Subtraction
P  k  Q  k
Positive multiplication
kP  kQ, k  0
Positive division
Negative multiplication
kP
kQ, k
0
Negative division
This property also applies for 	, , and 
.
Fundamental theorem of arithmetic
Every counting number
greater than 1 is either a prime or a product of primes, and the
prime factorization is unique (except for the order in which 
the factors appear).
Future value
See Compound interest formula.
Future value formula
For simple interest: 
for
compound interest:
Fuzzy logic
A relatively new branch of logic used in computer
programming that does not use the law of the excluded middle.
Gallon
A measure of capacity in the United States system that is
equal to 4 quarts.
A 5 P11 1 i2N
A 5 P11 1 rt2;
P
k . Q
k, k , 0
,
.
P
k , Q
k, k . 0
PK
QK 5 P
Q 1Q, K 2 02
P
k 5 Q
k , k 2 0
P 5 Q:
Gates
In circuit logic, it is a symbolic representation of a
particular circuit.
Gauss-Jordan elimination
A method for solving a system of
equations that uses the following steps. Step 1: Select as the
first pivot the element in the first row, first column, and pivot.
Step 2: The next pivot is the element in the second row, second
column; pivot. Step 3: Repeat the process until you arrive at
the last row, or until the pivot element is a zero. If it is a zero
and you can interchange that row with a row below it, so that
the pivot element is no longer a zero, do so and continue. If it
is zero and you cannot interchange rows so that it is not a zero,
continue with the next row. The final matrix is called the row-
reduced form.
g.c.f.
An abbreviation for greatest common factor.
General form
In relation to second-degree equations (or conic
sections), it refers to the form
where A, B, C, D, E, and F are real numbers and (x, y) is any
point on the curve.
General term
The nth term of a sequence or series.
Genus
The number of cuts that can be made without cutting a
figure into two pieces. The genus is equivalent to the number
of holes in the object.
Geometric mean
The geometric mean of the numbers a and b is
Geometric sequence
A sequence for which the ratio of each
term to the preceding term is a constant, written 
The nth term of a geometric sequence is 
where 
is the first term and r is the common ratio. It is also called a
geometric progression.
Geometric series
The indicated sum of the terms of a geometric
sequence. The sum of n terms is denoted by 
and
If 
then 
where G is the sum of the infinite 
geometric series. If 
the infinite geometric series has 
no sum.
Geometry
The branch of mathematics that treats the shape and
size of things. Technically, it is the study of invariant
properties of given elements under specified groups of
transformations.
GIGO
Garbage In, Garbage Out, an old axiom regarding the use
of computers.
Golden ratio
The division of a line segment 
by an interior
point P so that
It follows that this ratio is a root of the equation
or 
This ratio is called the
golden ratio and is considered pleasing to the eye.
Golden rectangle
A rectangle R with the property that it can be
divided into a square and a rectangle similar to R; a rectangle
whose sides form a golden ratio.
Googol
The number with 1 followed by 100 zeros—that is,
10,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,
000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,
000,000,000,000,000,000,000.
x 5 1
211 1 !52.
x2 2 x 2 1 5 0,
0AB0
0AP0 5 0AP0
0PB0
AB
0r0 $ 1,
G 5
g1
1 2 r,
0r0 , 1,
Gn 5
g111 2 rn2
1 2 r
, r 2 1
Gn
g1
gn 5 g1rn 2 1,
g1, g2, g3, c.
!ab.
Ax2 1 Bxy 1 Cy2 1 Dx 1 Ey 1 F 5 0
Glossary
G11
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Grace period
A period of time between when an item is
purchased and when it is paid during which no interest is
charged.
Gram
A unit of weight in the metric system. It is equal to the
weight of one cubic centimeter of water at 
Grant’s tomb properties
Two fundamental properties of
logarithms:
1.
2.
Graph
(1) In statistics, it is a drawing that shows the relation
between certain sets of numbers. Common forms are bar
graphs, line graphs, pictographs, and pie charts (circle graphs).
(2) A drawing that shows the relation between certain sets of
numbers. It may be one-dimensional (), two-dimensional
(2), or three-dimensional (3). (3) A set of vertices connected
by arcs or line segments.
Graph of an equation
See Equation of a graph.
Graphing method
A method of solving a system of equations
that finds the solution by looking at the intersection of the
individual graphs. It is an approximate method of solving a
system of equations, and depends on the accuracy of the graph
that is drawn.
Great circle
A circle on a sphere that has its diameter equal to
that of the sphere.
Greater than
If a lies to the right of b on a number line, then a
is greater than b, 
Formally, 
if and only if 
is positive.
Greater than or equal to
Written 
means 
or 
Greatest common factor
The largest divisor common to a
given set of numbers.
Group
A set with one defined operation that satisfies the
closure, associative, identity, and inverse properties.
Grouped frequency distribution
If the data are grouped before
they are tallied, then the resulting distribution is called a
grouped frequency distribution.
Grouping symbols
Parentheses ( ), brackets [ ], and braces { }
indicate the order of operations and are also sometimes used to
indicate multiplication, as in 
Also called symbols
of inclusion.
Growth formula
Refers to exponential growth. It is described
by the equation
where r is the annual growth rate (and consequently is positive),
t is the time (in years), 
is the amount present initially (present
value), and A is the future value. If r is positive, this formula
models growth, and if r is negative, the formula models decay.
Half-life
The time that it takes for a particular radioactive
substance to decay to half of its original amount.
Half-line
A ray, with or without its endpoint. The half-line is
said to be closed if it includes the endpoint, and open if it does
not include the endpoint.
Half-plane
The part of a plane that lies on one side of a line in
the plane. It is a closed half-plane if the line is included. It is
an open half-plane if the line is not included. The line is the
boundary of the half-plane in either case.
Hamiltonian cycle
A path that begins at some vertex and then
visits each vertex exactly once, ending up at the original vertex.
Hamilton’s apportionment plan
An apportionment plan in
which the representation of a geographical area is determined
A0
A 5 A0ert
122 132 5 6.
a 5 b.
a . b
a $ b
a 2 b
a . b
a . b.
blogb x 5 x, x . 0
log b bx 5 x
4°C.
by finding the quotient of the number of people in that area
divided by the total number of people and then the result is
rounded as follows: Allocate the remainder, one at a time, to
districts on the basis of the decreasing order of the decimal
portion of the quotients. This method is sometimes called the
method of the largest fractions.
Hare method
Each voter votes for one candidate. If a candidate
receives a majority of the votes, that candidate is declared to be
a first-round winner. If no candidate receives a majority of the
votes, then with the Hare method, also known as the plurality
with an elimination runoff method, the candidate(s) with the
fewest number of first-place votes is (are) eliminated. Each
voter votes for one candidate in the second-round. If a
candidate receives a majority, that candidate is declared to be a
second-round winner. If no candidate receives a majority of the
second-round votes, then eliminate the candidate(s) with the
fewest number of votes is (are) eliminated. Repeat this process
until a candidate receives a majority.
Hecto-
A prefix meaning 100.
Heptagon
A polygon having seven sides.
Hexagon
A polygon having six sides.
HH method
See Huntington-Hill’s plan.
Higher-level language
A computer programming language
(e.g., BASIC, PASCAL, LOGO) that approaches the syntax of
English and is easier both to use and to learn than machine
language. It is also not system-dependent.
Hindu-Arabic numerals
Same as the usual decimal numeration
system that is in everyday use.
Horizontal ellipse
An ellipse whose major axis is horizontal.
Horizontal hyperbola
A hyperbola whose transverse axis is
horizontal.
Horizontal line
A line with zero slope. Its equation has the
form 
Hundred
Ten 10s.
Huntington-Hill’s plan
An apportionment plan currently in use
by the U.S. legislature. It is based on the geometric mean of
two numbers, a and b, where a is the value of the exact ratio
rounded down and b is the value of the exact ratio rounded up.
It rounds down if the exact quota is less than the geometric
mean and rounds up if it is greater than the geometric mean.
Hyperbola
The set of all points in a plane such that, for each
point on the hyperbola, the difference of its distances from two
fixed points (called the foci) is a constant.
Hyperbolic geometry
A non-Euclidean geometry in which a
Saccheri quadrilateral is constructed with summit angles acute.
Hypotenuse
The longest side in a right triangle.
Hypothesis
An assumed proposition used as a premise in
proving something else.
Identity
(1) A statement of equality that is true for all values of the
variable. It also refers to a number I so that for some operation , 
I  a  a  I  a for every number a in a given set. (2) An open
equation that is true for all replacements of the variable.
Identity matrix
A matrix satisfying the identity property. It is a
square matrix consisting of ones along the main diagonal and
zeros elsewhere.
If-then
In symbolic logic, it is a connective also called
implication.
Implication
A statement that follows from other statements. It
is also a proposition formed from two given propositions by
connecting them with an “if
then
” form. It is
symbolized by p S q.
c
c,
y 5 constant.
G12
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Impossible event
An event for which the probability is zero—
that is, an event that cannot happen.
Improper fraction
A fraction for which the numerator is
greater than the denominator.
Improper subset
See Subset.
Inch
A linear measurement in the United States system equal in
length to the following segment: ________________
Inclusive or
The same as Disjunction. The compound statement
“p or q” is called the inclusive or.
Inconsistent system
A system for which no replacements of the
variable make the equations true simultaneously.
Indefinite integral
An antiderivative.
Independence of irrelevant alternatives
If a voter prefers A to
B with C as a possible choice, we assume that the voter still
prefers A to B when C is not a possible choice.
Independent events
Events E and F are independent if the
occurrence of one in no way affects the occurrence of the other.
Independent system
A system of equations such that no one of
them is necessarily satisfied by a set of values of the variables
that satisfy all the others.
Independent variable
The variable associated with the first
component of an ordered pair.
Indirect reasoning
One of the principal forms of logical
reasoning. It is an argument of the form
Inductive reasoning
A type of reasoning accomplished by first
observing patterns and then predicting answers for more
complicated similar problems.
Inequality
A statement of order. If always true, an inequality is
called an absolute inequality; if always false, an inequality is
called a contradiction. If sometimes true and sometimes false,
it is called a conditional inequality. Values that make the
statement true are said to satisfy the inequality. A string of
inequalities may be used to show the order of three or more
quantities.
Inequality symbols
The symbols 
and 
Also
called order symbols.
Inferential statistics
Statistics that is concerned with making
generalizations or predictions about a population based on a
sample from that population.
Infinite series
The indicated sum of an infinite sequence.
Infinite set
See Set.
Infinity symbol
Inflation
An increase in the amount of money in circulation,
resulting in a fall in its value and a rise in prices. In this book, we
assume annual compounding with the future value formula; that
is, use 
where r is the projected annual inflation
rate, n is the number of years, and P is the present value.
Information retrieval
The locating and displaying of specific
material from a description of its content.
Input
A method of putting information into a computer. Input
includes downloading a program, typing on a keyboard,
pressing on a pressure-sensitive screen.
Input device
Component of a system that allows the entry of
data or a program into a computer’s memory.
Installment loan
A financial problem
in which an item is paid for over a period of time. It is calculated
using add-on interest or compound interest.
Installments
Part of a debt paid at regular intervals over a
period of time.
A 5 P11 1 r2n,
`
#.
., $, ,,
[( p S q) ¿   q] S p
Instant Insanity
A puzzle game consisting of four blocks 
with different colors on the faces. The object of the game 
is to arrange the four blocks in a row so that no color is
repeated on one side as the four blocks are rotated 
through 
Instantaneous rate of change
The instantaneous rate of change
of a function f from x to 
is
Integers
  {. . . , 3, 2, 1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }, composed of
the natural numbers, their opposites, and 0.
Integral
A fundamental concept of calculus, which involves
finding the area bounded by a curve, the x-axis, and two
vertical lines. Let f be a function defined over the interval
Then the definite integral of f over the interval is
denoted by
and is the net change of an antiderivative of f over that interval.
The numbers a and b are called the limits of integration.
Integral calculus
That branch of calculus that involves
applications of the integral.
Integral of a sum
The following property of integrals:
Integrand
In an integral, it is the function to be integrated.
Integrated circuit
The plastic or ceramic body that contains a
chip and the leads connecting it to other components.
Interactive
Software that allows continuous two-way
communication between the user and the program.
Intercept form of the equation of a line
The form
of a linear equation where the x-intercept is a and the 
y-intercept is b.
Intercepts
The point or points where a line or a curve crosses a
coordinate axis. The x-intercepts are sometimes called the
zeros of the equation.
Interest
An amount of money paid for the use of another’s
money. See Compound interest.
Interest-only loan
A loan in which periodic payments are for
interest only so that the principal amount of the loan remains
the same.
Interest rate
The percentage rate paid on financial problems. In
this book it is denoted by r and is assumed to be an annual rate
unless otherwise stated.
Interface
The electronics necessary for a computer to
communicate with a peripheral.
Internet
A network of computers from all over the world that
are connected together.
Intersection
The intersection of sets A and B, denoted by A  B
is the set consisting of elements in both A and B.
Interval
See Classes.
Invalid argument
An argument that is not valid.
Inverse
(1) In symbolic logic, for an implication p S q, the in-
verse is the statement 
(2) For addition, see Opposites.
p S q.
x
a 1 y
b 5 1
3 3f 1x2 1 g 1x2 4 dx 5 3f 1x2 dx 1 3g 1x2 dx
3
b
a
f 1x2 dx
3a, b4.
lim
hS0 
f 1x 1 h2 2 f 1x2
h
x 1 h
360°.
Glossary
G13
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For multiplication, see Reciprocal. (3) For matrices, if [A] is a
square matrix, and if there exists a matrix [A]1 such that
[A]1[A]  [A][A]1  [I]
where [I] is the identity matrix for multiplication, then [A]1 is
called the inverse of [A] for multiplication.
Inverse cosine
See Inverse trigonometric ratios.
Inverse property
For each a  , there is a unique number
(a)  , called the opposite (or additive inverse) of a,
so that
a  (a)  a  a  0
Inverse sine
See Inverse trigonometric ratios.
Inverse tangent
See Inverse trigonometric ratios.
Inverse trigonometric ratios
The inverse sine, inverse cosine,
and inverse tangent are the inverse trigonometric ratios. For 
an acute angle in a right triangle,
sin1
 u;
cos1
 u,
tan1
 u
Invert
In relation to the fraction 
it means to interchange the
numerator and the denominator to obtain the fraction 
Irrational number
A number that can be expressed as a
nonrepeating, nonterminating decimal; the set of irrational
numbers is denoted by .
Irrelevant alternatives criterion
If a candidate is declared the
winner of an election, and in a second election one or more of
the other candidates is removed, then the previous winner
should still be declared the winner.
Isosceles triangle
A triangle with two sides the same length.
Isosceles triangle property
If two sides of a triangle have the
same length, then angles opposite them are equal.
Jefferson’s apportionment plan
An apportionment plan in
which the representation of a geographical area is determined
by finding the quotient of the number of people in that area
divided by the total number of people and then rounding the
result as follows: Any quotient with a decimal portion must be
rounded down to the previous whole number.
Jordan curve
Also called a simple closed curve. For example, a
curve such as a circle or an ellipse or a rectangle that is closed
and does not intersect itself.
Juxtaposition
When two variables, a number and a variable, or
a symbol and a parenthesis, are written next to each other with
no operation symbol, as in xy, 2x, or 
Juxtaposition is
used to indicate multiplication.
K
The symbol represents 1,024 (or 
For example, 48K bytes
of memory is the same as 
or 49,152 bytes. It is
sometimes used as an approximation for 1,000.
Keno
A lottery game that consists of a player trying to guess in
advance which numbers will be selected from a pot containing n
numbers. A certain number, say m, where 
of selections is
randomly made from the pot of n numbers. The player then gets
paid according to how many of the m numbers were selected.
Keyboard
Typewriter-like device that allows the user to input
data and commands into a computer.
Kilo-
A prefix that means 1,000.
Kilogram
1,000 grams.
Kiloliter
1,000 liters.
m , n,
48 3 1,024
2102.
31x 1 y2.
b/a.
a/b,
aOPP
ADJb
a ADJ
HYPb
a OPP
HYPb
u
Kilometer
1,000 meters.
Kruskal’s algorithm
To construct a minimum spanning tree
from a weighted graph: 1. Select any edge with minimum
weight. 2. Select the next edge with minimum weight among
those not yet selected. 3. Continue to choose edges of minimum
weight from those not yet selected, but make sure not to select
any edge that forms a circuit. 4. Repeat this process until the
tree connect all of the vertices of the original graph.
Laptop
A small portable computer.
Law of contraposition
A conditional may always be replaced
by its contrapositive without having its truth value affected.
Law of detachment
Same as direct reasoning.
Law of double negation
(p) 3 p
Law of the excluded middle
Every simple statement is either
true or false.
Laws of exponents
There are five laws of exponents.
Addition law
bm  bn  bmn
Multiplication law
(bn)m  bmn
Subtraction law
Distributive laws
(ab)m  ambm
Laws of logarithms
If A, B, and b are positive numbers, p any
real number, and b  1, then
Addition law
logb (AB)  logb A  logb B
Subtraction law
logb
 logb A  logb B
Multiplication law
logb Ap  p logb A
Laws of square roots
There are 4 laws of square roots.
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
l.c.d.
An abbreviation for least common denominator.
l.c.m.
An abbreviation for least common multiple.
Least common denominator (l.c.d.)
The smallest number that
is exactly divisible by each of the given numbers.
Least common multiple (l.c.m.)
The smallest number that each
of a given set of numbers divides into.
Least squares line
A line 
so that the sum of the
squares of the vertical distances of the data points from this
line will be as small as possible.
Least squares method
A method based on the principle that the
best prediction of a quantity that can be deduced from a set of
measurements or observations is that for which the sum of the
squares of the deviations of the observed values (from
predictions) is a minimum.
Leg of a triangle
One of the two sides of a right triangle that
are not the hypotenuse.
Length
A measurement of an object from end to end.
Less than
If a is to the left of b on a number line, then a is less
than b, 
Formally, 
if and only if 
Less than or equal to
Written 
means 
or 
Like terms
Terms that differ only in their numerical
coefficients. Also called similar terms.
Limit
The formal definition of a limit is beyond the scope of
this course. Intuitively, it is the tendency of a function to
approach some value as its variable approaches a given value.
a 5 b.
a , b
a # b,
b . a.
a , b
a , b.
y 5 mx 1 b
"a
b 5 !a
!b
!ab 5 !a!b
!a2 5 a
!0 5 0
A
B
aa
bb
m
5 am
bm
bm
bn 5 bm2n
G14
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Limit of a sequence
The formal definition of a limit of a
sequence is beyond the scope of this course. Intuitively, it is 
an accumulation point such that there are an infinite number 
of terms of the sequence arbitrarily close to the accumulation
point.
Limits of integration
See Integral.
Line
In mathematics, it is an undefined term. It is a curve that is
straight, so it is sometimes referred to as a straight line. It
extends in both directions and is considered one-dimensional,
so it has no thickness.
Line graph
See Graph.
Line of credit
A preapproved credit limit on a credit account.
The maximum amount of credit to be extended to a borrower.
That is, it is a promise by a lender to extend credit up to some
predetermined amount.
Line of symmetry
A line with the property that for a given
curve, any point P on the curve has a corresponding point Q
(called the reflection point of P) so that the perpendicular
bisector of 
is on the line of symmetry.
Line segment
A part of a line between two points on the line.
Linear
(1) A first-degree polynomial. (2) Pertaining to a 
line. In two variables, a set of points satisfying the equation
Linear combination method
See Addition method.
Linear correlation coefficient
A measure to determine whether
there is a statistically significant linear relationship between
two variables.
Linear equation
An equation of the form
(one variable) or
(two variables)
A first-degree equation with one or two variables. For
example, 
and 
are linear. An
equation is linear in a certain variable if it is first-degree in that
variable. For example, 
is linear in x, but not y.
Linear function
A function whose equation can be written in
the form 
Linear inequality
A first-degree inequality with one or two
variables.
Linear polynomial
A first-degree polynomial.
Linear programming
A type of problem that seeks to
maximize or minimize a function called the objective function
subject to a set of restrictions (linear inequalities) called
constraints.
Linear programming theorem
A linear expression in two
variables, 
defined over a convex set S whose sides
are line segments, takes on its maximum value at a corner
point of S and its minimum value at a corner point of S. If S is
unbounded, there may or may not be an optimum value, but if
there is, then it must occur at a corner point.
Linear system
A system of equations, each of which is first degree.
Liter
The basic unit of capacity in the metric system. It is the
capacity of 1 cubic decimeter.
Literal equation
An equation with more than one variable.
Logarithm
For 
means 
x is the called the logarithm and A is called the argument.
Logarithmic equation
An equation for which there is a
logarithm on one or both sides.
Logarithmic function
f (x)  logb x,
b  0,
x  0
bx 5 A
A . 0, b . 0, b 2 1 x 5 logb A
c1x 1 c2y,
f 1x2 5 mx 1 b.
x 1 y2 5 0
x 1 y 1 5 5 0
x 1 5 5 0
Ax 1 By 1 C 5 0
ax 1 b 5 0
Ax 1 By 1 C 5 0.
PQ
Logarithmic scale
A scale in which logarithms are used to
make data more manageable by expanding small variations and
compressing large ones.
Logic
The science of correct reasoning.
Logical conclusion
The statement that follows logically as a
consequence of the hypotheses of a theorem.
Logical equivalence
Two statements are logically equivalent if
they have the same truth values.
Logical fallacy
An invalid form of reasoning.
Log of both sides theorem
If A, B, and b are positive real
numbers with 
then 
is equivalent to
Lower quota
In apportionment, the result of a quota found by
rounding down.
Lowest common denominator
For two or more fractions, the
smallest common multiple of the denominators. It is the same
as the lowest common multiple.
Lump-sum problem
A financial problem that deals with a
single sum of money, called a lump sum. Contrast with a
periodic payment problem.
Main diagonal
The entries 
in a matrix.
Major axis
In an ellipse, the line passing though the foci.
Majority
Voting to find an alternative that receives more than
of the vote.
Majority criterion
If a candidate receives a majority of the
first-place votes, then that candidate should be declared the
winner.
Marriage
A pairing of one couple where each partner is taken
from a separate group. A marriage is stable if each partner is
satisfied with the pairing and unstable if one or the other (or
both) would prefer to be paired with another.
Mass
In this course, it is the amount of matter an object
comprises. Formally, it is a measure of the tendency of a body
to oppose changes in its velocity.
Mathematical expectation
A calculation defined as the product
of an amount to be won and the probability that it is won. If
there is more than one amount to be won, it is the sum of the
expectations of all the prizes. It is also called the expected
value or expectation.
Mathematical modeling
An iterative procedure that makes
assumptions about real-world problems to formulate the
problem in mathematical terms. After the mathematical
problem is solved, it is tested for accuracy in the real world,
and revised for the next step in the iterative process.
Mathematical system
A set with at least one defined operation
and some developed properties.
Matrix
A rectangular array of terms called elements.
Matrix equation
An equation whose elements are matrices.
Maximum loan
In this book, it refers to the maximum amount
of loan that can be obtained for a home with a given amount of
income and a given amount of debt. To find this amount, use
the present value of an annuity formula.
Mean
The number found by adding the data and dividing by the
number of values in the data set. The sample mean is usually
denoted by x.
Means
See Proportion.
Measure
Comparison to some unit recognized as standard.
Measures of central tendency
Refers to the averages of mean,
median, and mode.
Measures of dispersion
Refers to the measures of range,
standard deviation, and variance.
50%
a11, a22, a33, c
A 5 B
logb A 5 logb B
b 2 1,
Glossary
G15
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Measures of position
Measures that divide a data set by
position, which include median, quartiles, deciles, and
percentiles.
Median
The middle number when the numbers in the data are
arranged in order of size. If there are two middle numbers (in
the case of an even number of data values), the median is the
mean of these two middle numbers.
Member
See Set.
Meter
The basic unit for measuring length in the metric system.
Metric system
A decimal system of weights and measures in
which the gram, the meter, and the liter are the basic units of
mass, length, and capacity, respectively. One gram is the mass
of one 
of water and one liter is the same as 
In
this book, the metric system refers to SI metric system as
revised in 1960.
Micrometer
One millionth of a meter, denoted by m.
Mile
A unit of linear measurement in the United States system
that is equal to 5,280 ft.
Milli-
A prefix that means 
Milligram
of a gram.
Milliliter
of a liter.
Millimeter
of a meter.
Million
A name for 
Minicomputer
An everyday name for a personal computer.
Minimum spanning tree
A spanning tree for which the sum of
the numbers with the edges is a minimum.
Minor axis
In an ellipse, the axis perpendicular to the major
axis passing though the center of the ellipse.
Minus
Refers to the operation of subtraction. The symbol “
”
means minus only when it appears between two numbers, two
variables, or between numbers and variables.
Mixed number
A number that has both a counting number part
and a proper fraction part; for example, 
Mode
The value in a data set that occurs most frequently. If no
number occurs more than once, there is no mode. It is possible
to have more than one mode.
Modem
A device connected to a computer that allows the
computer to communicate with other computers using electric
cables, phone lines, or wireless.
Modified quotient
Adjust the standard divisor so that the
desired number of seats are used. This adjusted number is
known as the modified quotient.
Modular codes
A code based on modular arithmetic.
Modulo 5
A mathematical system consisting of five elements
having the property that every number is equivalent to one of
these five elements if they have the same remainder when
divided by 5.
Modulo n
A mathematical system consisting of n elements
having the property that every number is equivalent to one 
of these n elements if they have the same remainder when
divided by n.
Modus ponens
Same as direct reasoning.
Modus tollens
Same as indirect reasoning.
Monitor
An output device for communicating with a computer.
It is similar to a television screen.
Monomial
A polynomial with one and only one term.
Monotonicity criterion
A candidate who wins a first election
and then gains additional support, without losing any of the
original support, should also win a second election.
Monthly compounding
In the compound interest formula, it is
when n 5 12.
31
2.
2
106 5 1,000,000.
1/1,000
1/1,000
1/1,000
1/1,000.
1,000 cm3.
cm3
Monthly payment
In an installment application, it is a periodic
payment that is made once every month.
Mortgage
An agreement, or loan contract, in which a borrower
pledges a home or other real estate as security.
Mouse
A small plastic “box” usually with two buttons on top
and a ball on the bottom so that it can be rolled around on a
pad. It is attached to the computer by a long cord and is used to
take over some of the keyboard functions.
Multiple
See Divisibility.
Multiplication
For 
means
b  b  b  . . .  b
144424443
a addends
If a  0, then 0  b  0. 
Multiplication law of equality
If 
then 
Also
called the multiplication property of equality or a fundamental
property of equations.
Multiplication law of exponents
To raise a power to a power,
multiply the exponents. That is, 
Multiplication law of inequality
1. If 
and 
then 
2. If 
and 
then 
Multiplication law of logarithms
The log of the pth power of a
number is p times the log of that number. In symbols,
Multiplication of integers
If the integers to be multiplied both
have the same sign, the result is positive and the magnitude of
the answer is the product of the absolute values of the integers.
If the integers to be multiplied have opposite signs, the product
is negative and has magnitude equal to the product of the
absolute values of the given integers. Finally, if one or both of
the given integers is 0, the product is 0.
Multiplication of matrices
Let [M] be an m  r matrix and 
[N] an r  n matrix. The product matrix [M][N]  [P] is an 
m  n matrix. The entry in the ith row and jth column of
[M][N] is the sum of the products formed by multiplying each
entry of the ith row of [M] by the corresponding element in the
jth column of [N].
Multiplication of rational numbers
Multiplication principle
In a numeration system, multiplication
of the value of a symbol by some number. Also, see
Fundamental counting principle.
Multiplication property (of equations)
Both sides of an
equation may be multiplied or divided by any nonzero number
to obtain an equivalent equation.
Multiplication property of factorials
Multiplication property of inequality
Both sides of 
an inequality may be multiplied or divided by a positive
number, and the order of the inequality will remain 
unchanged. The order is reversed if both sides are multiplied 
or divided by a negative number. That is, if 
then
if 
and 
if 
This also applies 
to 
and $.
#, .,
c , 0.
ac . bc
c . 0
ac , bc
a , b
n! 5 n1n 2 12!
a
b 3 c
d 5 ac
bd
logb Ap 5 p logb A
ac , bc.
c , 0,
a . b
ac . bc.
c . 0,
a . b
1bn2 m 5 bmn.
ac 5 bc.
a 5 b,
b 2 0, a 3 b
G16
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Multiplication property of probability
If events E and F are
independent events, then we can find the probability of an
intersection as follows:
P(E  F)  P(E and F)  P(E)  P(F)
Multiplicative identity
The number 1, with the property that
for any real number a
Multiplicative inverse
(1) See Reciprocal. (2) If [A] is a square
matrix and if there exists a matrix [A]1 such that
[A]1[A]  [A][A]1  [I]
where [I] is the identity matrix for multiplication, then [A]1 is
called the inverse of [A] for multiplication.
Multiplicity
If a root for an equation appears more than once, it
is called a root of multiplicity. For example,
has roots 1, 2, and 3. The root 1 has multiplicity three and 
root 2 has multiplicity two.
Mutually exclusive
Events are mutually exclusive if their
intersection is empty.
Natural base
The natural base is e; it refers to an exponential
with a base e.
Natural logarithm
A logarithm to the base e, written ln N.
Natural numbers
  {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . .}, the positive integers,
also called the counting numbers.
Negation
A logical connective that changes the truth value of a
given statement. The negation of p is symbolized by p.
Negative of a conditional
The negative of a conditional, 
is found by
( p S q) 3 p  q
Negative number
A number less than zero.
Negative sign
The symbol “—” when used in front of a number, as
in 
Do not confuse with the same symbol used for subtraction.
Neither . . . nor
A logical operator for “neither p nor q,” which
is defined to mean ( p  q)
Network
(1) A linking together of computers. (2) A set of
points connected by arcs or by line segments.
New states paradox
When a reapportionment of an increased
number of seats causes a shift in the apportionment of the
existing states, it is known as the new states paradox.
n-gon
A polygon with n sides.
No p is q
A logical operator for “no p is q,” which is defined to
mean p S q.
Nonagon
A polygon with 9 sides.
Nonconformable matrices
Matrices that cannot be added or
multiplied because their dimensions are not compatible.
Non-Euclidean geometries
A geometry that results when
Euclid’s fifth postulate is not accepted.
Nonrepeating decimal
A decimal representation of a number
that does not repeat.
Nonsingular matrix
A matrix that has an inverse.
Nonterminating decimal
A decimal representation of a number
that does not terminate.
Normal curve
A graphical representation of a normal
distribution. Its high point occurs at the mean, it is symmetric
with respect to this mean, and each side of the mean has an
area that includes 
of the population within on standard
deviation, 
from one to two standard deviations, and
13.6%
34.1%
25.
p S q
1x 2 12 1x 2 12 1x 2 12 1x 2 22 1x 2 22 1x 2 32 5 0
1 # a 5 a
about 
of the population more than two standard
deviations from the mean.
Not
A common translation for the connective of negation.
NOT-gate
A logical gate that changes the truth value of a given
statement.
Null set
See Set.
Number
A number represents a given quantity, as opposed to a
numeral, which is the symbol for the number. In mathematics,
it generally refers to a specific set of numbers—for example,
counting numbers, whole numbers, integers, rationals, or real
numbers. If the set is not specified, the assumed usage is to the
set of real numbers.
Number line
A line used to display a set of numbers graphically
(the axis for a one-dimensional graph).
Numeral
Symbol used to denote a number.
Numeration system
A system of symbols with rules of
combination for representing all numbers.
Numerator
See Rational number.
Numerical coefficient
See Coefficient.
Objective function
The function to be maximized or minimized
in a linear programming problem.
Obtuse angle
An angle that is greater than a right angle and
smaller than a straight angle.
Obtuse triangle
A triangle with one obtuse angle.
Octagon
A polygon with eight sides.
Octal numeration system
A numeration system with eight
symbols.
Odd vertex
In a network, a vertex of odd degree—that is, with
an odd number of arcs or line segments connected at that
vertex.
Odds
If 
, where s is the number of outcomes
considered favorable to an event E and n is the total number of
possibilities, then the odds in favor of E is 
and the odds
against E is 
.
One
The first counting number; it is also called the identity
element for multiplication; that is, it satisfies the property that
for all numbers x.
One-dimensional coordinate system
A real number line.
One-to-one correspondence
Between two sets A and B, this
means each element of A can be matched with exactly one
element of B and also each element of B can be matched with
exactly one element of A.
Online
To be connected to a computer network or to the
Internet.
Open-ended loan
A preapproved line of credit that the
borrower can access as long as timely payments are made and
the credit line is not exceeded. It is usually known as a credit
card loan.
Open equation
An equation that has at least one variable.
Open half-plane
See Half-plane.
Operator
A rule, such as negation, that modifies the value of a
simple statement, or a rule that combines two simple
statements, such as conjunction or disjunction.
Opposite side
In a right triangle, an acute angle is made up of
two sides. The opposite side of the angle refers to the third side
that is not used to make up the sides of the angle.
Opposites
Opposites x and 
are the same distance from 0 on
the number line but in opposite directions; 
is also called the
additive inverse of x. Do not confuse the negative symbol “
”
2
2x
2x
x # 1 5 1 # x 5 x
f/s
s/f
s 1 f 5 n
2.3%
Glossary
G17
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

meaning opposite with the same symbol as used to mean
subtraction or negative.
Optimum solution
The maximum or minimum value in a linear
programming problem.
Or
A common translation for the connective of disjunction.
OR-gate
An electrical circuit that simulates disjunction. That is,
the circuit is on when either of two switches is on.
Order
Refers to the direction that an inequality symbol points.
In reference to matrices, it refers to the number of rows and
columns in a matrix. When used in relation to a matrix, it is the
same as the dimension of the matrix.
Order of an inequality
Refers to , 
, , or 	 relationship.
Order of operations
If no grouping symbols are used in a
numerical expression, first perform all multiplications and
divisions from left to right, and then perform all additions and
subtractions from left to right.
Order symbols
Refers to , 
, , 	 in an inequality. Also
called inequality symbols.
Ordered pair
A pair of numbers, written (x, y), in which the
order of naming is important. The numbers x and y are
sometimes called the first and second components of the pair
and are called the coordinates of the point designated by (x, y).
Ordered triple
Three numbers, written (x, y, z), in which the
order of the components is important.
Ordinary annuity
See Annuity.
Ordinary interest
The calculation of interest assuming a year
has 360 days. In this book, we assume ordinary interest unless
otherwise stated.
Ordinate
The vertical coordinate in a two-dimensional system
of rectangular coordinates, usually denoted by y.
Origin
The point designating 0 on a number line. In two
dimensions, the point of intersection of the coordinate axes;
the coordinates are (0, 0).
Origination fee
A fee paid to obtain a real estate loan.
Ounce
(1) A unit of capacity in the United States system that is
equal to 
of a gallon. (2) A unit of mass in the United
States system that is equal to 
of a pound.
Output
A method of getting information out of a computer.
Output device
Component of a system that allows the output of
data. The most common output device is a printer.
Overlapping sets
Sets whose intersection is not empty.
Pairwise comparison method
In the pairwise comparison
method of voting, the voters rank the candidates. The method
consists of a series of comparisons in which each candidate is
compared to each of the other candidates. If choice A is
preferred to choice B, then A receives 1 point. If B is preferred
to A, then B receives 1 point. If the candidates tie, each
receives point. The candidate with the most points is the
winner.
Parabola
A set of points in the plane equidistant from a given
point (called the focus) and a given line (called the directrix). 
It is the path of a projectile. The axis of symmetry is the axis 
of the parabola. The point where the axis cuts the parabola is
the vertex.
Parallel circuit
Two switches connected together so that if
either of the two switches is turned on, the circuit is on.
Parallel lines
Two nonintersecting straight lines in the same
plane.
Parallelepiped
A polyhedron, all of whose faces are
parallelograms.
Parallelogram
A quadrilateral with its opposite sides parallel.
1
2
1/16
1/128
Parentheses
See Grouping symbols.
Pareto principle
If each voter prefers A over B, then the group
chooses A over B.
Partial sum
If 
is a sequence, then the partial 
sums are
Pascal’s triangle
A triangular array of numbers that is bordered
by ones and the sum of two adjacent numbers in one row is
equal to the number in the next row between the two numbers.
Password
A word or set of symbols that allows access to a
computer account.
Pattern recognition
A computer function that entails the
automatic identification and classification of shapes, forms, or
relationships.
Pearson correlation coefficient
A number between 
and 
that indicates the degree of linear relationship between two sets of
numbers. In the text, we call this the linear correlation coefficient.
Pentagon
A polygon with five sides.
Percent
The ratio of a given number to 100; hundredths;
denoted by 
; that is, 
means 
Percent markdown
The percent of an original price used to
find the amount of discount.
Percent problem
A is 
of W is formulated as a proportion
Percentage
The given amount in a percent problem.
Percentile
Ninety-nine values that divide a data set into one
hundred equal parts.
Perfect number
An integer that is equal to the sum of all of its
factors except the number itself. For example, 28 is a perfect
number since
Perfect square
, so the perfect
squares are 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, . . . .
Perimeter
The distance around a polygon.
Periodic payment problem
A financial problem that involves
monthly or other periodic payments.
Peripheral
A device, such as a printer, that is connected to and
operated by a computer.
Permutation
A selection of objects from a given set with regard
to the order in which they are selected. Sometimes it refers to
the number of ways this selection can be done and is denoted
by 
. The formula for finding it is
Perpendicular lines
Two lines are perpendicular if they meet at
right angles.
nPr 5
n!
1n 2 r2!
nPr
12 5 1, 22 5 4, 32 5 9, c
28 5 1 1 2 1 4 1 7 1 14
P
100 5 A
W
P%
5/100.
5%
%
11
21
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
3
3
1
1
4
6
4
1
1
5 
10
10
5 
1



S1 5 s1, S2 5 s1 1 s2, S3 5 s1 1 s2 1 s3, c.
s1, s2, s3, c
G18
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Personal computer
A computer kept for and used by an
individual.
Pi (p)
A number that is defined as the ratio of the circumference
to the diameter of a circle. It cannot be represented exactly as a
decimal, but it is a number between 3.1415 and 3.1416.
Pictograph
See Graph.
Pie chart
See Graph.
Pirating
Stealing software by copying it illegally for the use of
someone other than the person who paid for it.
Pivot
A process that uses elementary row operations to carry out
the following steps: 1. Divide all entries in the row in which the
pivot appears (called the pivot row) by the nonzero pivot
element so that the pivot entry becomes a 1. This uses elemen-
tary row operation 3. 2. Obtain zeros above and below the
pivot element by using elementary row operation 4.
Pivot row
In an elementary row operation, it is the row that is
multiplied by a constant. See Elementary row operations.
Pivoting
See Pivot.
Pixel
Any of the thousands (or millions) of tiny dots that make
up a computer or calculator image.
Place-value names
Trillions, hundred billions, ten billions,
billions, hundred millions, ten millions, millions, hundred
thousands, ten thousands, thousands, hundreds, tens, units,
tenths, hundredths, thousandths, ten-thousandths, hundred-
thousandths, and millionths (from large to small).
Planar curve
A curve completely contained in a plane.
Plane
In mathematics, it is an undefined term. It is flat and level
and extends infinitely in horizontal and vertical directions. It is
considered two-dimensional.
Plot a point
To mark the position of a point.
Plurality rule
The winner of an election is the candidate with
the highest number of votes.
Point
(1) In the decimal representation of a number, it is a mark
that divides the whole number part of a number from its
fractional part. (2) In relation to a home loan, it represents 
of the value of a loan, so that 3 points would be a fee paid to a
lender equal to 
of the amount of the loan. (3) In geometry,
it is an undefinedword that signifies a position, but that has no
dimension or size.
Point-slope form
An algebraic form of an equation of a line that
is given in terms of a point 
and slope m of a given line:
Police patrol problem
Suppose a police car needs to patrol a
gated subdivision and would like to enter the gate, cruise all
the streets exactly once, and then leave by the same gate.
Polygon
A geometric figure that has three or more straight sides
that all lie in a plane so that the starting point and the ending
point are the same.
Polynomial
An algebraic expression that may be written as a
sum (or difference) of terms. Each term of a polynomial
contains multiplication only.
Population The total set of items (actual or potential) defined by
some characteristic of the items.
Population growth
The population, P, at some future time can
be predicted if you know the population 
at some time, and
the annual growth rate, r. The predicted population t years after
the given time is 
.
Population paradox
When there is a fixed number of seats, 
a reapportionment may cause a state to lose a seat to another
state, even though the percent increase in the population of the
P 5 P0ert
P0
y 2 y1 5 m1x 2 x12
1x1, y12
3%
1%
state that loses the seat is larger than the percent increase of the
state that wins the seat. When this occurs, it is known as the
population paradox.
Positional system
A numeration system in which the position of
a symbol in the representation of a number determines the
meaning of that symbol.
Positive number
A number greater than 0.
Positive sign
The symbol 
when used in front of a number
or an expression.
Positive square root
The symbol 
is the positive number
that, when multiplied by itself, gives the number x. The symbol
“
” is always positive.
Postulate
A statement that is accepted without proof.
Pound
A unit of measurement for mass in the United States
system. It is equal to 16 oz.
Power
See Exponent.
Precision
The accuracy of the measurement; for example, 
a measurement is taken to the nearest inch, nearest foot, or
nearest mile. It is not to be confused with accuracy that applies
to the calculation.
Predecessor
In a sequence, the predecessor of an element 
is
the preceding element, 
.
Premise
A previous statement or assertion that serves as the
basis for an argument.
Present value
See Compound interest formula.
Present value formula
The present value, P, of a known future
value A invested at an annual interest rate of r for t years
compounded n times per year is found by the formula
Present value of an annuity
A financial formula that seeks the
present value from periodic payments over a period of time.
the formula is
Previous balance method
A method of calculating credit card
interest using the formula 
in which P is the balance
owed before the current payment is subtracted.
Prime factorization
The factorization of a number so that all of
the factors are primes and so that their product is equal to the
given number.
Prime number
P  {2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, . . .}: a
number with exactly two factors: 1 and the number itself.
Principal
See Compound interest formula.
Printer
An output device for a computer.
Prism
In this book, it refers to a right prism, which is also called
a parallelepiped or more commonly a box.
Probabilistic model
A model that deals with situations that are
random in character and attempts to predict the outcomes of
events with a certain stated or known degree of accuracy.
Probability
If an experiment can result in any of n
mutually exclusive and equally likely outcomes, and if s of
these are considered favorable to event E, then 
.
Probability function
A function P that satisfies the following
properties: 
, and if E and F are
mutually exclusive events, then P(E
F)
P(E)
P(F).
Problem-solving procedure
1. Read the problem. Note what it
is all about. Focus on processes rather than numbers. You can’t
1
5
´
0 # P1E2 # 1, P1S2 5 1
P1E2 5 s/n
1n $ 12
I 5 Prt
P 5 m c
1 2 11 1 r
n2 2nt
r
n
d
P 5 Aa1 1 r
nb
2nt
an 2 1
an
1  
1x
“1”
Glossary
G19
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

work a problem you don’t understand. 2. Restate the problem.
Write a verbal description of the problem using operation signs
and an equal sign. Look for equality. If you can’t find equal
quantities, you will never formulate an equation. 3. Choose a
variable. If there is a single unknown, choose a variable. 
4. Substitute. Replace the verbal phrases by known numbers
and by the variable. 5. Solve the equation. This is the easy step.
Be sure your answer makes sense by checking it with the
original question in the problem. Use estimation to eliminate
unreasonable answers. 6. State the answer. There were no
variables defined when you started, so 
is not an answer.
Pay attention to units of measure and other details of the
problem. Remember to answer the question that was asked.
Product
The result of a multiplication.
Profit formula
, where P represents the profit, 
S represents the selling price (or revenue), and C the cost 
(or overhead).
Program
A set of step-by-step instructions that instruct a
computer what to do in a specified situation.
Progression
See Sequence
Projective geometry
The study of those properties of geometric
configurations that are invariant under projection. It was
developed to satisfy the need for depth in works of art.
Prompt
In a computer program, a prompt is a direction that
causes the program to print some message to help the user
understand what is happening at a particular time.
Proper divisor
A divisor of a number that is less than the
number itself.
Proper fraction
A fraction for which the numerator is less than
the denominator.
Proper subset
See Subset.
Proof
A logical argument that establishes the truth of a statement.
Property of complements
See Complementary probabilities.
Property of proportions
If the product of the means equals the
product of the extremes, then the ratios form a proportion.
Also, if the ratios form a proportion, then the product of the
means equals the product of the extremes.
Property of rational expressions
Let P, Q, R, S, and K be any
polynomials such that all values of the variable that cause
division by zero are excluded from the domain.
Equality
if and only if PS  QR.
Fundamental property
Addition
Subtraction
Multiplication
Division
Property of zero
if and only if 
or 
(or both). Also called the zero-product rule.
Proportion
A statement of equality between two ratios. For
example,
a
b 5 c
d
B 5 0
A 5 0
AB 5 0
P
Q 4 R
S 5 PS
QR
P
Q #  R
S 5 PR
QS
P
Q 2 R
S 5 PS 2 QR
QS
P
Q 1 R
S 5 PS 1 QR
QS
PK
QK 5 P
Q
P
Q 5 R
S
P 5 S 2 C
x 5 3
For this proportion, a and d are called the extremes; b and c are
called the means.
Protractor
A device used to measure angles.
Pseudosphere
The surface of revolution of a tractrix about its
asymptote. It is sometimes called a “four-dimensional sphere.”
Pyramid
A solid figure having a polygon as a base, the sides of
which form the bases of triangular surfaces meeting at a
common vertex.
Pythagorean theorem
If a triangle with legs a and b and
hypotenuse c is a right triangle, then 
.
Quadrant
See Axes.
Quadratic
A second-degree polynomial
Quadratic equation
An equation of the form
Quadratic formula
If 
and 
, then
The radicand 
is called the discriminant of the quadratic.
Quadratic function
Quadrilateral
A polygon having four sides.
Quart
A measure of capacity in the United States system equal
to 
of a gallon.
Quarterly compounding
In the compound interest formula, it
is when 
Quartile
Three values that divide a data set into four equal parts.
Quota rule
The number assigned to each represented unit must
be either the standard quota rounded down to the nearest
integer, or the standard quota rounded up to the nearest integer.
Quotient
The result of a division.
Radical form
The 
symbol in an expression such as 
The number 2 is called the radicand and an expression
involving a radical is called a radical expression.
Radicand
See Radical form.
Radius
The distance of a point on a circle from the center of the
same circle.
RAM
Random-Access Memory, or memory where each
location is uniformly accessible, often used for the storage of a
program and the data being processed.
Random variable
A random variable X associated with the
sample space S of an experiment is a function that assigns a
real number to each simple event in S.
Range
(1) In statistics, it is the difference between the largest
and the smallest numbers in the data set. (2) The range of a
graph of an equation with two variables x and y is the set of
permissible real-number replacements for y.
Rate
(1) In percent problems, it is the percent. (2) In tax
problems, it is the level of taxation, written as a percent. (3) In
financial problems, it refers to the APR.
Ratio
The quotient of two numbers or expressions.
Rational equation
An equation that has at least one variable in
the denominator.
Rational number
A number belonging to the set  defined by
 a
b
 a is an integer, b is a nonzero integer
a is called the numerator and b is called the denominator. A
rational number is also called a fraction.
12.
1  
n 5 4.
1/4
f 1x2 5 ax2 1 bx 1 c, a 2 0
b2 2 4ac
x 5 2b 6 "b2 2 4ac
2a
a 2 0
ax2 1 bx 1 c 5 0
ax2 1 bx 1 c 5 0, a 2 0.
a2 1 b2 5 c2
G20
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Ray
If P is a point on a line, then a ray from the point P is all
points on the line on one side of P.
Real number line
A line on which points are associated with
real numbers in a one-to-one fashion.
Real numbers
The set of all rational and irrational numbers,
denoted by .
Reciprocal
The reciprocal of n is 
also called the
multiplicative inverse of n.
Rectangle
A quadrilateral whose angles are all right angles.
Rectangular coordinate system
See Cartesian coordinate
system.
Rectangular coordinates
See Ordered pair.
Rectangular parallelepiped
In this book, it refers to a box all
of whose angles are right angles.
Reduced fraction
A fraction so that the numerator and
denominator have no common divisors (other than 1).
Reducing fractions
The process by which we make sure that
there are no common factors (other than 1) for the numerator
and denominator of a fraction.
Reflection
Given a line L and a point P, we call the point 
the
reflection about the line L if 
is perpendicular to L and is
also bisected by L.
Region
In a network, a separate part of the plane.
Regression analysis
The analysis used to determine the
relationship between two variables.
Regular polygon
A polygon with all sides the same length.
Relation
A set of ordered pairs.
Relative frequency
If an experiment is repeated n times and 
an event occurs m times, then the relative frequency is the 
ratio 
.
Relatively prime
Two integers are relatively prime if they have
no common factors other than 
; two polynomials are
relatively prime if they have no common factors except
constants.
Remainder
When an integer m is divided by a positive integer
n, and a quotient q is obtained for which 
with
, then r is the remainder.
Repeating decimal
See Decimal fraction.
Repetitive system
numeration system for which a single symbol
is repeated to represent a given number. For example, 
in the Babylonian system means
Replication
On a spreadsheet, the operation of copying a
formula from one place to another.
Resolution
The number of dots (or pixels) determines the
clarity, or resolution, of the image on the monitor.
Revolving credit
It is the same as open-ended or credit card
credit.
Rhombus
A parallelogram with adjacent sides equal.
Richter number
A number used to denote the magnitude or
size of an earthquake.
Richter scale
Same as Richter number.
Right angle
An angle of 
Right circular cone
A cone with a circular base for which the
base is perpendicular to its axis.
Right circular cylinder
A cylinder with a circular base for
which the base is perpendicular to its axis.
Right prism
A prism whose base is perpendicular to the lateral
edges.
Right triangle
A triangle with one right angle.
Rise
See Slope.
90°.
10 1 10 1 10 5 30

0 # r , n
m 5 nq 1 r
61
m/n
PPr
Pr
1
n,
ROM
Read-Only Memory, or memory that cannot be altered
either by the user or a loss of power. In microcomputers, the
ROM usually contains the operating system and system
programs.
Root of a number
An nth root (n is a natural number) of a
number b is a only if 
. If 
, then the root is called a
square root; if 
, it is called a cube root.
Root of an equation
See Solution.
Roster method
A method of defining a set by listing its members.
Rounding a number
Dropping decimals after a certain
significant place. The procedure for rounding is: 1. Locate the
rounding place digit. 2. Determine the rounding place digit: It
stays the same if the first digit to its right is a 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4; it
increases by 1 if the digit to the right is a 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9. 3.
Change digits: all digits to the left of the rounding digit remain
the same (unless there is a carry) and all digits to the right of
the rounding digit are changed to zeros. 4. Drop zeros: If the
rounding place digit is to the left of the decimal point, drop all
trailing zeros; if the rounding place digit is to the right of the
decimal point, drop all trailing zeros to the right of the
rounding place digit.
Row
A horizontal arrangement of numbers or entries of a matrix.
It is denoted by numerals 1, 2, 3,
on a spreadsheet.
Row
An elementary row transformation that causes one row
of a matrix (called the pivot row) to be added to another row
(called the target row). The answer to this addition replaces the
entries in the target row, entry by entry.
Row-reduced form
The final matrix after the process of Gauss-
Jordan elimination.
RowSwap
An elementary row operation that causes two rows of
a matrix to be switched, entry-by-entry.
Rubik’s cube
A three-dimensional cube that can rotate about all
three axes. It is a puzzle that has the object of returning the
faces to a single-color position.
Rules of divisibility
A number N is divisible by:
1
2
if the last digit is divisible by 2.
3
if the sum of the digits is divisible by 3.
4
if the number formed by the last two digits is divisible 
by 4.
5
if the last digit is 0 or 5.
6
if the number is divisible by 2 and by 3.
8
if the number formed by the last three digits is divisible
by 8.
9
if the sum of the digits is divisible by 9.
10
if the last digit is 0.
12
if the number is divisible by 3 and by 4.
Run
See Slope.
Runoff election
An attempt to obtain a majority vote by
eliminating one or more alternatives and voting again on the
remaining choices.
Saccheri quadrilateral
A rectangle with base angles A and B
right angles, and with sides 
and 
the same length.
Sales price
A reduced price usually offered to stimulate sales. It
can be found by subtracting the discount from the original
price, or by multiplying the original price by the complement
of the markdown.
Sales tax
A tax levied by government bodies that is based on the
sale price of an item.
Sample
A finite portion of a population.
BD
AC
c
n 5 3
n 5 2
an 5 b
Glossary
G21
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Sample space
The set of possible outcomes for an experiment.
Satisfy
See Equation or Inequality.
Scalar
A real number.
Scalar multiplication
The multiplication of a real number and a
matrix.
Scalene triangle
A triangle with no two sides having the same
length.
Scatter diagram
A diagram showing the frequencies with
which joint values of variables are observed. One variable is
indicated along the x-axis and the other along the y-axis.
Scientific notation
Writing a number as the product of a
number between 1 and 10 and a power of 10: For any real
number n, 
, and c is an integer.
Calculators often switch to scientific notation to represent
large or small numbers. The usual notation is 8.234 05, where
the space separates the number from the power; thus 8.234 05
means 
Secant line
A line passing through two points of a given curve.
Second component
See Ordered pair.
Second-degree equation
With one variable, an equation of 
the form 
; with two variables, an equation of
the form
Semiannual compounding
In the compound interest formula, it
is when 
.
Semicircle
Half a circle.
Sequence
An infinite sequence is a function whose domain is
the set of counting numbers. It is sometimes called a
progression. A finite sequence with n terms is a function whose
domain is the set of numbers {1, 2, 3, . . . , n}.
Sequential voting
A runoff election procedure that has one vote
followed by another.
Series
The indicated sum of a finite or an infinite sequence of
terms.
Series circuit
Two switches connected together so that the
circuit is on only if both switches are on.
Set
A collection of particular things, called the members or
elements of the set. A set with no elements is called the null set
or empty set and is denoted by the symbol . All elements of a
finite set may be listed, whereas the elements of an infinite set
continue without end.
Set-builder notation
A technical notation for defining a set. For
example,
{a 0 a  , 5  a  100}
means “the set of all elements a such that a is an integer
between 5 and 100.”
Set theory
The branch of mathematics that studies sets.
SI system
See Metric system.
Sieve of Eratosthenes
A method for determining a set of primes
less than some counting number n. Write out the consecutive
numbers from 1 to n. Cross out 1, since it is not classified as 
a prime number. Draw a circle around 2, the smallest prime
number. Then cross out every following multiple of 2, since
each is divisible by 2 and thus is not prime. Draw a circle
around 3, the next prime number. Then cross out each
succeeding multiple of 3. Some of these numbers, such as 
6 and 12, will already have been crossed out because they are
also multiples of 2. Circle the next open prime, 5, and cross
n 5 2
Ax2 1 Bxy 1 Cy2 1 Dx 1 Ey 1 F 5 0
ax2 1 bx 1 c 5 0
8.234 3 105.
n 5 m # 10c, 1 # m , 10
out all subsequent multiples of 5. The next prime number is 7;
circle 7 and cross out multiples of 7. Continue this process
until you have crossed out the primes up to 
. All of the
remaining numbers on the list are prime.
Sigma notation
Sigma, the Greek letter corresponding to S, is
written . It is used to indicate the process of summing the
first to the nth terms of a set of numbers 
,
which is written as
This notation is also called summation notation.
Signed number
An integer.
Significance level
Deviations between hypothesis and
observations that are so improbable under the hypothesis as not
to be due merely to sampling error or random fluctuations are
said to be statistically significant. The significance level is set at
an acceptable level for a deviation to be statistically significant.
Similar figures
Two geometric figures are similar if they have
the same shape, but not necessarily the same size.
Similar terms
Terms that differ only in their numerical
coefficients.
Similar triangle theorem
Two triangles are similar if two
angles of one triangle are equal to two angles of the other
triangle. If the triangles are similar, then their corresponding
sides are proportional.
Similar triangles
Triangles that have the same shape.
Similarity
Two geometric figures are similar if they have the
same shape.
Simple curve
A curve that does not intersect itself.
Simple event
An event that contains only one element of the
sample space.
Simple grouping system
A numeration system is a grouping
system if the position of the symbols is not important, and each
symbol larger than 1 represents a group of other symbols.
Simple interest formula
Simple statement
A statement that does not contain a connective.
Simplify
(1) A polynomial: combine similar terms and write
terms in order of descending degree. (2) A fraction (a rational
expression): Simplify numerator and denominator, factor if
possible, and eliminate all common factors. (3) A square root:
The radicand (the number under the radical sign) has no factor
with an exponent larger than 1 when it is written in factored
form; the radicand is not written as a fraction or by using
negative exponents; there are no square root symbols used in
the denominators of fractions.
Simulation
Use of a computer program to simulate some real-
world situation.
Simultaneous solution
The solution of a simultaneous system
of equations.
Sine
In a right triangle ABC with right angle C,
sin A 
Singular matrix
A matrix that does not have an inverse.
Sinking fund
A financial problem in which the monthly payment
must be found to obtain a known future value. The formula is
m 5
AAr
nB
A1 1 r
nBnt 2 1
LENGTH OF OPPOSITE SIDE OF A

LENGTH OF HYPOTENUSE
I 5 Prt
a
n
k 5 1
sk
s1, s2, s3, c, sn
S
!n
G22
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Skewed distribution
A statistical distribution that is not
symmetric, but favors the occurrence on one side of the mean
or the other.
Slant asymptotes
In graphing a hyperbola, the diagonal lines
passing through the corners of the central rectangle.
Slope
The slope of a line passing through (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) is
denoted by m, and is found by
m  
y
x
2
2


y
x
1
1
 
 
R
R
I
U
S
N
E

Slope-intercept form
Slope point
A point that is found after counting out the rise and
the run from the y-intercept.
Software
The routines, programs, and associated documentation
in a computer system.
Software package
A commercially available computer program
that is written to carry out a specific purpose, for example, 
a database program or a word-processing program.
Solution
The values or ordered pairs of values for which an
equation, a system of equations, inequality, or system of
inequalities is true. Also called roots.
Solution set
The set of all solutions to an equation.
Solve a proportion
To find the missing term of a proportion.
Procedure: First, find the product of the means or the product
of the extremes, whichever does not contain the unknown
term; next, divide this product by the number that is opposite
the unknown term.
Solve an equation
To find the values of the variable that make
the equation true.
Solve an inequality
To find the values of the variable that make
the inequality true.
Some
A word used to mean “at least one.”
Spanning tree
A tree that is created from another graph by
removing edges while keeping a path to each vertex.
Sphere
The set of all points in space that are a given distance
from a given point.
Spreadsheet
A rectangular grid used to collect and perform
calculations on data. Rows are horizontal and are labeled with
numbers and columns are vertical and are labeled with letters
to designate cells such as A4, P604. Each cell can contain text,
numbers, or formulas.
Square
(1) A quadrilateral with all sides the same length and all
angles right angles. (2) In an expression such as , which is
pronounced “x-squared,” it means xx.
Square matrix
A matrix with the same number of rows and
columns.
Square number
Numbers that are squares of the counting
numbers: 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100, 121, 144, 
169,
.
Square root
See Root of a number.
Square unit
A two-dimensional unit. It is the result of squaring
a unit of measurement.
Stable marriage
A pairing in which both partners are 
satisfied.
Standard deviation
It is a measure of the variation of a data set.
In particular, it is the square root of the mean of the squares of
the deviations from the mean.
Standard divisor
STANDARD DIVISOR 
TOTAL POPULATION

NUMBER OF SHARES
c
x2
y 5 mx 1 b
VERTICAL CHANGE

HORIZONTAL CHANGE
Standard form
The standard form of the equation of a line is
Standard quota
STANDARD QUOTA 
Statement
A declarative sentence that is either true or false, but
not both true and false.
Statistics
Methods of obtaining and analyzing quantitative data.
Stem-and-leaf plot
A procedure for organizing data that can be
divided into two categories. The first category is listed at the
left, and the second category at the right.
Sticker price
In this book, it refers to the manufacturer’s total
price of a new automobile as listed on the window of the car.
Straight angle
An angle whose rays point in opposite
directions; an angle whose measure is 
Straightedge
A device used as an aid in drawing a straight line
segment.
Straw vote
A nonbinding vote taken before all the discussion
has taken place. It precedes the actual vote.
Street problem
A problem that asks the number of possible
routes from one location to another along some city’s streets.
The assumptions are that we always move in the correct
direction and that we do not cut through the middle of a block,
but rather stay on the streets or alleys.
Subjective probability
A probability obtained by experience
and used to indicate a measure of “certainty” on the part of the
speaker. These probabilities are not necessarily arrived at
through experimentation or theory.
Subscript
A small number or letter written below and to the
right or left of a letter as a mark of distinction.
Subset
A set contained within a set. There are 
subsets of a set
with n distinct elements. A subset is improper if it is equivalent
to the given set; otherwise it is proper.
Substitution method
The method of solution of a system of
equations in which one of the equations is solved for one of the
variables and substituted into another equation.
Substitution property
The process of replacing one quantity or
unknown by another quantity. That is, if 
, then a may be
substituted for b in any mathematical statement without
affecting the truth or falsity of the given mathematical
statement.
Subtraction
The operation of subtraction is defined by:
means 
Subtraction law of exponents
To divide two numbers with the
same base, subtract the exponents. That is,
Subtraction law of logarithms
The log of the quotient of two
numbers is the log of the numerator minus the log of the
denominator. In symbols,
logb 	A
B

  logb A  logb B
Subtraction of integers
a 2 b 5 a 1 12b2
bm
bn 5 bm 2 n
a 5 b 1 x
a 2 b 5 x
a 5 b
2n
180°.
TOTAL POPULATION

STANDARD DIVISOR
Ax 1 By 1 C 5 0.
Glossary
G23
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Subtraction of matrices
[M]  [N]  [S] if and only if 
[M] and [N] are the same order and the entries of [S] are found
by subtracting the corresponding entries of [M] and [N].
Subtraction of rational numbers
a
b
  d
c
  a
b
d
d
  b
b
d
c
  
ad
b

d
bc

Subtraction principle
In reference to numeration systems, it is
subtracting the value of some symbol from the value of the
other symbols. For example, in the Roman numeration system
IX uses the subtraction principle because the position of the I
in front of the X indicates that the value of I (which is 1) is to
be subtracted from the value of X (which is 10). 
Subtraction property of equations
The solution of an equation
is unchanged by subtracting the same number from both sides
of the equation.
Subtraction property of inequality
See Addition property of
inequality.
Successor
In a sequence, the successor of an element 
is the
following element, 
.
Sum
The result of an addition.
Summation notation
See Sigma notation.
Supercomputer
A large, very fast mainframe computer used
especially for scientific computations.
Superfluous constraint
In a linear programming problem, a
constraint that does not change the outcome if it is deleted.
Supermarket problem
Set up the shelves in a market or
convenience store so that it is possible to enter the store at one
door and travel each aisle once (and only once) and leave by
the same door.
Supplementary angles
Two angles whose sum is 
Supply
The number of items that can be supplied at a given price.
Surface
In mathematics, it is an undefined term. It is the outer
face or exterior of an object; it has an extent or magnitude
having length and breadth, but no thickness.
Surface area
The area of the outside faces of a solid.
Syllogism
A logical argument that involves three propositions,
usually two premises and a conclusion, the conclusion
necessarily being true if the premises are true.
Symbols of inclusion
See Grouping symbols.
Symmetric property of equality
If 
, then 
.
Symmetry
(1) In geometry, a graph or picture is symmetric with
respect to a line if the graph is a mirror reflection along the
line. (2) In voting, it means that if one voter prefers A to B and
another B to A, then the votes should cancel each other out.
Syntax error
The breaking of a rule governing the structure of
the programming language being used.
System of equations
A set of equations that are to be solved
simultaneously. A brace symbol is used to show the equations
belonging to the system.
System of inequalities
A set of inequalities that are to be solved
simultaneously. The solution is the set of all ordered pairs 
(x, y) that satisfy all the given inequalities. It is found by finding
the intersection of the half-planes defined by each inequality.
Tangent
In a right triangle ABC with right angle C,
tan A 
Tangent line
A tangent line to a circle is a line that contains
exactly one point of the circle. The tangent line to a curve at
LENGTH OF OPPOSITE SIDE OF A

LENGTH OF ADJACENT SIDE OF A
b 5 a
a 5 b
180°.
an 1 1
an
IX 5 9.
a point P is the limiting position, if this exists, of the secant
line through a fixed point P on the curve and a variable point
on the curve so that 
approaches P along the curve.
Target population
The population to be considered for a
statistical application.
Target row
In an elementary row operation, it is the row that is
changed. See Elementary row operations.
Tautology
A compound statement is a tautology if all values on
its truth table are true.
Temperature
The degree of hotness or coldness.
Ten
A representation for “” objects
Term
(1) A number, a variable, or a product of numbers and
variables. See Polynomial. (2) A term of a sequence is one of
the elements of that sequence.
Terminating decimal
See Decimal fraction.
Tessellation
A mosaic, repetitive pattern.
Test point
A point that is chosen to find the appropriate half-
plane when graphing a linear inequality in two variables.
Theorem
A statement that has been proved. See Deductive
reasoning.
Theoretical probability
A probability obtained by logical
reasoning according to stated definitions.
Time
In a financial problem, the length of time (in years) from
the present value to the future value.
*Row
An elementary row operation that multiplies each entry 
of a row of a matrix (called the target row) by some 
number, called a scalar. The elements of the row are replaced
term-by-term by the products. It is denoted by Row.
*Row
An elementary row operation that multiplies each entry of
a row of a matrix (called the pivot row) by some number (called a
scalar), and then adds that product, term by term, to the numbers
in another row (called the target row). The results replace the
entries in the target row, term by term. It is denoted by Row .
Ton
A measurement of mass in the United States system; it is
equal to 2,000 lb.
Topologically equivalent
Two geometric figures are said to be
topologically equivalent if one figure can be elastically
twisted, stretched, bent, shrunk, or straightened into the same
shape as the other. One can cut the figure, provided at some
point the cut edges are “glued” back together again to be
exactly the same as before.
Topology
That branch of geometry that deals with the
topological properties of figures. If one figure can be
transformed into another by stretching or contracting, then the
figures are said to be topologically equivalent.
Tournament method
A method of selecting a winner by pairing
candidates head-to-head with the winner of one facing a new
opponent for the next election.
Trailing zeros
Sometimes zeros are placed after the decimal
point or after the last digit to the right of the decimal point, and
if these zeros do not change the value of the number, they are
called trailing zeros.
Transformation
A passage from one figure or expression to
another, such as a reflection, translation, rotation, contraction,
or dilation.
Transformational geometry
The geometry that studies
transformations.
Transitive law
If A beats B, and B beats C, then A should beat
C. In symbols, equality: If 
and 
then 
;
inequality: If 
and 
, then 
. Also holds for
, and #.
$, ,
a . c
b . c
a . b
a 5 c
b 5 c,
a 5 b
1
*
*
Pr
Pr
G24
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Transitive reasoning
If 
and 
, then 
.
Translating symbols
The process of writing an English
sentence in mathematical symbols.
Transversal
A line that intersects two parallel lines.
Transverse axis
The line passing through the foci is called the
transverse axis.
Trapezoid
A quadrilateral that has two parallel sides.
Traveling salesperson problem (TSP)
A salesperson starts at
home and wants to visit several cities without going through
any city more than once and then returning to the starting city.
Traversable network
A network is said to be traversable if it
can be traced in one sweep without lifting the pencil from the
paper and without tracing the same edge more than once.
Vertices may be passed through more than once.
Tree
A graph that is connected and has no circuits.
Tree diagram
A device used to list all the possibilities for an
experiment.
Triangle
A polygon with three sides.
Trichotomy
Exactly one of the following is true, for any real
numbers a and b: 
, or 
.
Trigonometric functions
The same as the trigonometric ratios.
Trigonometric ratios
The sine, cosine, and tangent ratios are
known as the trigonometric ratios.
Trillion
A name for 
Trinomial
A polynomial with exactly three terms.
Truth set
The set of values that makes a given statement true.
Truth table
A table that shows the truth values of all
possibilities for compound statements.
Truth value
The truth value of a simple statement is true or
false. The truth value of a compound statement is true or false
and depends only on the truth values of its simple component
parts. It is determined by using the rules for connecting those
parts with well-defined operators.
Two-point form
The equation of a line passing through 
and 
is
Type I error
Rejection of a hypothesis based on sampling
when, in fact, the hypothesis is true.
Type II error
Acceptance of a hypothesis based on sampling
when, in fact, it is false.
Undefined terms
To avoid circular definitions, it is necessary to
include certain terms without specific mathematical definition.
Union
The union of sets A and B, denoted by A  B, is the set
consisting of elements in A or in B or in both A and B.
Unit circle
A circle with radius 1 centered at the origin.
Unit distance
The distance between 0 and 1 on a number line.
Unit scale
The distance between the points marked 0 and 1 on a
number line.
United States system
The measurement system used in the
United States.
Universal set
The set that contains all of the elements under
consideration for a problem or a set of problems.
Unless
A logical operator for “p unless q” that is defined to
mean q S p.
Unrestricted domain
Any set of rankings is possible; if there
are n candidates, then there are n! possible rankings.
Unstable marriage
A pairing in which one (or both) of the
partners would prefer to be paired with another partner.
y 2 y1 5 a
y2 2 y1
x2 2 x1
b 1x 2 x12
1x2, y22
1x1, y12
1012 5 1,000,000,000,000.
a 5 b
a , b, a . b
a 5 c
b 5 c
a 5 b
Upload
The process of copying a program from your computer
to the network.
Upper quota
In apportionment, the result of a quota found by
rounding up.
User-friendly A term used to describe software that is easy to use.
It includes built-in safeguards to keep the user from changing
important parts of a program.
Valid argument
In logic, refers to a correctly inferred logical
argument.
Variable
A symbol that represents unspecified elements of a
given set. On a calculator, it refers to the name given to a
location in the memory that can be assigned a value.
Variable expression
An expression that contains at least one
variable.
Variance
The square of the standard deviation. When the
variance is based on a set of sample scores, it is called the
variance of a random sample and is denoted by , and when it
is based on the entire population, it is called the variance of the
population and is denoted by 
. The formulas for variance are
Velocity
An instantaneous rate of change; a directed speed.
Venn diagram
A diagram used to illustrate relationships among
sets.
Vertex
(1) A vertex of a polygon is a corner point, or a point of
intersection of two sides. (2) A vertex of a parabola is the
lowest point for a parabola that opens upward; the highest
point for one that opens downward; the leftmost point for one
that opens to the right; and the rightmost point for one that
opens to the left.
Vertex angle
The angle included between the legs of an
isosceles triangle.
Vertical angles
Two angles such that each side of one is a
prolongation through the vertex of a side of the other.
Vertical ellipse
An ellipse whose major axis is vertical.
Vertical hyperbola
A hyperbola whose transverse axis is
vertical.
Vertical line
A line with undefined slope. Its equation has the
form 
Vertical line test
Every vertical line passes through the graph of
a function in at most one point. This means that if you sweep a
vertical line across a graph and it simultaneous intersects the
curve at more than one point, then the curve is not the graph of
a function.
Volume
A number describing three-dimensional content of a
set. Specifically, it is the number of cubic units enclosed in a
solid figure.
Vote
A decision by a group on a proposal, resolution, law, or a
choice between candidates for office.
Water-pipe problem
Consider a network of water pipes to be
inspected. Is it possible to pass a hand over each pipe exactly
once without lifting it from a pipe, and without going over the
samepipe more than once?
Webster’s apportionment plan
An apportionment plan in
which the representation of a geographical area is determined
by finding the quotient of the number of people in that area
divided by the total number of people and then rounding the
result as follows: Any quotient with a decimal portion must be
rounded to the nearest whole number.
x 5 constant.
s2 5
S1x 2 x2 2
n 2 1  s2 5
S1x 2 m2 2
n
s2
s2
Glossary
G25
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Weight
(1) In everyday usage, the heaviness of an object. In
scientific usage, the gravitational pull on a body. (2) In a
network or graph, a cost associated with an edge.
Weighted graph
A graph for which all its edges have weight.
Weighted mean
If the scores 
occur
times, respectively, then the weighted mean is
Well-defined set
A set for which there is no doubt about
whether a particular element is included in the given set.
Whole numbers
The positive integers and zero; 
  {0, 1, 2, 3, . . .}.
Windows
A graphical environment for IBM format computers.
With replacement
If there is more than one step for an
experiment, to perform the experiment with replacement
means that the object chosen on the first step is replaced before
the next steps are completed.
Without replacement
If there is more than one step for an
experiment, to perform the experiment without replacement
means that the object chosen on the first step is not replaced
before the next steps are completed.
Word processing
The process of creating, modifying, deleting,
and formatting textual materials.
World Wide Web
A network that connects together computers
from all over the world. It is abbreviated by www.
x 5
S1w # x2
Sw
w1, w2, c, wn
x1, x2, x3, c, xn
WYSIWYG:
An acronym for What You See Is What You Get.
x-axis
The horizontal axis in a Cartesian coordinate system.
x-intercept
The place where a graph passes through the x-axis.
y-axis
The vertical axis in a Cartesian coordinate system.
y-intercept
The place where a graph passes through the y-axis.
For a line
it is the point 
.
Yard
A linear measure in the United States system; it has the
same length as 3 ft.
Zero
The number that separates the positive and negative
numbers; it is also called the identity element for addition; that
is, it satisfies the property that
for all numbers x.
Zero matrix
A matrix with all entries equal to 0.
Zero multiplication
If a is any real number, then
.
Zero-one matrix
A square matrix in which the entries
symbolize the occurrence of some facet or event with a 1 and
the nonoccurrence with a 0.
Zero-product rule
If 
, then either 
or 
.
z-score
A measure to determine the distance (in terms of standard
deviations) that a given score is from the mean of a distribution.
b 5 0
a 5 0
a # b 5 0
a # 0 5 0 # a 5 0
x 1 0 5 0 1 x 5 x
10, b2
y 5 mx 1 b
G26
Appendix A
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix
B
Selected Answers
39. 54
41. 4 mm
43. Answers vary. Put one lump in the first cup, four
lumps in the second cup, and 5 lumps in the third cup. Now, put the first 
cup (containing the lump) inside the second cup.
45. Answers vary.
47. Answers vary.
49. The fly flies 20 miles
51. 8 miles or 12 miles
53. puff
55. 1.62
57. The number of routes from the start to the finish
minus the number of routes passing through the barricade. a. 26
b. 23
c. 27
59. Answers vary.
1.2 Inductive and Deductive Reasoning, page 24
7. a. 17
b. 13
9. a. 45
b. 45
11. a. 14
b. 6
13. a. 50
b. 2
15. a. 38
b. 54
17. a. 13
b. 12
19. inductive reasoning; answers
vary 
21. 3, 6, 9, . . .
23. 5, 1, 6, 2, 7, 3, 8, 4, 9, . . .
25. a. 625
b. 62,500
27.
A1
2
7
6
9
5
1
4
3
8
deductive reasoning
47. probably Alabama; inductive reasoning
49. There is no door seen, so this means that the bus is heading 
west (or to the left); this is an example of deductive reasoning.
51. a. 
b. 8,888,888,888
c. 98,888,888,888
53. 
111111111555555556, so the sum is 
inductive
reasoning
55. 91 squares
57. Balance 3 with 3 to determine which
group is heaver. Repeat with the heavier group.
59. a. One diagonal is
38,307; other sums are 21,609.
b. One diagonal is 13,546,875; other
sums are 20,966,014.
1.3 Scientific Notation and Estimation, page 40
7. a. 
3.2 03
b. 
c. 
6.4 10
9. a. 
b. 
; 6.3 05
c. 
11. a. 49
b. 72,000,000,000
c. 4,560
13. a. 216
b. 0.00000 041
c. 0.00000 048
15. 
17. 
19. 3,600,000
21. 0.00000 003 
Estimates in Problems 23–30 may vary.
23. 35 mi
25. Estimate
27. Estimate
29. Estimate 
10,000 hours; 
days; estimate one year.
31. a. 
b. 
33. a. 
b. 
35. a. 
b. 1.2
37. Estimate
, so about 120 oranges.
39. Estimate 270 chairs
41. Assume 
one balloon is about 1 
and also assume a typical classroom is 
30 
so 
we
estimate that it would take 60–70 classrooms.
43. Assume there are 233
$1 bills per inch. A million dollars would form a stack about 119 yd high.
45. Assume there are 2,260,000 grains in a pound of sugar. 
grains
47. Assume that a box of chalk contains 12 four inch pieces, so one
box is about 4 ft of chalk. Also assume that a box of chalk costs about 
$1. 
miles.
49. a. Answers vary.
b. 
c. 
to 
51.
53. Assume a brick is 8 in. by 
in. by 2 in. Answers vary; the wall will contain between 27,000 and 31,000 
bricks.
55. 48 minutes, 13 seconds
57. 192 zeros
59. a. D
b. 701.8 ft2/person
31
2
3.36271772 3 1023
10387,000,000
10369,692,902
999
400,000 ft < 75
1.356 3 1017
106 4 11.5 3 1042 < 67;
50 ft 3 10 ft 5 15,000 ft3,
ft 3
ft3
10/cm2
4 3 1028
2 3 107
1.2 3 1023
3 3 102
1.2 3 109
525,600 4 60 4 24 5 365
10,000 4 25 5 400
5 
600,000 4 60
20 3 15 5 300; 23 3 15 5 345
2,000 3 500 5 1,000,000; 1,850 3 487 5 900,950
2.2 3 108; 2.5 3 1026
9.3 3 107; 3.65 3 102
3.4 3 1028; 3.4 208
6.3 3 105
5.629 3 103; 5.629 03
6.4 3 1010;
4 3 1024; 4 204
3.2 3 103;
9A1B 1 8A5B 1 6 5 55;
342 5 1156; 3342 5 111556; 33342 5 11115556; c;
9 3 54,321 2 1; 488,888
29. valid
31. valid
33. valid
35. not
valid
37. not valid
39. not valid
41. east;
deductive reasoning
43. probably Las Vegas;
inductive reasoning
45. eight persons; 
PROLOGUE 
Prologue Problem Set, page P11
9. 181
11. 1,099
13. February and March
15. 30
17. March 2011
19. 119
21. 945
23.
25. 2
27. a. tetrahedron
b. cube
(hexahedron)
c. octahedron
d. dodecahedron
e. icosahedron
29. 1,499
31. More than a million trees must be cut down to print a tril-
lion one-dollar bills.
33. The area is approximately 13.7 in.2.
35.
37. She had $22 at the start of the first day.
39. The cost is $390 if 100
make the trip.
41. Let x be the number of weeks enrolled, and y be the 
total cost. Then 
. The graph is shown.
y 5 45110 2 x2
1
3
3
8
43. The rate at which percentage of alcohol is changing with respect to 
time is 
.
45. There are 33 shortest paths.
47. It will 
take until March 2125.
49.
51. Answers vary; at least three
cubes can be seen.
53.
55. This pattern of numbers has the property
that the sum of the numbers in any row, column, or diagonal is the same
(namely, 15).
57. The population in 2000 was 153,000. The graph is shown. 
59.
dollars (more than a billion dollars) 
230 2 1
1
120
b 5 22/3
dC
dt 5 20.15e2t/2
0
2
4
6
8
10
100
200
300
400
500
x
y
0
4
8
12
16
20
125,000
250,000
375,000
500,000
t
P
CHAPTER 1
1.1 Problem Solving, page 14
5. first diagonal
7. Yes; yes; answer is the same because the triangle is
symmetric.
9. a. 35
b. 56
11. 2 up, 3 over; 10 paths
13. 4 up, 
6 over; 210 paths
15. 4 down, 3 over; 35 paths
17. 2 up, 4 over; 15
paths
19. Answers vary.
21. There is a total of 27 boxes.
23. The
blind person says, “I need a pair of scissors.”
25. a. 2
b. 4
c. 8
d. 16
27. 49 paths
29. 284 paths
31. 12
33. 7
35. 11
37. 12:30
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

33. 32 subsets; yes
35. 
37. 
39. a. ƒ Aƒ  3, ƒ Bƒ  1, ƒ C ƒ  3, ƒ D ƒ  1, ƒ E ƒ  1, ƒ F ƒ  1
b. A 4 C; B 4 D 4 E 4 F
c. A  C; D  E  F
41. a. true
b. false
43. a. true
b. false
45. true
47. true
49. false
51. false
53. true
55. Answers vary; the set of real
numbers, or the set of people alive in China today.
57. There will be
five different ways, since each group of four will have one missing person.
59. The set of Chevrolets is a subset of the set of automobiles.
2.2 Operations with Sets, page 62
3. a. or
b. and
c. not
5. {2, 6, 8, 10}
7. {2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9}
9. {3, 4, 5}
11. {1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10}
13. {2, 4, 6, 8, 10}
15. {2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10}
17. {1, 3, 5, 7, 9}
19. {x ƒ x is a nonzero
integer}
21. 
23. 
25. 
27. U
29. {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
31. {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7}
33. {5}
35. {5, 6, 7}
37. {1, 2, 4, 6}
39. {1, 2, 3, 4}
41. {1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7}
43. A
45. A
B
47.
49. 
51. 
53. yes
55. 3
57. 51,000
59. 2n regions 
U
Y
U
X
Y
A d B
 d 
Automobiles
Chevrolets
30
or under
U
Over 30
Drivers
31. 
33. 
35. 
37. 
39. 
I: 24,985,000
II: 203,825,000
III: 15,780,000
IV: 5,260,000
V: 1,315,000
VI: 2,630,000
VII: 0
VIII: 9,205,000
41. Steffi Graf, II; Michael Stich, V; Martina Navratilova, III; Stefan
Edberg, V; Chris Evert Lloyd, VI; Boris Becker, V; Evonne Goolagong, II;
Pat Cash, V; Virginia Wade, II; John McEnroe, IV
43.
B
45. [(
)
C]
[(A
B)
C]
47. 
It is true. 
A
U
=
U
B
A
B
 d 
 d 
´
 d 
A ´ B
 d 
A
Black
White
Hispanic
U
I
II
III
V
IV
VI
VII
VIII
Black
Blue
Brown
U
Dogs
U
Cats
Animals
A
U
C
B
A
U
C
B
A2
Selected Answers
Chapter 1 Review Questions, page 44
1. Understand the problem, devise a plan, carry out the plan, and then look
back.
2. 126
3. 330 paths
4. 12,345,678,987,654,321
5. Order of
operations: (1) First, perform any operations enclosed in parentheses. 
(2) Next, perform multiplications and divisions as they occur by working
from left to right. (3) Finally, perform additions and subtractions as they
occur by working from left to right.
6. The scientific notation for a number
is that number written as a power of 10 times another number x, such that
7. Inductive reasoning; the answer was found by looking at
the pattern of questions.
8. Answers vary.
a.
or 
9.223372037E18
b.
1.454258675E12
9. C
10. 
hr. This is 
approximately 
hr book. Could not possibly be a complete transcription of
each book.
11. Answers vary. It is larger than the capacity of all of lakes
behind all the world’s dams, even the world’s largest one to be completed
in 2009 on the Yangzi River in China.
12. Each person’s share is about 
$44,516.
13. Arrange the cards as 
.
14. Fill the classroom 
with $100 bills; it will take 857 classrooms.
15. not valid
16. not valid
17. valid
18. valid
19. Answers vary.
20. 
ends in 1.
CHAPTER 2
2.1 Sets, Subsets, and Venn Diagrams, page 57
9. a. well defined
b. not well defined
11. a. not well defined
b. not well defined
13. a. {m, a, t, h, e, i, c, s}
b. {Barack Obama}
15. a. {7, 8, 9, 10, . . .}
b. {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
17. a. {p, i, e}
b. {151,
152, 153, . . .} Answers to Problems 19–24 may vary.
19. counting
numbers less than 10
21. multiples of 10 between 0 and 101
23. odd
numbers between 100 and 170
25. the set of all numbers, x, such that x is
an odd counting number; {1, 3, 5, 7, . . .}
27. the set of all natural num-
bers, x, except 8; {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, . . .}
29. The set of all whole
numbers, x, such that x is less than 8; {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}
31. a. 
b.
c.
d.
e.
52, 3, 46, 51, 2, 3, 46
51, 2, 36, 51, 2, 46, 51, 3, 46,
53, 46,
 51, 26, 51, 36, 51, 46, 52, 36, 52, 46,
[, 516, 526, 536, 546,
51, 2, 36
52, 36,
526, 536, 51, 26, 51, 36,
[, 516, 
[, 516, 526, 51, 26
[, 516
[
71000
£
2 7 6
9 5 1
4 3 8
§
/
23
4
3
4 hr 3 365 5 273.75

6
EE
6.34

18
EE
9.22
ENTER
63
^
2

63
yx
2
1 # x , 10.
2.3 Applications of Sets, page 70
1.

and 

3. {3, 5}
5. {7}
7. {5, 6, 7}
9. {1, 2, 4, 6, 7}
11.
13.
15.
17.
19. 
21. 
23. 
25. 
27. 
29. 
A
U
C
B
B
A
U
C
C
B
A
U
U
A
B
C
U
A
B
U
A
B
Y
 d 
X
X ´  Y     
X  d  Y
X ´ Y 
X ´ Y
X d Y 
X d Y
 X ´ Y
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A3
57. 
59. a. region 32
b. region 2 
2.4 Finite and Infinite Sets, page 77
5. A
B  {(c, w), (c, x), (d, w), (d, x), (f, w), (f, x)}
7. {(1, a), (1, b),
(1, c), (2, a), (2, b), (2, c), (3, a), (3, b), (3, c), (4, a), (4, b), (4, c), (5, a),
(5, b), (5, c)}
9. {(2, a), (2, e), (2, i), (2, o), (2, u), (3, a), (3, e), (3, i),
(3, o), (3, u), (4, a), (4, e), (4, i), (4, o), (4, u)}
11.
13.
15.
17. 0
19. 
21.
23. 
25. 
27. 5,000
29. {m, a, t}; {m, a, t}; there are others.
{1, 2, 3}; {3, 2,1} 
31. {1, 
2, . . . ,  n,
n  1, . . . , 
353, 354, 355, 356 . . . , 586,
587}
,
{550, 551, ..., n549, n 550, . . . , 902, 903}
Thus, the sets do not have the same cardinality. 
33. a. finite
b. infinite
35. {1,
2,
3, . . . ,
n, . . .}
{1, 2, 3, . . . , n, . . .}
Since these sets can be put into a one-to-one correspondence, they
have the same cardinality—namely, 
. 
37. {1, 2, 3, . . . , n, . . .}
{ ,
, . . . , , . . .}
Since these sets can be put into a one-to-one correspondence, they
have the same cardinality—namely, 
. 
u0
1
n
1
3
1
2
1
1
D
D
D
D
u 0
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
260 
u 0
460
u 0
21
85
143 
3
C
U
B
IX
II
X
A
III
IV
I
V
XI
D
VI
VII
VIII
XII
XIII
XIV
XV
XVI
49.   {0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , 
n, . . .}
{1, 2, 3, 4, . . . , n  1, . . .}
Thus,  is countably infinite.
51.  is countably infinite because it can be put into a one-to-one corre-
spondence with the counting numbers (see Example 3).
53. {2, 4, 8, . . . , 2n, . . .}
{1, 2, 3, . . . , n, . . .}
Thus, the set {2, 4, 8, 16, 32, . . .} is countably infinite.
55. If a set is uncountable, then it is infinite, by definition; the statement is
true.
57. Some infinite sets have cardinality 
. Whereas other infinite
sets may have larger cardinality; the statement is false.
59. Answers
vary; odd numbers  even numbers  counting numbers.
Chapter 2 Review Questions, page 80
1. a. {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10}
b. {9}
2. a. {1, 3, 5, 7, 8}
b. 0
3. a. 10
b. 5
4. a. 25
b. 50
5. a. {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10}
b. {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10}
c. yes, from De Morgan’s law 
6. {2, 4, 6, 8, 10}
7. {2, 4, 6, 10}
8. a.
or
b.
c.
or
d.
or
e.
or
9. a. 25
b. 41
c. 20
d. 46
10. a. 
b. 
11. a. 
b. 
12. a. 
b. U
Y
X
X
Y
U
U
X
U
X
U
X
Y
U
X
Y
#
 (
#
5
#
5
[
#
(
u 0
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
49. 
It is true. 
51. 
It is true. 
53. No, there were 102 persons polled, not 100. 
55. a. 
E  {favor Prop. 8} 
T  {favor Prop. 13}
F  {favor Prop. 5}
b. 12
c. 7 
E
T
F
U
10
2
10
8
3
1
4
12
U
=
U
Y
X
Y
X
=
U
A
C
B
U
A
C
B
39.   {0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , 
n, . . .}
{1, 2, 3, 4, . . . , n  1, . . .}
Since these sets can be put into a one-to-one correspondence, they
have the same cardinality—namely, 
. 
41. {1, 3, 5, . . . , 2n  1, . . .}
{1, 2, 3, . . . ,
n, . . .}
Since these sets can be put into a one-to-one correspondence, they
have the same cardinality—namely, 
.
43. {1, 2, 3, . . . , n, . . .}
{1, 3, 9, . . . ,  3n1, . . .}
Since these sets can be put into a one-to-one correspondence, they
have the same cardinality—namely, 
.
45.   {0, 1, 2, 3, . . . ,
n, . . .}
{1, 2, 3, 4, . . . , n  1, . . .}
Since  can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with a proper
subset of itself, it is infinite.
47. {12, 14, 16, . . . ,
n, . . .}
{14, 16, 18, . . . , n  2, . . .}
Thus, this set is infinite.
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
u 0
D
D
D
D
u 0
D
D
D
D
u 0
D
D
D
D
D
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A4
Selected Answers
15. 
The statement has been proved. 
16. a. The set of rational numbers is the set of all numbers of the 
form such that a is an integer and b is a counting number.
b. ; answers vary.
17. {5, 10, 15, . . . , 5 , . . .}
{10, 20, 30, . . . , 10 , . . .}
Since the second set is a proper subset of the first set, we see that the
set F is infinite.
18. a. {n | (
n)  }; answers vary.
b. { 1, 
2, 
3, . . . , n, . . .}
{1, 2, 3, . . . , n, . . .}
Since the first set is the set of counting numbers, it has cardinality 
;
so the given set also has cardinality 
since it can be put into a one-
to-one correspondence with the set of counting numbers.
19. 
Ten students had none of the items.
20. a. A, AB, B, A, AB, B, O, O
b. A, AB, B, A, AB, B, O
c. A, B, O
U
C
TV
B
5
5
3
2
20
10
10
15
u 0
u 0
D
D
D
D
2
n
D
D
D
D
n
2
3
a
b
5
U
U
A
C
B
A
C
B
9.
11. 
13.
15. 
17.
19. 
21.
23. If the slash through “P” means no parking, then a slash through
“No Parking” must mean park here (law of double negation). 
25. Statement: p S q; Converse: q S p
Inverse: p S q; Contrapositive: q S p
27. Statement: t S s; Converse: s S t
Inverse: t S s; Contrapositive: s S t
29. Statement: If I get paid, then I will go Saturday.
Converse: If I go Saturday, then I got paid. 
Inverse: If I do not get paid, then I will not go Saturday. 
Contrapositive: If I do not go Saturday, then I do not get paid. 
31. If it is a triangle, then it is a polygon.
33. If you are a good person,
then you will go to heaven.
35. If we make a proper use of these means
p
q
r
p  q
r
(p  q)  r
[(p  q)  r]  r 
T
T
T
T
F
F
F 
T
T
F
T
T
T
F 
T
F
T
T
F
F
F 
T
F
F
T
T
T
F 
F
T
T
T
F
F
F 
F
T
F
T
T
T
F 
F
F
T
F
F
F
F 
F
F
F
F
T
F
F 
p
q
r
p  q
(p  q)  r 
T
T
T
T
T 
T
T
F
T
T 
T
F
T
T
T 
T
F
F
T
T 
F
T
T
T
T 
F
T
F
T
T 
F
F
T
F
T 
F
F
F
F
F 
p
q
p  q
p  (p  q)
[p  (p  q)] S p
T
T
T
T
T 
T
F
T
T
T 
F
T
T
F
T 
F
F
F
F
T 
p
q
p S q
p  (p S q)
T
T
T
T 
T
F
F
T 
F
T
T
T 
F
F
T
T 
p
q
p
p  q
q
(p  q)  q 
T
T
F
F
F
F 
T
F
F
F
T
T 
F
T
T
T
F
T 
F
F
T
F
T
T 
p
q
q
p  q 
T
T
F
F 
T
F
T
T 
F
T
F
F 
F
F
T
F 
r
r
(r)
T
F
T 
F
T
F 
CHAPTER 3 
3.1 Deductive Reasoning, page 89
5. a, b, and d are statements.
7. a, b, and d are statements.
9. Claire
11. Charles, Joe
13. T
15. F
17. T
19. F
21. Some dogs do not
have fleas.
23. Some triangles are squares.
25. Some counting numbers
are not divisible by 1.
27. All integers are odd.
29. a. T
b. F
c. T
d. F
31. a. Prices or taxes will rise.
b. Prices will not rise and taxes
will rise.
c. Prices will rise or taxes will not rise.
d. Prices will not rise
or taxes will not rise.
33. a. T
b. F
c. T
d. F
35. a. T
b. F
37. a. F
b. T
39. a. T
b. T
41. e  d  t
43. t  m
45. ( j  i)  p
47. d  e
49. a. (s  t)  c
b. s  (t  c)
51. T
53. T
55. T
57. T
59. Melissa did change her mind.
13. a. 
b. 
14. 
The statement has been disproved.
U
A
C
B
U
A
C
B
?
U
X
Y
Z
U
X
Y
Z
3.2 Truth Tables and the Conditional, page 98
5.
7. p
q
p  q
(p  q)
T
T
T
F 
T
F
F
T 
F
T
F
T 
F
F
F
T 
p
q
p
p  q 
T
T
F
T 
T
F
F
F 
F
T
T
T 
F
F
T
T 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A5
which the God of Nature has placed in our power, then we are not 
weak.
37. If it is work, then it is noble.
39. T
41. T
43. a. T
b. F
c. F
45. a. F
b. T
c. T
47. (q  d) S n, where q: The qualifying
person is a child; d: This child is your dependent; n: You enter your child’s
name.
49. (b  c) S n, where b: The amount on line 32 is $86,025; c:
The amount on line 32 is less than $86,025; n: You multiply the number of
exemptions by $2,500.
51. (m  d) S s, where m: You are a student; 
d: You are a person with disabilities; s: you see line 6 of instructions.
53. a. a S (e  f)
b. (a  e) S q
c. (a  f ) S q
55. [(m  t  w  h)  s] S q
57. t S (m  s  p)
59. This is not a
statement, since it gives rise to a paradox and is neither true nor false. 
3.3 Operators and Laws of Logic, page 105
7. a. 9 hours
b. if you look at the middle sign, 10 hours; if you look at
the lower sign, 15 minutes
9. no
11. no
13. yes
15. no 
17.
19.
21. Let h: I will buy a new house; p: All provisions of the sale are clearly
understood. Not h unless p: p S h.
23. Let r: I am obligated to pay
the rent; s: I signed the contract. r because s: (r  s)  (s S r)
25. Let
m: It is a man; i: It is an island. No m is i: m S i
27. Let n: You are
nice to people on your way up; m: You will meet people on your way down.
n because m: (n  m)  (m S n).
29. Let f: The majority, by mere force
of numbers, deprives a minority of a clearly written constitutional right; r: 
Revolution is justified. If f then r: f S r. Answers to Problems 30–35 may
vary.
31. The cherries have not turned red or they are ready to be picked.
33. If Hannah watches Jon Stewart, then she watches the NBC late-night
orchestra.
35. If the money is not available, then I will not take my
vacation. 
37. p
p
(p)
p 4 (p)
T
F
T
T 
F
T
F
T 
p
q
q
p S q 
T
T
F
F 
T
F
T
T 
F
T
F
T 
F
F
T
T 
p
q
p  q
(p  q)
T
T
T
F 
T
F
T
F 
F
T
T
F 
F
F
F
T 
sublets a portion of the premises; p: Permission is obtained. Symbolic
statement: p S [(/  m)  (s  t)] 
3.4 The Nature of Proof, page 113
1. reasoning that can be written in the form [(p S q)  p] S q
3. reasoning that can be written in the form [(p S q)  (q S r)] S
(p S r)]
7. a. valid; indirect
b. invalid; fallacy of the converse
9. a. invalid; fallacy of the inverse
b. valid; direct
11. valid; direct
13. valid; transitive
15. valid; direct
17. valid; direct
19. invalid;
false chain 21. valid; indirect
23. valid; indirect
25. invalid; fallacy of
the converse
27. valid; transitive
29. valid; transitive
31. valid;
indirect
33. valid; contrapositive and transitive
35. false chain pattern
37. If you learn mathematics, then you understand human nature.
(transitive)
39. We do not go to the concert. (indirect)
41. b  0
(excluded middle)
43. We do not interfere with the publication of false
information. (indirect)
45. I will not eat that piece of pie. (indirect)
47. We will go to Europe. (transitive; direct)
49. Babies cannot manage
crocodiles. (transitive)
51. None of my poultry are officers. (transitive,
contrapositive twice, indirect)
53. Airsecond Aircraft Company suffers
financial setbacks. (direct; indirect)
55. The janitor could not have taken
the elevator because the building fuses were blown.
57. Guinea pigs do
not appreciate Beethoven.
59. This is not an easy problem. 
3.5 Problem Solving Using Logic, page 121
1. a. The playing board is an undefined term. The directions simply present
the board, but do not define it.
b. This is a stated rule of the game, so we
would call this an axiom.
c. Passing “GO” is an undefined term, because
the rules of the game simply refer to GO.
d. The “chance” cards are part of
the definitions, so this is a defined term.
e. This playing piece is simply
given as part of the game, so it qualifies as an undefined term.
3. a. The
playing pieces in Sorry are not specifically defined, so this would be an un-
defined term.
b. This is a stated rule of the game, so we would call this an
axiom.
c. “Home” is a defined term in Sorry. 
d. This is a stated rule of
the game, so we would call this an axiom.
e. This term is not defined, so it is
an undefined term.
5. a. This is a stated rule of the game, so we would call
this an axiom.
b. This is a stated rule of the game, so we would call this an
axiom.
c. It is assumed that you know what is meant by a “die,” so we take
this as an undefined term.
d. A door’s location is precisely located on the
playing board, but the notion of a door itself is not defined, so this is an unde-
fined term.
e. This is a stated rule of the game, so we would call this an
axiom.
7. a. While the number, size, and specifications of permitted play-
ers are all part of the rules, the word “player” is not defined, so this is an
undefined term.
b. This is a stated rule of the game, so we would call this
an axiom.
c. This is a defined term.
d. This is a defined term.
e. This is a
consequence of the rules of the game, so this would be considered a theorem. 
9.
11.
13. Statements
Reasons 
MIIIUUIIIII
Given 
MIIIIIIII
Deletion (Rule 4) 
MIIUU
Substitution (Rule 3) 
MII
Deletion (Rule 4) 
MIIU
Addition (Rule 1)
Statements
Reasons 
MI
Given 
MII
Doubling (Rule 2) 
MIIII
Doubling (Rule 2) 
MIIIIIIII
Doubling (Rule 2) 
MIUIU
Substitution (Rule 3) 
Statements
Reasons 
MIII
Given 
MIIIIII
Doubling (Rule 2) 
MUU
Substitution (Rule 3) 
M
Deletion (Rule 4) 
Thus, (p S q) 3 (p  q). 
43. (p S q) 3 (p  q) 3 (p)  (q) 3 p  q
45. (p S q) 3 [(p)  q] 3 p  (q) 3 p  q
47. Jane did not go to the basketball game and she did not go to the 
soccer game.
49. Missy is on time or she did not miss the boat.
51. You
are out of Schlitz and you have beer.
53. x  5  4 and x  1.
55. x  1
and y  2, and 2x  3y  8.
57. Let d: You purchase your ticket between
January 5 and February 15; f: You fly round trip between February 20 and
May 3; m: You depart on Monday; t: You depart on Tuesday; w: You depart
on Wednesday; h: You return on Tuesday; i: You return on Wednesday; j:
You return on Thursday; s: You stay over a Saturday night; e: You obtain 40%
off regular fare. Symbolic statement: [d  f  (m  t  w)  (h  i  j)
 s] S e
59. Let /: The tenant lets the premises; m: The tenant lets a
portion of the premises; s: The tenant sublets the premises; t: The tenant
Thus, p 3 (p). 
39.
p
q p  q (p  q) p
q p  q (p  q) 4 (p  q)
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
Thus, (p  q) 3 p  q. 
41. p
q
p S q
p
p  q
(p S q) 4 (p  q)
T
T
T
F
T
T 
T
F
F
F
F
T 
F
T
T
T
T
T 
F
F
T
T
T
T 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A6
Selected Answers
15.
17. 
19.
21. The first is a knight and the second is also a knight.
23. Bob is a
knave and Cary is a knight.
25. white
27. need to choose three socks
29. There must be 49 red and 1 yellow.
31. Alice has an ace on her head.
33. Ben and Cole have kings and Alice has a lower card.
35. Ben says, 
“I lose” and Cole says, “I win.” Cole has a queen and the others have lower
cards. You should take Problems 37–54 together.
37. 6
39. 3
41. 6
43. 7
45. 3
47. 3
49. 4
51. 2
53. 2
55. Moe knows that his hat
must be black.
57. Gary was 17 and had 15 marbles; Harry was 10 and
had 12 marbles; Iggy was 3 and had 12 marbles; Jack was 18 and had
9 marbles. They shot in the order of Gary, Jack, Harry, and then Iggy.
59. three weighings
3.6 Logic Circuits, page 128
5. light
7. AND-gate
9. NOT-gate
Answers to Problems 10–15 may
vary.
11. p
13. p or q; p  q
15. p  q
17.
19.
21. p  q
23. p  q
p
q
~
on
off
p
on
off
q
p
q
+
on
off
q
off
on
p
p
q
q
p  q
(p  q)
T
T
F
T
F 
T
F
T
T
F 
F
T
F
F
T 
F
F
T
T
F 
p
q
p
p  q 
T
T
F
F 
T
F
F
F 
F
T
T
T 
F
F
T
F 
Statements
Reasons 
AE
Given 
AEE
Rule 1 
A
Rule 5 
Statements
Reasons 
AI
Given 
AIII
Rule 1 
AE
Rule 4 
AEE
Rule 1
A
Rule 5 
Statements
Reasons 
EA
Given 
AE
Rule 3
AEE
Rule 1 
A
Rule 5 
25. (p  q)
27. q S p
29. q S p (note that this is the contrapositive of Problem 28, so the truth
table and circuits are the same.)
31. (q S p) 
33. (p  q)  r
35. (p  q) 
37. (p  q)  (p  q) 
39.
on
off
on
on
off
off
q
p
r
p
q
r
p  q
(p  q)  r
T
T
T
T
T 
T
T
F
T
T 
T
F
T
T
T 
T
F
F
T
T 
F
T
T
T
T 
F
T
F
T
T 
F
F
T
F
T 
F
F
F
F
F 
p
q
p
q
+
+
~
~
~
p
q
~
+
p
q
r
+
on
off
p
on
off
q
p
q
q S p
(q S p)
T
T
T
F 
T
F
T
F 
F
T
F
T 
F
F
T
F 
on
off
p
on
off
q
p
q
p
q S p
T
T
F
F 
T
F
F
T 
F
T
T
T 
F
F
T
T 
on
off
p
on
off
q
p
q
q S p 
T
T
T 
T
F
T 
F
T
F 
F
F
T 
~
p
q
on
off
p
on
off
q
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A7
41. 
43.
45.
Note the circuit for this problem is the same as the one for Problem 38.
This fact is sometimes called the associative property for conjunction. 
That is, 
(p  q)  r  p  (q  r)
47. Let b1: the first rest room is occupied; b2: the second rest room is
occupied; b3: the third rest room is occupied. 
a. (b1  b2)  b3; note that this is equivalent to b1  (b2  b3). 
b.
c.
49. Let a: the thermostat is set on automatic mode; d: all the doors are
closed; m: the thermostat is set on manual mode; c: the proper authorization
code has been entered. A logical statement might be: (a  d)  (m  c). 
b1
b2
b3
b1  b2
(b1  b2)  b3
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F 
p
q
r
q  r
p  (q  r)
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
p
q
r
p  q
(p  q)  r
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
p
q
r
q  r
p  (q  r)
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
51.
53.
(p S q) 3 (p  q)
55. Notice that p S q 3 p  q.
57. a.
b. $140,000 
59. Let the committee members be a, b, and c, respectively. Light on repre-
sents a majority. Light is on for a yea majority and light is off otherwise. 
Chapter 3 Review Questions, page 130
1. a. A logical statement is a declarative sentence that is either true or
false.
b. A tautology is a logical statement in which the conclusion is
equivalent to its premise.
c. (p S q) 4 (q S p) or, in words: 
A conditional may always be replaced by its contrapositive without having
its truth value affected. 
2. p
q
p
p  q
p  q
p S q
p 4 q
T
T
F
T
T
T
T 
T
F
F
F
T
F
F 
F
T
T
F
T
T
F 
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
yea
nay
yea
nay
b
yea
nay
c
c
yea
nay
a
yea
nay
b
~
~
p
q
p
p
~
~
+
p
q
~
+
~
p
q
p S q
p
p  q
(p S q) 4 (p  q)
T
T
T
F
T
T 
T
F
F
F
F
T 
F
T
T
T
T
T 
F
F
T
T
T
T 
on
on
off
off
on
off
off
d
a
m
on
c
on
on
on
off
off
off
q
r
p
on
on
off
off
on
off
q
r
p
on
off
on
off
q
p
on
off
r
on
off
on
off
b2
b3
on
off
b1
p
q
~
+
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A8
Selected Answers
3. p
q
p  q
(p  q) 
T
T
T
F 
T
F
F
T 
F
T
F
T 
F
F
F
T 
4.
5.
6.
7.
8. Answers vary. 
If you study hard, then you will get an A. 
You do not get an A. 
Therefore, you did not study hard.
9. Answers vary; fallacy of the converse, fallacy of the inverse, or false
chain pattern; for example: 
If you study hard, then you will get an A. 
You do not study hard, so you do not get an A. (fallacy of the inverse.)
10. Yes; it is indirect reasoning.
11. a. Some birds do not have feathers.
b. No apples are rotten.
c. Some cars have two wheels. d. All smart
people attend college.
e. You go on Tuesday and you can win the lottery.
12. a. T
b. T
c. T
d. T
e. T
13. a. If P is a prime number, then
P  2 is a prime number.
b. Either P or P  2 is a prime number.
14. a. Let p: This machine is a computer; q: This machine is capable of
self-direction. p S q
b. Contrapositive: (q) S p; q S p. If this
machine is capable of self-direction, then it is not a computer.
15. Let p:
There are a finite number of primes; q: There is some natural number,
greater than 1, that is not divisible by any prime. Then the argument in
symbolic form is: 
p S q
q
______
‹ p
Conclusion: There are infinitely many primes (assuming that “not a finite
number” is the same as “infinitely many”). This is indirect reasoning. 
16. a.
on
off
p
on
off
q
p
q
p S q
(p S q)  p
[(p S q)  p] S q
T
T
T
T
T 
T
F
F
F
T 
F
T
T
F
T 
F
F
T
F
T
p S q
p______
‹ q
p q p q p  q (p  q) p  q (p  q) 4 (p  q) 
T T
F
F
T
F
F
T 
T F
F
T
F
T
T
T 
F T
T
F
F
T
T
T 
F F
T
T
F
T
T
T 
p
q
r
p  q
(p  q)  r
[( p  q)  r] S p
T
T
T
T
T
T 
T
T
F
T
F
T 
T
F
T
F
F
T 
T
F
F
F
F
T 
F
T
T
F
F
T 
F
T
F
F
F
T 
F
F
T
F
F
T 
F
F
F
F
F
T 
p q q p  q p (p  q)  p [(p  q)  p] S q
T T
F
T
F
F
T 
T F
T
T
F
F
T 
F T
F
F
T
F
T 
F F
T
T
T
T
T 
b. 
17. I do not attend to my duties.
18. No prune is an artificial sweetener.
19. All squares are polygons.
20. North: Maureen (baker); East: Terry
(hiker); South: Josie (gardener); West: Warren (surfer) 
p
q
p
[(p ` q) ` p]
CHAPTER 4
4.1 Early Numeration Systems, page 143
7. a. Roman, Egyptian
b. Roman, Babylonian
c. Egyptian, Roman,
Babylonian
d. Egyptian, Roman, Babylonian
e. Roman, Babylonian
f. Roman
9. a. 
b. 100,010
11. a. 
b.
13. a. 1,100
b. 1,997
15. a. 1,999
b. 2,001
17. a. 7,600
b. 9,712
19. a. 71
b. 671
21. a. 47
b. 25
23. 133
25. 1
27. 
1
100
241
2
2
3
29. 
31. 
33. LXXV
35. DXXI
37. MMVII
39. 
41.
43.
45.
47.
49. 
51. VIII
53. LXXXIX
55. MMMCMXCIX
57. a. MDCLXVI
b. MCDXLIV
59.
4.2 Hindu–Arabic Numeration System, page 147
9. 5 units
11. 5 hundred-thousandths
13. 5 thousandths
15. a. 100,000
b. 1,000
17. a. 0.0001
b. 0.001
19. a. 5,000
b. 500
21. a. 0.06
b. 0.00009
23. 10,234
25. 521,658
27. 7,000,000.03
29. 500,457.34
31. 20,600.40769
33. a. 9  102  6  103  4  104  2  105  1  106
b. 2  101  7  100  5  101  7  102  2  103 
35. a. 6  103  2  102  4  101  5  100
b. 2  106  3  105  5  103  6  102  8  101  1  100
37. 5  106  2  107  7  108
39. 8  102  9  101  3  100 1  104
41. 6  105  7  104  8  103  1  102
43. 5  104  7  103
 2  102  8  101  5  100  9  101
 3  102  6  103  1  104
45. 3,201
47. 5,001,005
49. 8,009,026
51.
53.
55.
by
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A9
57.
59. 22, 23, 24, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 40, . . .
4.3 Different Numeration Systems, page 152
5. a. 9
b. 14five
c. 100three
d. 11eight
e. 1001two
f. 10nine
7. 6  82  4  81  3  80
9. 1  25  1  24  1  22  1  21
 1  20  1  21  1  24
11. 6  87  4  86  2  85
 5  81  1  80
13. 3  45  2  44  3  43  2  41
15. 3  50  4  51  2  53  3  54  1  55
17. 343
19. 4,307
21. 116
23. 11.625
25. 807
27. 66
29. 351.125
31. a. 10344five
b. 21310four
33. a. 3122five
b. 1147eight
35. a. 1000000000two
b. 1002110three
37. a. 1132eight
b. 1030four 
39. 7 weeks, 3 days
41. 4 ft, 7 in.
43. 3 gross, 5 doz, 8 units
45. 84  314five, so eight coins are needed
47. 954twelve  1,360 pencils
49. 44  62seven; 6 weeks, 2 days
51. 29  15twenty-four; 1 day, 5 hours
53. 6 years, 3 months
55. 16 ft, 1 in.
57. 4 gross, 6 dozen, 3 units
59. 4 years, 11 months, 6 days
4.4 Binary Numeration System, page 157
3. 39
5. 167
7. 13
9. 11
11. 29
13. 27
15. 99
17. 184
19. 1101two
21. 100011two
23. 110011two
25. 1000000two
27. 10000000two
29. 1100011011two
31. 68 79
33. 69 78 68
35. HAVE
37. STUDY
39. 101two
41. 1101two
43. 10two 
45. 100011two
47. The computer is correct because there must be either
war or peace.
49. a. 101two
b. 110two
51. a. 001 110 111two 
b. 110 010 100two
53. a. 5eight
b. 7eight
55. 007750eight 
57. 773521eight
4.5 History of Calculating Devices, page 168
11. a. 27
b. 63
c. 54
13. a. 243
b. 432
c. 504
15. ENIAC, UNIVAC, Cray, Altair, Apple
Answers to Problems 16–33 may vary.
17. Aristophanes developed a finger-counting system about 500 B.C.
19. Babbage built a calculating machine in the 19th century.
21. Berry
helped Atanasoff build the first computer.
23. Cray developed the first
supercomputer.
25. Engelbart invented the computer mouse.
27. Jobs was the cofounder of Apple Computer and codesigned the 
Apple II computer.
29. Leibniz built a calculating device in 1695.
31. Napier invented a calculating device to do multiplication (in 1617).
33. Wozniak codesigned the Apple II computer.
35. yes; speed,
complicated computations
37. yes; speed, repetition
39. yes;
repetition 41. yes; ability to make corrections easily
43. yes (but not
completely); it can help with some of the technical aspects
45. yes;
speed, complicated computations, repetition
47. E
49. D 
Chapter 4 Review Questions, page 171
1. Answers vary. The position in which the individual digits are listed is
relevant; examples will vary.
2. Answers vary. Addition is easier in a
simple grouping system; examples will vary.
3. Answers vary. It uses ten
symbols; it is positional; it has a placeholder symbol (0); and it uses 10 as
its basic unit for grouping.
4. Answers vary. Should include finger
calculating, Napier’s rods, Pascal’s calculator, Leibniz’ reckoning machine,
Babbage’s difference and analytic engines, ENIAC, UNIVAC, Atanasoff’s
and Eckert and Mauchly’s computers, and the dispute they had in proving
their position in the history of computers. Should also include the role and
impact of the Apple and Macintosh computers, as well as the supercomput-
ers (such as the Cray).
5. Answers vary. Should include illegal (breaking
into another’s computer, adding, modifying, or destroying information;
copying programs without authorization or permission) and ignorance 
(assuming that output information is correct, or not using software for
purposes for which it was intended).
6. Answers vary.
a. the physical
components (mechanical, magnetic, electronic) of a computer system
b. the routine programs, and associated documentation in a computer sys-
tem
c. the process of creating, modifying, deleting, and formatting text
and materials
d. a system for communication between computers using
electronic cables, phone lines, or wireless devices
e. electronic mail—
that is, messages sent along computer modems
f. Random-Access
Memory or memory where each location is uniformly accessible, often
used for the storage of a program and data being processed
g. an
electronic place to exchange information with others, usually on a particu-
lar topic
h. a computer component that reads and stores data
7. 109
8. 4  102  3  101  6  100  2  101  1  105
9. 5  82  2  81  3  80
10. 1  26  1  23  1  22  1  21
11. 4,020,005.62
12. 29
13. 123
14. 17
15. 1,177
16. 1100two
17. 110100two
18. 11111010111two
19. 11110100001001000000two
20. a. 92Etwelve
b. 400five 
CHAPTER 5
5.1 Natural Numbers, page 180
11. a. 4  4  4
b. 3  3  3  3
13. a. 184  184
b. 2  2 
 2 (a total of 184 terms)
15. a. y  y  y 
 y 
(a total of x terms)
b. x  x  x 
 x (a total of y terms)
17. commutative
19. associative
21. commutative
23. commutative
25. commutative
27. commutative
29. none are associative
31. Answers vary; dictionary definitions are often circular.
33. a. i
b. 1
c. 1
d. i
e. i
f. 1
35. Answers vary; yes
37. Answers vary;
a. yes
b. yes
39. yes; answers vary
41. a. n
b. ~
c. yes; no [~ • ^  ^ • ~]
d. yes
43. Check: a T (b S c)  (a T b) S (a T c). Try several examples; it holds.
45. a. 5  (100  1)  500  5  495
b. 4  (90  2)  360  8  352
c. 8  (50  2)  400  16  416
47. yes
49. yes; even  even  even
51. yes; odd  odd  odd
53. yes; let a and b be any elements in S. Then,
a } b  0  a  1  b  b and we know that b is an element of S.
55. It is
commutative but not associative: 2 
3  10 and 3
2  10; try other 
examples. (2 
3) 
4  2 
(3 
4)
57. yes
59. Answers vary; 
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  1
5.2 Prime Numbers, page 194
7. a. prime; use sieve
b. not prime; 3  19
c. not prime; only 1 
divisor
d. prime; check primes under 45
9. a. prime; use sieve
b. prime; use sieve
c. not prime; 32  19
d. not prime; 32  223 
11. a. T
b. F
c. T
d. F
13. a. F
b. T
c. T
d. T
15. Use the
sieve of Eratosthenes; you need only to cross out the multiples of primes
up to 17. The list of primes is: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41,
43, 47, 53, 59, 61, 67, 71, 73, 79, 83, 89, 97, 101, 103, 107, 109, 113, 127,
131, 137, 139, 149, 151, 157, 163, 167, 173, 179, 181, 191, 193, 197, 199,
211, 223, 227, 229, 233, 239, 241, 251, 257, 263, 269, 271, 277, 281, 283,
and 293.
17. a. 23  3
b. 2  3  5
c. 22  3  52
d. 24  32
19. a. 23  3  5
b. 2  32  5
c. 3  52
d. 3  52  13
21. prime
23. prime
25. 13  29
27. 3  5  7
29. prime
31. 32  5  7
33. 34  7
35. 19  151
37. 12; 360
39. 3; 2,052
41. 1; 252
43. 15; 1,800
45. The least common multiple of 6 and 8 is 24, so the
next night off together is in 3 weeks, 3 days.
47. Answers vary.
49. 1, 3, 7, 9, 13, 15, 21, 25, 31, 33, 37, 43, 45, 49, 51, 63, 67, 69, 73, 75,
79, 87, 93, and 99
51. Answers vary.
53. a. yes
b. yes
c. yes
55. 2  3  5  7  11  13  1  30,031, which is not prime, 
since 30,031  59  509
57. Answers vary; some other possibilities are:
2, 17, 37, 101, 197, 257, 401, 577, 677, 1297, 1601, 2917, 3137, 4357,
5477, 7057, 8101, 8837. A computer could also be used to answer this
question.
59. If N  5, 251 (25  1)  496.
5.3 Integers, page 203
7. a. 30
b. 30
c. 30
d. 0
9. a. 8
b. 2
11. a. 10
b. 4
13. a. 7
b. 12
15. a. 3
b. 3
17. a. 18
b. 20
19. a. 70
b. 70
21. a. 3
b. 7
23. a. 132
b. 1
25. a. 56
|
|
|
|
|
|
p
p
p
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b. 75
27. a. 4
b. 4
29. a. 12
b. 15
31. a. 150
b. 19
33. a. 5
b. 10
35. a. 0
b. 8
37. a. 0
b. 23
39. a. 7
b. 0
41. a. 8 b. 2
43. a. 6
b. 7
45. a. 1
b. 22
47. a. 4
b. 16
49. a. 44
b. 16
51. a. 1
b. 1
c. 1
d. 1
e. 1
f. 1
53. a. 1
b. 1
c. 1
d. 1
e. 1
f. 1
55. a. An operation ~ is
commutative for a set S if a ~ b  b ~ a for all elements a and b in S.
b.
yes
c. no
d. yes
e. no
59. 12345668765433 
5.4 Rational Numbers, page 210
7. a.
b.
9. a. 2
b. 2
11. a. 3
b.
13. a.
b.
15. a.
b. 
17. a.
b. 
19. a.
b.
21. a.
b.
23. a.
b.
25. a.
b.
27. a.
b.
29. a. 1
b. 1
31. a. 36
b. 25
33. a.
b.
35. a.
b.
37. a. 20
b. 6
39. a.
b.
41. a.
b.
43. 
45. 
47. 
55. 
57. 


or

59. It checks. 
5.5 Irrational Numbers, page 218
7. true
9. a. 30
b. 36
c. 807
d. 169
11. a. a
b. xy
c. 4b
d. 40w
13. a. irrational; 3.162
b. irrational; 5.477
c. irrational; 9.870
d. irrational; 7.389
15. a. rational; 13
b. rational; 20
c. irrational; 23.141
d. irrational; 22.459
17. a. rational; 32
b. rational; 44
c. irrational; 1.772
d. irrational; 1.253
19. a. 10
b. 20
c. 8
d. 21
21. a.
b.
c.
d.
23. a.
b. 
c.
d.
25. a. simplified
b. x  2 
27. a. 10
b. 0
29. a. 3 
b. 2 
31. a. 1  3
b. 3 
33. a.
b.
35.
37.
39. 24 ft
41. 10 ft
43. 
in. or 2
in.
45. 200 ft
47. 15 ft
49. Answers vary;
1.2323323332 . . .
51. Answers vary; 0.0919919991 . . . 53. Solution
comes from Pythagorean theorem.
a. 2-in. square
b. same
c. 7-in.
square
d. 9-in. square
e. 15-in. square
55. 
57. Answers vary; any number can be written as the sum of three triangular
numbers. He must have meant 3 or fewer triangular numbers because to
represent 2, for example, we write 1  1.
59. Consider the second
diagonal: 1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, . . . . If we take the sum of any 2 adjacent terms,
we obtain square numbers: 4, 9, 16, 25, . . . . (Note: Don’t forget that we start
counting with the 0th diagonal.) 
5.6 Groups, Fields, and Real Numbers, page 228
5. Let  be any set, let ~ be any operation, and let a, b, and c be any
elements of . We say that  is a group for the operation of ~ if the
8
 11
 11
10
9
9
7
6
10
 7
8
9
22
28
6  237
1  219
6
1
4x25xy
2x
5y2y
2x
2x
23
25
22
1
2210
2
525
1
323
1
222
1
7221
1
5215
1
323
1
222
210
235
27
210
1
20 
1
120
1
2
1
8  1
10
1
3
67
120
3
4  1
2  1
4
10,573
13,020
971
3,060
2,137
10,800
3
4
3
4
39
5
11
15
15
56
80
27
4
45
18
35
1
20
10
21
7
10
8
15
7
27
20
7
71
63
1
9
5
6
92
105
7
8
17
21
3
20
6
35
1
3
1
8
2
3
1
4
1
5
following properties are satisfied: 1. The set  is closed for ~: (a ~ b)
.
2. The set  is associative for ~: (a ~ b) ~ c  a ~ (b ~ c). 3. The set  sat-
isfies the identity for ~: There exists a number I
 so that
x ~ I  I ~ x  x for every
. 4. The set  satisfies the inverse for ~:
For each
, there exists a corresponding 
so that
x ~ x1  x1 ~ x  I, where I is the identity element in .
7. a. , , , 
b. , 
c.
, 
d.
, 
e. , 
f. , 
g. , 
h. , , , 
i. , , 
9. a. 1.5
b. 0.7
c. 0.6
d. 1.8
11. a. 0.
b. 
c. 5
d.
13. a.
b.
15. a.
b.
17. a.
b.
19. a. 
b.
21. a. 3.179
b. 5.504
c. 1.901
d. 6.31
23. a. 0.13112
b. 65.415
c. 12.4
d. 0.85
25. a. 7.46
b. 5.15
c. 72.6
d. 45.96
27. a. commutative
b. distributive
29. a. commutative
b. associative
31. identity
33. x
35. no
37.  is not a group forsince it is not closed.
39.  is not a group for  since the inverse property is not satisfied.
41.  is not a group for  since the inverse property is not satisfied.
43.  is not a group for  since there is no multiplicative inverse for the
rational number 0. 
45. a.
b. 
c. Operation : not closed, associative, identity is 1, no inverse property,
commutative; Operation *: not closed, not associative, no identity, no in-
verse property, not commutative
Answers to Problems 46–50 may vary.
47. 2.5; 
49. 4. ; 4.545545554 . . .
51. {
, 
. . .}
53. a ~ b  ab
55. a ~ b  a  b  1 
57. a ~ b  2(a  b)
59. a ~ b  a2  1 
5.7 Discrete Mathematics, page 238
5. a. 3
b. 10
c. 3
d. 2
7. a. 12
b. 8
c. 8
d. 3
9. a. 8
b. 1
11. a. T
b. F
13. a. T
b. T
15. a. T
b. T
17. a. 0, (mod 5)
b. 8, (mod 12)
c. 2, (mod 5)
d. 3, (mod 5)
19. a. 2, (mod 5)
b. 2, (mod 8)
21. a. 3, (mod 5)
b. 10, (mod 11)
23. a. 4, (mod 7)
b. 4, (mod 5)
25. a. 5, (mod 6)
b. 3, (mod 7) 
27. a. 1, 3, (mod 4)
b. 2, (mod 9)
29. a. 0, (mod 4)
b. 2, (mod 4)
31. all x’s (mod 2)
33. a. Sunday
b. Thursday
c. Wednesday
d. Monday
35. The possible distances are 4, 14, 24, 34, . . . or 
9, 19, 29, 39, . . . .
37. She lives 14 miles from your house.
39. It is a group for addition modulo 7.
1
4, 3
4, 1
5, 2
5, 3
5, 4
5, 1
6, 5
6, 1
7, 2
7, 
1
2, 1
3, 2
3
5
2p
3
* 
1
2
3
4
1
2
2
2
2
2
4
4
4
4
3
6
6
6
6
4
8
8
8
8

1
2
3
4
1
1
2
3
4
2
2
4
6
8
3
3
6
9
12
4
4
8
12
16
139
20
153
10
63
100
987
10
117
500
9
20
4
5
1
2
1.09
2.153846
6


x21 [ 
x  
x  


A10
Selected Answers
41.

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0 
2
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1 
3
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2 
4
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3 
5
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4 
6
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5 
7
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6 
8
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 
9
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 
10
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A11
43. no
45. no
47. 
49. 
51. 
53. a. 8
b. 5
55. The check digit is 10.
57. Assign eleven teams the
numbers 1 to 11. On the first day, all teams whose sum is 1, (mod 11) play;
day 2, matches those whose sum is 2, (mod 11); . . . . The last team plays
the left over numbered team so each team plays every day. The schedule
follows: 
Day 1:
1-11;
2-10;
3-9;
4-8;
5-7;
6-12
Day 2:
2-11;
3-10;
4-9;
5-8;
6-7;
1-12
Day 3:
3-11;
4-10;
5-9;
6-8;
1-2;
7-12
Day 4:
4-11;
5-10;
6-9;
7-8;
1-3;
2-12
Day 5:
5-11;
6-10;
7-9;
1-4;
2-3;
8-12
Day 6:
6-11;
7-10;
8-9;
1-5;
2-4;
3-12
Day 7:
7-11;
8-10;
1-6;
2-5;
3-4;
9-12
Day 8:
9-10;
1-7;
2-6;
3-5;
8-11;
4-12
Day 9:
9-11;
1-8;
2-7;
3-6;
4-5;
10-12
Day 10:
10-11;
1-9;
2-8;
3-7;
4-6;
5-12
Day 11:
1-10;
2-9;
3-8;
4-7;
5-6;
11-12;
Note: The answer is not unique.
59. The smallest result is 785. 
5.8 Cryptography, page 244
1. 14-5-22-5-18-29-19-1-25-29-14-5-22-5-18-28
3. 25-15-21-29-2-5-20-
29-25-15-21-18-29-12-9-6-5-28
5. ARE WE HAVING FUN YET
7. FAILURE TEACHES SUCCESS
9. Divide by 8.
11. Subtract 2 and
then divide by 20.
13. Divide by 2, then subtract 2, then divide by 4.
15. MOHOY .CQ MOHOYZ
17. ZFREIOPEZFRLE WQOC
19. HUMPTY DUMPTY IS A FALL GUY.
21. MIDAS HAD A GILT
COMPLEX.

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
1
3
5
7
9 
3
0
3
6
9
1
4
7
10
2
5
8 
4
0
4
8
1
5
9
2
6
10
3
7 
5
0
5
10
4
9
3
8
2
7
1
6 
6
0
6
1
7
2
8
3
9
4
10
5 
7
0
7
3
10
6
2
9
5
1
8
4 
8
0
8
5
2
10
7
4
1
9
6
3 
9
0
9
7
5
3
1
10
8
6
4
2 
10
0
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
23. D UPEOTEHEQAUXUJGEWAUOEHEQHGHEXAUNTDDCRZEDN
UULEHRQECEPCLLED UPEVUJEHERCRNUOXJGTAB
25. ANYONE WHO SLAPS CATSUP, MUSTARD, AND RELISH ON
HIS HOT DOG IS TRULY A MAN FOR ALL SEASONINGS.
27. CRYSTAL-CLEAR AIR OF ROCKY MOUNTAINS PROVIDES
IDEAL ENVIRONMENT FOR WEATHER STATION.
29. 3,915  15  4,826  8,756 
Chapter 5 Review Questions, page 246
1. 19
2.
3.
4. 10
5. 2
6.
7. 
8.
9.
(Note: 2 is mixed-number form, but is reduced.)
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
, rational
15.
, rational
16.
, rational
17.
, rational
18.
, rational
19. prime
20. prime
21. prime
22. 7  11  13
23. 3  52  7  13
24. x
, (mod 8)
25. x
5, (mod 7)
26. x
1, (mod 2)
27. 7
28. 343,343
29. 119
30. 2
31. For
b
, multiplication is defined as: a  b means  b  b  b      b. 
14444244443
a addends
If a  0, then 0  b  0.
32. a  b  a  (b)
33.
 m means 
a  bm where b
0.
34. If we use the definition of division,  m, 
then 0  m  x. If x
0, then there is no solution because 0  m  0 for all 
numbers m. Also, if  m, then 0  0  m which is true for every
number m. Thus,  0 checks, and  1 checks, and since two numbers
equal to the same number must also be equal, we obtain the statement 0  1;
thus, we say is indeterminate.
35. 34.1011011101111011 . . .
36. See p. 228.
37. It is not a group.
38. BMI 
a. 27.5
b. 25.1
c. w  155 lb
39. There are 31 doors left open.
40. 12 steps
are necessary; length of segments is 20 ft; length of diagonal is 4
ft.
!13
703w
h2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

x
0

a
b
 0


 2
0.230769
6.25
0.428571
2.3
0.375
3
7
8
9
4
33
8
9
8
3
2
3
8
3
3  233
4
7
9
7
72
 
1,396
3,465
71
63
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57585960616263 64
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
CHAPTER 6
6.1 Polynomials, page 257
9. x  8; 1st-degree binomial
11. 3x  6y  4z; 1st-degree trinomial
13. 5x2 7x  7; 2nd-degree trinomial
15. x2  5x  3; 2nd-degree
trinomial
17. x  31; 1st-degree binomial
19. 16x2  9x  3; 
2nd-degree trinomial
21. 3x2  15x  17; 2nd-degree trinomial
23. a. x2  5x  6
b. y2  6y  5
c. z2  4z 12
d. s2  s  20
25. a. c2  6c  7
b. z2  2z  15
c. 2x2  x  1
d. 2x2  5x  3
27. a. x2  2xy  y2
b. x2  2xy  y2
c. x2  y2
d. a2  b2
29. a. x2  8x  16
b. y2  6y  9
c. s2  2st  t2
d. u2  2uv  v2
31. 6x3  x2  12x  5
33. 5x4  9x3  13x2  3x
35. 4x3  25x2  19x  22
37. 7x2
39.
x  4
41. 
x  4
x  2
x  3
(x  2)(x  4)  x2  6x  8 
43.
3x  2
(2x  3)(3x  2)  6x2  13x  6
45. (x  1)3  x3  3x2  3x  1
47. (x  y)6  x6  6x5y  15x4y2  20x3y3  15x2y4  6xy5 y6
49. (x  y)8  x8  8x7y  28x6y2  56x5y3  70x4y4  56x3y5  28x2y6 
8xy7  y8
51. (2x  3y)4  16x4  96x3y  216x2y2  216xy3  81y4
x2
x2
x2
x
x
x2
x2
x2
x
x
x
x
x
1 1 
x
x
x
1 1 
x
x
x
1 1 
x2
x x x
x
x
1 1 1 1
x
1 1 1 1
x2
x
x
x
x
x
1
1
1 1 
x
1
1
1 1
x
1
1
1 1 
(x  3)(x  4)  x2  7x  12
2x  3
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A12
Selected Answers
53. 91x2y12  14xy13  y14
55. (6x  2)(51x  7)  306x2  60x  14
57. (6b  15)(10  2b)  150  30b  12b2
6.2 Factoring, page 263
3. 2x(5y  3)
5. 2x(4y  3)
7. (x  3)(x  1)
9. (x  3)(x  2)
11. (x  4)(x  3)
13. (x  6)(x  5)
15. (x  7)(x  5)
17. (3x  10)(x  1)
19. (2x  1)(x  3)
21. (3x  1)(x  2)
23. (2x  1)(x  4)
25. (3x  2)(x  1)
27. x(5x  3)(x  2) 
29. x2(7x  3)(x  2)
31. (x  8)(x  8)
33. 25(x2  2)
35. (x  1)(x  1)(x2  1)
37. x2  5x  6  (x  2)(x  3)
39. x2  4x  3  (x  1)(x  3)
41. x2  6x  8  (x  2)(x  4)
43. x2  1  (x  1)(x  1)
45. x2  x  2  (x  1)(x  2)
47. x2  x  2  (x  1)(x  2)
49. The dimensions are x 13 feet by
x  11 feet.
51. The time is 2x 1 hours. 53. (3x  2)(2x  1)
55. x2(x  3)(x  3)(x  2)(x  2)
57. x2(4y  5z)(5y  2z)
59. Let x  1, x, and x  1 be the three integers. Then 
(x  1)(x  1)  x2  1 so the square of the middle integer is one more
than the product of the first and third. 
6.3 Evaluation, Applications, and Spreadsheets, page 271
5. a. (23)*A1^2
b. 5*A1^2  6*A2^2
7. a. 12*(A1^24)
b. (15*A17)2
9. a. (5  A1)*(A13)^2   
b. 6*(A13)*(2*A1  7)^2
11. a. (14)*A1^2(12)*A112
b. (23)*A1^2(13)*A1  17
13. a. 4x  3
b. 5x2  3x  4
15. a. x  142
b. ( x  14)2
17. a. (z)
b.
19. A  13
x
yz
x
y
5
4
5
4
A
B
C
D
1
NAME
SALES
COST
PROFIT
COMMISSION
2
+B2-C2
+.08*D2
3
Replicate Row
 2 for Rows 3 to 21.
4
5
E
A
B
C
D
E
1
1
3
4
5
6
2
1
3
3
3
3
3
4
5
21. C  8
23. E  21
25. G  19
27. I  2
29. K  4
31. M  9
33. P  20
35. R  11
37. T  17
39. V  48
41. X  100
45. a. 8
b. 5
c. 9
d. 3.5
47. a.
b.
49. a.
b.
51. 
53. Genotype: black, 42.25%; black (recessive brown), 45.5%; brown,
12.25% Phenotype: black, 87.75%; brown, 12.25%
55. Genotypes and
phenotypes are the same: red, 4%; pink, 32%; white, 64%
57. B  50%
and b  50%
59. Answers vary. For the general population, FF is 49%,
Ff is 42%, and ff is 9%; free hanging is 91% and attached is 9%. In other
words, F is 70% and f is 30%. 
6.4 Equations, page 281
3. a. 15
b. 8
c. 4
d. 8
5. a. 0
b. 0
c. 8
d. 2
7. a.
b.
9. a.
b.
11. a. X 
b. C  10 13. a. F  1
b. G  6
15. a. J  15
b. K  9
17. a. N  6
b. P  8
19. S  8
21. U  3
23. W  15
25. Z  14
27. 0, 10
1
5
28
45
13
33
47
90
1,111
10,000
A
B
C
1
107           100            105
2
102           104            106
3
103           108            101
A
B
C
1
7
0
5
2
2
4
6
3                8                1
3
29. 11, 6
31. 0, 2, 2
33.
, 
35.
37.
39.
41.
43. no real values
45. 4, 
47. 0, 
49. 1.41, 2.83 
51. 0.91, 2.33
53. 41.54, 0.01
55. a. 45.5 mg
b. 20 mg
57. On the last step, dividing by a  b  c is not allowed
because a  b  c so a  b  c  0; cannot divide by 0.
59. a. 13, 3
b. 3
5
6
1
3
25 6 "73
6
3 6 "2
5 6 "37
2
27 6 "41
2
3
2
23
2
6.5 Inequalities, page 287
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
31.
33.
35.
37.
39.
41.
43.
45.
47.
49.
51. any number greater than 
53. any number less 
than 
55. 2
57. less than 2
59. height and width must be 18 in. or
less and the length is 36 in. or less
6.6 Algebra in Problem Solving, page 297
3. a. 3  2  4  11
b. 3(2  4)  18
5. a. 8  9  10  82
b. 8(9  10)  152 7. a. 32  23  17
b. 33  22  23
9. a. 42  92  97 b. (4  9)2  169
11. a. 3(n  4)  16; 
;
open, conditional
b. 5(n  1)  5n  5; open, identity
13. a. 32  42  25; true
b. 12  22  32  n; n  14; open, conditional
15. a. 6n  12  6(n  2); open, identity
b. n(7  n)  0; n  0, 7;
open, conditional
17. A  bh
19. A  pq
21. V  s3
23. V 
r2h
25. V 
r3 27. 2(NUMBER)  12  6; The number 
is 9. 29. 3(NUMBER)  6  2(NUMBER); the number is 6. 
31. EVEN INTEGER  NEXT EVEN INTEGER  94; The integers are 46 and 48.
33. INTEGER  NEXT INTEGER  THIRD CONSECUTIVE INTEGER  FOURTH
CONSECUTIVE INTEGER  74; the integers are 17, 18, 19, and 20. 
35. PRICE OF FIRST CABINET  PRICE OF SECOND CABINET  4,150; the prices
of the cabinets are $830 and $3,320. 37. 4(AMOUNT OF MONEY TO START)
 72  48; The gambler started with $30. 39. 82  142  (LENGTH OF
BRACE)2. The exact length of the brace is 2
; this is approximately 16 ft.
41. DIST FROM N TO M  DIST FROM M TO C  DIST FROM C TO D  TOTAL
DISTANCE; it is 250 mi from Cincinnati to Detroit. 43. DIST OF SLOWER
RUNNER  HEAD START  DIST OF FASTER RUNNER; the faster runner will
catch the slower one in 12.5 seconds. 45. DIST OF CAR  HEAD START
 DIST OF POLICE CAR; it will take the police car 6 minutes to catch the
speeder. 47. DIST OF 1ST JOGGER  DIST OF 2ND JOGGER  TOTAL DISTANCE;
the jogger’s rates are 6 mph and 8 mph. 49. The length of the shorter side
is 5 cm. 51. The base is 3.6 ft and the height is 1.6 ft. 53. Need to obtain
about 41.4% interest. 55. The center would be approximately 10.5 ft
above the ground. 57. There are 120 lilies. 59. The second monkey
jumped 50 cubits into the air. 
6.7 Ratios, Proportions, and Problem Solving, page 306
5. 20 to 1
7. 53 to 50
9. 18 to 1
11. a. yes
b. yes
c. yes
13. a. yes
b. no
c. no
15. a. 	 b. 
c. 	 17. a. 
b. 	
c. 
d. 
19. A  30
21. C  10
23. E  8
25. G  21
27. I  16
29. K 
or 7.5
31. M  4
33. P  3
35. R  9
37. T 
or 0.25
39. V 
or 2.5
41. Y  22
43. $0.91
45. 2 gallons
47. 27 minutes
49. 2,475 calories
51. 159.25
53.
55. 
ft or 3 ft, 4 in. 57. $780
59. Since she started with 
31
3
2
3
5
2
1
4
15
2
"65
4
3p
1
3p
1
2
n 5 4
3
24
25
I . 5
4
G . 7
E , 21
C . 19
2
A . 0
w , 21
u # 2
s . 2
a $ 2
s , 26
x # 1
x . 21
m , 5
s . 22
y . 26
x $ 22
x $ 24
250
0
2100
50
100
250
0
2100
50
100
24
0
28
4
8
24 22
0
2
26
4
6
8
0
2
4
6
8
24 22
26
24 22
0
2
26
4
6
8
24 22
0
2
26
4
6
8
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A13
32 gallons and ended with 1 pt (of pure soft drink), the amount of soft drink
served was 31 gal, 3 qt, and 1 pt. 
6.8 Percents, page 316
1. ; 75%
3. ; 0.4
5. 0. ; 33 %
7. ; 85%
9. 0.375; 37.5%
11. ; 1.2
13.
; 5%
15. 0.1 ; 16 %
17. ; 0.
19.
; 17.5%
21.
; 0.25% Estimates in Problems 22–28 may vary. 23. a. 9,500
b. 8.56
25. a. 200
b. 200
27. a. 40
b. 8,100
29.
; 9.6
31.
; 150
33.
; 200%
35.
; 80%
37.
; 75%
39.
; 140
41.
; 13
43.

; 36
45.

; $489
47. 23.1 million
49. $10.86
51. 5%
53. 40%
55. The tax withheld is $2,624. 57. 90%
59. The old wage was $1,250 and the new wage is $1,350.
6.9 Modeling Uncategorized Problems, page 323
3. A
5. A
7. A
9. B
11. D
13. C
15. A
17. A
19. A
21. C
23. C
25. C
27. B
29. A
33. 15 and 17
35. 1 and 2
37. a. 55%
b. 122%
39. Standard Oil bldg., 1,136 ft; Sears, 1,454 ft.
41. 10,100
43. 70
45. 180 hours
47. x  2  c 40
49. Should
invest $64,000 in savings and $36,000 in annuities.
51. Cut off 2 in.; the 
box is 8  9  12 in. 53. The wind speed is 21 mph. 55. $2,350 
with 30 additional persons
57. The reading would not change. 
59. 24,000.
Chapter 6 Review Questions, page 327
1. a. Algebra refers to a structure as a set of axioms that forms the basis for
what is accepted and what is not. b. The four main processes are simplify
(carry out all operations according to the order-of-operations agreement
and write the result in a prescribed form), evaluate (replace the variable(s)
with specified numbers and then simplify), factor (write the expression as a
product), and solve (find the replacement(s) for the variable(s) that make
the equation true). 2. a. x3  x2  6x  8
b. x4  x3y  x2y  xy
3. a. 19
b. 19
4. a. 3(x 3)(x  3)
b. (x  6)(x  1)
5. a.
b. 2 
6.
x  3
x  2
x2  5x  6  (x  3)(x  2)
7. a. 4
b.
8. a. 9
b.
9. a. P  15
b. W  3.75
10. 5, 1
11.
12. x 3
13. x  2
14. x  2
15. x  3
16. a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e.  17.
cups of flour
18. The integers are 22, 24, 26, and 28. 19. Genotypes: 27% tall, 50% tall
(recessive short), 23% short; Phenotypes: 77% tall, 23% short
20. The distance from New York to Chicago is 720 mi, from Chicago to San
Francisco is 1,860 mi, and from San Francisco to Honolulu is 2,400 mi.
121
2
3 6 "5
4
27
3
1
4
"10
3
2
1
30
A
8,150
6
100
12
W
331
3
100
1
3
120
100 5 16
W
35
100 5 49
W
P
100 5 9
12
P
100 5 4
5
P
100 5 10
5
14
100 5 21
W
15
100 5 A
64
1
400
7
40
2
2
9
2
3
6
1
20
6
5
17
20
1
3
3
2
5
3
4
x2
x x x
x
1 1 1
x
1 1 1
CHAPTER 7 
7.1 Geometry, page 337
1. both
3. Answers vary; the point that is being made is that although we
may use a figure in geometry to help us understand a problem, we cannot
use what we see in a figure as a basis for our reasoning.
9. reflection
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21. symmetric
23. symmetric
25. symmetric
27. not symmetric
41. not symmetric
43. symmetric (except for the words)
45. symmetric
47. symmetric
P
S
P
Q
P Q
P Q
P Q
49.
51.
53.
55. C
57. C
59. (1) letters with no symmetry; (2) letters with
horizontal line symmetry; (3) letters with vertical line symmetry; 
(4) letters with symmetry around both vertical and horizontal lines 
7.2 Polygons and Angles, page 346
9. a. quadrilateral
b. pentagon
11. a. triangle
b. hexagon
13. a. quadrilateral
b. heptagon
15. a. T
b. T
17. a. T
b. F
19. a. F
b. F
21. a. yes
b. yes
c. yes
d. yes
e. yes
23. a. no
b. no
c. no
d. no
e. no
25.
27.
29.
31. a. acute
b. right
33. a. right
b. obtuse
35. a. acute
b. acute
37. adjacent and supplementary
39. adjacent and supplementary
C
U
B
E
C
U
B
E
C
U
B
E
41. vertical
43. alternate interior angles
45. F
47. T
49. F
51.
m
2  m
4  m
6  m
8  65°
53. m
1  m
3  m
5  m
7  153°;
m
2  m
4  m
6  m
8  27°
55. m
1  m
3  m
5 
m
7  163°; m
2  m
4  m
6  m
8  17°
57. a. obtuse
b. obtuse
c. acute
d. acute
e. straight
f. right
g. acute
h. straight
i. acute
j.
AOC
59.
7.3 Triangles, page 354
5.
7.
9.
11. 88°
13. 145°
15. 56°
17. 75°
19. 80°
21. 100°
23.
25.
/K . /M
/L . /N;
/J . /P;
JK . PM;
LK . NM;
JL . PN;
/STR . /URT
/S . /U;
/SRT . /UTR;
ST . UR;
RT . TR;
RS . TU;
/C . /F
/B . /D;
/A . /E;
CB . FD;
AC . EF;
AB . ED;
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
m/1 5 m/3 5 m/5 5 m/7 5 115°;
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A14
Selected Answers
27.
29. 20°
31. 21°
33. 6°
35. 60°; 60°; 60°
37. 50°; 60°; 70°
39. 13°; 53°; 114°
41. 50°
43. 120°
Answers to Problems 45–52
may vary.
53.
55.
57. a.
b.
c.
59. 540°
7.4 Similar Triangles, page 359
3. similar
5. not similar
7. similar
9.
11.
13.
15.
17. 
19. 
21. 
or 
23. 4
25. 
27. 
29. 22
31. 7.8
33. 13.7
39. The lake is 125 ft long.
41. The height of the building is 24 ft.
43. The building is 45 ft tall.
45. The bell tower is 70 ft tall.
47. The tree is 17 ft tall.
49. The tree
is 6 ft 8 in. tall.
51. Denver to New Orleans is 1,080 mi. and Chicago to
Denver is 1,020 mi.
53. a. 
and 
b. yes; answers vary.
c. The footbridge is 21 ft above the base.
7.5 Right-Triangle Trigonometry, page 368
1. For any right triangle with sides with lengths a and b and hypotenuse
with length c, 
. Also, if a, b, and c are lengths of sides of a
triangle so that 
, then the triangle is a right triangle.
3. In 
a right triangle ABC with right angle at C, 
.
cos  A 5  length of adjacent side of A
length of hypotenuse
a2 1  b2 5  c2
a2 1  b2 5  c2
DBTP
DHSP
8
3
16
3
4"5
"80
0 ArCr 0 5 3.75
0 ArBr 0 5 6.25; 
0 AC 0 5 6; 0 BC 0 5 8; 0 BrCr 0 5 5;
0 AB 0 5 10; 
0 EF 0 5 15
0 GH 0 5 14; 0 HI 0 5 12; 0 GI 0 5 16; 0 DF 0 5 20; 0 DE 0 5 17.5; 
0 AC 0 5 0 AB 0 5 11; 0 ArCr 0 5 0 ArBr 0 5 22; 0 BC 0 5 5; 0 BrCr 0 5 10
m/A 5 m/Ar 5 54°; m/B 5 m/Br 5 36°; m/C 5 m/Cr 5 90°
m/A 5 m/D 5 38°; m/B 5 m/E 5 68°; m/C 5 m/F 5 74°
m/A 5 m/Ar 5 25°; m/B 5 m/Br 5 75°; m/C 5 m/Cr 5 80°
y 5 44°
x 5 136°;
x 5 132.5°; y 5 47.5°
x 5 135°, y 5 45°
5. Rope A would form a right triangle.
7. b
9. a
11.
13.
15.
17. 0.8290
19. 0.8746
21. 0.5878
23. 0
25. 0.4452
27. 3.7321
29. 30°
31. 45°
33. 60°
35. 56°
37. 37°
39. Yes; 
; 
; 
41. No
43. Yes; 
45. Yes; 
47. No
49. The height is 109 ft.
51. The distance is 199 m.
53. The top of the ladder is 12 ft 7 in.
55. The chimney stack is 
1,251 ft tall.
57.
° 
, sin 
°  , and 
° 
59. 12 in. 
"3
3
tan 30
1
2
 30
"3
2
cos 30
tan A 5
1
!3
sin A; cos A 5 !3
2 ; 
tan A 5
1
!35
sin A 5 1
6; cos A 5 !35
6 ;
tan A 5 12
5
cos A 5 5
13
sin A 5 12
13
a
b
b
c
a
c
7.6 Mathematics, Art, and Non-Euclidean Geometries, page 380
5. The divine proportion is the relationship 
.
7. It is the 
number 
.
9. Answers vary; for example, start with 4 and 4.
a. The sequence is 4, 4, 8, 12, 20, 32, . . . . 
b. The ratios are 
, 
, 
, 
.  It seems that these ratios 
oscillate around 
.
11.
; it is close to .
13.
to h is 1.62,
about the same; b to s is 1.7, close
15. 2.17, not too close
17. Euclidean
19. Euclidean
21. elliptic
23. hyperbolic
25. It is a
Saccheri quadrilateral.
27. It is not a Saccheri quadrilateral.
b
2
t
1.616
t < 1.62
32
20 5 1.6
20
12 5 1.6
12
8 5 1.5
4
4 5 1, 8
4 5 2
1 1 "5
2
h
w 5
w
h 1 w
29. a. 5 in. by 3 in.
b. 1.67; about the same
31. a. 10.25 in. by 8 in.
b. 1.28; not close
33. Answers vary
35. a. 2
b. 8
c. 144
d. 1, 2, 1.50, 1.67, 1.60, 1.63, 1.62, . . . ; close to .
37. close
39. 3.1 ft or 8.1 ft
41. 15 cm
43. B
45. C
47. Their sum is greater
than 180°.
49. a. A great circle is a circle on a sphere with a diameter
equal to the diameter of the sphere.
b.
is a line (a great 
circle), but m is not.
c. yes
51. Lines are great circles, and the circle
labeled m is not a great circle.
53. True; answers vary.
55. The length-to-width ratio will remain unchanged if 

.
57. a.
b. They are negative reciprocals.
59. Just down 
from the North Pole there is a parallel that has a circumference of 
exactly one mile. If you begin anywhere on the circle that is 300 feet north
of this parallel, the conditions are satisfied.
Chapter 7 Review Questions, page 384
1. a. 0
b. 8
c. 24
d. 24
e. 8
2. two men (rotate the picture 180°)
3. rotation
4. the photograph
5. the photograph
6. a. Flag is sym-
metric; picture is not (if you include the flagpole).
b. no
c. no
d. yes
7. a. a rectangle satisfying the divine proportion
b. yes
8. 173 ft
9.
10. a. obtuse angle
b. adjacent angles or
supplementary angles
c. vertical angles
d. acute angle
e. obtuse
angle
f. vertical angles
11. a. 41°
b. 131°
c. 41°
12. 36°
13. The width is about 6 in.
14. The other leg is 5 in. 15.
in.
16. a. 0.8572
b. 0
c. 0.9511
d. 7.1154
17. The distance is
about 753 ft.
18.
19. A Saccheri quadrilateral is a quadrilateral ABCD with base angles A
and B right angles and with sides 
and 
with equal lengths. 
20. If the summit angles C and D of a quadrilateral 
are right angles,
then the result is Euclidean geometry. If they are acute, then the result is
hyperbolic geometry. If they are obtuse, the result is elliptic geometry.
ABCD
BD
AC
C
U
B
E
C
B
E
B
B
B
B
U
  5!2
C 5 ,w
15
x 5 1 6  "5
2
!2
L
W
,
t
CHAPTER 8 
8.1 Euler Circuits and Hamiltonian Cycles, page 397
7. not an Euler circuit; traversable
9. not an Euler circuit; not traversable
11. not an Euler circuit; not traversable
13. Hamiltonian cycle; 
A S B S C S D S A
15. Hamiltonian cycle; A S B S C S G S
H S F S E S D S A
17. Hamiltonian cycle; A S B S C S D S A
Possible paths in Problems 18–23 may vary.
19. not traversable
21. not traversable
23. traversable
25. not an Euler circuit; not
traversable
27. not an Euler circuit; not traversable
29. no Hamilton-
ian cycle
31. no Hamiltonian cycle
33. Answers may vary. 1 S 2 S
3 S 10 S 11 S 12 S 4 S 5 S 14 S 13 S 19 S 18 S 17 S 9 S 8 S
7 S 16 S 20 S 15 S 6 S 1
35. no
37. It is traversable; begin at ei-
ther Queens or Manhattan.
39. yes; 2 odd vertices
41. No; there are 
8 odd vertices.
43. a. NYC to Boston to Washington, D.C. to NYC; 892
mi; forms a loop without including Cleveland
b. NYC to Boston to
Washington, D.C. to Cleveland to NYC; 1,513 mi
45. 4,627 mi
47. 2,699 mi
49. 720°
51. a. Room 1: 1 path; room 2: 2 paths; 
room 3: 3 paths; room 4: 5 paths
b. 89
c. 377
53. a. Start at the top
(or at the right) at one of the two odd vertices.
b. The chance that you
will choose one of the two odd vertices at random is small.
55. The
result is a twisted band twice as long and half as wide as the band with
which you began.
57. The result is two interlocking pieces, one twice as
long as the other.
59. One edge; one side; after cutting, you will have a
single loop with a knot.
8.2 Trees and Minimum Spanning Trees, page 409
5. no
7. no
9. no
11. yes 
13. 
C
D
B
A
E
C
D
B
A
E
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A15
19. 
21. 
23. 
25.
B
D
A
C
B
D
A
C
B
D
A
C
B
D
A
C
B
D
A
C
B
D
A
C
B
D
A
C
B
D
A
C
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
F
B
A
D
E
J
C
G
I
H
F
B
A
D
E
J
C
G
I
H
G
H
F
E
I
G
H
F
E
I
G
H
F
E
I
G
H
F
E
I
G
H
F
E
I
G
H
F
E
I
G
H
F
E
I
G
H
F
E
I
G
H
F
E
I
G
H
F
E
I
G
H
F
E
I
15.  
17. 
B
D
E
A
C
B
D
E
A
C
A
E
B
D
C
A
E
B
D
C
27. The propane molecule
29. The isobutane molecule
is a tree.
is a tree.
31. Not a tree; because there is a circuit.
33. 60
35. 45
37. 180
39. 65
41. 30
43. 64
45. no
47.
49. 49
51. $38,500
53. 375 miles
55. a.
b. 
c. $4,000,000 
57. a. 
J
T
P
M
172
249
237
410
160
252
105
476
253
219
Orlando
1
1
1
1
President
Business
Services
VP
Academic
VP
Operations
VP
Personnel
Book Store
Deans
Departments
Facilities Grounds
Certified
Staff
Food
Services
Grants
&
Scholarships
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
H
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A16
Selected Answers
25. Answers vary.
A16
Selected Answers
b. 
c. $57,290
59. a.
a tree with n vertices has n  1 edges
b. 0
c. one edge
d. two edges 
8.3 Topology and Fractals, page 418
3. A and F; B and G; C, D and H
5. A and F are simple closed curves.
7. C, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, and Z are the same
class; A, D, O, P, Q, and R are another class; B is a third class.
9. A, C, E,
and F are the same class; B and D are the same class; G is different.
11. A and C are inside; B is outside.
13. A and B are inside; C is outside.
15. It will need only two colors.
19.
21.
E 5 v 2 1;
Orlando
172
160
105
237
T
J
P
M
F
I
L
N
P
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
29. a. No, it will now fit the left hand.
b. yes
Chapter 8 Review Questions, page 422
1. no
2. yes
3. yes
4. yes
5. a. no
b. yes 
6. a.
b.
c.
d. No such map exists.
7. 20,160 ways
8. 1,596 miles
9. 635
3
1
4
1
2
1
2
1
3
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
R
R
R
R
B
B
B
B
10. Weighted graph:
The minimum spanning tree is:
The minimum distance is 855 miles.
11. yes
12. no
13. 20
14. 47
15. 4.3589  1010
16. 39
17. no
18. yes
19. Answers vary; here is one: 
20. There are two edges and two sides; the result after cutting is two
interlocking loops.
A
H
D
I
B
C
G
F
E
P
SF
LA
SD
353
369
133
SF
LA
SD
P
755
353
369
372
133
502
CHAPTER 9 
9.1 Perimeter, page 433
3.
5. The number p is the
ratio of the circumference to the diameter of a circle.
7. a.
b.
c.
9. A
11. B
13. A
15. C
17. B
19. B
21. C
23. C
25. C 27. A
29. C
31. A
33. A
35. a. 3 cm
b. 3.4 cm
c. 1 in. d. 1 in.
37. 18 in.
39. 9 dm
41. 15.08 m
43. 397.08 ft
45. 46 ft
47. 15.2 cm
49. 35.7 in.
51. 11.14 cm
53. 300 m
55. The sides are 26 in., 39 in., and 52 in.
57. probably
smaller
59. The approximate measurements of the ark are 158 m long,
26 m wide, and 16 m high. 
9.2 Area, page 442
3. a. 3 cm2
b. 3 cm2
5. 8 cm2
7. 11 cm2
9. C
11. A
13. C
15. A
17. C
19. 15 in.2
21. 1,196 m2
23. 100 mm2
25. 7,560 ft2
27. 136.5 dm2
29. 5,550 cm2
31. 28 in.2
33. 314.2 in.2
35. 78.5 in.2
37. 307.9 in.2
39. 7.6 cm2
41. A; $2.86/ft2 for Lot A
and $3.19/ft2 for Lot B.
43. 22.2 acres
45. 216 in.2
47. 93 in.2
49. 20 pounds are necessary; $117
51. s  11.5; A
20 ft2
53. s  230; area of triangle
9,591.66; area of figure
52,792 ft2
55. 172 in.2
57. 483 in.2
59. 79 in.2
9.3 Surface Area, Volume, and Capacity, page 453
5. A liter is a bit larger than a quart.
7. 60 cm3
9. 125 ft3
11. 8,000 cm3
13. 24 ft3
15. 96,000 cm3
17. a. 2 c
b. 16 oz
19. a. 13 oz
b. 380 mL
21. a. 25 mL
b. 75 mL
c. 75 mL
23. B
25. A
27. C
29. B
31. B
33. 112 kL
35. 3,125 cm2
37. 780 cm2
39. 35,000 cm2
41. 36
cm2 
113.1 cm2
43. 7.8 in.2
45. 29,375 m2
47. 4.3 gal
49. 4 L
51. 9 L
53. 500 L
55. a. 45.375 ft3
b. 26.375 ft3
57. 2.5 yd3
59. a. 560,000 people/mi2
b. 11,071 mi2; this is about the size of the
state of Maryland.
c. about 5.4 acres per person 
9.4 Miscellaneous Measurements, page 464
5. a. centimeter
b. meter
7. a. liter
b. kiloliter
9. a. Celsius
b. Celsius
11. C
13. C
15. B
17. C
19. A
21. B
23. C
25. B
27. B
29. A
31. 0.000063 kiloliter; 0.00063 hectoliter;
0.0063 dekaliter; 0.063 liter; 0.63 deciliter; 6.3 centiliter; 63 milliliter
33. 0.0035 kiloliter; 0.035 hectoliter; 0.35 dekaliter; 3.5 liter;
35 deciliter; 350 centiliter; 3,500 milliliter
35. 0.08 kiloliter; 
0.8 hectoliter; 8 dekaliter; 80 liter; 800 deciliter; 8,000 centiliter; 
80,000 milliliter
37. 0.31 kiloliter; 3.1 hectoliter; 31 dekaliter; 
<
p
<
<
<
1
2
3
8
P 5 4s; P 5 21, 1 w2; P 5 3s; P 5 5s     
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A17
310 liter; 3,100 deciliter; 31,000 centiliter; 310,000 milliliter
39. a. 0.001
b. 0.000001
c. 1,000
d. 100
41. a. 1,000
b. 10
c. 0.001
d. 1,000,000
43. 71 cm2
45. 2,827 cm2
47. 30 ft3
49. 600 cm3
51. S  452 in.2; V  905 in.3
53. The area is increased six-fold.
55. The area is increased nine-fold.
57. The area is increased four-fold.
59. Answers vary; use the formula F  C  32 in the column headed
Fahrenheit.
Chapter 9 Review Questions, page 468
1. a. 
b. 1.9 cm
2. a. feet and meters
b. Answers vary; 40°C; 100°F
c. Answers vary; in.; 1.5 cm
3. a. one-thousandth
b. capacity
c. 1,000,000 cm
4. s 43 in.
5. 105 in.2
6. less than
7. 1,262 in.3
8. a. 4p ft2
b. 12.6 ft2
9. a.
ft3
b. 4.2 ft3
10. a. 30 dm3
19. a. 
b. yes
20. The diagram gives a geometric justification of the distributive law. 
132
13
12
5
122
52
4
3p
1
2
9
5
I
Area
is ab.
II
Area
is ac.
b
b 1 c
c
a
Area of rectangle I: ab
Area of rectangle II: ac
Area of I1II is ab 1 ac
Area of large rectangle is
a(b1c)
b. 30 L
11. 56 dm2
12. a. 30 cm  20 cm  50 cm
b. 130 gal
13. 76 cm2
14. a. The best value is the large size.
b. Answers vary;
$17.95.
15. 2,400 ft2
16. 7,200 ft3
17. 53,856 gal
18. You need to
purchase 20 square yards.
CHAPTER 10 
10.1 Exponential Equations, page 480
5. a.
is the exponent on a base 10 that gives N.
b.
is the
exponent on a base e that gives N.
c.
is the exponent on a base b
that gives N.
7. An exponential equation is an equation where the variable
appears as an exponent.
9. a.
b.
c.
11. a.
b.
c.
13. a. 1
b. 3
c.
15. a.
b.
c. 1
17. a. 1
b. 3
c.
19. a. 
b.
c.
d. 
21. a. 
b. log 2.5
c. log 45
d. log 15
23. a. 0.63
b. 2.00
c. 3.00
d. 2.30
25. a. 4.85
b. 2.00
c. 0.00
d. 6.91
27. a.
b. 2.82
c. 1.99
d.
29. 3.4650
b. 2.8028
31. a. 1.3181
b. 9.1189
33. a.
b. 2.1991
35. a. 2.0686
b. 3.4396
37. a. 0.528320834
b. 0.386988016
39. a. 1.623249290
b.
41. a.
b.
43. a. 2.129072048
b. 1.855903615
45. 3.07
47. 2.16
49. 2015
51. 2016
53. 3
55. 8.665302427
57.
ln 
59. 1 hour, 18 min
10.2 Logarithmic Equations, page 488
5. F
7. F
9. T
11. F
13. F
15. F
17. F
19. F
21. a. 23
b. 3.4
c. x
d. x
23. a. 2
b. 7
c. 4
d. 3
25. a.
b. e
c.
d.
27. a.
b.
c.
29. a.
b.
c.
31. 3.5
33. 6.2
35. 3,572
37. a. 8
b.
39. a. 2
108
ln 
3
1,024
ln 1
48
ln 3
2
ln 
x2y3
z4
log 2
log 24
e3
e2
105
P
P0
t 5 1
r
22.09691001301
22.07944154168
21.630784143
27.4804
21.14
0.82
2
3
log4 5
log6 4.5
log58
22
26
21
23
25
n 5 logts
2 5 log636
21 5 log 1
10
p 5 lognm
2 5 log 100
6 5 log264
logbN
ln N
log N
b. 25
41. a. 2
b. 
43. a. 2
b. 
45. 
47. 1, 21
1010
e2
"2
e2
49. 
51. 
53. 0
55. 
57. a. 13 sec
b. 
59. a. 3.89
b. 8.8
c.
d. 101.5M111.8
1023.8
t 5 e1802R2/27
3 6 "409
2
8e12
4.8 # 1018
10.3 Applications of Growth and Decay, page 497
5. 30 dB
7. 107 dB
9. 114 dB
11. 896,716
13.
15. The half-life is about 28 years.
17. 6.7
19. An earthquake with
magnitude 6 is 100 times stronger than an earthquake of magnitude 4.
21.
ergs
23. The artifact is about 10,500 years old.
25. The
elapsed time is about 7 years.
27. 63 times more energy
29. The
artifact is about 1,300 years old.
31. 1.41 times more energy
33. 31.6 times more energy
35. The cookies are about 128° F.
37. 37°C
39. 5,313 ft
41. The satellite will operate for about 
128 days.
43. a. 1.5%
b. 674,161
d. 802,673
45. a. 1.1%
b. 510,478
d. 582,976
47. a. 8.8%
b. 518,429
d. 1,482,201
49. a. 0.5%
b. 278,106
d. 296.490
51. a. Growth rate of about 1.6%;
predict the 2004 population to be 4,049,258.
b. Growth rate of about
%; predict the 2004 population to be 3,357,957.
c. Growth rate of
about 1.07%; predict the 2004 population to be about 3,838,310.
53. a. February 2003
b. The actual growth rate is greater than the 
assumed growth rate.
c. April 2011
55. 1,583 yr
57. In 1988, the
Shroud was about 662 years old.
59. When 
, 
or no 
O-ring failures; when 
, 
or 5 O-ring failures. 
Chapter 10 Review Questions, page 500
1.
2. 543
3. 4.3
4. 0.5
5. 3
6. a. 0.93
b. 3.99
7. a. 0.69
b.
8. a. 3.32
b.
9. 1.929418926
10. 6.214608098
11. 1.1178328654
12. 0.935554163
13.
14.
15.
16.
17. 5
18.
19. about 7 days
20. Equation is 
, where 
is the number of teens infected and t is the 
number of years after 1992.
A0
A 5 A0e0.59t
A
P
log111i2
101
99
log 5
2
log
2
 611
3
64
21
22.08
21
2
y < 4.80
x 5 32
y < 0.16
x 5 75
20.27
1024.25
20.023104906
CHAPTER 11 
11.1 Interest, page 514
7. C; interest rate is not stated, but you should still recognize a 
reasonable answer.
9. B is the most reasonable.
11. A
13. D
15. B
17. $1,500
19. $4,200
21. $1,028.25
23. $16,536.79
25. $1,132,835.66
27. $1,661.44
29. $165,298.89
31. a. $28,940.57
b. $29,222.27
c. $29,367.30
d. $29,465.60
e. $29,513.58
f. $29,515.24
g. $29,515.24
h. $22,800
33. $1,548.13
35. a. $2.74
b. $1.96
c. $3.06
d. $4.63
e. $2,509.30
f. $29,797.93
g. $43,912.74
h. $25,092.99
37. $1,220.19
39. $11,023.18
41. $5,219.84
43. $279,064
45. $17,072.71
47. P  $101,500
49. $800,000
51. $200,000
53. 4 years, 61 days
55. 7 years, 49 days 
57. a. 3 years, 3 months
b. 10 years
c. The interest rate is about 14%.
59.
11.2 Installment Buying, page 523
7. B
9. B
11. B
13. B
15. B
17. B
19. C
21. A
23. B 
(it should be the least expensive)
25. 15%
27. 18%
29. 8%
31. a. $4.50
b. $3.75
c. $3.95
33. a. $37.50
b. $36.88
c. $36.58
35. $14,181
37. $18,975
39. 23.4%
41. 21.1%
43. a. $344.17
b. $349.69
c. 4.9%
d. 0% is better
45. a. $711.67
b. $705.00
c. 4.9%
d. 2.5% is better
47. a. $11,430
b. $2,430
c. 0.09
d. 17.5%
49. a. $23,443.20
b. $9,093.20
c. 0.1584181185
d. 31.0%
51. a. $8,886.48
b. $2,088.48
c. 0.08702
d. 17.0%
53. 8% add-on rate; APR is about 15.7%
55. 11% add-on rate; APR is
about 21.6%
57. previous balance method, $45; adjusted balance
method, $40.50; average daily balance method, $43.35
59. $67.58 
11.3 Sequences, page 536
7. a. geometric
b.
c. 32
9. a. arithmetic
b.
c. 35
11. a. Fibonacci-type
b.
 5, 
 15
c. 35
13. a. geometric
b.
c.
15. a. geometric
b.
c. 27
17. a. none of the
classified types
b. differences are 
.. .
c. 5
22, 1,22, 1,22,
r 5 3
1
5
r 5 1
5
s2
s1
d 5 10
r 5 2
Y 5 11 1 r
n2 n 2 1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19. a. geometric
b.
c. 96
21. a. both arithmetic and geometric
b.
or 
c. 10
23. a. Fibonacci-type
b.
 3, 
 6
c. 24
25. a. geometric 
b.
c.
27. a. geometric
b.
or 
c. 4
29. a. arithmetic
b.
c.
31. a. arithmetic
b.
c.
33. a. 0, 3, 6
b. arithmetic; 
35. a.
b. arithmetic; 
37. a.
b. arith-
metic; 
39. a.
b. neither
41. a. 1, 3, 6
b. neither
43. a.
b. geometric, 
45. a.
b. both; 
or 
47. a.
b. neither
49.
51. 625
53.
55. 1, 2, 3, 5, 8
57. It is Fibonacci.
59. 1st number: 
2nd number: 
3rd number: 
4th number: 
5th number: 
6th number: 
7th number: 
8th number: 
9th number: 
10th number: 
SUM:
11.4 Series, page 546
5. 30
7. 150
9.
11. 12
13. 90
15. 10
17. 33 
19. 2
21.
23.
25. 25
27. 15
29. 110
31. 10,000
33. 5,050
35.
37. 11,500
39. 2,030
41. 120
43. 56; 64 
45. 9,330
47. 3,828 blocks
49. 200 cm
51. 1,500
53. 190 ft
55. 1,024,000,000 present after 10 days
57. 31 games
59. 364 games 
11.5 Annuities, page 554
7. $1,937.67
9. $2,026.78
11. $41,612.93
13. $74,517.97
15. $15,528.23
17. $18,294.60
19. $170,413.86
21. $540,968.11
23. $56,641.61
25. $59,497.67
27. $99,386.46
29. $38,754.39
31. $2,204.31
33. $252,057.07
35. $1,193.20
37. $1,896.70
39. $7,493.53
41. $8,277.87
43. $2,261.06
45. $36.89
47. $915,239.29
49. $27,298.98
51. $2,880.97
53. $1,666,454.24
55. $831,706
57. Answer depends on your age.
59. $255,309.73 
11.6 Amortization, page 560
3. m is the amount of a periodic payment (usually a monthly payment); 
n is the number of payments made each year; t is the number of years; 
r is the annual interest rate; A is the future value; and P is the present value
5. $2,586.28
7. $27,942.24
9. $20,442.52
11. $175,131.20
13. $297.46
15. $1,100.65
17. $1,316.36
19. $2,092.02
21. $6,882.42
23. $10,827.33
25. $5,429.91
27. $12,885.18
29. $7,407.76
31. $5,999.44
33. $6.38
35. $148.31
37. $430.73
39. $73.35
41. $780.54
43. $10,186.47
45. $117,238
47. $367,695.71
49. The annuity is the better choice.
51. $12,462,210.34
53. $206,029.43
55. a. decreases
b. increases
c. decreases
57. $1,510.92; $543,931.20; $213,046.20
59. price range
of $175,322.31 to $204,386.77 
11.7 Summary of Financial Formulas, page 565
5.
; the unknown is m
7. present value
9. annuity
11. amortization
13. present value of an annuity
15. amortization
17. annuity; $5,264.62
19. sinking fund; $1,574.10
21. a. annuity
b. $5,264.62
23. a. sinking fund
b. $1,670.92
25. a. future value
b. $27,081.62
27. a. present value of an annuity
b. $5,756.94
29. a. amortization
b. $1,028.61
31. a. annuity
b. $23,193.91
33. a. present value
b. $7,215.46
35. a. annuity
b. $21,867.63
37. a. present value
b. $165,134.88
39. a. amortization
b. $1,317.40
41. a. annuity
b. $228,803.04
43. a. future value
b. $884.12
45. a. future value
b. $9,506.04
47. a. present value
b. $3,655.96
49. a. present value
b. $148,348
51. a. present value
b. $500,420
m 5
P1 r
n2
12111r
n2 2nt
n1n 1 12
240
3
3
2
21
55x 1 88y 5 1115x 1 8y2
21x 1 34y
13x 1 21y
8x 1 13y
5x 1 8y
3x 1 5y
2x 1 3y
x 1 2y
x 1 y
y
x
3, 1, 1
3, 1
9, 1
27
2200
22, 3, 24
r 5 1
d 5 0
2
3, 2
3, 2
3
r 5 21
21, 1, 21
0, 1
2, 2
3
d 5 210
0, 210, 220
d 5 21
1, 0, 21
d 5 3
11
12
d 5 1
12
3
5
d 5 1
10
1
4
r 5 421
81
2
r 5 3
2
s2
s1
r 5 1
d 5 0
r 5 2
A18
Selected Answers
53. $1,328.94
55. $179,986.40, total; $112,932 savings
57. $726,624
59. Take $10,000 now and $45,000 in one year. 
Chapter 11 Review Questions, page 567
1. A sequence is a list of numbers having a first term, a second term, 
and so on; a series is the indicated sum of the terms of a sequence. 
An arithmetic sequence is one that has a common difference,
; a geometric sequence is one that has a common 
ratio, 
; and a Fibonacci-type sequence, 
, is 
one that, given the first two terms, the next is found by adding the 
previous two terms. The sum of an arithmetic sequence is 
or
, and the sum of a geometric sequence is 
.
2. A good procedure is to ask a series of questions. 
Is it a lump-sum problem? If it is, then what is the unknown? If FUTURE
VALUE is the unknown, then it is a future value problem. If PRESENT VALUE
is the unknown, then it is a present value problem. Is it a periodic
payment problem? If it is, then is the periodic payment known? If the
PERIODIC PAYMENT IS KNOWN and you want to find the future value, then it
is an ordinary annuity problem. If the PERIODIC PAYMENT IS KNOWN and
you want to find the present value, then it is a present value of an annuity
problem. If the PERIODIC PAYMENT IS UNKNOWN and you know the future
value, then it is a sinking fund problem. If the PERIODIC PAYMENT IS
UNKNOWN and you know the present value, then it is an amortization prob-
lem.
3. a. arithmetic; 
b. geometric; 
c. Fibonacci-type; 
, 
, 
d. none of
these (add 5, 10, 15, 20, . . . ); 55, 80
e. geometric; 
f. none of these (alternate terms); 5, 50
4. a. 5
b.
or 
5. There
are a minimum of 2,047 people.
6.
7. You should offer $19,500 for
the car.
8. a. The total interest is $783, and the monthly payment 
is $595.13.
b. The APR is 5.568%.
9. The APR is about 23.5%.
10. The adjusted balance method is most advantageous to the consumer.
The previous balance method’s finance charge is $3.94. The adjusted bal-
ance method’s finance charge is $3.19. The average daily balance
method’s finance charge is $3.42.
11. Deposit $11,297.10 to have 
a million dollars in 50 years.
12. a. The monthly payments are $1,288.12.
b. The price of the home is $192,500.
c. $639,122.51
13. $80,834.49
14. $97,178.53
15. $1,246,454.24
16. $302,821.47
17. You need to
set aside $97,178.53.
18. $10,000
19. Take installments.
20. Take
the one-time payment.    
282
1.43
43
30
gn 5 5 # 10n21
sn 5 sn21 1 sn22, n $ 3
s2 5 10
s1 5 5
gn 5 5 # 2n21
an 5 5n
Gn 5
g111 2 rn2
1 2 r
An 5 n
232a1 1 1n 2 12d 4
An 5 n1a1 1 an
2
2
sn 5 sn21 1 sn22
gn 5 g1rn21
an 5 a1 1 1n 2 12d
CHAPTER 12 
12.1 Permutations, page 580
3. 9
5. 72
7. 3,024
9. 132,600
11. 95,040
13. 1,680
15. 1
17. 2,520
19. 210
21. 5,527,200
23. 336
25. 7,920
27.
29.
31. 5,040
33. 360
35. 34,650
37. 4,989,600
39. 831,600
41. 120
43. 720
45. 16
47. 336
49. 6,400,000
51. 10,000
53. 40,320
55. 720
57. 64
59. 4,459
12.2 Combinations, page 588
3. 9
5. 84
7. 1
9. 22,100
11. 1
13. 35
15. 1,225
17.
19. 
21. 
23. 4,200
25. 1,260
27. 105
29. 792
31. 6
33. 1,287
35. 24
37. 10
39. 128 41. combination; 
; 142,506 43. combination; 
; 190
45. combination; 
; 4,495
47. neither; distinguishable permutation;
1,260
49. permutation; 
; 90
51. permutation; 
; 720
53. combination; 
; 35
55. permutation; 
; 42
57.
59.
; approximately 
12.3 Counting without Counting, page 595
3. 15
5. 786,240
7. 21
9. 78,960,960
11. 1,296
13. 31
15. 127
17. 2,730
19. 1.95  1011
21. 135
23. 27,405
6.043394448 3 1010
a31
6 b
16P2 # 19P2 #
an
5b
7P2
a7
4b
6P5
10P2
a31
3 b
a20
2 b
a30
5 b
m!
n!1m 2 n2!
k!
1k 2 42!
g!
h!1g 2 h2!
5!
15 2 r2!
g!
1g 2 h2!
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A19
25. permutation; 120
27. combination; 286
29. combination;
1,191,052,400
31. permutation; 720
33. distinguishable permutation; 24
35. FCP, permutation, and combination; 57,600
37. permutation; 24
39. combination; 66
41. Subsets: {a, b}; Arrangements: (a, b), (b, a)
43. Subsets: {a, b, c, d}; 24 arrangements
45. 810,000,000
47. 3,486,784,401
49. 26!
51. 9,134.2 centuries
53. Subtract each
pair of billiard balls to find the value of the ball located below the pair.
55. 0
57. 524,800
59. 6,161,805 
12.4 Rubik’s Cube and Instant Insanity, page 601
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
31. yes
33. no
35. no
37. yes
39.
41. B
43.
or 
45. B or 
47.
49.
51. BF
53. no
55. No,
answers vary.
57. 41,472 
Chapter 12 Review Questions, page 603
1. 40,314
2. 2
3. 120
4. 24
5. 28!
6. 10
7. 336
8. 1
9. 1,001
10. 970,200
11. They can form 220 different committees.
12. They can form 120 different lineups at the teller’s window.
13. happy: 60; college: 1,260
14. At least one red ball can be drawn in
100 ways.
15. The 100 senators can be formed into 75,287,520 different
five-member committees.
16. The claim is correct.
17. a. 1,024
b. 59,049
c. 9,765,625
18. a. 7,962,624
b. The result is more than
92 days (nonstop).
19. It is not possible.
20. The number of arrange-
ments is 
. This is almost 10,000 years, so that day
will never come for the members of this club.   
10P10 5 10! 5 3,628,800
TF21
U21B21
1B212 3
1U212 2
U 2
U21
T
F
U
U R
R
F F
R
R
F
F
F
F
F F
L
L
T T R
T T R
T T R
T
T
T
T R
R
R R
R
R
F
F
F
F
F F
L
L
L L L
T T T
T T T
U
F
T
T R
R
F F
R
R
F
F
F
F
F F
L
L
T T L
T T L
T T L
R
T
R
R R
R
B B
R
R
U
U
F
F
F F
R
R
F F F
T T T
T T T
F
T
T
T R
R
R T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F F
F
F
L L L
T T T
L L L
U
R
R
R R
R
R R
R
R
U
U
F
T
T F
F
T
B T F
B T F
B T F
L
F
R
R R
R
F F
R
R
F
F
F
F
F F
L
L
T T T
T T T
T T T
F
U
U
U R
R
R R
R
R
F
F
F
F
F F
F
F
R R R
T T T
T T T
F
R
R
R R
R
R R
R
R
F
F
F
B
B F
F
B
U T T
U T T
U T T
F
L
L
L R
R
R R
R
R
F
F
F
F
F F
F
F
U U U
T T T
T T T
F
R
R
R R
R
R R
R
R
F
F
F
U
U F
F
U
F T T
F T T
F T T
F
R
R
R R
R
R T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F F
F
F
T T T
T T T
L L L
F
R
R
F F
R
R R
R
F
F
L
L
L
F F
F
F
T T T
T T T
T T T
F
T
T
T R
R
R R
R
R
F
F
F
F
F F
F
F
L L L
T T T
T T T
CHAPTER 13 
13.1 Introduction to Probability, page 616
5. a.
b.
c.
7. a.
b.
c. 
9. about 0.05
11. 0.19
13. P(royal flush) 
0.000001539077169
15. P(four of a kind) 
0.0002400960384
17. P(flush) 
0.00196540155
19. P(three of a
kind) 
0.02112845138
21. P(one pair) 
0.42256902761
23. a. P(five of clubs) 
b. P(five) 
c. P(club) 
25. a. P(five and a jack)  0
b. P(five or a jack) 
27. a.
b.
c.
29. a.
b.
31.
33. P(seven) 5 1
6
P(five) 5 1
9
3
4
1
4
1
12
7
12
1
12
2
13
1
4
1
13
1
52
<
<
<
<
<
2
3
1
3
1
2
1
2
1
4
1
4
1
2
3
4
1
(1, 1)
(1, 2)
(1, 3)
(1, 4)
2
(2, 1)
(2, 2)
(2, 3)
(2, 4)
3
(3, 1)
(3, 2)
(3, 3)
(3, 4)
4
(4, 1)
(4, 2)
(4, 3)
(4, 4)
s
n
f
n
35.
37. P(four or five) 
39. P(eight or ten) 
41. Pick A.
43. Pick D.
45. Pick F.
47. Pick F.
49. Answers vary.
51. Answers vary; yes
53. 10%
55. a.
b. 
57. a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
59.
13.2 Mathematical Expectation, page 624
7. B
9. B
11. B
13. $0.08
15. $7.20
17. $0.25 for two plays 
of the game
19. $1.50
21. $0.05
23. $0.05
25. $0.05
27. $0.05
29. $0.05
31. fair game
33. not a fair game
35. $2.84
37. play
39. $6,415
41. $6,875; yes
43. $0.02; yes
45. $0.05
47. 1.82
49. no
51. yes
57. $1.50
59. $500.00 
13.3 Probability Models, page 634
3. 15,120 ways
5. The probability of event E is the ratio of s (success) to
n (total number), whereas the odds in favor of that same event is the ratio
of s (success) to f (failure) where  
.
7. C
9. B
11. B
13.
15. 0.995
17.
19.
21. 15 to 1
23. 9 to 2
25.
;
;
;
;
27.
29.
31. 1
33.
35.
37.
39.
41.
43. 51.5%
45. 36.1%
47. a. 0.3125
b. 0.675
c. 0.389
d. 0.70
49. a. 0
b. 1
51. a.
b.
c. 0
53.
5 odds against
55. a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
13.4 Calculated Probabilities, page 646
3.
, provided E and F are independent.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23. no
25. yes
27. yes
29.
31.
33.
35. a. 0.000455
b. 0.01229
c. 0.01229
d. 0.1538
e. 0.0237
37. $0.08
39. $1.42
41. $0.92
43. 2.7%
45.
47. a.
; 5
14
25
64
1
32
11
36
1
2
1
6
35
36
5
9
1
3
11
12
4
9
2
3
1
12
5
6
1
2
P1E d F2 5 P1E2 # P1F2
10
34
25
25
P1
P2
P2
P2
P2
9
35
35
34
10
34
24
34
First selection
Second selection
P1
2
7
12
17
5
17
25
34
9
34
5
7
2
7
5
f
n # n
s 5
f
s
P1E2
P1E2 5
1
5
1
5
26
51
4
17
4
51
1
2
1
3
4
11
33
34
P1#52 5 1
2
P1#42 5 5
12
P1#32 5 1
3
P1#22 5 2
5
P1#12 5 1
19
15
16
4
5
1
5
s 1 f 5 n
2
3
1
8
3
16
1
4
3
16
1
8
1
16
1
9
2
9
2
9
7
36
P(nine) 5 1
9
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

35.
37. 
39.
41. a.
b.
c. The graph in part b.
43. 
Salaries (80.23%)
3.90% Academic
11.23% Plant operations
1.78% Student activities
2.87% Athletics
100
Brand A
99
98
97
96
95
Percent
Brand B
Brand C
100
Brand A
80
60
40
20
0
Percent
Brand B
Brand C
1
0
40
Frequency
Temperature (in degrees Fahrenheit)
2
3
4
50
60
5
5
0
0
Number 
Registered cars
1
2
3
4
10
1
0
39
Frequency
Temperature (in degrees Fahrenheit)
41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59
2
3
4
5
45. Each figure represents 30 managing directors. 
Paine Webber: 46 out of 465, or about 10%.
women
men
women
men
Goldman, Sachs: 9 out of 173, or about 5%.
A20
Selected Answers
b.
; 
c.
; 
d.
; 
49. a. play
b. play
53. $0.44
55. $0.55
57. one spot
59. First bet: 0.5177; second bet: 0.4914
13.5 The Binomial Distribution, page 653
3. 0.132
5. 0.128
7. 0.016
9. 1.701  104
11. 0.3125
13. .234375
15. 0.161
17. 0.3125
19. 0.044
21. 0.0107
23. 0.296
25. 0.222
27. 0.656
29. 0.0001
31. 0.9477
33. 0.512
35. 0.096
37. 0.488
39. 0.2109
41. 0.4019
43. 0.3025
45. 0.1699
47. 0.1028
49. 0.2765
51. 0.0837
53. 16
55. a. 0.109375
b. 0.114265
57. 0.75
59. 0.3125 
Chapter 13 Review Questions, page 655
1. C
2. B
3. 0.004
4.
5.
6.
7.
8. a.
b.
c.
9. a. 0.99
b. 9 to 1
c.
10. $2
11. a.
b.
12.
13.
14. 0.138
15. 0.522
16.
17. 0.821
18. Choose C; 
19.
20. 1
25
1
5
P1C wins2 5 5
8
2
3
10.0012 x10.9992 n2x
Qn
xR
P1X 5 x2 5
2
15
1
2
3
5
1
1,001
1
18
5
9
11
36
1
17
4
13
5
36
1
2
15
56
15
64
15
28
15
32
3
38
9
64
CHAPTER 14
14.1 Frequency Distributions and Graphs, page 667
5. a. October
b. August
7. a. U.S. trade with Canada for 1990–2005
b. more imports
9. a. 121 kwh
b. 44 kwh
c. 209 kwh
d. 55 kwh
11. C
13. Graph is meaningless without a scale.
15. Graphs are based
on height, but the impression is that of area.
17. Three-dimensional bars
are used to represent linear data, which is not appropriate.
19. 25 times
21. Maybe DUI (illegal if under 18 yr old)
23. no
25. Number
27. Temperature
Tally Frequency
of Cars
Tally
Frequency
39
|
1
0
|
1
40
|
1
1
||||
4
41
2
||||| |||
8
42
3
||
2
43
||
2
4
|
1
44
|
1
45
||
2
46
47
|
1
48
49
||||
4
50
||||
4
51
|
1
52
||
2
53
||
2
54
||
2
55
||
2
56
57
||
2
58
||
2
59
|
1
29. 0
0
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
4
31. 3
9
4
0
3
3
4
5
5
7
9
9
9
9
5
0
0
0
0
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
7
7
8
8
9
33.
5
0
0
Number 
Registered cars
1
2
3
4
10
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A21
women
men
Merrill Lynch: 76 out of 694, or about 11%
47. $32 billion
49. CBS
51. The ratings for all three 
networks (except for FOX) have generally declined from 1986 to 2008.
53. 2.4 persons
55. 2036
57. The line graph at the right begins at 
50 rather than 0.
59. The advertisement says that the car is 57 in. wide on
the outside, but a full 5 ft across on the inside.
14.2 Descriptive Statistics, page 681
11. The data values are all the same.
13. mean  19; median  19; 
no mode
15. mean  767; median  767; no mode
17. mean  11;
median  9; no mode
19. mean  82; median  81; no mode
21. mean  6; median  2.5; mode  1
23. range  4; var.  2.5; 
s
1.58
25. range  4; var.  2.5; s
1.58
27. range  24; 
var.  93.5; s
9.67
29. range  25; var.  83; s
9.11
31. range  21; var.  62.86; s
7.93
33. median  432.51; 
 427.48; 
 442.28
35. mean  13; median  11; mode  10
37. mean  68; 
median  70; mode  70; range  50
39. mean 
366; median  365; no
mode
41. A
43. C
45. a. mean  105.25
b. median  12
c. mode  42
47. 5
49. 12
51. 15
53. mean  19,200; 
range  4,000; s
1,483
57. a.
; H.M.  4.7
b.
mph; H.M.  56.1 mph
14.3 The Normal Curve, page 692
5. The mean is to the right of the median.
7. 5%, 16%, 45%, 79%, 94%,
99%, 100%; 
, median  3, mode  3
9. 1%, 12%, 47%, 68%,
88%, 94%, 97%, 99%, 100%; 
, median  3, mode  2
11. 28%, 40%, 75%, 81%, 100%; 
; median  8; mode  8
13. 41.92%
15. 49.25%
17. 49.99%
19. 49.01%
21. 17.72%
23. 48.68%
25. a. 34 people
b. 34 people
27. 91.92%
x 5 7.84
x 5 2.94
x 5 2.62
x 5 56.5
x 5 6.5
<
<
Q1 Q2
Q3
420
450
Q3
Q1
<
<
<
<
<
29. Height Number Cumulative
31. 60 or above
33. 25
35. 87
155
0.1% 
160
1
2.3% 
165
7
15.9% 
170
17
50.0% 
175
17
84.1% 
180
7
97.7% 
185
1
99.9% 
190
100.0% 
37. 69
39. Grade
Score
Cumulative
41. mode
A
87 and above
6% 
B
80–86
22% 
C
70–79
78% 
D
65–69
94% 
F
64 and below
100.0% 
43.
45.
47. 0.1587
49. 42.07%
51. 0.0228 or 2.28%
53. 0.3085
55. a. 50%
b. 12.4 oz
57. Graph a has less variance and graph b has more variance.
x 5 68.919
x 5 98.0675
59. 4
0.00001
3
0.00195
2
0.06250
1
0.50000
0
1.00000
1
0.50000
2
0.06250
3
0.00195
4
0.00001
14.4 Correlation and Regression, page 699
3.
5. Strong positive 
correlation
7. no
9. yes
11. no
13. yes
15. yes
17. no
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
31. D
33. A
35. C
37.
; 
39.
; 
41.
, significant at 5%
43.
, significant at 1%
45.
47.
, no significant
49.
, significant at 1%
correlation
51.
53. yr5 26.186x 1 87.179
yr5 0.468x 1 19.235
r 5 20.936
r 5 0.358
yr5 2.4545x 1 6.0909
r 5  0.8421
r 5 0.8830
r 5 1
yr5 x 1 2
r 5 0
yr5 6
yr5 22.380x 1 270.00
yr5 22.7143x 1 30.0571
yr5 21.95x 1 4.146
r 5 20.890
r 5 20.954
r 5 20.765
r 5
nSxy 2 1Sx2 1Sy2
!n1Sx22 2 1Sx2 2 !n1Sy2 2 2 1Sy2 2
55. a. Time 27:31 or 27 hr 31 min; the difference is 4 hr 29 min.
57. a. Time is 44:21 or 44 hr 21 min.
59.
, significant at the
5% level 
14.5 Sampling, page 706
5. B
7. B
9. D
11. A
13. D
25. (1) You accept that 72 is the
mean, and it is the mean. (2) You accept that 72 is the mean, and it is not
the mean. This is Type II error (accept a false hypotheses). (3) You do not
accept that 72 is the mean, and it is the mean. This is Type I error (reject a
true hypothesis). (4) You do not accept that 72 is the mean, and it is not the
mean. 
Chapter 14 Review Questions, page 709
1. Heads: ||||| ||||| ||||| ||| (18); Tails ||||| ||||| ||||| ||||| || (22)
r 5 0.380
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15. mean
; median  23,675; no mode
16. 18,091
17. a.
b.
c.
d. Impressions can be greatly influenced by using faulty or inappropriate
scale (or even worse, no scale at all).
18.
The best-fitting line is 
.
19.
; not significant at 1% or 5% levels
20. Approximately 1 in
1,000 pregnancies will have a 314-day duration. 
r 5 0.658
yr5 0.22x 1 81.8
18
10
20
30
40
28 38 48 58 68
50
60
70
80
90
100
y
x
78 88 98
250
1993
1994
1995
1996
260
270
280
1,000
1993
1994
1995
1996
2,000
3,000
4,000
50
1993
1994
1995
1996
100
150
200
250
300
5 255,585
10
5 25,558.5
A22
Selected Answers
2.
3.
4.
5. 23
6. 21
7. 35
8. 11.59
9. mean  11; median  12;
232
3
"Andrew"
"Barbara"
"Carla"
12.0
11.0
10.0
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
Grade equivalent (GE)
Word
Recognition
Spelling
Word 
Meaning
(Vocabulary)
Silent
Reading
Comprehension
Heads
Tails
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
mode  12; mode is the most appropriate measure.
10. mean  79;
median  74; no mode; mean is the most appropriate measure.
11. mean  $113,423; median  $110,750; no mode; the median is the
most appropriate measure. 
12. a. yes 
b. yes 
13. a. LTL
b. Courier Air
c. October
14.
Coalinga
Brisbane
Brentwood
Cupertino
Lincoln
Rio Vista
Rocklin
Dublin
La Quinta
Temecula
60,000
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
Population
Fastest-growing CA Cities
Men
Women
Children
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Saved
Lost
First-class
Second-class
Third-class
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Saved
Lost
CHAPTER 15 
15.1 Cartesian Coordinates and Graphing Lines, page 722
1. a. Aphrodite
b. Maxwell Montes
c. Atalanta Planitia
d. Rhea
Mons
e. Lavina Planitia   Ordered pairs in Problems 7–18 may vary.
7. (0, 5), (1, 6), (2, 7)
9. (0, 5), (1, 7), (1, 3)
11. (0, 1), (1, 0),
(2, 1)
13. (0, 1), (1, 1), (1, 3)
15. (0, 1), (1, 3), (2, 5)
17. (0, 2),
(2, ), (4, 1) 
19.
21.
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
1
2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A23
23.
25.
27.
29.
31.
33.
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
35.
37.
39.
41.
43.
45. C
47. A
49. E
x
y
–500
500
5
–5
x
y
–100
100
100
–100
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
51. a. nearly
b. y  0.14x  5.8
c. 0.9
53. a.
b. 800
c. 10,000
55. a.
b. loss of $850
c. 1.25; it is the profit increase corresponding to each
unit increase in number of items sold
57. 22.3 million 
200 400 600 800 1000
400
800
–800
–400
P
x
0
2
4
6
8
10
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
t
A
15.2 Graphing Half-Planes, page 725
3. F
5. F
7. T
9. T
11. T
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A24
Selected Answers
25.
27.
29.
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–.5
–1
1
.5
.5
1
–.5
–1
x
y
–.5
–1
1
.5
.5
1
–.5
–1
15.3 Graphing Curves, page 730
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
31.
33.
35.
37.
39.
41.
x
y
0.5
1.0
5
10
x
y
0.5
1.0
5
10
x
y
5
1
–1
x
y
–8
–16
2
4
x
y
5
1
–1
x
y
5
1
–1
x
y
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A25
43. a.
b. downward
c.
45.
47.
49.
51.
53.
55.
57.
59.
x
y
–0.4
0.4
0.2
–0.2
2
4
–2
–4
t
y
10
20
30
40
50
60
20
40
x
y
1000
2000
4000
2000
8
Compound
interest
Simple interest
16
t
500
t
P
10
20
5000
x
y
5
10
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
50
–50
100
150
200
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
x
y
50
–50
100
150
200
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
If 
The crossover point 
is
between 4,700 and 5,000, so he
will make it across.
1y 5 02
x 5 5,000, y 5 2550, negative.
x 5 4,700, y 5 188, positive;
x 5 4,000, y 5 1,560, positive;
15.4 Conic Sections, page 743
9. A and C have opposite signs.
11. A  0 and 
, or 
and
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25. a. line
b. ellipse
c. parabola
27. a. parabola
b. hyperbola
c. ellipse
14
12
10
8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
10
12
14
F1
F2
14 12
10
8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
10
12
14
F1
F2
0
–1
–2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
F
5
6
0
–1
–2
1
2
3
4
7
8
9
10
11
12
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
F
0
–1
–2
1
2
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
F
A 5 C 5 0
C 5 0
A 2 0
C 2 0
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A26
Selected Answers
29.
31.
33.
35.
37.
39.
41.
43.
45.
47.
49.
51.
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–10
10
10
–10
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
53. aphelion is 
mi; perihelion is 
mi.
55. 
57. 2.25 m
59. 8 in.
15.5 Functions, page 750
3. function
5. function
7. not a function
9. function
11. function
13. not a function
15. a. 18
b. 22
c.
d. 11
e.
17. a. 17
b. 37
c. 65
d.
e.
19. a. 7
b. 11
c.
d. 0
e.
21. a. 8
b.
c.
23. a.
b.
c.
25. a. 5
b.
c.
27. not a function; domain: 
; range: 
29. not a function; domain: 
;
range: 
31. function; domain: 
; range: 
33. quadratic
35. logarithmic
37. probability
39. 3
41.
43.
45. a. 64
b. 96
c. 128
d. 256
e. 512
47. a. 1,430
b. 1,050
c. 670
d. 290
e. 100
49. a. 4
b. 0
c. 25
51.
; domain: 
53.
; domain: 
55. Toss a rock into the well and measure the time it takes to hit the 
bottom. It will take 18 seconds.
57.
59.
Chapter 15 Review Questions, page 753
1.
2.
3.
4.
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–10
10
5
–5
A 5 AP
4B2
f 1x2 5 10x 1 25
x # 5
y 5 !5 2 x
y 5 3x 2 5
21
x1x 1 h2
x
y
.2
.4
.6
2
4
–2
–4
3x2 1 3xh 1 h2
x
y
–4
–2
2
4
2
4
–2
–4
x
y
–4
–2
2
4
2
4
–2
–4
28 # y # 4
22 # x # 3
x $ 23
23 # y # 3
21 # x # 1
3
2
22
3a 2 1
231
21
p 2 7
216
2t 2 1
217
t2 1 1
11
4
21t 1 52
26
< 0.053
1.3 3 108
1.5 3 108
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A27
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13. Yes
14. 20
15. 3
16. 75
17. 5
x
y
–1.5
1.5
0.5
1.5
0.5
–0.5
–1.5
x
y
–1.5
1.5
0.5
1.5
0.5
–0.5
–1.5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–6
6
3
–3
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–100
–200
100
200
100
200
–100
–200
18.
19.
t
y
50
100
150
200
250
2 4 6 8
P
A
1
4
8
12
16
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
20.
P
100,000
t
75,000
50,000
25,000
10
20
30
40
CHAPTER 16
16.1 Systems of Linear Equations, page 761
7. (4, 1)
9. inconsistent
11. (1, 1)
13. (1, 1)
15. (5, 3)
17. (1, 2)
19. (2, 10)
21. (9, 4)
23. (4, 1)
25. (6, 2)
27. (525, 35)
29. (5, 2)
31. dependent
33. (s1, s2)  (3, 4)
35. (u, v)  (5, 2)
37.
39. (5, 3)
41. (3, 1)
43. (3, 1)
45. (4, 1)
47.
49. (1, 1)
51. inconsistent
53. (8, 2)
55.
57. 2,601 days after the cat’s birth—namely, June 2, 1999.
59.
, 
16.2 Problem Solving with Systems, page 770
1. The box has 31 nickels and 56 dimes.
3. There are 18 nickels.
5. The plane’s speed in still air is 390 mph.
7. The equilibrium point for
the system is (50, 250 000).
9. The optimum price for the items is $3.
11. Goldie Hawn was born in 1945.
13. Mixture a has 7 lb of micoden.
15. Mixture c has 0.5p L of bixon.
17. Mixture a contains 
%
micoden.
19. There are 40 oz of the base metal.
21. Mix 45 gal of
milk with 135 gal of cream.
23. The equilibrium point is (58, 9200).
25. The equilibrium point is (2, 10,000).
27. There are 14 dimes 
and 28 quarters.
29. Clint Eastwood was born in 1930.
31. Matt Damon was born in 1970.
33. Add gal water.
35. TX is 
262,134 sq mi and FL is 54,090 sq mi.
37. There are 37 quarters.
39. There are 30 dimes.
41. The robbery included 14 $5 bills, 
70 $10 bills, and 31 $20 bills.
43. The plane’s speed is 304.5 mph.
45. Mix together 28.5 gal of milk with 1.5 gal of cream.
47. The Bank
of America building is 779 ft and the Transamerica Tower is 853 ft.
49. The length of the Verrazano Narrows bridge is 4,260 ft.
51. The
equilibrium point is $3.50 for 4,000 items.
53. Mix 20 g of pure silver
and 80 g of sterling silver.
55. Add in 25 gallons of cream.
57. Replace qt of the punch with 7-UP.
59. a. 125 items would be
supplied; 75 would be demanded
b. No items would be supplied at
$200.
c. No items would be demanded at $400.
d. The equilibrium
price is $233.33.
e. The number of items produced at the equilibrium
price is 83.  
16.3 Matrix Solution of a System of Equations, page 781
5. false
7. true
9. true
11. false
13. false
15. a.
b.
c.
17. RowSwap([B], 1, 2); 
19. *Row(15, [D], 1);
£
1
0
2
28
22
3
5
9
0
1
0
5
§
μ
x1 5 32
x2 5 27
x3 5 25
0 5 3
e
x1 5 3
x2 1 2x3 5 4
•
6x 1 7y 1 8z 5 3
x 1 2y 1 3z 5 4
y 1 3z 5 4
5
8
1
3
462
3
aa 2 "a2 2 4
2
, a 1 "a2 2 4
2
b
aa 1 "a2 2 4
2
, a 2 "a2 2 4
2
A28
5, 221
5 B
A1
3, 22
3B
A3
5, 1
2B
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A28
Selected Answers
A28
Selected Answers
21. *Row(3, [B], 1, 2); 
23. *Row(2, [D], 1, 2), Row(3, [Ans], 1, 3);
25. *Row(13, [B], 2); 
27. *Row(1, [D], 3, 2); 
29. *Row(3, [B], 2, 1), *Row(2, [Ans], 2, 3); 
31. *Row(5, [D], 2, 1), *Row(1, [Ans], 2, 3), 
*Row(2, [Ans], 2, 4); 
33. *Row(18, [B], 3); 
35. *Row(12, [D], 3); 
37. *Row(4, [B], 3, 2), *Row(3, [Ans], 3, 1); 
39. *Row(8, [D], 3, 1), *Row(4, [Ans], 3, 2), 
*Row(1, [Ans], 3, 4);
41. (5, 3)
43. (3, 1)
45. (4, 1)
47. (4, 1)
49. (2, 0, 1)
51. (3, 2, 5)
53. (2, 3, 1)
55. (2, 3, 2)
57.
59. Mix 3 containers of Spray I with 4 containers of
Spray II. 
16.4 Inverse Matrices, page 794
9. a. 
b.
11. a.
b.
13. a.
b.
15. a. not conformable
b. not conformable
17.
19. [A][B]  [B][A] 
21.
23.
25.
27. (3, 2)
29. (5, 4)
31. (38, 21)
33. (3, 2)
35. (3, 5)
37. (4, 1)
39. (3, 1)
41. (2, 2)
≥
1
0
21
0
0
1
2
0
0
22
0
2
1
0
0
1
0
¥
£
9
24
22
218
9
4
24
2
1
§
c2
7
1
4d
c1
0
0
1d
•
x 1 2y 1 4z 5 13
23x 1 2y 1 z 5 11
2x 1 z 5 0
≥
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
¥
c 14
14
27
7d
£
21
37
32
4
14
45
27
9
28
§
£
20
21
34
29
16
15
7
48
5
§
£
26
21
22
3
27
23
4
27
22
§
£
2
4
2
6
22
4
2
2
5
§
A1, 2, 21
2B
≥
1
0
0
2
24
0
1
0
2
28
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
0
1
9
¥
£
1
0
0
7
0
1
0
27
0
0
1
3
§
≥
1
0
28
2
8
0
1
21
3
2
0
0
1
0
5
0
0
22
1
6
¥
£
1
0
4
25
0
1
3
6
0
0
1
1.5
§
≥
1
0
226
28
8
0
1
5
2
0
0
0
21
22
5
0
0
213
23
7
¥
£
1
0
12
27
0
1
22
25
0
0
22
24
§
£
1
3
22
0
0
1
24
8
0
3
6
1
§
£
1
5
23
5
0
1
3
25
0
2
1
5
§
£
1
5
3
2
0
27
27
0
0
213
28
26
§
£
1
3
25
6
0
13
214
20
0
5
1
3
§
£
1
4
3
6
5
7
25
3
2
12
0
1
4
§
43. (1, 8)
45. (5, 6, 1)
47. (26, 52, 15)
49. (88, 176, 38)
51. (1, 1, 1)
53. (2, 4, 1)
55. a.
b. It is the same as the Pascal’s matrix except that the signs of the terms
alternate.
57.
59. a. Riesling costs 24; 
Charbono, 25; and Rosé, 51
b. Outside bottling, 230; produced and
bottled at winery, 520; estate bottled, 280
c. It is the total cost of 
production of all three wines. 
16.5 Modeling with Linear Programming, page 804
5. a.
b.
7. 
9. 
11. 
13. 
15. 
17. 
19. a. no
b. yes
c. no
d. no
e. no
f. no
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
x
y
–5
5
5
–5
3A43 5 ≥
2
4
1
3
4
2
3
4
1
3
0
1
3
4
1
2
¥
P 5 E
1
0
0
0
0
21
1
0
0
0
1
22
1
0
0
21
3
23
1
0
1
24
6
24
1
U
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A29
Selected Answers
A29
21.
23. 
25. 
27. 
29.
31. 
33.
35. (0, 0), 
, (5, 2), (6, 0)
37. (0, 0), (0, 4), (2, 3), (4, 0)
39. (0, 0), (0, 4), (4, 4), (6, 2), (6, 0)
41. (0, 0), 
, 
, 
43. (50, 0), 
, (8, 24), 
(0, 40)
45. (3, 2), (5, 5), (7, 5), 
47. maximum W  190 at
(5, 2) 49. maximum P  500 at (2, 3)
51. minimum A  12 at (0, 4)
53. Let x  number of grams of food A, y  number of grams of food B;
Minimize C  0.29x  0.15y, Subject to 
55. Let x  amount invested in stock (in millions of dollars), 
y  amount invested in bonds (in millions of dollars); Maximize 
T  0.12x  0.08y, 
Subject to 
57. The maximum profit P  $14,300 is
achieved with all 100 acres planted in corn.
59. $70,000 in stocks and
$30,000 in bonds for a yield of $17,000 
μ
x $ 0, 
x # 8, y $ 2
x 1 y # 10
x # 3y
μ
x $ 0, y $ 0
10x 1 5y $ 200
2x 1 5y $ 100
3x 1 4y $ 20
A10
3 , 4
3B
A200
7 , 60
7 B
A8
3, 0B
A24
13, 16
13B
A0, 8
5B
A0, 9
2B
x
y
10
–10
x
y
–5
5
5
x
y
5
5
x
y
–5
5
–5
x
y
5
10
5
–5
x
–10
10
10
–10
x
y
–10
10
10
–10
Chapter 16 Review Questions, page 807
1. 
2. 
3. not conformable
4.
5.
6.
7.
8. (3, 4)
9. (0, 1)
10. (1, 3)
11. (1, 2, 1)
12. (33, 79)
13. (3, 1)
14. (5, 0)
15. (4, 2, 1)
16. (11, 9)
17.
18. Use 7 bars of Product I and 3 bars of Product II.
19. The number of
product I to be manufactured is 100; product II, 150; and product III, 250.
20. Plant 100 acres of corn and 200 acres of wheat (200 acres are left
unplanted). 
x
y
–10
10
5
–5
£
7
23
23
21
1
0
21
0
1
§
c21
22
3
4d
c1
0
2
21d
£
4
22
0
8
25
22
1
21
21
§
c3
22
5
25d
£
4
25
0
7
21
2
21
22
4
§
17.2 Voting Dilemmas, page 836
11. a. California Teachers Association
b. no
13. a. There is no 
majority winner; A wins plurality.
b. A
c. no
15. a. A wins
b. C wins
c. yes
17. a. A
b. There is no majority winner; B wins
plurality. This violates the Condorcet criterion.
19. a. A wins
b. B wins
c. yes
21. There is no majority winner; C wins plurality.
This violates the Condorcet criterion.
23. C wins; yes
25. A is the
Condorcet candidate.
27. A wins; no
29. A wins; no
31. E wins
33. E wins; no
35. M wins; yes
37. Lillehammer wins; no
39. a. Beijing wins
b. no
41. a. Chirac and Le Pen
b. Answers
vary.
c. Answers vary.
43. Betty wins; no
45. Betty wins; none
47. D (Dave) wins; no
49. D; no
51. a. no winner
b. A, C, or D
could win depending on the way they are paired.
c. Yes, both of these
methods violate the condition of decisiveness.
53. a. B wins
b. yes
55. a. no majority; C wins plurality
b. There is no winner because B
and C tie.
c. B wins
d. C wins; yes
CHAPTER 17
17.1 Voting, page 822
13. 12
15. a. “(ACB)” means that the voter ranks three candidates in the
order of A first, C next, and candidate B last.
b. It means that in the 
election there were 4 voters who ranked the candidates in the order ACB.
17. a. “(BCA)” means that the voter ranks three candidates in the order of
B first, C next, and candidate A last.
b. It means that in the election
there were no voters who ranked the candidates in the order BCA.
19. 10
21. a. “(ADBC)” means the voter picks A as the first choice, fol-
lowed by D, then B, with C in last place.
b. It means that in the election
there were 8 voters who ranked the candidates in the order ADBC.
23. a. 24
b. (ABCD), (ABDC), (ACBD), (ACDB), (ADCB), (BACD),
(BCAD), (BCDA), (BDAC), (CABD), (CADB), (CBAD), (CBDA),
(CDAB), (CDBA), (DABC), (DBAC), (DBCA), (DCBA)
25. a. 6
b. 24
c. 120
27. n!
29. A wins
31. A wins
33. A wins
35. snacks
37. Howard Dean
39. no winner
41. A wins
43. A wins
45. no winner
47. C wins
49. C wins
51. a. B
b. plurality vote
53. a. C
b. plurality vote
55. 120
57. C wins
59. D wins 
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A30
Selected Answers
A30
Selected Answers
CHAPTER 18
18.1 What Is Calculus?, page 879
5.
7. 1
9.
11.
13.
15.
No single tangent line exists.
P
x
y
P
P
p
1
3
tower is 176 ft.
b. The velocity is 32t  96.
29. a. $8,900/item
b. $6,200/item
c. $5,930/item
d. 5,900  30h
18.4  Integrals, page 904
1. 40
3. 24
5. 19.5
7. 6x  C
9. x2  5x  C
11. x 2  4x  C
21. 242
23. 82.5
25. 2e  2
27. 76
29. 58,965.3; this represents the increase in the number of
bacteria after 10 hours.
Chapter 18 Review Questions, page 906
1. limits, derivatives, and integrals
2. The closer the measurements are
together, the better the approximation at a particular point.
3. 0
4. does not exist
5.
6.
7. e
8. 0
9. 2
10. 1
11. 8x
12. 22e0.5x
13. 8x2  C
14.
15. 33
16. 6
17. 4.67
18. 2x  y  1  0
19. 7 mph
20. Oil reserves will be depleted
in 2014. 
px 1 C
`
3
7
2
3
3
2
1
2
17.
19.
21.
23. 20
25. 4 or 5
27. 3 
18.2 Limits, page 855
3. 0, 2, 0, 2, 0
5. , , 2, ,
7. 8,000
9.
11. 5
13. 4
15. 0
17. 0
19. 0.7
21. 0
23.
25. 3
27. 3
29. 0.75 mg;
24
mg
18.3 Derivatives, page 895
1. a. 5.71 ft/s
b. 15 ft/s
c. 40 ft/s
d. 40 ft/s
3. a. 59 mph
b. 18 mph
c. 36 mph
d. 38 mph
5. Let $ be trillions of dollars. 
a. 0.198 $/yr
b. 0.255 $/yr
c. 0.307 $/yr
d. 0.348 $/yr
e. 0.371 $/yr
f. It is changing at the rate of $371 billion per year (or greater).
7.
9.
slope is 32
slope is 2
11.
13. a. 0
b. 0
slope is 2
5
Q
P
5
10
y
h
x
m
x
10
5
P
Q
y
g
5
h
10
5
P
Q
y
x
5
h
A1
2Bn
`
2
3
16
7
13
6
7
4
4
3
3
2
1
2
2
3
15. a. 25
b. 15
17. x2
19.
21. 2  6x
23. 16x  y  32  0
25. 4x  y  0
27. a. The height of the 
26e26x
17.3 Apportionment, page 856
7. a. 3; 4
b. 3.5
c. 3.46
d. 4; 4
9. a. 1; 2
b. 1.5
c. 1.41
d. 1; 2
11. a. 2; 3
b. 2.5
c. 2.45
d. 2; 3
13. a. 1,695; 1,696
b. 1,695.5
c. 1,695.50
d. 1,695; 1,695
15. 6,500
17. 126
19. 120,833.33
21. 184,000 
Year
d
Manhattan Bronx Brooklyn Queens Staten Island
23. 1800
10,125
6.02
0.20
0.59
0.69
0.49
25. 1900 429,750
4.30
0.47
2.72
0.36
0.16
27. 1990 915,500
1.63
1.32
2.51
2.13
0.41
29. a. 11,600
b. 3.02, 1.81, 1.03, 4.14
c. 9
d. 10,000
31. a. 80,000
b. 1.69, 2.89, 1.48, 3.95
c. 7
d. 65,000
33. a. 11,600
b. 3.02, 1.81, 1.03, 4.14
c. 13
d. 13,000
35. a. 80,000
b. 1.69, 2.89, 1.48, 3.95
c. 11
d. 110,000 
CT DE GA KY ME MD MA NH NJ NY NC
PA
RI SC VT VA
37. 6.41 1.59 2.23 1.99 2.61 8.62 10.21 3.83 4.97 9.17 10.65 11.69 1.86 6.72 2.30 20.16
39. 96
41. N, 3; S, 2; E, 3; W, 2
43. N, 4; S, 2; E, 3; W, 1
45. N, 4; S,
2; E, 3; W, 1
47. N, 8; S, 5; E, 7; W, 6
49. N, 8; S, 5; E, 7; W, 6
51.
N, 5; S, 3; E, 4; W, 4
53. N, 5; S, 3; E, 5; W, 3
55. N, 5; S, 3; E, 5; W, 3
57. N, 52; NE, 84; E, 50; SE, 57; S, 34; SW, 71; W, 95; NW, 32
59. N,
52; NE, 84; E, 50; SE, 57; S, 34; SW, 71; W, 94; NW, 33 
17.4 Apportionment Paradoxes, page 863
5. State A violates the quota rule.
7. State A violates the quota rule.
9. State D violates the quota rule.
11. State A illustrates the Alabama
paradox.
13. State B illustrates the Alabama paradox.
15. State C 
illustrates the population paradox.
17. State C illustrates the population
paradox.
19. State A illustrates the new states paradox.
21. State B 
illustrates the new states paradox.
23. a. 62.78
b. A: 199.43;  
B: 72.55;  C: 12.93;  D: 15.08
c. A: 199, 200;   B: 72, 73;   C: 12, 13;
D: 15, 16
d. modified quota is 62.4; A: 200, B: 72, C: 13, D: 15
e. no
25. a. 203.3
b. Uptown (U): 83.52;  Downtown (D): 16.48
c. U: 84;
D: 16
d. U: 83;  D: 17;  New: 12
e. yes
27. yes
29. Adams’ or
Webster’s plan gives the correct apportionment of the horses. 
Chapter 17 Review Questions, page 866
1. no majority; plurality vote goes to C
2. 3
3. A
4. B
5. Hare
method violates the Condorcet criterion.
6. A
7. yes, B
8. Carr (280),
Crouch (770), Dorsey (638), Freeney (42), Grossman (708), 
Harrington (364), McKinnie (116), Peppers (41), El (267), Williams (146);
Crouch wins
9. A
10. A
11. C; yes
12. 7.9
13. EA: 11.39; MC:
27.22; M: 33.92; P: 16.84;  SR: 10.63.  The lower and upper quotas are EA:
11, 12;  MC: 27, 28;   M: 33, 34;  P: 16, 17   SR: 10, 11.
14. EA: 12;  MC: 27; M: 33; P: 17; SR: 11
15. EA: 11; MC: 28;  
M: 34;  P: 17;  SR: 10
16. EA: 11;  MC: 27;  M: 34;  P: 17;  SR: 11
17.
EA: 11;  MC: 27;  M: 34; P: 17; SR: 11
18. EA: 11;  MC: 27;  
M: 34;  P: 17;  SR: 11
19. no
20. Downtown: 70;  Fairground: 29;
Columbus Square: 28;  Downtown West: 27;  Peabody: 26 
EPILOGUE
Epilogue Problem Set, page E10
3. a. social science
b. natural science
c. natural science
d. humanities
e. social science
5. a. social science
b. natural science
c. social science
d. social science
e. natural science
f. natural science
7. all natural science
9. 1.46  108
11. Venus and Neptune 13. 54 oz.
15. genotype SS
0.3025; genotype wS or Sw
0.4950;
genotype ww
0.2025
5
5
5
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selected Answers
A31
17. 0.45 cm2
19.
21. a. 0.0996
b. Let each unit be 
23. 24
0.5
1.0
1.5
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
0.5
1.0
1.5
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
y
x
"1016 5 108.
25. a.
A
B
C
D
b. Answers vary.
27.
29. A. 6
b. 3
a
b
c
d
≥
11, 22
13, 12
14, 12
12, 22
12, 32
14, 42
13, 22
11, 12
12, 42
13, 32
14, 42
11, 32
13, 12
12, 22
14, 32
11, 42
¥
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A
A posteriori model, 609
A priori model, 609
Abacist, 145
Abacus, 148, 160
Abel, Niels, 226, 255, 609
Abelian group, 226
Abscissa, 716
Absolute value, 197
Abstraction, 876, E2
Abundant numbers, 211
Academy Awards
problem, 662
voting, 869
Accuracy, 427
procedure used in this book, 427
Achaemenid, P2
Achilles, 293, 872
Achilles and the tortoise problem, 
249, 872
Acre, 441
Actors, 662
Acute
angle, 342
triangle, 350
ADA problem, 318
Adams, John Quincy, 847, E6
Adams’ apportionment plan, 845
summary, 854
Add-on interest, 517
Adding machine problem, 133
Addition, 175
identity, 224, 225
integers, 198
flowchart for, 198
inverse property, 225
law of exponents, 35
matrices, 783
method for solving systems, 760
origin of word, 175
principle, 136
rational numbers, 206
Addition property
of equality, 275
of inequality, 285
of probability, 642
Additive
identity, 225, E5
inverse, 225
of a matrix, 788
law of logarithms, 485
property of numeration systems, 136
Address, 156
Adjacent
angles, 343
sides, 359
Adjusted balance method, 522
Adleman, Leonard, 241, 244
Aestheometry, 387
Africa Counts, 401
Age chart puzzle, 158
Age of Genius, P8
Age of Reason, P8
Age problems, 766
Agenda effect, 833
Agreement regarding rounding, 296
AHA, P2
Ahlfors, L. V., 139
Ahmed, Maya Moshin, 47
Ahmes’ dilemma, P2
problem, 17
Ahmose, 136
AIDS
deaths (example), 491
teenagers, 500
Al-Khwâarizmî, Mohammed ibn Musa,
P7, 145, 251, 283
Alabama paradox, 860
summary, 863
Alberti, Leone, P8
Alderman, Leonard, 241, 244
Aleph-null, 73
Alexander the Great, P2
Algebra, 231, 251
evaluate, 264
factor, 258
finite, 231
flow of knowledge, P10
four main processes, 250
history of, P10
matrices, 783
origin of word, P7, 251
simplify, 252
solve, 274
Algorist, 145
Algorithm, 145
Alice in Wonderland, 108
All, 87
negation of, 87
All Is Vanity, 337
Allen, Paul, 166
Alphamagic square, 47
Altair 8800, 166
Alternate
exterior angles, 344
interior angles, 344
Alternating series, 539
America Online, 165
American Express, 521
American Pyramid, 381
American Standard Code for Information
Interchange, 155
Amicable number, 196
Amortization, 560, E10
calculator program, 558
distinguish from simple interest, 560
formula, 558
Amount
add-on interest, 517
compound interest, 509
simple interest, 503
Amplitude, 493
Anacin
example, 667
problem, 669
Analytic engine, 162
Analytic geometry, 726
Anamorphic art, 420, 424
Anamorphosis, 420, 424
And, 85
as an intersection, 59
-gate, 126
table, 85
with probabilities, 614
Angle(s), 341
acute, 342
adjacent, 343
alternate exterior, 344
alternate interior, 344
classification of, 342
complementary, 343
congruent, 343
construction, 341
corresponding, 344, 356
equal, 342
exterior, 352
included, 350
obtuse, 342
of depression, 367
of elevation, 367
right, 342
straight, 342
supplementary, 343
trisect, 336
vertical, 343
with parallel lines, 344
von Anhalt-Zerbst, Sophie, 390
Annual
compounding, 507
interest rate, 503
percentage rate, 519
salary increase problem, 569
yield, 516
Annuity, 549
calculator program, 553
formula, 550
present value, 556
Answers, A1
Antecedent, 94
Anthologia Palantina, 326
Anthropology, E5
Antiderivative, 898
as an area, 900
exponential, 900
of a sum, 900
properties of, 900
Antigen, 72
Anton, Marsha and Nick, 13
AOL, 165
Aphelion, 739, E4
Apianus, Petrus, 10
Apogee, 744, E11
Apollonius of Perga, P3, 732
Appel, Kenneth, 415
Apple computer, 165
Applied mathematics, 251
Apportionment, 841
history of, 841
problem, 868
paradoxes, summary table, 863
summary, 854
Approval voting method, 819
summary, 821
APR, 520
formula for, 520
Aquarium of Americas, 501
Arc, 390
Archeology, E5
Archimedes, P3, 222, 874
Archimedian screw, P3
d’Arcis, Pierre, 499
Area, 435
calculus problem, 874
circle, P3, 440
compared to volume, 459
curve boundaries, 872
distributive law, 469
function, 897
line segment boundaries, 872
normal curve, 691
parallelogram, 298, 437
problem, 874
Pythagorean theorem, 469
rectangle, 256, 436
related to factoring, 259
rhombus, 298
sampling, 703
square, 256. 436
surface, 445
trapezoid, 298, 439
triangle, 298, 438, 444
under a curve, 902
Argument, 83
invalid, 84
of a logarithm, 474
Aristophanes, 160
Aristotelian logic, 83, 86
Aristotle, P5, 20, 83, E1
Arithmetic
clock, 231
cryptic, 245
fundamental theorem, 188
growth, 527
logic, 31
mean, 684, 851, 852
modulo five, 233
progression, 527
repetitive, 137
sequence, 527
definition, 527
formula 528
general term, 528
summary, 546
series, 540
formula, 541
general term, 541
summary, 546
Ark problem, 435
Armengaud, Joel, 193
Army cavalry problem, 326
Arrangement, 574
Array, 773
Arrhenius equation, 499
Arrow, Kenneth J., 813, 832
Arrow’s impossibility theorem, 834
Arrow’s paradox, 832
Art
Egyptian, E8
mathematics of, 372, E8
modular, 248
perspective in, P5, P8
Art of the Fugue, E9
Articles of Confederation, 855
Artificial intelligence, 168
Artificial symbolic language, 84
–Aryabhata, P6 
as, P4
ASCII code, 155
table of symbols, 158
Ask Marilyn
bead problem, P11
door problem, 246
hunter problem, P14
matching a key to a car problem, 656
water tube problem, P11
Associative property, 224
addition, 176
distinguish from commutative
property, 178
intersection, 71
matrices, 788
multiplication, 177
real numbers, 226
union, 67
Assuming the antecedent, 108
Assuming the consequent (fallacy), 112
Astonished man symbol, 136
Astronomy, E3
Asymptote, slant, 742
Atanasoff, John Vincent, 162
Athens, School of, P5
Index
I1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
I2
Atmospheric
pressure, 498
temperature, 462
Augmented matrix, 773
Automobile buying, 518
dealer’s cost, 518
Avenger puzzle, 605
Average, 674
daily balance method, 522
finite collection, 872
infinite collection, 872
rate of change, 888
speed, 887
winnings/game, 619
Axes, 716
Axiom, 22, 332
Axis
Cartesian, 716
cone, 732
conjugate, 736
length of major, 735
length of minor, 735
major, 735
minor, 735
parabola, 734
transverse, 736
Aztec nation, 142
B 
Babbage calculator, 161
Babbage, Charles, 161
Babylonian mathematics, P2, P10, E5
algebra, 251
history of, P2
numeration system, 140, 142
quadratic equation, 328
root approximation, 248
BAC problem, 670
Bach, Johann Sebastian, E9
Bacon, Kevin, 410
Balam, Chilam, 221
Ballinski and Young impossibility
theorem, 863
Bacon, Roger, 427
Balance scale problem, 117
Bald problem, 597
Balinski and Young’s impossibility
theorem, 863
Banana peel problem, 308
Band-around-the-earth problem, 435
BankAmericard, 523
Banneker, Benjamin, 358
Bar code, 145
Bar graph, 663
Baran, Paul, 165
Barber’s rule, 81
Base, 29, 353, 473
angles of a triangle, 353
b, 148, 149
change to base 10, 150
grouping, 158
parallelogram, 437
percent, 312
ten, see also binary numeration system
change to base b, 150
trapezoid, 439
triangle, 438
two, see binary numeration system
with a logarithm, 473
with a percent, 312
Baseball
batting average problem, 681, 725
path of, 754
stadium problem, 423
statistics, 681, 713
Batch processing, 163
Battery symbol, 124
Batting average problem, 681, 725
project, 755
B.C. comic strips
depth of a well, 745
dice problem, 618
distance to the sun, 41
four fours, 204
negative numbers, 197
perspective, 376
proof, 25
Pythagorean theorem, 212
snake eyes, 618
walk to cemetery, 21
well problem, 752
Beans in a jar problem, 572, 597
Bear problem, 122
Beat the Dealer, 656
Because, 104
Becker
Ben, 323
Cole, 106, 324
Hannah, 106, 250, 323, 680
Melissa, 7, 82, 91, 114, 169, 323, 516,
547, 561, 840
Beckwith, Jay and Cecily, 472
Beehive problem, 299
Beer
consumption example, 698
six-pack problem, P12
Beetle Bailey cartoon, 115
Bell, Alexander Graham, 495
Bell-shaped curve, 686
Bellows, George, 373
Belong to a set, 50
Bergamini, David, 5, E8
Bernays, 81
Berners-Lee, Tim, 165
Bernoulli, Daniel, 448, 627
Bernoulli family, P8
Bernoulli, Jacob, 448, 651
Bernoulli, Johann, 448, 651
Bernoulli trials, 651
Berry, Clifford E., 162
Best Actor Academy Award, 662
Best-fitting line, 698
Betting systems, 636
Beyond Numeracy: Ruminations of a
Numbers Man, 753
Bh–askara, P6, 299 
Biased coin problem, 708
Biconditional, 100
compared to conditional, 102
table, 101
translations of, 101
Bicycle problem, 16
Bidder, George, 42
Big 10 football conference, 423
Big Spin problem, 626
Biggest number problem, 42
Biggs, Henry, 221
Bigollo, Leonardo, 530
Billiard ball problem, 597
Billingsley, H. 468
Billion, 37, 39
Bimodal, 675
Binary numeration system, 148, 154
addition, 156
arithmetic, 156
compared to octal system, 158
multiplication, 156
Binary-octal equivalence, 158
Binary voting, 817
Binomial, 250
distribution, 649, 675
experiment, 649
products, 253
random variable, 648
theorem, 256, 586, 650
Biochemistry, E4
Biology, E4
Biophysics, E5
Birthday problem, 642, 657
Bit, 155
Bitnet, 164
Black Death, P8
Black mathematicians, 868
Blood alcohol concentration (BAC)
problem, 670
Blood problem, 43
Blood-type problem, 81
Bluffhead game, 123
BMI, 247
Bˆocher, Maxine, E1
Body mass index problem, 247
Body temperature, 462
Boiling temperature, 461
Bolyai, János, 378
Bolyai-Lobachevski geometry, 379
Bond, 555
Book reports
Africa Counts by Claudia 
Zaslavsky, 401
Beat the Dealer, by Edward O. 
Thorp, 656
Beyond Numeracy: Ruminations of
a Numbers Man, by John
Paulos, 753
Considerations on Representative
Government, by John Stuart
Mill, 867
Escalante, The Best Teacher in
America, by Jay Mathews, 603
Estimation and Mental Calculation,
by Harold L. Schoen and Marilyn
J. Zweng, 247
Ethnomathematics: A Multicultural
View of Mathematical Ideas, by
Marcia Ascher, 500
Flatland, a Romance of Many Dimen-
sions, by A Square, by Edwin Ab-
bott, 471
Flatterland: Like Flatland, Only More
So, by Ian Stewart, 471
Graph Theory and Its Applications, by
Jonathan Gross and Jay Yellen, 423
How Computers Work, by Ron White,
171
How to Lie with Statistics, by Darrell
Huff, 711
How to Solve It, by George Pólya, 45
How to Take a Chance, by Darrell
Huff and Irving Geis, 656
Hypatia’s Heritage, by Margaret Alic,
327
Infinity and Beyond: A Cultural History
of the Infinite, by Eli Maor, 907
Innumeracy: Mathematical Illiteracy
and Its Consequences, by John
Allen Paulos, 81
Mathematical Magic Show, by Martin
Gardner, 45
Mathematical Puzzles for Beginners &
Enthusiasts, by Geoffrey Mott-
Smith, 130
Mathematical Recreations and Essays,
by W. W. R. Ball and H. S. M.
Coxeter, 386
Nerds 2.0.1, by Stephen Segaller, 171
Never Give a Sucker an Even Break,
by John Fisher, 648
On the Shoulders of Giants: New
Approaches to Numeracy, by
Lynn Steen, 808
Overcoming Math Anxiety, by Sheila
Tobias, 130
Sphereland, A Fantasy About Curved
Spaces and an Expanding Uni-
verse, by Dionys Burger, 386
The Man Who Knew Infinity, by S.
Kanigel, 247
The Mathematical Experience, by Philip
J. Davis and Reuben Hersh, 500
The Power of Logical Thinking, by
Marilyn vos Savant, 656
To Infinity and Beyond: A Cultural
History of the Infinite, by Eli
Maor, 907
Traveling Salesman Problem: A
Guided Tour of Combinatorial
Optimization, by E. L. Lawler, et
al., 423
Voting Procedures, by Michael
Dummett, 867
What Are Numbers?, by Louis
Auslander, 568
Bookworm problem, 16
Boole, George, 86
Borda count method, 815
summary, 821
Borda, Jean Charles de, 812
Bottle and cork problem, 15, 648
Bottle and olive problem, 648
Boundary, half-plane, 724
Bourbon Palace, 385
Bowling dad problem, 673
Box, volume of, 448
Box plot, 678
Box-and-whisker plot, 679
Boyd, James N., 46
Boyer, Carl, 422
Brache, Tycho, 484
Brahmagupta, P6, 299
Brahmi symbols, P6
Brazil fertility problem, 723
Brokaw, Tom, 72
Broken window problem, 124
Bronson, Charles, 771
Brooks, Mel, 770
Brouwer, L. E. J., 413
Brute force method, 396
number of routes, 397
Budget example, 877
Buffon, Georg, 153
Buffon’s needle problem, 712
Bulletin boards, 167
Bürgi, Jobst, 478
Business, E10
Buxion, Jedidiah, 42
Buying an automobile, 518
dealer’s cost, 518
Byte, 39, 155
C
c (abbreviation for cup), 450
C (Roman numeral for 100), 138
CAD, 168
Calculators
amortization, 558
annuity, 553
Babbage’s analytic engine, 161
basic operations, 31
calculating interest, 504
clear entry key, 32
clear key, 32
enter key, 31
equal key, 32
exponent key, 33, 508
exponents, 474, 508
financial programs, 553
finger, 159
fixed-point form, 33
floating-point form, 33
future value, 553
graphing a line, 761, 720, 758
hand-held, 162
history of, 159
integers, 199
inverse matrix, 790
ISECT key, 759
Leibniz’, 161
logic, 31
matrices, 775
matrix multiplication, 785
matrix operations, 784
mean, 675
median, 675
mode, 675
Napier’s bones, 161
parentheses, 31
part of a year, 595
Pascal’s, 161
plus/minus symbol, 199
present value, 553
present value of an annuity, 558
quadratic formula, 280
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I3
Index
scientific notation, 33
singular matrices error, 792
sinking fund, 553
slide rule, 161
solving quadratic equations, 280
solving systems of equations, 785
by graphing, 759
by inverse matrix, 790
three-by-three, 791, 793
statistical functions, 675
systems of equations, 785
by graphing, 759
by inverse matrix, 790
three-by-three, 791, 793
types of, 31
usage, 31
use with , 433
Calculus, 872
differential, 874
distinguished from elementary
mathematics, 872
integral, 875
invention of, 871
Calendar, P3
California
area problem, 771
Native American (Yukis), 149
population problem, 42
Cameron, James, 193
Canada-U.S. trade problem, 668
Candy-bar nutritional information, 683
Cannonball
path of, 677, E2
equation, E3
problem, 726, E11
Canonical form, 189
Cantor, Georg, 50, 81, 413
Capacity, 450
Coke® , 450
common grocery items, 450
conversions, 467
metric to U.S., 467
relationship to volume, 452
standard units, 450
U.S. to metric, 467
Car buying, 518
dealer’s cost, 518
Carbon-14 dating, 492, 731
half-life constant, 492
Cardano, Girolamo, 628, 657
Cardinal number, 52
Cardinality
of a union, 61
of sets, 52
Cards, deck of, 584
de Caritat, Marie Nicolas, 812, 826
Carlyle, Thomas, 99, 105
Carroll, Lewis, 99, 108
Carte Blanche, 518
Carter, Jimmy, 703
Cartesian coordinate system, 716
Cartesian product, 76
cardinality of, 61
Case of the Dead Professor, 115
Case of the Tumbled Tower, 116
Catherine the Great (Catherine II of
Russia), 390
Cauchy, Augustin, 259
Cause-and-effect, contrast with correla-
tion, 698
Cayley, Arthur, 412, 786
CD-ROM, 165
Cell, 267
Celsius, 461
compared to Fahrenheit, 461
Center
circle, 432, 733
ellipse, 735
hyperbola, 736
centi-, 430, 463
definition, 462
Centigrade, see Celsius, 462
Centigram, 463
Centiliter, 463
p
Centimeter, 429
comparison with inch, 429
cubic, 447
square, 447
Central Park problem, 43
Central processing unit, 165
Central rectangle, 742
Central tendency, measures of, 673
cg (abbreviation for centigram), 463
Chain letter problem, 542
Chain link problem, 597
Challenger disaster problem, 499
Chambered nautilus, 375
Change of base theorem, 476
proof of, 487
Chaos, 281, 418
Charles XII, 153
Charles, Ray, 770
Charlie Brown chain 
letter problem, 542
Chat rooms (Internet), 167
Chemistry, E4
Cheops’ pyramid, P2, 365
Chessboard problem, 38, 44
Childs, Rives, 249
Chile earthquake, 497
Chinese
mathematics, P3, 142
numeration system, 142
Period, P3
remainder problem, P6, 240
Chou Dynasty, P4
Chronological periods, P2
Chrystal, George E., 251
Ciphertext, 242
Circle(s), 432
algebraic characterization, 736
area of, 440
center, 432, 733
construction of, 334
definition, 733
diameter, 432
eccentricity, 739
equation, 737
geometric characterization, 733
graphs, 665
using definition, 733
perpendicular, 383
radius, 432
Circle intersection puzzle, 64
Circle Limit III, 417
Circle Limit IV, 383
Circuit theorem, 392
Circuits, 124
Euler, 389
negation, 126
parallel, 124
series, 124
Circular
cone, 456
cylinder, 456
definition, 49
Circumference, 432
Civics, E5
cl (abbreviation for centiliter), 463
Classes (statistical), 661
Clear entry key, 32
Clear key, 32
Clock arithmetic, 231
five-hour, 233
twelve-hour, 231
Closed curve, 414
Closed-end loan, 517
Closed half-plane, 724
Closed set, 175
Closure, 175, 224
for addition, 176
for multiplication, 177
set of reals, 226
Club (deck of cards), 584
Cluster sampling, 703
cm (abbreviation for centimeter), 429
Codes, 240
modular, 242
public key, 244
unbreakable, 243
Coffee and cream mixing problem, 772
Coifman, Ronald, 539
Coin problems, 124, 762
Coin-tossing, 610
biased coin, 708
experiment, 617
Coke® , capacity of a can, 450
Colburn, Zerah, 42, 192
Color-mixing problem, 81
Columbo problem, 115
Columbus, P8
Column, 773
Combination, 582
compared to permutation, 590, 592
classifying as, 592
definition, 583
formula, 583
lock, 591
notation, 583
summary, 592
Combining rate problems, 763
Committee problem, 582
Common
denominator, 207
difference, 527
divisors, greatest, 189
factor, 262
greatest, 189
factoring, 262
logarithm, 475
multiple, 191
ratio, 529
Communication matrix, 786
Communications package, 167
Community survey problem, 712
Commutative group, 226
Commutative property, 224
addition, 176
distinguish from associative
property, 178
matrices, 788
multiplication, 177
real numbers, 226
Comparison property, 283
Compass, 333
Complement, 54
of a union, 65
probability, 627
property of, 627
Venn diagram, 54
Complementary angles, 343
Complementary probabilities, 631
property of, 628
Completely factored, 262
Completing the square, 283, 737
Components
first, 716
second, 716
Composite number, 186
Compound interest, 506
compared with simple interest, 509
formula for, 508
graph comparing with simple
interest, 730
Compound statement, 84
negation of, 103
Compounding
annual, 507
continuous, 510
daily, 508
monthly, 508
number of, 509
periods, 508
quarterly, 508
semiannual, 508
Computational Windows
amortization, 558
annuity, 553
financial programs, 553
future value, 553
graph a line, 720, 758
inverse of a matrix, 790
line, graph of, 720
matrix
entry, 775
inverse, 790
operations, 784
multiplication, 785
negative, 199
partial sums, 545
present value, 553
present value of an annuity, 558
quadratic formula, 280
sequences, 535
sinking fund, 553
solving systems of equations, 785
by graphing, 759
by inverse matrix, 790
three-by-three, 791, 793
Computer science, E4
Computer(s)
abuses of, 174
artificial intelligence, 168
bulletin boards, 167
CAD (computer-aided design), 168
central processing unit, 165
Cray, 163
Earth simulator, 163
ENIAC, 162
first, 162
hardware, 165
history of, 159-168
illegal use, 167
input error, 170
laptop, 165
logic error, 170
machine error, 170
minicomputers, 163
misuse of, 167
parts of, 165
pirating, 167
present day, 163
programs for, 165
programming error, 170
run-time error, 170
software, 166
super, 163
thinking, 168, 169
underground, 168
uses for, 167
Conclusion, 22, 83
Conditional, 94
compared to biconditional, 102
equation, 274
negation of, 103
probability, 631
translations of, 97
truth tables, 95
Condorcet
candidate, 825
criterion, 825, 832
paradox, 834
Condorcet, Marquis de, 812, 825
Cone, 456, 732
Congruence, 336
symbol for, 345
Congruent, 333
angles, 343
line segments, 333
modulo m, 232
segments, 333
triangles, 343, 350
Conic sections, 732
algebraic characterization, 736
general-form equation, 736
geometric characterization, 733
graphing, 737
Conjecture, 13
Conjugate axis, 736
length of, 741
Conjunction, 85
circuit, 126
Connected
graph, 390
network, 391
Connective, 84
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
I4
Consecutive integers, 291
Consequent, 94
denying, 108
Considerations on Representative
Government, 867
Constant function, 750
Constant multiple rule, 900
Constitution
French, 838
United States, 841, 858
Constraints, 798
superfluous, 802
Construction, 333
angle, 341
circle, 334
golden rectangle, 371
line segment, 333
parallel lines, 334
triangle, 350
Consumer loans, 517
Consumer Reports, 518
Contained in a set, 50
Continuous
compounding, 510
distribution, 686
random variable, 648
Contract an expression, 485
Contractions, 335
Contradiction, 274
Contradictory statements, 133
Contraposition, law of, 97
Contrapositive, 97
Contrary statements, 133
Convention problem, 133
Converge, 881
Converse, 97
fallacy of, 112
Conversions
between numeration systems, 150,
154, 158
capacity, 467
length, 467
metric, 463
numeration systems, 150
temperature, 467
units, 462
weight, 467
Convex set, 798
Coordinate system, Cartesian, 716
Copernicus, Nicolaus, P8
Correlation, 695
analysis, 698
coefficient, 696
contrast to cause-and-effect, 698
negative, 695
positive, 695
types of, 695
Correspondence, one-to-one, 73
Corresponding
angles, 344, 356
parts, 350
sides, 356
cosine, 364
Cost problem, 723
Count-down property, 577
Countable set, 74, 75
Countably infinite, 78
Counterexample, 112, 176
Counting
numbers, 19, 53, 135, 175
procedure for, 145
principle, fundamental, 77
techniques, comparison of, 592
CPU, 165
Craig, John, 484
Craps, 618
Cray, Seymour, 163
CRAY computer, 163
Credit (see Loan)
line of, 517
revolving, 517
Credit cards, 517
calculating interest, 522
history of, 521
trap, 522
CREN, 164
Cricket-temperature problem, 701
Critical values for significance level, 697
Cross, symbol for multiplication, 225
Cruise, Tom, 766
Cryptic arithmetic, 245
Cryptography, 240
on the internet, 249
CSNET, 164
Cube, 22, 447
painted problem, 31
pattern problem, 339
problem, 349
rotation problem, 339
volume of, 448
Cubed, 22
Cubic
centimeter, 447
inch, 447
yard, 455
Cubit, P2, 435
Cumulative frequency, 685
Cuneiform symbols, 140
Cup, 450
Currency, rounding procedure, 508
Curves, see also Graphs
area under, 902
exponential, 729
normal frequency, 686
Cycles, Hamiltonian, 394
Cylinder, 456
Czarina Catherine, 390
D
D (Roman symbol for 500), 138
Daily compounding, 508
Dantzig, G. B., 797
Darcis engraving, 627
Daschkoff, Princess, 390
Dashow, Carrie, 41
Data processing, 167
Database managers, 166
da Vinci, Leonardo, 373, 377, E8
David, 374
dB (abbreviation for decibel), 495
De Méré, Chevalier, 627, 648
De Morgan, Augustus, 3, 66
De Morgan’s laws
logic, 102
proof of, 77
sets, 66
De Niro, Robert, 411
Dead-Pai, E8
Dead Sea Scrolls, 497
Dealer’s cost, 518
Dear Abby
birth problem, 635
term of pregnancy problem, 711
Decagon, 343
Decay
carbon-14, 490
formula, 490
radioactive, 492
deci-, 430, 463
definition, 462
Decibel, 495
formula, 490
rating table, 495
Decigram, 463
definition, 462
Decile, 677
Deciliter, 463
Decimal, 221
comparing the size, 302
convert to a fraction, 276, 310
convert to a percent, 310
history of, 221
nonrepeating, 221
notation, 33
numeration system, 142, 144
point, 146
repeating, 221
terminating, 221
Decimeter, 463
Decisiveness, 834
Deck of cards, 53, 584
puzzle, 133
Decoding key, 242
Deductive reasoning, 22, 83, E1
Deficient number, 211
Definite integral, 902
Definition, circular, 49
Degree, 342
of a polynomial, 250
of a term, 250
of a vertex, 390
symbol for, 342
deka-, 429, 463
Dekagram, 463
Dekaliter, 463
Dekameter, 463
DeLuise, Dom, 770
Demand equation, 765
Denominator, 205
Dense set, 222
Denying the antecedent (fallacy), 113
Denying the consequent, 108
Dependent
events, 641
system, 757
graph, 759
variable, 718
Depreciation formula, 723
Depression, angle of, 367
Derivative, 872
definition, 891
exponential function, 892
Descartes, Rene’, 197, 279, 657, 
726, 732
Description method, 50
Descriptive statistics, 673, 702
Designer of the Lying Woman, 377, E8
Detective-type problems, 114
dg (abbreviation for decigram), 463
Diagonal form, 775
Diameter, 469
Diamond (deck of cards), 584
Diatonic scale, E9
Dice, 612
game of, 618
roll, 661
sample space for a pair of, 612
sample space for a single die, 608
Dictatorship, 813, 834
satisfies fairness criterion, 832
Die, 607, 612
experiment, 617
loaded, 608
puzzle problem, 597
sample space, 608
Difference, 289
engine, 1618
of squares, 262
quotient, 747, 888
Differentiable function, 891
Differential calculus, 874
Diffie, Whitfield, 243
Digital signature algorithm, 244
Dilation, 335
Dilemmas, voting, 824
Dimension, 416, 426
one, 456
matrix, 773
two, 456
three, 456
Diners Club, 521
Diophantine equation, 249
Diophantus, P8, 321
Direct reasoning, 107
Directrix, 733
Discover card, 517
Discrete
distribution, 686
mathematics, 231
random variable, 648
Disjoint sets, 54
Disjunction, 86
circuit, 126
Disney World, 34
resort hotels, 853
Disneyland, 40
Dispersion, measure of, 678
Distance-rate-time formula, 887
Distance relationships, 292
Distance unit, 222
Distinguishable permutation, 579
classifying, 592
formula, 580
Distributive property, 178
areas, 469
intersection over union, 71
law of exponents, 36
matrices, 788
reals, 224
simplification of polynomials, 251
union over intersection, 71
Distributions
continuous, 686
discrete, 686
skewed, 691
Diverge, 881
Divided by, translations for, 289
Divides, 183
Divine proportion, 371
Divisibility, 183
by 2, 184
by 3, 184
rules of, 185
Division, 202
by zero, 202
definition, 232
history of symbol, 205
of decimals, 309
of integers, 202
property, 275
rational numbers, 206
Divisors, 183
least number, 183
modified, 846
number of, 183
proper, 196
standard, 842
Divorce rate problem, 889
dkg (abbreviation for dekagram), 463
dkL (abbreviation for dekaliter), 463
dkm (abbreviation for dekameter), 463
dL (abbreviation for deciliter), 463
dm (abbreviation for decimeter), 463
DMV problem, 670
Dodecagon, 343
Dodecahedron, 466
traveler’s, 399
Dodgson, Charles, 108
Dog age problem, 761
Domain, 746
unrestricted, 814, 834
Dominant gene, 266
Domino, 420
Dot, symbol for multiplication, 177
Dots on a cube problem, 386
Double negation
law of, 91
proof of, 91
statement of, 93
Double subscripts, 773
Doughnut and coffee-cup morph, 414
Douglas, Jesse, 139
Down payment, 556
Download, 167
Drawing Hands, 334
Driving time table, 887
DSA (digital signature algorithm), 249
Duccio, di Buoninsegna, 376, E8
Last Supper, 376
DUI problem, 670
Dummett, Michael, 867
Dummy variable, 902
Dungeons and Dragons, 618
Duodecimal numeration system, 
P4, 153
Duodecimal Society of America, 153
Duran, Peter, 539
Durante, Jimmy, 105
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I5
Index
Dürer, Albrecht, P8, 373, 375, 377,
426, E8
Designer of a Lying Woman, E8
Proportions of the Human Body, 375
DVD, 165
DVR problem, 318
Dynamic Symmetry, 375, 387
E
e (Euler’s number), 214, 510
e-mail, 167
Earlobe problem, 273
Early Modern Period, 1700-1899, P9
Earth
fill with water problem, 481
orbit, 739
example, 739
problem, 744
simulator, 163
weight problem, 481
Earthlink, 165
Earthquakes, 493
Eastwood, Clint, 771
Eccentricity, 739, E4
circle, 739
earth’s, 739
ellipse, 742
hyperbola, 742
parabola, 742
Eckert, Presper, J., 162
Ecology, E4
Economics, E10
Eddin, Nasîr, P9
Edge, 390
Effective rate, 516
Egyptian mathematics, P2, P10
algebra, 251
art, E8
equation solving, 290
fractions, 137, 211, 249
god problem, 17
history of, P2
limiting process, 874
measuring rope, 387
numeration system, P2, 135, 142
pyramids, 387
zero, 224
Egyptian Period, P2
Eight, pattern of, 19
Einstein, Albert, 94, 548, E1
Either, 86
Either p or q, 86
Elastic motion, 413
Eleatic school, P5
Electoral college problem, 131
Election problem, 573
Electronic mail, 167
Electronic Numerical Integrator and Cal-
culator (ENIAC), 162
Element, 50
Elementary operations, 232
Elementary row operations, 775, 778
Elements by Euclid, P3, P8, 188
Elevation, angle of, 367
Elimination
runoff method, 816
tournament, 543
tournament method, 818
Ellipse, 733
algebraic characterization, 736
center, 735
conic section, 774
definition, 734
eccentricity, 742
equation, 737
geometric characterization, 733
graph, 734
graph paper, 734
graphing using definition, 734
horizontal, 737
intersection with a cone, 732
standard form, E3
vertical, 737
Ellipses, 51
Elliptic geometry, 379
compare with other geometries, 380
Emory Harrison family problem, 635
Empire State Building, 339
Empirical probability, 609
Empty set, 52
probability of, 609
Encoding key, 242
Encrypt, 242
Engelbart, Douglas, 165
ENIAC, 162
ENTER key, 31
Enterprise Starship, 36, 298
Environmental protection problem, 809
EPA problem, 809
Epicenter, 493
Equal
angles, 342
key on calculator, 32
matrices, 783
sets, 52
symmetric property, 275
translations for, 289
Equality
of matrices, 783
sets, 52
symbol, 52
symmetric property, 275
Equally likely outcomes, 607
Equation(s), 274
Arrhenius, 499
Diophantine, 249
ellipse, 737
equivalent, 274
exponential, 728
false, 274
first-degree, 718, 729
hyperbola, 736
linear, 274, 718
logarithmic, 483
matrix, 773, 783
open, 274
properties of, 275
quadratic, 274
second-degree, 736
solving
with one variable, 274
with two variables, 757
symmetric property, 275
systems of, 757
true, 274
Equilateral triangle, 350
perimeter, 431
Equilibrium point, 764
Equivalence,
compared with implication, 102
logical, 102
Equivalent
equations, 274
matrices, 775
sets, 52
systems, 759
Eratosthenes, 186
sieve of, 186
Escalante, Jamie, 160
Escalante, The Best Teacher in
America, 603
Escher
Circle Limit III, 417
Circle Limit IV, 383
Drawing Hands, 334
ESP problem, 654
Estimation, 33, 311, 427
acres, 441
financial problem, 514
jar’s contents problem, 597
probabilities, 624, 634
Estimation and Mental Computation, by
Schoen and Zweng, 247
Ethnomathematics: A Multicultural View
of Mathematical Ideas, by Marcia
Ascher, 500
Euclid, P3, P8, 331
Euclid’s
Elements, 331
postulates, 332
Euclidean geometry, 333
compare with other geometries, 380
Eudoxus school, P5
Euler, Leonhard, 24, 390, 391, 413, 448,
657, 762
Euler circles, 23, 53
compared to Venn diagrams, 58
Euler circuits, 389, 391
applications of, 393
compared to Hamiltonian cycles, 402
theorem, 392
Euler’s formula for networks, 400
Euler’s number (e), 214, 510
European mathematics, P10
Evaluate
by calculator, 476
expression, 264
logarithms, 483
summation, 539
Even vertex, 391
Events, 607
dependent, 641
equally likely, 607
impossible, 607
independent, 640
mutually exclusive, 608
simple, 607
Everybody Counts, 32, 46
Evolve an algebra problem, 293
Exact
interest, 504
solution, 477
Excel, 166
Excluded middle, law of, 84
Exclusive or, 86
Expand, 256
expression, 268
logarithm, 485
summation, 539
Expanded notation, 146
Expansion-joint problem, 296
Expectation, 619
with a cost for playing, 622
Expected value, 619
Experiment, 607
Explorer, 166
Exponent, 29
key, 33, 508
laws of, 35
Exponential, 29, 473
antiderivative, 900
curves, 729
decay, 490
derivative, 892
equation, 473, 728
types of, 477
function, 750
growth, 490
notation for, 746
types of, 750
Exponentiation, 29
Expression, evaluation of, 264
Extended order-of-operations 
agreement, 29
Exterior angle, 342
property, 353
Exterior point, 414
Extra square centimeter 
problem, 445
Extra square inch problem, 470
Extraneous solution, 486
Extrasensory perception, 645
Extremes, 301
Eye color problem, 273, E4
F
Fable for students, xix
Facebook, 167
Faces of a cube problem, 349
Factor(ing), 22, 183, 258
an expression, 258
by algebra, 260
by areas, 274
common, 262
complete, 262
FOIL, 253
procedure for trinomials, 253
tree, 189
Factorial
definition, 576
multiplication property, 577
Factorization, prime, 188
Fahrenheit, 461
convert to Celsius, 461
Failure, 649
Fair
coin, 607
game, 619
voting principles, 824
Fairness criteria, 832
comparison table, 832
Fallacy, 111
assuming the consequent, 112
denying the antecedent, 113
false chain pattern, 113
of exceptions, 796
of the converse, 112
of the inverse, 113
Falling object problem, 896
False chain pattern, 113
False equation, 274
Farmer problem, 800
Farmer’s age chart puzzle, 158
FCP, 77
Feasible solution, 798
Feliciano, José, 770
Female mathematicians, 868
Feminine numbers, 211
Fermat, Pierre de, 192, 241, 627, 657
Fermat’s last theorem, 47, 328
Ferndale, CA, 81, 693, 821
Fibonacci, Leonardo, 532
Fibonacci
association, 532
forgeries, 537
magic trick, 538
numbers, 571, E9
rabbit problem, 530, 886
sequence, 532
classifying, 536
general term, 532
in nature, 532
summary, 546
Fibonacci Quarterly, 571
Fickle-pickers, 747
FidoNet, 164
Field, 2228
Fields, John Charles, 139
Fields, W. C., 91
Fields Medal, 139
Fifth postulate, 332
Finance charge, 522
Financial formulas
amortization, 560
annuity, 549
calculator programs for, 553
future value, 504
present value, 503
present value of an annuity, 556
sinking fund, 552
summary, 562
Financial independence problem, 551
Finger counting, 159
Finite
algebra, 231
random variable, 648
series, 538
set, 73
First component, 745
First-degree equation, 718, 729
First-degree inequality, 724
First Dynasty, P2
First law of logarithms, 485
First-round winner, 816
Fisher, John, 648
Fisher, R. A., 713
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
I6
Five-color map, 421
Five-hour clock, 204
Five-percent offer, 518
Five postulates, 332
Five regular solids, 471
Five-step process for finding a
derivative, 891
Fixed-point form, 34
Flatland, a Romance of Many
Dimensions, by A Square, 471
Flatterland: Like Flatland, Only More
So, 471
Floating-point form, 33
Floor-plan problem, 393
Florida, area of, 771
Flower garden problem, 122
Flush (in poker), 585, 616
Fly problem, 16
Foci, 733
Focus, 733
FOIL, 253
factoring, 254
Foley, Jack and Rosamond, 555
Foot, 429
square, 436
Football conferences
Big 10, 423
Pacific 12, P16
Forest Service problem, 669
Forgetting curve, 489
Four-color problem, 47, 415
Four corners problem, 419
Four fours problem, 204, 248
Four of a kind (in poker), 616
Fourier, Joseph, 259
Fox, goose, and corn problem, 16
Fractal
geometry, 425
guest essay, 418
images, 416
problem, 424
Fraction(s), 205
comparing the size, 302
convert to a decimal, 310
convert to a percent, 310
definition, 205
Egyptian, 137, 211, 249
fundamental property, 205
history of symbol, 205
improper, 205
proper, 205
reduced, 205
unit, 211
whole number, 205
zero, 224
Francesca, Piero della, 377
Frankel, 81
Franklin, Benjamin, 47
Fréchet, Maurice, 413
Free-fall problem, 893
Freeware, 166
Freezing temperature, 461
French Constitution, 838
Frequency, 661
cumulative, 685
distribution, 661
grouped, 661
Fried’s rule, 282
Friendly number, 196, 211
ft (abbreviation for foot), 429
Fulcrum, 675
Full house (in poker), 616
Function, 746
area, 897
classification of, 750
definition, 746
differentiable, 891
machine, 746
notation for, 746
objective, 798
types of, 750
Functional notation, 746
Fundamental counting principle, 77, 574
classifying as, 592
Fundamental operator, 92
Fundamental property of fractions, 205
Fundamental theorem of arithmetic, 188
Fur color problem, 273
Future Shock, 169
Future value, 504
calculator program, 553
compound interest, 509
continuous compounding, 511
simple interest, 506
Fuzzy logic, 84
G
g (abbreviation for gram), 460
g. c. f. (greatest common factor), 189
procedure for finding, 190
G.M. (geometric mean), 684
Gable, Clark, 410
Gage, Paul, 193
gal (abbreviation for gallon), 450
Galilei, Galileo, P8, 103, E5
Gallon, 450
in cubic inches, 451
Galois, Evariste, 259, 657
Galois theory, 780
Galton, Francis, 713
Garbage in, garbage out, 157
Garden Houses of Ostia, 330, 426
Garden problem, 123
Gardner, Martin, 27x, 45
Gates, Bill, 166
Gates, logical, 126
Gauss, Karl, 222, 378, 657, 780, E1
Gauss-Jordan method, 774
Gaussian elimination, see Gauss-Jordan
elimination, 780
Gears, 741
Geese problem, 299
Geis, Irving, 656
Gene, 266
dominant, 266
pool, 266, E4
recessive, 266
General form, conic sections, 736
General term, 880
arithmetic sequence, 528
Fibonacci-type sequence, 532
geometric sequence, 530
Generator of a cone, 732
Genesis problem, 435
Genetics, 265, E4
Genius test, 527
Genjun, Nakone, 14
Genotype, 266
Genus, 414
Geoboard, 413
Geology, E4
Geometric
growth, 529
mean, 684, 852
sequence, 529
classifying, 536
definition of, 529
formula, 530
general term, 530
summary, 546
series, 542
formula, 543
general term, 543
summary, 546
Geometry
analytic, 726
Bolyai-Lobachevski, 379
comparisons, 380
elliptic, 379
Euclidean, 333
fractal, 415
hyperbolic, 379
non-Euclidean, 333, 378, 387
projective, 376
traditional, 333
transformational, 332
Gerbert, 144
Germain, Sophie, 609
Gernes, Don, 117
Gibbs, William, E1
Gigabytes, 39, 166
GIGO, 157
GIMPS, 193
Global climate, modeling, 876
Glossary, G1
Goethe, 99
Goldbach, Christian, 196
Goldbach’s conjecture, 196
Golden ratio, 371
Golden rectangles, 370
construction of, 371
Golygon, 349
Golygon City, 349
Goodyear, Lucille, 25
Googol, 39
Gottingen Prix Bordin, 446
Grace period, 523
Grade
distribution example, 677
on a curve, 687
percent problem, 81
Grains of wheat problem, 38
Gram, 460
compared to meter and liter, 462
Grant’s tomb properties, 482
Graph(s), 390, 716
bar, 663
circle, 665
connected, 390
curves, 726
equation, 726
exponential, 729
frequency distribution, 661
half-planes, 724
lines, 717
calculator, 720
general procedure, 720
misuses, 667
national debt history, 671
normal curve, 694
normal frequency curve, 686
paper
ellipse, 734
hyperbola, 736
parabola, 734
parabolas, 733
pictograph, 666
pie chart, 665
plotting points, 716
scatter diagram, 723
slope-intercept, 718
trees, 402
Graph Theory and Its Applications, 423
Graphing method for systems, 757
Gravity, 726
Great circle, 379
Great Internet Prime Search, 193
Great Pyramid, P3, 381
of Cheops, 365
Great tapes problem, 44
Greater than, 284
Greater than or equal to, 284
Greatest common factor, 189
procedure for finding, 190
Greek mathematics, P10, 83, 224, 251
algebra, 251
numeration system, 142, 471
sound waves, E9
Greek period, P5
Griffiths, Philip A., 47
Gross, Johathan, 423
Group
definition, 226
properties for a modulo system, 236
with bases (octal/binary), 158
Group Research Projects:
G1: report on recent changes in mathe-
matics, 46
G2: Pascal’s triangle, 46
G3: student’s grade problem, 81
G4: Venn diagram, five sets, 81
G5: barber’s rule, 81
G6: symbolic statement, 131
G7: electoral vote problem, 131
G8: taxicab mix-up problem, 131
G9: baseball problem, 131
G10: pinball-gate problem, 132
G11: invent a numeration system, 172
G12: Resolved: Roman vs. Hindu-
Arabic, 172
G13: Can computers think?, 172
G14: Turing test, 172
G15: Ancient computer exhibit, 172
G16: irrational segments, 248
G17: four fours, 248x
G18: Pythagorean theorem, 248
G19: modular art, 248
G20: Babylonian approximations, 248
G21: Is 
rational?, 328
G22: Babylonian form of quadratic
equation, 328
G23: Wolfskehl Prize, 328
G24: square/cube proof, 328
G25: journal problem; code
translation, 328
G26: mirror maze, 386
G27: dots on a cube puzzle, 386
G28: dollar bill problem, 386
G29: What good are fractals?, 424
G30: anamorphic art, 424
G31: fill a house with marbles, 470
G32: spa installation, 470
G33: extra square inch, 470
G34: Pythagorean triplets, 470
G35: logarithmic spiral, 501
G36: world oil reserves, 501
G37: Thirty grand inheritance, 559
G38: Salary raise problem, 569
G39: Home loan advertisement, 569
G40: hexahexaflexagon, 604
G41: Avenger puzzle, 605
G42: Rubik’s cube, 605
G43: Monopoly, 657
G44: birthday problem, 657
G45: circle toss problem, 658
G46: Buffon’s needle problem, 712
G47: community survey problem, 712
G48: baseball path problem, 754
G49: AIDS case projection, 754
G50: conic section history, 754
G51: escalator problem, 809
G52: rancher problem, 809
G53: EPA problem, 809
G54: knot theory, 810
G55: history of apportionment, 868
G56: conduct an election, 868
G57: women mathematicians, 868
G58: black mathematicians, 868
G59: mathematicians named Karl, 868
G60: free choice research, 868
Grouped frequency distribution, 661
Grouping
property of, 176
system, 136
Growth, see Chapter 10
arithmetic, 527
geometric, 529
formula, 490
Guess Who? game, 90
Guest essays:
“Chaos” by Jack Wadhams, 381
“Extrasensory Perception” by John
Paulos, 645
“What Good Are Fractals?” by Jeanne
McDermott, 418
Guidelines for problem solving, 317
Gutenberg, Beno, 482
Gutenberg, Johann, P8
H 
H.M. (harmonic mean), 684
Hacking, 168
"2
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I7
Index
Hairs-on-head problem, 597
Hajratwala, Nayan, 193
Haken, Wolfgang, 415
Half-life, 492
Half-line, 333
Half-plane, 724
closed, 724
open, 724
Halsted, G. B., 331, 661
Hamilton, Alexander, 855, E6
Hamilton, William Rowan, 391
Hamilton’s apportionment plan, 849
summary, 854
Hamiltonian cycles, 394
compared to Euler circuits, 402
Hammurabi, P2
Han Dynasty, P4
Hankel, Herman, 175
Hanoi, tower of, 605
Happy number, 45
Hard drive, 166
Hardrock 100 race, 701
Hardware, 165
Hardy, G. H., 265, E1
Hare, Thomas, 816
Hare method, 816
summary, 821
Harmonic mean, 684
Harrison Emory family problem, 635
Harrison, William H., 851
Hat game problem, 123
Hausdorff, Felix, 413
Hawking, Stephen, 166
Hayyan, Jabir ibn, 25
HDTV, 415
Healing law, 731
Healthy Choice problem, 42
Heart (deck of cards), 584
Heathen numerals, 145
Hebart, John, 3, 83, E1
hecto- , 429, 46_
definition, 462
Hectogram, 462
Hectoliter, 462
Hectometer, 462
Heel bone symbol, 136
Height
of a parallelogram, 437
of a trapezoid, 439
of a triangle, 438
Heisman trophy, 816
voting, 869
Henry, Patrick, 99
Heptagon, 343
Hero’s formula, 444
Heron’s formula, 444
Hertz, Heinrich, E9
Heterozygous, 266
Hexadecimal numeration system, 148
Hexaflexagon, 604
Hexagon, 343
Hexahedron, 466
Hexahexaflexagon problem, 604
hg (abbreviation for hectogram), 462
HH plan, 852
summary, 821
Hieroglyphics, P2, 136
Hilbert, David, 193, 544, E1
Hill, Joseph, 852
Hilton tower logical puzzle, 131
Hindu-Arabic mathematics, 148, 224,
530, E5
algebra, 251
evolution of symbols, 145
numeration system, 144
evolution of symbols, 146
Hindu Period, P6
Hints for success, 3
Historical Notes
abacist, 145
Abel, Niels, 255
Adams, John Quincy, 847
Ahmose, 136
algebra origin, 251
Apianus, Petrus, 10
Aristotle, 83
Aztec mathematics, 142
Babbage, Charles, 162
Babylonians and the quadratic
formula, 278
Banneker, Benjamin, 358
Bar codes, 145, 156
Bernoulli family, 448
Bernoulli, Jacob, 651
Boole, George, 86
Cajori, F., 475
Cantor, Georg, 50, 413
Cardano, Girolamo, 628
Carroll, Lewis, 108
Catherine the Great, 390
Cayley, Arthur, 786
Condorcet, Marquis de, 826
credit card history, 521
cuneiform tablet, 140
De Morgan, Augustus, 66
decimal notation, 221
Descartes, René, 726
divided by symbol, 205
divine proportion, 371
Dodgson, Charles, 108
Egyptian mathematics, 136
Egyptian pyramid, 369
Egyptian variables, 290
Einstein, Albert, 94
Euclid, 331
Euler, Leonhard, 762
Fermat, Pierre de, 329
Fermat’s last theorem, 329
Fibonacci, Leonardo, 530
fifth postulate, 378
fractional notation, 205
fuzzy logic, 84
Galilei, Galileo, 103
Galois, Evariste, 259
Gauss, Karl, 222, 780
Germain, Sophie, 609
Hamilton, Alexander, 855
Hamilton, William Rowan, 391
Hawking, Stephen, 166
Hilbert, David, 193, 544
Hindu-Arabic numeration system, 145
Hypatia, 296
interest rates, 513
invention of calculus, 871
invention of the Cartesian coordinate
system, 726
Isaku, Sator, 84
Jefferson, Thomas 849
Jobs, Steven, 165
Karmarkar, Narendra, 800
Kovalevsky, Sonfia, 446
large primes, 192
Leibniz, Gottfried, 85, 871
logarithm, 484
logic history, 83, 85, 86
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth, 299
Louvre tablet, 762
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 416
minus symbol, 175
multiplication symbol, 177
Napier, Jhone, 161, 478
Native Californians (Yukis), 149
Neper, Jhone, 161, 478
Neugebauer, Otto, 140
Newton, Isaac, 550, 871
Nightingale, Florence, 679
Noether, Amalie, 209
OCR numerals, 156
Pareto, Vilfredo, 817
Pascal, Blaise, 9
 history, 223
plus symbol, 175
Pólya, George, 6
prime R317, 186
probability origin, 627
Pythagoras, 212
Pythagorean theorem, 213
Ramanujan, Srinivasa, 203
ratio symbol, 301
Rhind, Henry A., 136
Rhind papyrus, 137
Riemann, Georg Bernhard, 379
root symbol, 223
Rubik, Ernö, 599
Russell, Bertrand, 86
Russell’s paradox, 81
satellite photographs, 151
sieve of Eratosthenes, 187
square root symbol, 214
Sylvester, James, 793
Thureau-Dangin, 140
topology, 413
267  1 is not prime, 194
Webster, Daniel, 852
Whitehead, Alfred North, 86
whole nine yards, 449
zero symbol, 224
Historical Quest problem:
Abacus, 148
age of reason, P11
Ahmes’ dilemma, 17
Al-Khwârizmî equation problem, 283
American Pyramid of the Sun, 381
amicable numbers, 196
Anthologia Palatina, 326
army general cavalry, 326
Babylonian period, P11
Babylonians and the quadratic
equation, 328
Bernoulli, Daniel, 627
Bidder, George, 42
Black mathematicians, 868
Brahmagupta, 299
Buxion, Jedidiah, 42
Cayley, Arthur, 412
Charles Dodgson logic problems, 
115, 116
Chinese period, P11
Colburn, Zerah, 42
completing the square, 283
Diophantus age problem, 326
duodecimal numeration system, 153
Dürer, Albrecht, 426
early modern period, P11
Egyptian
god of wisdom, 17
equation, 283
fractions, 211, 249
period, P11
Euler pistole problem, 762
Eureka! Gauss, Karl, 220
Even Knievel and the Snake River,
714, 731
Fermat’s last theorem, 328
Fibonacci numbers, 571
Fibonacci rabbit problem, 886
Field’s Medal, 139
French constitution, 838
friendly numbers, 196
frog and tree problem, 299
garden houses of Ostia, 426
geese problem, 299
Goldbach’s conjecture, 196
Golygon City problem, 349
Great Pyramid of Giza, 379
Great Pyramid of Khufu (Cheops), 365
Greek numeration system, 471
Greek period, P11
Hexahexaflexagon, 604
Hindu period, P11
International Olympic Committee
1988 site vote, 838
International Olympic committee 1993
site vote, 838
invention of the computer, 168
Ionic numeration system, 471
Kadamba flower, 299
Kitty Hawk problem, 713
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth, 299
Louvre tablet, 762
Maclaurin, Colin, 328
magic square of emperor Yu, 25
measurement system using stones, 811
Möbius strip, 401
modern period, P11
Mohenjo-Daro problem, 811
Napier, John, 501
native American period, P11
NBC Nightly News, May 25, 1995, 72
NUM
Parthenon, 373
Pascal’s triangle, 471
Persian period, P11
perfect numbers, 196
Ptolematic riddle, 328
Pythagoreans, 196
Richter of Turin, 489
Roman period, P11
rope stretchers, 368
Russell, Bertrand, barber’s rule, 81
St. Petersburg paradox, 627
seven chronological periods in
history, P11
Shroud of Turin, 489
spanning trees, 412
Tower of Hanoi, 605
transition period, P11
triangular numbers, 220
traveler’s dodecahedron, 399
U. S. House of Representatives based
on 1790 census, 857
U. S. House of Representatives appor-
tionment history, 868
water lily problem, 299
Wolfskehl prize, 328
women mathematicians, 868
Yale tablet, 144
equation, 328
Yang Hui’s triangle, 471
History, see Prologue, P1, E5
hL (abbreviation for hectoliter), 462
hm (abbreviation for hectometer), 462
Hogarth, William, 376
Hogben, L., E1
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 375
Holmes, Sherlock, 8, 771
problem, 771
Homozygous, 266
Honsberger, Ross, 472
Horizontal, 346
ellipse, 737
hyperbola, 741
line, 346, 721
Horse distribution problem, 865
How Computers Work, 171
How to Lie with Statistics, 711
How to Solve It, 6, 45
How to Take a Chance, 656
Howard, Ron, 766
Huff, Darrell, 656, 711
Human blood type problem, 81
Human body proportions, 374
Humanities, E10
Hundred, 39, 145
Hundred dollar reward problem, 27
Hundred fowl problem, 240
Hunter midterm problem, 677
Huntington, Edward, 852
Huntington-Hill’s apportionment plan,
852
summary, 854
Hybrid, 266
Hypatia, 296
Hypatia’s Heritage, 191
Hyperbola, 732
algebraic characterization, 736
center, 736
conic section, 732
definition, 735
eccentricity, 742
equation, 736
geometric characterization, 733
graph paper, 736
horizontal, 741
standard form, 741
vertical, 741
5 ^ 1 ^ 1 ^, 220
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
I8
Hyperbolic geometry, 379
compare with other geometries, 380
Hyperboloidal gears, 741
Hypotenuse, 212, 359
Hypotheses, 83
I
I (Roman symbol for 1), 138
Iceberg problem, 44
Icosahedron, 466
Identity, 274
addition property, 225
matrices, 788
multiplication property, 226
set of reals, 226
If, uses of 94
If p, then q, 101
Implication, 102
compared to equivalence, 102
material, 94
Imply, 102
Important Ideas
Chapter 1, 43
Chapter 2, 80
Chapter 3, 129
Chapter 4, 170
Chapter 5, 245
Chapter 6, 326
Chapter 7, 384
Chapter 8, 422
Chapter 9, 468
Chapter 10, 500
Chapter 11, 567
Chapter 12, 605
Chapter 13, 655
Chapter 14, 709
Chapter 15, 753
Chapter 16, 807
Chapter 17, 865
Chapter 18, 905
Impossibility theorems
Arrow, 834
Balinski and Young, 863
Impossible event, 607
Improper fraction, 205
Impulse power, 36
in. (abbreviation for inch), 429
IN YOUR OWN WORDS, 6
Inch, P4, 429
compared with centimeter, 429
cubic, 447
square, 447
Included angle, 350
Inclusive or, 86
Inconsistent
statement, 133
system, 757
graph of, 758
Indefinite integral, 902
Independence of irrelevant alternatives,
817, 834
Independent events, 640
Independent variable, 718
Indeterminate form, 203
Indian mathematics, P10
Indirect reasoning, 108
Individual Research Projects, 5
Chapter 1, 47
Chapter 2, 81
Chapter 3, 133
Chapter 4, 173
Chapter 5, 249
Chapter 6, 329
Chapter 7, 387
Chapter 8, 426
Chapter 9, 471
Chapter 10, 501
Chapter 11, 571
Chapter 12, 605
Chapter 13, 659
Chapter 14, 713
Chapter 15, 753
Chapter 16, 811
Chapter 17, 869
Inductive reasoning, 21, E1
Inequality, 284
addition property, 285
first-degree, 724
multiplication property, 286
linear, 724
procedure for solving, 286
symbol for, 284
system of, 797
Inferential statistics, 702
Infinite, 73
countably, 78
geometric series, 544
series, 544
set, 74
uncountably, 78
Infinity, limits to, 881
Inflation, 512
Information retrieval, 167
Innumeracy: Mathematical Illiteracy and
Its Consequences, John Allen Pau-
los, 81
Input device, 165
Input error, 170
Insincere voting, 833
Installment loan, 517
Instant Insanity, 600
Instantaneous
rate of change, 891
speed, 887
Instructors, a note for, xv
Insurance policy problem, 513
Integers, 50, 197
addition, 198
calculator usage, 199
classification of, 224
consecutive, 291
division, 202
multiplication, 202
negative, 197
positive, 197
subtraction, 201
zero, 224
Integral, 872, 874
calculus, 875
definite, 902
indefinite, 902
of a sum, 900
Integrand, 902
Intensity of sound, 495
Intercept, 718
form, 723
Interest, 503, E10
add-on, 517
compare simple and compound, 509
compound, 506
continuous compounding, 509
exact, 504
formula, variables used, 509
ordinary, 504
part of a year, 504
rate(s), 503
historical, 513
rebate, 526
simple, 503
variables, 509
Interior point, 414
Internal Revenue Service 1040 form, 96
International Standard Book Number,
240
Internet, 165
Explorer, 166
timeline, 164
Interpretation, E2
Intersection, 59
cardinality of, 61
formula, 641
probability, 614
Venn diagram, 59
Interval, 661
Invalid reasoning, 23, 84
Invariant property, 414
Inverse, 97
cosine, 366
fallacy of, 112
for addition, 225
for multiplication, 226
matrices, 788, 789, 788
set of reals, 226
sine, 366
tangent, 366
trigonometric ratios, 366
Inverse property
addition, 225
multiplication, 226
set of reals, 226
Inversion transformations, 336, E9
Ionian center of learning, P5
Ionic numeration system, 471
IQ test, 527
Irrational numbers, 214
classification of, 223
Irrelevant alternatives criterion, 829, 932
Isaka, Satoru, 84
ISBN number, 240
Ishige, Terutoshi, 599
Isosceles triangle, 350
property, 353
IXOHOXI, 18
J
Jefferson, Thomas, 849, E6
Jefferson’s plan, 847
summary, 854
Jeopardy, 554
Jerome, Saint, E8
Jobs, Steven, 165
Jordan, Camille, 780
Jordan curve, 414
theorem, 419
Journal, 4
Journal Problems
College Mathematics Journal, 684
Journal of Recreational 
Mathematics, 328
Mathematics Teacher, 761
Scientific American, 694
Judgment of the Dead-Pai, E8
Jump rope
cartoon, 590
problem, 597
Justice, Dave, 681
Juxtaposition, symbol for 
multiplication, 177
JVC advertisement problem, 597
K
Kabbalah, P14
Kan, A. H. G. Rinnooy, 423
Karl mathematicians, 868
Karmarkar, Narendra, 800
Kaval, Dave, 422
Kemeny, John, 170
Keno, 637
payoff table, 637
Keogh account, 554
Kepler, Johannes, P8, 221
Kepler’s sphere packing conjecture, 47
Keyboard, 166, E9
Keyser, J. F., 83
kg (abbreviation for kilogram), 460
Khwârizmî, see Al-Khwârizmî,
Mohammed ibn Musa,
Khayyám, Omar, P6, 14
Khet, P2
Khufu pyramid, 369
al-Khwârizmî, 251, 283
kilo-, 429, 463
definition, 462
Kilobyte, 39, 166
Kilogram, 460
compared to pound, 460
Kiloliter, 450
Kilometer, 429
King-of-the-hill voting method, 818
Kitty Hawk problem, 713
kl (abbreviation for kiloliter), 450
Klein bottle, 401
Kline, Felix, 413
km (abbreviation for kilometer), 429
Knievel, Evel, 714
problem, 731
Knight and knave problem, 122
Knoll, Curt, 193
Knot theory, 810
Ko¨nigsberg Bridge problem, 389
Korvin-Krukovsky, Sophia, 446
Kovalevsky, Sonja, 446
Kramp, Christian, 576
Kruskal’s algorithm, 406
L
L (abbreviation for liter), 450
L (Roman symbol for 50), 138
l.c.m. (least common multiple), 191
Lake Erie temperatures, 661
Lambert, Johann, 369
Landon, Alfred, 703
Language, E6
LANs, 165
Laptop computer, 165
Largest number you know, 39
Largest prime number, 193
table of, 193
Largest three-digit number 
example, 487
Last Supper, 376, E8
Law of contraposition, 97, 102
Law of detachment, 108
Law of double negation, 93, 102
Law of excluded middle, 84
Law of large numbers, 609
Lawler, E. L., 423
Laws of exponents, 36
addition law, 35
multiplication law, 35
subtraction law, 36
Laws of logarithms, 485
Laws of logic, 100
Laws of square roots, 216
lb (abbreviation for pound), 460
LCM, 191
Le Trente-et-un, 627
Leaf, 661
Learning curve, 731
problem, 485
Least common denominator, 208
Least common multiple, 191
procedure for finding, 191
Least-squares
line, 698
method, 695
Leblanc (pseudonym for Sophie
Germain), 609
Ledbetter-Nering algorithm, 602
Legendre, Adrien-Marie, 378
Legs (of a triangle), 212, 363
Leibniz, Gottfried, 85, 161, 448, 
550, 871
Leibniz’ reckoning machine, 161
Length, 428
conversions, 467
standard units, 429
Lenstra, Arjen K., 243
Lenstra, Jan Karel, 423
Leonard, Bill, 17
Leprechaun puzzle, 182
Less than, 284
Less than or equal to, 284
Letter game, 117
Liar problem, 118
Liber Abaci, 530
Liberi, Bert, 470
Librarian’s ratio, 383
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I9
Index
License plate problem, 591
personalized, 596
U.S. Preamble, 591
Light buck, 40
Light symbol, 124
Light year, 31, E10
Like terms, 251
Lily problem, 299
Limit, 872, 873
finite, 885
infinite, 885
of a sequence, 881
of integration, 902
to infinity, 881
Lincoln, Abraham, 105
Line, 331, 736
best-fitting, 698
graph, 664, 736
horizontal, 721
intercept form, 723
least squares, 698
of credit, 517
of symmetry, 335
point-slope form, 723
procedure for graphing
by plotting points, 720
by slope-intercept method, 723
re-entrant, 379
regression, 695
secant, 874
segment, 333
construction of, 333
slope-intercept form, 719
standard form, 718
tangent, 890
two-point form, 723
vertical, 721
Linear
combination method, 760
correlation coefficient, 696
equation, 274, 718
function, 750
inequalities, 724
systems of, 797
polynomial, 250
programming, 797
procedure for solving, 800
theorem, 799
system, 757
units, 428
Linguistics, E5
Liter, 450
compared to meter and gram, 462
compared to quart, 450
in cubic decimeters, 452
Little Caesar’s problem, 598
Lo-shu magic square, 25
Loaded die, 608
Loans
car, 518
closed-end, 517
consumer, 517
credit card, 517
installment, 517
open-end, 517
Lobachevski, Nikolai, 378
Lobachevskian postulate, 378
Local area network, 165
Log of both sides theorem, 483
Logarithmic
equations, 483
laws of, 485
types of, 483
function, 750
scale, 593
spiral, 501
Logarithm(s), 474
additive law, 485
both sides theorem, 483
common, 475
contract, 485
definition, 474
evaluate, 476
expand, 485
first law, 485
fundamental properties, 485
Grant’s tomb properties, 482
history of, 484
laws of, 485
multiplicative law, 485
natural, 475
second law, 485
subtractive law, 485
third law, 485
Logic, 83
Aristotelian, 83
circuits, 124
error, 170
fuzzy, 84
laws of, 100
operators, 84
symbolic, 83
Logical
equivalence, 102
fallacy, 111
gates, 126
Loma-Prieta earthquake, 497
London’s underground transit system
problem, 399
Longdon, John, 336
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth, 299
Loop, 395
LORAN, 742
problem, 755
Lo-shu magic square, 25
Lost nail problem, 115
Lottery
Keno, 647
odds, 629, 636
problem, 626
ticket, 624
Lotus flower symbol, 136
Louvre Tablet, 762
Lower quota, 842
Lucky numbers, 195
Lump-sum problem, 549
Lyceum school, P5
M
m (abbreviation for meter), 429
M (Roman symbol for 1,000), 138
Mach, Ernst, 602
Machine error, 170
Macintosh computer, 165
Maclaurin, Colin, 326, 328
Mad dog move, 602
Mad scientist problem, 618
Madison, James, 855
Magic number cards, 159
Magic squares, P4, 18
alphamagic, 47
Franklin, Benjamin, 47
IXOHOXI, 18
Lo-shu, 25
Mah–av–ira, P6
Main diagonal, 788
Mainframe computer, 163
Major axis, 735
Majority criterion, 824, 832
Majority rule, 813
summary, 821
Manasse, Mark S., 243
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 416
Mandlebrot set, 281
Maor, Eli, 907
Marble player problem, 124
Marginal
cost, 723
profit, 723
Markowsky, George, 371, 372
Marriage license problem, 676
Marriage
stable, E5
unstable, E7
Mars orbit problem, 744
Masaccio (Tommaso Cassai), 377
Masculine numbers, 211
Mass, 460
MasterCard, 517
Material implication, 94
Math Counts, 80
Mathematical expectation, 619
definition, 620
Mathematical Experience, 500
Mathematical Magic Show, 45
Mathematical modeling, 289, 873, E2
budgeting, 877
global climate, 876
linear programming, 797
mathematical, 875
path of a cannonball, E2, E3, E11
population growth, 490
uncategorized problems, 317
Mathematical Puzzles for Beginners &
Enthusiasts, 130
Mathematical Recreations and Essays,
386
Mathematicians, see Historical Notes
black, 868
female, 868
Karl first name, 868
women, 868x
Mathematics, 5
Mathematics
applied, 251
art, 372
Babylonian, P2
business, E10
Chinese, P3
definition, E1
degree at UCLA, E1
economics, E10
Egyptian, P2, P10
Greek, P3
Hindu, P6
history of, P2
humanities, E10
journals, 4
Mayan, P3
Mesopotamian, P2
modern, P10
Muslim, 213
native American, P2, 142, 149
natural sciences, E1
numeration system, 135
Olmeca, P3
Persian, 6
pure, 251
puzzles, 130
Roman, P3
social sciences, E5
Why not study mathematics?, E1
“Why should I take mathematics?”, 551
Why study mathematics?, P2
writing, 4
Mathematics Counts, 43
Material implication, 94
Mathews, Jay, 130, 603
mathnature.com, 5
Matrix (matrices), 773
augmented, 773
communication, 786
definition, 773
dimension, 773
equation, 773, 783
equivalent, 775
inverse, 788, 789
key (calculator), 775
main diagonal, 788
nonconformable, 784
nonsingular, 790
operations, 783
order, 773
Pascal, 795
properties of, 788
singular, 773
square, 773
systems of equations, 793
zero, 788
zero-one, 786
Matyasievich, Yuri, 213
Mauchley, John W., 162
Maximize winnings, 620
Maximum
house payment problem, 557
loan, 556
Mayan Indians, 224
Mayan mathematics, E5
numeration system, 142
zero symbol, 224
McBerty, Mary and Dan, 13, 563
McNichol, Kristy, 771
Mean, 674
arithmetic, 684
definition, 674
geometric, 684, 852
harmonic, 684
weighted, 676
Means, 301
Measure, 427
angle, 342
capacity, 450
length, 428
mass, 460
metric, 429
temperature, 461
U.S., 428
Measurement
metric, 430
miscellaneous, 456
temperature, 461
U.S. 428
Measures
of central tendency, 673
of dispersion, 678
of position, 677
Measuring cup, 451
Measuring rope, 368
Median, 674
arithmetic, 684
definition, 674
geometric, 684
harmonic, 684
weighted, 676
Medication formula, 282
Medicine, E5
Megabyte, 39, 166
Melancholia, 18
Member (of a set), 50
Mendel, Gregor, 265
Mendelssohn, Kurt, 369
Mendes, P2
Mensa
problem, 182
test, 527
Mercury orbit problem, 744
de Méré, Chevalier, 627, 648
Mersenne, Marin, 192, 193
Mertz, J. T. 753
Mesopotamian mathematics, P2
Meteorology, E1
Meter, 429, 463
compared to liter and gram, 462
comparison with yard, 429
Metric system, 430
capacity, 450
conversions, 463, 467
length, 428
measurements, 429
metric countries, 428
prefixes, 462
Mexico-U.S. trade, 668
mg (abbreviation for milligram), 460
Michelangelo, 374
Micrometer, 479, 493
Microsecond, 755
Microsoft, 166
Middle Ages, P7
Middle C, E9
problem, E11
Mikelson, Eva, 622
Mile, 429
Miletus, P3
Mill, John Stuart, 858, E1
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
I10
Millennium problem, 426
milli-, 430, 463
definition, 462
Milligram, 460
Milliliter, 450
Millimeter, 463
Million, 37, 39
Million dollar
gift problem, 513
salary problem, 543
Millionth number problem, 81
Minicomputer, 163
Minimize losses, 620
Minimum spanning tree, 404
Minor axis, 735
Minus, translations for, 289
Mirror
image problem, 340
maze problem, 386
Miscellaneous operators, 104
Mittag-Leffler, 139
Mixed bag problem, 124
Mixture problems, 766
spreadsheet, 766
mL (abbreviation for milliliter), 450
mm (abbreviation for 
millimeter), 463
Möbbius, August, 401, 413
Möbbius strip, 401
Mod five, 233
Mode, 674
definition, 674
Modeling, E2
budgeting, 877
global climate, 876
linear programming, 797
mathematical, 289, 875
path of a cannonball, E2
population growth, 490
uncategorized problems, 317
Models, 866
a posteriori, 609
a priori, 609
money growth, see Chapter 11
plank, 675
population growth, 490
probability, 609
seesaw, 675
Modem, 167
Modern Period (1900-present), P10
Modified divisor, 846
Modified quota, 846
Modular
arithmetic, 233
art problem, 248
codes, 242
Modulate, 243
Modulo-five arithmetic, 233
Modus ponens, 108
Modus tollens, 108
Mohenjo-Daro of the Indus, 811
Molecule problem, 410
Mona Lisa, 231
Mondriaan, Pieter, 373
Money rounding, 508
Monitor, 165
Monkey in the tree problem, 299
Monomial, 250
Monopoly® , 116, 606
problem, 657
Monotonicity criterion, 827, 832
Monroe doctrine, 847
Monthly
compounding, 508
payment, 549, 557
transportation charge, 710
Monty Hall Dilemma, 613
Moon orbit problem, 744
Mosaic tiles, 420
Moscow papyrus, P2, 136
Moser, Leo, 382
Mother Goose rhyme, 143
Mott-Smith, Geoffrey, 130
Mouse, 165x
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, E9
composition, E9
MSN, 139
µ (Greek letter mu), 686
Multiple, 183
Multiplication
by a scalar, 776
definition, 177, 232
identity, 226
integers, 200
flowchart, 200
inverse matrix, 788
inverse property, 226
matrices, 783
nonconformable, 784
notation for, 177
law of exponents, 35
law of logarithms, 485
rational numbers, 206
symbols for, 177
Multiplication law of exponents, 35
Multiplication law of logarithms, 485
Multiplication principle, 139
Multiplication property
of equality, 275
of factorial, 577
of inequality, 286
of probability, 641
formula, 641
Multiplicative
identity, 226
inverse, 226, 788
law of logarithms, 485
Multiplicity, 278
Multiply, origin of the word, 177
Musical scale, E9
Muslim mathematics, 213
Mutually exclusive events, 608
N
n-gon, 343
Napier, John, 161, 221, 478, 484
Napier’s bones, 161
Napier’s rods, 161
Nappe of a cone, 732
Nasîr-Eddin, P6
National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics, 46
National debt, 516
history, graph of, 671
problems involving, 40, 44
Native American Period, P2
Native Americans, 142, 149
Natural base, 510
Natural logarithm, 475
Natural numbers, 19, 50, 175
Natural sciences and mathematics, E1
Nautilus, 375
NBC Nightly News problem, 72
NCAA basketball tournament
problem, 543
NCTM, 46
Nearest neighbor method, 396
Necessary and sufficient, 133
Necessary condition, 133
Needle problem, 712
Negation, 86
circuit, 126
compound statement, 103
of all, 87
of a conditional, 103
of no, 87
of some, 87
Negative
as an inequality, 285
correlation, 695
multiplication property, 286
integer, 197
slope, 721
symbol, 285
Neither p nor q, 104
Nelson, Harry, 27
Neper, Jhone, 161, 478
Nerds 2.0.1, 171
Net change, 902
Networks, 390
computer, 165
connected, 391
local area, 165
table, 391
Neugebauer, Otto, 140
Never Give a Sucker an Even 
Break, 648
New states paradox, 862
summary, 863
New York
area of, 771
city bridge problem, 399
subway system problem, 399
Newman, James, 5
Newton, Isaac, 103, 222, 548, 657, 871
Newton’s laws
of cooling, 498
of motion, E3
Nickel, Laura, 193
Night watchman problem, 596
Nightingale, Florence, 679, 713
Nine, pattern of, 19
No, see Negation
negation of, 87
No p is q, 104
Noah’s ark problem, 435
Nobel Prize, 869
voting, 869
Noether, Amalie (Emmy), 209
Nominal rate, 516
Non-Euclidean geometries, 333, 378,
387, 413
Nonagon, 343
Nonconformable matrices, 784
None, 87
Nonrepeating decimal, 221
Nonsingular matrix, 790
Nonterminating decimal, 221
Normal curve, 686
area of, 691
as a percentage, 691
as a probability, 691
Normal distribution, 688
comparison of types, 691
Normal equation, 694, 731
Normal frequency curve, 686
Normal graph of, 686
Norse, James, 602
Northridge earthquake, 497
Not, 84, 86
-gate, 126
table, 87
Not closed, 175
NSFNET, 164
Null, Brad, 422
Null set, 52
Number(s), 135
abundant, 211
amicable, 196
billion, 37, 39
byte, 39
canonical representation, 109
cardinal, 52
classifications of, 224
composite, 186
counting, 19, 50, 135, 175
decimal, 221
deficient, 211
distinguish from numeral, 135
Egyptian, 249
Euler’s, 214
feminine, 211
fraction, 205
friendly, 196, 211
gigabyte, 39
googol, 39
happy, 45
heathen, 145
hundred, 39
integers, 50, 197
irrational, 214
ISBN, 240
kilobyte, 39
arge, 39
line, 222
lucky, 195
masculine, 211
megabyte, 39
million, 37, 39
natural, 19, 50, 175
negative, 197
of divisors, 183
of prime triplets, 196
of prime twins, 195
one, 39
pentagonal, 211
perfect, 196, 211, E6
positive, 197
prime, 196
puzzle:
proportions, 307
solving equations, 272, 282
quadrillion, 39
quintillion, 39
racket, 625
rational, 50, 205
real, 220
relations, 291
relatively prime, 191
sacred, 325
sextillion, 39
square, 212
ten, 39
tetrahedral, 46
thousand, 39
triangular, 46, 211
trillion, 37
unhappy, 45
vigintillion, 39
whole, 50, 205
word problems, 291
Number-of-vertices-and-edges-in-a-tree
theorem, 408
Numeral, 135
cuneiform, 140
distinguish from number, 135
Numeration systems, 135
addition principle, 136
Babylonian, P2, 140, 142
base b, 148, 149
base ten, 144
base two, 148, 154
binary, 148, 154
Chinese, 142
converting between, 150, 154, 158
decimal, 142, 144
definition, 135
different, 148
duodecimal, 153
Egyptian, 135, 142
Greek, 142
hexadecimal, 148
Hindu-Arabic, 144
Mayan, 142
multiplication principle, 139
Native American, 142
number of symbols, 149
octal, 148
positional, P3, 140
properties of, 141
repetitive, 137
Roman, 138, 142
sexagesimal, 140
simple grouping, 136
Sumerian, 142
Numerator, 205
Numerical coefficient, 250
O
O’Neal, Tatum, 771
O-ring problem, 499
Objective function, 798
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I11
Index
Obtuse
angle, 342
triangle, 350
OCR, 156
Octagon, 343
Octahedron, 466
Octal-binary equivalence, 158
Octal numeration system, 148
compared to binary system, 158
table for conversion, 158
Octave, E9
Odd
ball problem, 117
man out, 654
vertex, 391
Odds
against, 629
given the probability, 630
in favor, 629
racetrack, 635
Ohm, Martin, 371
Oil
consumption problem, 901
-drilling problem, 625
Old Sturbridge Village problem, 400
Old woman/young woman, 332, 337
Olmeca mathematics, P3
Olympic host city, 828
voting for, 869
On the Shoulders of Giants: New
Approaches to Numeracy, 808
One, 39
definition, 225
dimension, 416, 456
identity for multiplication, 225
multiplicative identity, 225
pair (poker), 626
One hundred fowl problem, 
P6, 240
One-to-one correspondence, 73
Online, 167
Onsberger, Ross, 500
Open-end loan, 517
Open equation, 274
Open half-plane, 724
Operational research, 388
Operations
Cartesian product, 76
elementary, 232
order of, 20
research, 388
with sets, 54, 59
Operator(s), 84
fundamental, 92
miscellaneous, 104
Opposite(s),
definition, 197
operations, 179
property of, 225
side, 359
Optical Character Recognition 
(OCR), 156
Optical illusions, 332
Optimum solution, 798
Or, 59, 54, 86
as a union, 59
different usages, 86
inclusive, 86
exclusive, 86
-gate, 126
table, 86
with probabilities, 642
Oracle of Bacon problem, 410
Orbit, E3
Order
matrix, 773
property of, 176
statement of, 284
Order-of-operations agreement, 20
extended, 29
logic statements, 88
Ordered
pairs, 574
triples, 575
Ordinary
annuity, 549
interest, 504
Ordinate, 716
Origami, 605
Origin, 716
Orthogonal circles, 4383
Oscar awards for best actor, 662
Ostia, Garden Houses, 330
Oughtred, William, 221
Ounce, P4, 460, 450
Output device, 165
Oven temperatures, 462
Overcoming Math Anxiety, 130
Overlapping-circle puzzle, 64
oz (abbreviation for ounce), 461
Ozanam, Jacques, 221
P
p because q, 104
p unless q, 104
Pac 12 football conference problem, P16
Pacioli, Luca, 371
Pagonini, Nicolo, 197
Painted cube problem, 31
Pair
in poker, 619
of dice, sample space, 612
Pairwise comparison method, 817
summary, 821
Paper folding, 605
Paper-link chain, 594
problem, 597
Pappus, P8
Parabola, 726
algebraic characterization, 736
axis, 734
conic section, 732
definition, 733
downward, 727
eccentricity, 742
geometric characterization, 733
graph paper, 734
reflectors, 742
standard, 727
vertex, 734
Parabolic
archway problem, 744
mirror, 742
reflector problems, 744
Paradox, 81
Alabama, 860
apportionment, 858
Arrow’s, 832
new states, 862
population, 861
Simpson, 684
voting, 834
Zeno, 293
Parallel circuit, 124
Parallel lines, 332, 757
associated angles, 344
construction of, 334
cut by a transversal, 344
Parallelepiped, 448
volume of, 448
Parallelogram, 344, 437
area of, 437
Parent problem, 122
Parentheses
calculator, 31
order of operations, 20
symbol for multiplication, 177
Pareto principle, 817, 834
Pareto, Vilfredo, 817
Parmenides, P5
Parthenon, 373, E8
problem, 381, 387
Partial sums, 544
Pascal, Blaise, 9, 627, 657
Pascal matrix, 795
Pascal’s calculator, 161
Pascal’s triangle, P6, 9, 46, 585
binomial expansion, 255
first time in print, 10
natural numbers, 46
patterns in, 46
tetrahedral numbers, 46
triangular numbers, 46
with the binomial theorem, 255
Password, 167
Pattern of eights, 19
Pattern of nines, 19
Pattern recognition, 167
Paulos, John Allen, 81, 645, 753
Pea plant problem, 273, 327
Peanuts comic strips
age problem, 321
average problem, 673
banana peel problem, 308
chain letter problem, 542
rationalizing a denominator, 217
square root simplification, 217
Pearson, Karl, 713
Pearson correlation coefficient, 697
Penguin problem, 15
Penny stack problem, 41
Pentagon, 343
Pentagonal number, 211
Pentagonal pyramid, 466
Pentatonic scale, E9
Pentominos, 420
Percent, 308
convert to a decimal, 310
convert to a fraction, 310
of a fraction, 310
problem, 312
symbol, 308
Percentage, 311, 312
compared to a normal curve, 686
Percentile, 677
Perfect number, 204, 221, E6
Perfect square, 211
Perigee, 744, E11
Perihelion, 739, E4
Perimeter, 430
Periodic-payment problem, 549
Peripheral, 165
Permutation, 582
classifying as, 592
compare with combination, 590, 592
definition, 575
distinguishable, 592
formula for, 578
lock, 591
notation, 575
number of, 575
relationship to combination, 
590, 592
Perpendicular
circles, 383
lines, 345
Persian mathematics, P10
Persian period, P6
Personal computer, 165
Perspective, P5, P8, 376
problem, 387
Peter the Great, P8
Petroleum reserves, 501
Phenotype, 266, E4
Phi ( ), 371
Phillips, David, 42
Phoenix, Arizona, 491
Phyllotaxy, 533
Physics, E5
Pi ( ), P3, P6, 214, 432
approximation, 283
calculator use, 433
history of, 223
mnemonic for remembering, 223
Piano keyboard, E9
Picnic table problem, 355
Pictograph, 666
Pie chart, 665
Pigeon holes, 574
Pipeline expansion problem, 296, 299
p
f
Pirating, 167
Pisano, Leonardo, see Fibonacci
Pistole, 762
Pitch of a roof, 308, 718
Pivot(ing), 778
row, 778
Pixel, 166
Pizza problem, 469
Little Caesar, 598
Place-value chart, 150
Planar simple closed curves, 414
Plane, 331
intersection with a cone, 732
Plank model, 675
Plato’s Academy, P6
Platonic school, P5
Playfair, John, 378
Playfair’s axiom, 332
Plot-plan problem, 455
Plurality method, 816
summary, 821
Plus, translations for, 289
Poe, Edgar Allan, 249
Poincaré, Jules-Henri, 81, 413
Point, 331
exterior, 414
interior, 414
Point-slope form, 723
Pointing-finger symbol, 136
Poker probabilities, 616
Police patrol problem, 393
Political science, E6
Polliwog symbol, 136
Pólya, George, 6, 7, 45
Polygon, 343
regular, 343
Polyhedron (pl. polyhedra), 466
model problem, 471
Polynomials, 250
area representation, 256
classification, 250
degree, 250
simplification, 251
Pomerance, C., 253
Population, 702
earth problem, 455
growth, 490
New York borrough, 842
paradox, 861
summary, 863
target, 712
United States, 44, 516xx
1790, 844
world, 43, 455
Poseidonius of Rhodes, 378
Position, measures of, 677
Positional numeration system, P3, 140
Positive
correlation, 695
integer, 197
multiplication property, 286
number, 285
symbol for, 285
slope, 721
square root, 188
Postulate, 107, 332
Pound, 460
compared to kilogram, 460
Power, 29
The Power of Logical Thinking, 656
Powers of Ten, 28
Preamble with license plates, 591
Precision, 427
Predecessor, 880
Premise, 22, 83
Present value, 503
calculator program, 553
formula, 556
Present value of an annuity, 556, E10
calculator, 556
formula, 556
Presidential election, 2000, 829
Previous balance method, 522
Prime factorization, 188
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
I12
Prime numbers
definition, 186
formula for, 192
largest, 193
procedure for finding, 186
proof that there is no largest, 193
Pythagoreans, 211
R317, 186
table of, 193
triplets, 196
twins, 195
Principal, 503
Principia Mathematica, 86
Principle of decisiveness, 815
Principle of independence of irrelevant
alternatives, 817
Principle of unrestricted domain, 814
Printer, 166
Prism, 456
Prisoner door problem, 133
Probabilistic model, 609
Probability
addition property, 642
by counting, 614
calculated, 636
conditional, 631
definition, 610
empirical, 609
empty set, 614
function, 750
given the odds, 630
intersection, 614
formula, 641
multiplication property, 641
poker, 616
subjective, 609
theoretical, 609
union, 614
universal set, 614
Problem solving, 6
Achilles and the tortoise 
problem, 294
by patterns, 8
guidelines, 6
in algebra, 288
Pólya’s plan, 7
procedure, 6
procedure using algebra, 289
strategies, 317
using logic, 116
with systems, 762
Problems, types of
IN YOUR OWN WORDS, 6
Level 1, 6
Level 2, 6
Level 3, 6
Prodicus, Diadochus, P5, 378
Products
binomial, 253
Cartesian, 76
polynomials, 289
Profit problem, 723
Program, 166
Programming errors, 170
data errors, 170
input errors, 170
logic errors, 170
run-time errors, 170
syntax errors, 170
Progression, 555
Projective geometry, 376, 377
Projects
individual, 5, 47, 81, 133, 249, 329,
387, 426. 471, 501, 571, 605,
659, 713, 755, 811, 869
group, 5, 46, 81, 131, 248, 328, 386,
424, 470, 501, 569, 604, 657,
712, 754, 809, 868
Proof
by contradiction, 76
logical, 107
Proof (PBS production), 329
Proper
divisor, 196
fraction, 205
subset, 55
Property of
arrangement, 177, 226
complements, 628
grouping, 177
order, 176, 177
proportions, 301
Proportion(s), 301
divine, 371
human body, 374, 375
procedure for solving, 303
property of, 301
solving, 303
Proportional ratios, 356
Prostaphaeresis, 484
Protractor, 342
Pseudosphere, 379
Pseudovertex, 742
Psychology, E6
Ptolemy, P2
Ptolematic riddle, 328
Public domain software, 166
Public key code, 244
Pulitzer prize, 869
Punnett square, 266
Pure mathematics, 251
Puzzle problems
Diophantus, 321
Games magazine, 672
mathematical, 130
proportions, 307
solving equations, 272, 282
Pyramid, 387
American, 381
angle of elevation, 369
Cheops, 365
Egyptian, 369
Giza, 381
Khufu, 369
of the Sun at Teotihuacán, 381
red, 370
riddle of, 369
truncated, P3
Pathagoras, P5
Pythagorean theorem, P6, 212, 295, 363
area, 469
Chinese, 213
Egyptian, 213
exhibit project, 249
geometric interpretation, 469
Muslem, 213
proofs of, 248
squares problem, 220
statement of, 212
Pythagorean triples, 471
Pythagoreans, P5, 204, E6
Q
Qiujian, Zhang, P6
qt (abbreviation for quart), 450
Quadrants, 716
Quadratic, 250
equation, P7, 274
formula, P2, 278
function, 750
polynomial, 250
Quadrilateral(s), 343, 344
pyramid, 466
Saccheri, 378
sum of angle measure, 356
Quadrillion, 39
Quart, 450
compared to liter, 450
Quarterly compounding, 508
Quartile, 677
Queen of the Sciences, E1
Quetelet, Adolph, 679, 713
Quintillion, 39
Quota, 842
lower, 842
modified, 846
rule, 844
summary, 863
violation of, 858
standard, 843
summary, 863
upper, 842
Quotient, 289
R
R317, 186
Rabbit problem, 530
Racetrack odds, 635
Radar, 743
antenna problem, 742
Radical form, 215
Radicand, 216
Radioactive decay, 492
Radius, 432
RAM, 166
Ramanujan, Srinivasa 203
Ramsey theory problem, 426
Rancho Cotati High School, 63
Random-access memory, 166
Random sampling, 702
Random variables, 648
binomial, 648
continuous, 648
discrete, 648
finite, 648
Range, 678, 746
Raphael, P5
Rate
annual, 503
effective, 516
interest, 503
nominal, 516
of change, 891
percent, 312
Ratio, 300
golden, 371
symbol for, 300
Rational number(s), 50
classifications of, 224
countable set, 75
definition, 205
operations with, 206
Ray, 333
Re-entrant line, 379
Read-only memory, 166
Reader’s Digest sweepstakes, 626
Real number(s)
classification of, 221
countable set, 75
decimal representation, 221
definition, 220
field properties, 228
line, 222, 223
Realtor example, 622
Reasoning
deductive, 22, 83
direct, 107
indirect, 108
inductive, 21
invalid, 84
transitive, 109
valid, 83
Recessive gene, 266
Reciprocals, 226
Rectangle, 344
area, 256, 436
golden, 370
perimeter, 431
Rectangular
array, 773
parallelepiped, 448
prism, 456
Recursion formula, 886
Red pyramid, 370
Reduced fraction, 205
Reflecting telescope, 742
Reflection, 335, E9
Reflector, parabolic, 742
Refrigerator capacity problem, 455
Region, 390
Regression analysis, 695
Regression line, see least squares
line, 698
Regular polygon, 343
Regular polyhedra, 471
dodecahedron, 466
icosahedron, 466
octahedron, 466
solids, 471
tetrahedron, 466
Relative frequency, 609
Relatively prime numbers, 191
Renaissance, P7
Repeating decimal, 221
Repetitive numeration system, 137
Replacement, with or without, 643
Replicate, 269
Reporter’s error problem, 120
Research Projects
individual, 5, 47, 81, 133, 173, 329,
387, 426, 471, 501,
571, 605, 659, 713, 755, 811, 869
group, 5, 46, 81, 131, 172, 328, 386,
424, 470, 501, 569, 604, 657,
712, 754, 809, 868
Resolution, 166
Retirement
interest-only payment, 506
problem, 554
research, 571
savings account, 551, 552
Reviews
Chapter 1, 43
Chapter 2, 80
Chapter 3, 129
Chapter 4, 170
Chapter 5, 245
Chapter 6, 326
Chapter 7, 384
Chapter 8, 422
Chapter 9, 468
Chapter 10, 500
Chapter 11, 567
Chapter 12, 602
Chapter 13, 655
Chapter 14, 709
Chapter 15, 753
Chapter 16, 807
Chapter 17, 865
Chapter 18, 905
Revolving credit, 517
Reward problem, 27, 132
Rhind, Henry A., 136
Rhind papyrus, P2, 137
Rhombus, 344
Richter, Charles, 482, 493
Richter
number, 493
scale, 482, 493
Riemann, Georg Bernhard, 379, 
413, 657
Right
angle, 342
circular cone, 456
circular cylinder, 456
rectangular prism, 456
triangle, 356
theorem, 357
Rise, 718
Rivest, Ronald, 244
Road signs, xiii
Robert’s Rules of Order, 
815, 834
Roberts, Ed, 166
Robinson, David, 139
Rodney King example, 834
ROM, 166
Roman mathematics, P3
Roman numerals, 138, 530
Roman numeration system, 138.
142, 224
Roosevelt, Franklin, 703
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I13
Index
Root(s)
Babylonian approximation, 248
equation, 274
multiplicity, 278
multiplicity, 278
square, 213
symbol, 213
Rope stretches, P2
Roster method, 50
Rotation, 335
Roulette, 623
Rounding
agreement, 296
money, 508
Round-off error, 427
Round Table Pizza problem, 469
Row, 773
Row operations, 775
Row, 775
*Row, 775
*Row, 775
RowSwap, 775
Row-reduced form, 779
Royal flush (in poker), 616
RPN logic, 31
RSA algorithm, 244
encryption method, 242
Rubik, Ernö, 599
Rubik’s cube, 598
standard position, 599
Rucker, Rudy, 49
Rule of 78, 526
Rules of divisibility, 185
Index, , 11th Edition The 
Nature of Mathematics Index 
page 176
Rumely, R. S., 241
Run, 718
Run-off election, 816
Run-time error, 179
Run-off election method, 816
Russell, Bertrand, 81, 86x, E1
Russell’s paradox, 81
S
SAAB problem, 672
Saccheri, Girolamo (Giovanni), 378
Saccheri quadrilateral, 378
Sacred number, 325
St. Ives problem, 143
St. Petersburg paradox, 627
St. Jerome, E8
Salary
increase problem, 569
millionaire problem, 543
Sallows, Lee, 47
Sample, 702
Sample space, 607
coin and a die, 608
deck of cards, 615
pair of dice, 612
single die, 608
Sampling
area, 703
cluster, 703
procedure, 704
simple random, 702
stratified, 703
systematic, 703
San Francisco
earthquake, 497
map, 7
Santa Rosa
Junior College, 63
street problem, P11
SAT scores, 691
test-score problem, 684
Satisfy equation
with one variable, 325
with two variables, 715
vos Savant, Marilyn
door problem, 246
hunter problem, P14
matching a key to a car problem, 656
The Power of Logical Thinking, 656
water tube problem, P11
Scalar, 776
multiplication of matrices, 783
Scale, E4
Scalene triangle, 350
Scaling factor, E4
Scatter diagram, 695, 723
Schedule A tax problem, 96
Scheubel, Johann, 14
Schnirelmann, L., 196
School of Athens, P5
Schwenk, Allen J., 72
Scientific method, 21, E1
Scientific notation, 30
calculator, 33
Scroll symbol, 136
Search engine and trees, 411
Sears
Building, 772
credit card, 525xx
Secant line, 874
Second component, 745
Second-degree equation, 728, 736
Second-round winner, 816
Second law of logarithms, 485
Seesaw model, 675
Segaller, Stephen, 166
Seismogram, 493
Seismograph, 493
Semiannual compounding, 508
Semicircle, 432
Semielliptic archway problem, 744
Sequence, 527
arithmetic, 527
classifying, 546
Fibonacci-type, 532
geometric, 529
limits of, 880
summary, 546
Sequential voting, 818
Series, 538
alternating, 539
arithmetic, 540
circuit, 124
finite, 538
geometric, 542
infinite geometric, 544
summary, 546
Series circuit, 124
Set-builder notation, 51
Sets, 49
applications of, 64
belongs to, 50
cardinality, 52
combined operations, 64
complement, 54
convex, 798
countable, 74
defining property, 50
denoting, 49
dense, 222
description method, 50
disjoint, 54
element, 50
empty, 52
equal, 52
finite, 73
general representations
five sets, 72
four sets, 72
one set, 54
three sets, 60
two sets, 59
infinite, 74
intersection, 59
member, 50
operations, 54, 59
proper subset, 55
roster method, 50
subset, 54
theory, 49
union, 59
universal, 52
well-defined, 50
Seurat, Georges, 373, E8
La Parade, 373
Seven sages, P3
Sexagesimal numeration system, 140
Sextillion, 39
Seymour, Dale, 46
Shakespeare, P8
Shanir, A., 244
Shang and Chou Dynasty, P4
Shanks, William, 223
Shareware, 166
Shaw, G. B., 99
Sherlock Holmes problem, 771
Shmoys, D. B., 423
Shroud of Turin, 499, E5
SI system, 430
Sieve of Eratosthenes, 186
table of, 187
Sigma
, standard deviation, 680, 686
, sum, 673 
notation, 539
Sigmund, Thomas, 249
Sign language, 87
Significance level, 697
Similar
figures, 336
terms, 251
triangles, 356
theorem, 357
Similarity, 336
Simple curve, 414
Simple event, 607
Simple grouping system, 136
Simple interest, 503
compared with compound interest, 509
distinguish from amortization, 560
formula, 553
graph comparing with compound
interest, 730
Simple random sampling, 702
Simple statement, 83
Simplex method, 804
Simplify, 252
square roots, 217
Simpson’s paradox, 684
Simpson, O. J. murder trial, 642
Simulation, 167
Simultaneous solution of a system of
equations, 757
sin A, 364
Sine, 364
Single die sample space, 608
Singmaster, David, 602
Singular matrix, 792
Sinking fund, 552, E10
calculator program, 553
formula, 553
Sister’s garden problem, 123
Six-pack problem, P12
Skewed distribution, 691
comparison with normal, 691
Skycycle problem, 731
Skywalker, Luke, problem, 401xx
Slant asymptote, 742
Slide rule, 161
Slope, 718
curve, 872
does not exist, 721
line, 718, 872
negative, 721
point, 719
positive, 721
zero, 721
Slope-intercept form, 719
Slot machine, 646
Slowinski, David, 193
Slyke, Andy van, 681
Smith, Arthur F., 369
Smith, Linda, 323, 833, 840
Smith, Will, 411
g
Snake eyes, 618
Snowflake curve, 416, 424
Social choice theory, 812, 813, E6
Social sciences, E5
Social Security
benefits example, 557
crunch problems, 672
maximum payments problem, 555
Sociology, E6
Sock problem, 122
Socks and shoe problem, 180
Soft-drink dilution problem, 308
Software, 166
freeware, 166
package, 166
public domain, 166
Y2K bug, 173
Soldier problem, 182
Solution
equation with one variable, 274
equation with two variables, 715
inequality, 286
optimum, 798
Solve
an equation, 274
an inequality, 286
a proportion, 303
Some, 87
negation of, 87
Sophist school, P5
Sorted-edge method, 396
Sound wave, E9
Sovndals
Shannon, 82, 323, 411, 414, 547, 561
Søren, 323, 681
Theron, 106, 324
Spade (deck of cards), 584
Spanning tree, 403
definition, 404
minimum, 404
Speed, 887
Sphere, 456
Sphereland, A Fantasy About Curved
Spaces and an Expanding Universe,
386
Sphere-packing conjecture, 47x
Spiral, 375
construction, 375
Spreadsheet, 168, 267
mixture problems, 767m 770
partial sums, 545
terms of a sequence, 535
Sprinkler system problem, 403
Square(s), 22, 212, 344
area of, 256, 436
centimeter, 447
difference of, 262
foot, 436
inch, 447
magic, 18
matrix, 773
number, 212
number of (problem), 27
of a difference, 290
perimeter of, 431
symmetries of, 230
units, 435
yard, 437
Square root, 213
approximate representation, 214
laws of, 216
project, 249
simplify, 217
Squared, 22
Squares
magic, 18
number of problem, 27
SRJC problem, 405
Stable marriage, E6
Stand and Deliver, 160
Standard-position Rubik’s cube, 599
Standard capacity units, 450
Standard deviation, 680
procedure for finding, 680
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
I14
Standard divisor, 843
Standard-form
conic sections, 737
ellipse, 737
hyperbola, 741
line, 718
normal, 731
parabola, 727
Standard linear units, 429
Standard normal curve, 694
distribution table, 688
Standard normal distribution; z-score
table, 688
Standard position Rubik’s cube, 599
Standard quota, 843
Standard scores, 689
Standard temperature units, 461
Standard triangle, 349
Standard weight units, 460
Star Trek, 166
Enterprise, 36, 298
The Next Generation, 166, 328
Star Wars problem, 401
Statement, 83
compound, 84
conditional, 94
simple, 83
Statistics, see Chapter 14; 660, E5
baseball, 681, 713
business, 713
descriptive, 673, 702
education, 713
graphs of, 679
inferential, 702
psychology, 713
Steen, Lynn, 46, 808
Steepness, 718
Stem, 661
Stem-and-leaf plot, 661
Stevin, Simon, 221
Stewart, Ian, 537
Sticker price, 518
Straight angle, 342
Straight
in poker, 616
flush (in poker), 616
Straight-line depreciation problem, 723
Straightedge, 333
Strata, 703
Stratified sampling, 703
Straw vote, 827
Streep, Meryl, 770
Street problem, 7
Stroke symbol, 136
Student fable, xix
Sturbridge problem, 400
Subjective probability, 609
Subscripts
double, 773
single, 773
Subset, 54
proper, 55
Substitution
method, 759
property, 288
Subtraction
definition, 179, 232
integers, 201
law of exponents, 36
law of logarithms, 485
matrices, 783
principle, 138
property, 275
rational numbers, 206
Subtractive symbol, Babylonian
system, 141
Success
hints for, 3
probability, 649
Successor, 880
Sufficient condition, 133
Sugar box, 372
Sugar Pops, 372
Sùlvas–utra period, P6 
Sum, 289
of the measures of angles in a
triangle, 351
partial, 544
Sumerian numeration system, 142
Summaries
Chapter 1, 43
Chapter 2, 80
Chapter 3, 129
Chapter 4, 170
Chapter 5, 245
Chapter 6, 326
Chapter 7, 384
Chapter 8, 422
Chapter 9, 468
Chapter 10, 500
Chapter 11, 567
Chapter 12, 602
Chapter 13, 655
Chapter 14, 709
Chapter 15, 753
Chapter 16, 807
Chapter 17, 865
Chapter 18, 905
Summation notation, 539
Sun Zi, P6
Sunflower, 533
Super-ball problem, 548
Supercomputer, 163
Superfluous constraint, 802
Supermarket problem, 393
Supplementary angles, 343
Supply, 769
Supply and demand problems, 764
Surface area, 445
circular cone, 456
circular cylinder, 456
cone, 456
cylinder, 456
formulas for, 456
pyramid, 456
rectangular prism, 456
right circular cone, 456
right circular cylinder, 456
right rectangular prism, 456
sphere, 456
Surfaces, 331
Survey problems
three sets, 68
two sets, 62
Swimming pool problem, 320
Switch symbol, 124
Syllogism, 23, 107
Sylvester II, 144
Sylvester, James J., 793, E1
Symbolic
language, 84
logic, 83
Symmetric property of equality, 275
Symmetries
of a cube, 249
of a square, 230
table of, 230
Symmetry
human face, 375
line of, 335
voting, 814, 834
Syntax error, 170
System
equations, 757
adding method, 760
dependent, 757
graphing method, 757
inconsistent, 757
matrix method, 793
substitution method, 759
inequalities, 797
Systematic sampling, 703
T
T (abbreviation for ton), 460
Table puzzle, 130
Taj Mahal, 335
tan A, 364
tangent, 364
Tangent line, 890
formula for, 892
problem, 873
Tappin, Linda, 499
Target population, 702
Target row, 776
Tau ( ), 371
Tautology, 101
conditional compared to
biconditional, 102
implication compared to
equivalence, 102
Tax form, 96
Teacher convention problem, 122
Teeter-totter problem, 250
Television network problem, 668
Temperature, 461
boiling point, 461
comparisons, 461, 467
conversions, 467
freezing point, 461
properties of, 461
standard units, 461
Ten, 39, 145
power of, 28
Tenocelome, P3
Term(s), 250
degree, 250
like, 251
of a sequence, 527
similar, 251
undefined, 22
Terminating decimal, 221
Tessellations, 417
Test point, 724
Tetrahedron, 466
Texas, area of, 771
Thales, P5
The Man Who Knew Infinity, by Charles
Schribners, 247
The Mathematical Experience, by 
Philip J. Davis and Reuben 
Hersh, 500
The Power of Logical Thinking, 656
Theorem, 23, 107, 332
Theoretical probability, 609
Thinking computers, 168, 169
Third law of logarithms, 485
Thorp, Edward O., 656
Thoth, P2
maneuver, 17
Thousand, 39
Three-card problem, 617
Three dimensions, 416, 456
Three of a kind (in poker), 616
Through the Looking Glass, 108
Thureau-Dangin, F., 140
Tie-breaking, 818
Tiling, 420
Time, 503
ordinary interest, 505
Timelines
3000 BC to 601 BC, P1
600 BC to AD 499, P4
500 to 1199, P6
1200 to 1599, P7
1600 to 1699, P9
1700 to 1799, P9
1800 to present, P10
Age of reason, P9
Babylonian, P1
Chinese, P4
Early Modern Period, P9
Egyptian, P1
Greek, P4
Hindu, P6
Internet, 164
Mayan, P3
Modern Period, P10
native American, P1
Persian, P6
t
Roman, P4
Transition Period, P7
Times, translations for, 289
*row, 776
*row+, 776
To Infinity and Beyond: A Cultural His-
tory of the Infinite, 907
Tobias, Sheila, 130
Toffler, Alvan, 169
Ton, 460
Topologically equivalent, 413
Topology, 413
Torday, Emil, 401
Toscanelli, P8
Tote board, 635
Tournament, 543
elimination method, 818
summary, 821
of champions, 548
two-team elimination, 543
Tower of Hanoi problem, 605
Trace, calculator, 720
Tractrix, 379
Traditional geometry, 332
Transformation, 335
inversion, 336, E9
Transformational geometry, 332
Transition Period, 1200-1599, P7
Transitive
law, 834
reasoning, 109
voting, 834
Transitivity, voting, 834
Translation
English to mathematics, 289
geometric, 335
Translating symbols, 289
Transversal, 344
Transverse axis, 736
length of, 741
Trapezoid, 344, 439
area of, 439
Traveler’s dodecahedron, 399
Traveling Salesman Problem: A Guided
Tour of Combinatorial
Optimization, 423
Traveling salesperson problem, 394
number of routes, 397
Traversable, 390
Tree, 402
definition, 402
diagram, 573, 644
procedure for using, 634
minimum spanning, 404
number of vertices, 408
search engines, 411
spanning, 403
Le Trente-et-un, 627
Triangle(s), 343, 349
acute, 350
area of, 438, 444
classification, 350
congruent, 343
equilateral, 350, 431
exterior angle measure, 352
height of, 437
isosceles, 350
number of problem, 27
obtuse, 350
Pascal’s, 9
right, 350
scalene, 350
similar, 356
Triangular number, 211
Triangular pyramid, 466
Trichotomy property, 283
TriDelt sorority, 63
Trigonometric
functions, 750
ratios, 364
Trigonometry, P6, 364
Trillion, 37
Trinomials, 250
factoring of, 253, 260
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I15
Index
Trisect an angle, 336
Tromino, 420
Tropp, Henry S., 139
Troth maneuver, 17
True equation, 274
Truman, Harry S., 703
Truncated pyramid, formula for
volume, P3
Truth
set, 101
table, 92
value, 85
Truth-in-Lending Act, 520
TSP, 394
number of routes, 397
Tuckerman, Bryant, 193
Tuning fork , E9
Tunnel problem, 744
Turin, Shroud of, 499, E5
Turing test, 172
Turkey problem, 121
Twelve-hour clock, 231
Twitter, 167
Two dimensions, 416, 456
Two pair (in poker), 616
Two-pan balance problem, 117
Two-point form, 723
Two-state device, 154
2000 U.S. presidential election, 829
TV networks problem, 668
Type I error, 704
compared to Type II error, 705
Type II error, 704
compared to Type I error, 705
U
UCLA mathematics degree, E1
Uccello, Paolo, 377
Unbreakable code, 243
Uncia, P4, 205
Uncountably infinite, 78
Undefined term, 22, 331
Unhappy number, 45
Union, 59
cardinality formula, 61
of complements, 64
probability of, 610
Venn diagram, 53
Unit
distance, 222
fraction, 137
fraction-conversion method, 311
fraction problem, 211
United States
Constitution, 841
House of Representatives
(2000), 841
measurement system, 428
to metric conversions, 467
population, 44
1995, 70
2009, 516
Preamble problem, 591
UNIVAC, 163
Universal characteristic, 85
Universal set, 52
Universe, size of, 28
Unless, 104
Unrestricted domain, 814, 834
Unstable marriage, E7
Upload, 167
Upper quota, 842
Upside-down words, 336
Useful life problem, 723
V
V (Roman symbol for 5), 138
Valid reasoning, 23, 83
Vandermonde, C. A., 391
Van Slyke, Andy, 681
Vanishing leprechaun puzzle, 182
Variable(s), 251, E7
correlation, 696
dependent, 718
dummy, 902
financial, 509
independent, 718
odds, 629
probability, 610
random, 648
writing, 289
Variance
of a population, 679
of a random sample, 679
Velocity, 893
Venn, John, 53
Venn diagram, 53
compared to Euler circles, 58
complement, 54
general representations:
five sets, 72
four sets, 72
one set, 54
three sets, 60
two sets, 59
intersection, 59
number of regions, 63
union, 59
Venus, map of, 722
Verification, E2
Verne, Jules, 249
Vertex, 341, 390, 727
angles, 353
even, 391
hyperbola, 741
odd, 391
parabola, 734
pseudo, 742
Vertical
angles, 343
property, 344
ellipse, 737
hyperbola, 741
line, 346, 721
test, 748
Vertices (pl for vertex), 341
Victoria, Queen, 108
Victorian village, 693
Viète, François, 221
Vigintillion, 39
da Vinci, Leonardo, 373, 377, E8
Vinogradoff, I. M., 196
VISA, 523
Volume, 447
box, 298, 448
circular cone, 456
circular cylinder, 298, 456
compare to area, 459
compare to capacity, 452
cone, 298
cube, 298
cylinder, 456
formulas for, 456
parallelepiped, 448
pyramid, 456
relationship to capacity, 452
right circular cone, 456
right circular cylinder, 456
right rectangular prism, 456
sphere, 298, 456
triangular solid, 298
Von Neumann, John, xix, 81
vos Savant, Marilyn
door problem, 246
hunter problem, P14
matching a key to a car problem, 656
The Power of Logical Thinking, 656
water tube problem, P11
Voss, Richard, 416
Vote, 813
straw, 827
Voting, 812
comparison of, 821
dilemmas, 824
insincere, 833
paradoxes, 863
principles, fair, 824
sequential, 818
summary of, 821
Voyage-around-the-world problem, 399
W
Warner, Sylvia Townsend, E9
Water lily problem, 299
Water-pipe problem, 393
Web address, xiii
Webster, Daniel, 852, E6
Webster’s plan, 851
summary, 854
Wedhams, Jack, 281
Weierstraß, Karl, 466
Weight, 404, 460
conversions, 467
definition, 460
-of-the-earth problem, 481
standard units, 460, 461
Weighted
graph, 404
mean, 679
Weinberg, Wilhelm, 265
Well-defined set, 50
What Are Numbers? 568
Wheel of Fortune problem, 548
Wheeler, John A. 389
Whispering gallery, 740
Whitehead, Alfred North, 86
Whodunit problem, 124
Whole Earth Catalog, 165
Whole nine yards, 449
Whole number(s), 50, 205
“Why should I take mathematics?”, 551
Widman, Johannes, 175
Wiles, Andrew, 329
Williams, Hugh C., 186
WIN, game of, 840
Windows, 166
Wing, Vincent, 301
Winger, Debra, 770
With replacement, 643
Without
replacement, 643
repetition, 575
Wolfskehl Prize, 328
Women
mathematicians, 868
on Wall Street problem, 672
Word, 166
Word problems
age, 321, 766
coin problems, 762
combining rates, 763
distance relationships, 292
linear programming, 797
mixture problems, 766
number relationships, 291
procedure for solving, 289
Pythagorean theorem, 295
strategy for solving, 289
supply and demand, 764
translate, evolve, solve, and 
answer, 293
uncategorized, 317
Word processing, 166
Word statement, 290
Wordplay, 336
World population, 43, 455
clock, 499
World Wide Web, 165
www, 165
history of, 164
www.mathnature.com, 5
X
X (Roman symbol for 10), 138
Xiatong, Wang, P6
x-intercept, 718
Y
y-intercept, 718
Yale tablet, 144
Yang, P4
Yang Hui’s triangle, 173
Yard, 455
comparison with meter, 429
Yd (abbreviation for yard), 455
Yellen, Jay, 423
Yin, P4
Yin-yang symbol, P4, 83
Yosemite, 40
Young, J.W.A., 473
Young’s rule, 282
Y2K bug, 173
Yu, Chinese emperor, P4, 25
Yuki nation, 144
Z
z-score, 688
definition, 689
formula, 689
table of, 688
Zeno, 293, 872
Zeno’s paradoxes, 293, 892
Zermelo, 81
Zero, 224
additive identity, 224
definition, 225
division by, 202
Egyptian, 224
Greek, 224
identity for addition, 224
invention of, E5
matrix, 788
Mayan, 224
multiplication, 232
percent financing, 521
slope, 721
Spanish, 224
symbol, 144
Zero-one matrix, 786
Zero percent financing, 521
Zero-product rule, 277
Zi, Sun, P6
Zoology, E5
Zygmund, Antonio, 539
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Free mathematics tutorials, problems, and worksheets (with applets). This is an
invaluable link:
http://www.analyzemath.com/
Webmath: Instant solution to your math problems:
http://www.webmath.com/
Ask Dr. Math is a question and answer service for K-12 math students and their teachers.
A searchable archive is available by level and topic, together with frequently asked ques-
tions (FAQ).
http://mathforum.org/dr.math/
Online Math Calculators and Solvers. Easy-to-use online math calculators and solvers
are available for various mathematics topics. These may be used to check homework so-
lutions, as well as to practice on your own.
http://www.analyzemath.com/Calculators.html
Materials available on the Mathematics Archives are classified into five main categories:
Topics in Mathematics, Software, Teaching Materials, Other Math Archives Features, and
Other Links. This is a very useful site.
http://archives.math.utk.edu/
Mathematical Resources on the Web:
http://www.math.ufl.edu/math/math-web.html 
http://webster.commnet.edu/webpicks/weblist/math_list.htm
Mathematics Resources on the Web:
http://mathforum.org/
You can contact the author at: smithkjs@mathnature.com
The Web site for this book is www.mathnature.com. You will find homework
hints, essential ideas, search engines, projects, and links to related topics. Getting
help on the world wide Web: Included are links to the following Web addresses.
This book belongs to:
Phone number:
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

