



Faster than Light: How Your Shadow Can Do It but You Can’t
Copyright © 2023 by Robert J. Nemiroff
All rights reserved. Neither this book, nor any parts within it may be sold or reproduced in
any form or by any electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and
retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the author. The only exception is by
a reviewer, who may quote short excerpts in a review.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2022948702
If you are reading a print version of this book, please be advised that an electronic version
exists that links many technical terms to relevant background information on the internet.
If you are reading an electronic version of this book, please be advised that a print version
of this book exists that may look better on a bookshelf.
Classification options for this book include Dewey Decimal System 530 (General Physics)
and Library of Congress Classification QC173.65.
ISBN (hardcover): 9781662933844
eISBN: 9781662933851

Contents
Prologue
PART I: EARTH
Chapter 1
Superluminal Trains (Trains Moving Faster than
Light)
Chapter 2
Superluminal History
Chapter 3
How to Make Light Bulbs Flash Faster than Light
Chapter 4
Quick Questions
Chapter 5
Superluminal Tricks & Illusions
Chapter 6
How to Make Laser Spots Go Faster than Light
Chapter 7
How to Make Your Shadow Go Faster than Light
Chapter 8
Superluminal Image Doubling
Chapter 9
The Many Speeds of Light
Chapter 10
Superluminal Aquatics
Chapter 11
Superluminal Laser Spots: Level 2
Chapter 12
Supersonic Booms
Chapter 13
How to Make a Magnetic Field Move Faster than
Light
Chapter 14
Superluminal Colors
PART II: UNIVERSE
Chapter 15
How Fast Is Light?

Chapter 16
Superluminal Reflections in Astrophysics
Chapter 17
Superluminal Cosmology
Chapter 18
Superluminal Galaxies
Chapter 19
How to Go Warp 2
Chapter 20
Superluminal Gravity
Chapter 21
Superluminal Black Holes
PART III: RELATIVITY & COMMUNICATION
Chapter 22
Direct Attempts at Superluminal Time Travel
(Using Relativity)
Chapter 23
Superluminal Simultaneity
Chapter 24
Adding Really Fast Speeds
Chapter 25
Superluminal Smartphones
Chapter 26
Superluminal Communication
PART IV: QUANTA
Chapter 27
Superluminal Quantum Shapes
Chapter 28
Superluminal Quantum Paths
Chapter 29
FTL Double-Slit Experiments in Your Basement
Chapter 30
FTL Double-Slit Observations across the Universe
Chapter 31
Superluminal Entanglement in Your Basement
Chapter 32
Superluminal Entanglement across the Universe
Chapter 33
How to Send Information Back in Time
PART V: SPECULATION
Chapter 34
Craze c

Chapter 35
What Happens if c Changes?
Chapter 36
Are There Other Limits Like c?
Chapter 37
Epilogue
Chapter 37.1
Glossary (minimal wording)
Chapter 37.2
Image Credits
Acknowledgements
Index

Prologue
There was a young lady named Bright
Whose speed was far faster than light;
She set out one day
In a relative way,
And returned on the previous night.
—A. H. R. Buller, “Relativity” (1923)
Albert Einstein knew already in the early 1900s, when he first published his
famous paper about the constancy of the speed of light, c, that not only did
this constancy imply that mass contains energy (E = mc2), but that faster-
than-light motion could lead to paradoxes—some that seemed to involve
backward time travel.
What are these paradoxes? Why is light and its speed relevant? This
book will lead you through an obstacle course of conundrums and oddities,
building up your understanding of how light’s speed creates simple but
mind-expanding paradoxes—one conceptual riddle at a time.
What kind of book is this? This is not your average popular science
book. This is also not a textbook. This book takes one theme—the
seemingly immutable speed of light—and shows how it may appear
compromised on scales from the quantum mechanics of the very small to
the cosmology of the very large.
After finishing the book, you should understand more about this
strange constant c, and how and why it is key to many fundamental
concepts. These include how nearby shadows and distant galaxies can
move superluminally (faster than light: FTL), how things that move at
superluminal speeds may show two images at the same time, how
entangled particles seem to communicate faster than light, and how
superluminal speeds are related to backward time travel.

Perhaps surprising, the answers to most of the questions in this book are
not only correct, but as seemingly bizarre as they are, they are not even
controversial. In the last section of the book, I will go off the speculative
deep end and ponder questions that nobody really knows the answers to. I
will then give you the standard physics answer as well as my own guesses.
Aside 1: Butterfly versus Cover-to-Cover Readers
How should you read this unusual book? Many people tell me that nonfiction
books are best read like novels: cover to cover (c2c). I disagree. Yes, in my
view, reading most fiction books is really best done c2c, in part because the
author has planned for the plot to unfold in a well-designed way. Therefore, I
will rarely skip to the end of a novel to find out who the murderer is, for
example, because I care more about the storytelling than finding out which
character is guilty.
Now I will admit that c2c reading can also be a fulfilling way to read
nonfiction books. One reason is because, typically, concepts developed in
earlier chapters will help in the understanding of later chapters. Even so, it is
difficult for me to read many nonfiction books front to back. I just can’t wait
to find out the good stuff! In my view, nonfiction books are more about
satisfying curiosity than whole-book storytelling. Therefore, I typically end up
flipping through a nonfiction book, finding the stuff that I am most curious
about, and reading that first. In my mind, the book becomes a meadow of
flowers, and I become a butterfly. Sometimes the book’s good stuff makes me
curious about other stuff in the book, stuff that I didn’t know to be curious
about before. In those cases, I do end up reading the whole book, but only one
disconnected section at a time.
Although I suspect that there are relatively few “butterfly readers” like me
who flutter around nonfiction books, I have tried to write this book for both
cover-to-cover and butterfly readers.
That said, there is not only one arc that runs through this book, but two.
The first follows attempts to communicate faster than light, and the second is
how faster-than-light motion relates to backward time travel. Regarding
these arcs: yes, reading the early chapters does help in the understanding of
later chapters. Nevertheless, most chapters are able to stand on their own, so
butterfly readers should have many satisfying places to land.

PART I
EARTH
Chapter 1
Superluminal Trains (Trains Moving Faster than
Light)
Chapter 2
Superluminal History
Chapter 3
How to Make Light Bulbs Flash Faster than Light
Chapter 4
Quick Questions
Chapter 5
Superluminal Tricks & Illusions
Chapter 6
How to Make Laser Spots Go Faster than Light
Chapter 7
How to Make Your Shadow Go Faster than Light
Chapter 8
Superluminal Image Doubling
Chapter 9
The Many Speeds of Light
Chapter 10
Superluminal Aquatics
Chapter 11
Superluminal Laser Spots: Level 2
Chapter 12
Supersonic Booms
Chapter 13
How to Make a Magnetic Field Move Faster than
Light
Chapter 14
Superluminal Colors

CHAPTER 1
Superluminal Trains (Trains
Moving Faster than Light)
Can a train go faster than light? You might emphatically answer “no,” but
the real answer might surprise you. At speeds near light, familiar concepts
like time and space act in unfamiliar ways. Speed itself brings up the
question, relative to what? To help clarify these and other fundamental
concepts, you will sometimes be cast as a passenger on a train or as a
passenger standing on a platform when a train passes. Balls will be thrown
into the air, how things look will be contrasted with how things are, and
nearby trains will be considered fundamentally different from faraway
trains. In the puzzling questions that follow, you will first be challenged to
contemplate seemingly simple questions, some of which have obvious
answers you may get right away. Don’t become too confident, though,
because the questions become increasingly complex, and a few tricks have
been thrown in. Either way, here comes the first train . . .
Question 1: You wake up on a windowless train that is running on a smooth track
at a constant speed. Can you tell that you are moving?
A.    Yes, because you feel a pull toward the back of the train.
B.    No, because every experiment you do acts the same as if the train were
stopped.
C.    Yes. Throw a ball straight up into the air and watch it arc. That arc would not
occur on a motionless train.
D.    Yes, just look at the speedometer.

When moving, you do not feel a pull toward the back of the train.
When you politely ask the passengers around you about this, they ignore
you at first, but then they, too, admit that they feel no backward pull. Even
the conductor, after first telling you that “Pulltoward” is not a stop for this
train, tells you that they’ve been riding these rails for years and that there is
no pull toward any direction, including to the back of the train, when the
train is cruising smoothly down the tracks. Answer A is wrong.
To test answer C, you throw a ball straight up in the air to see if it traces
out an arc. Even though the passenger in the seat behind you flinches, the
ball comes straight back down to . . . you. The ball did not arc. Answer C is
wrong.
On a windowless train gliding down a smooth track, you cannot tell
that your train is moving. If you unshutter a window and look out, you
might see that the train is sitting motionless at a platform. Or you might see
that your train is moving quickly past trees, houses, and your cousin who
appears to be shouting something important to you. Without opening the
window shutter, though, you just can’t tell. Answer B is best.
The inability to feel steady motion is a major pillar in our
understanding of the universe and goes by the names of the principle of
relativity, Galilean invariance (at slow speeds), and Lorentz covariance (at
high speeds). The term Galilean invariance arises from the famous Galileo
in his 1600s book Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. The
underlying reason why this principle is true is that all things on the train
have the same speed in the same direction. To get away from that speed
would require acceleration (or deceleration, which is considered here a
form of acceleration). If the train windows are shuttered and the ride is
smooth, there will be nothing to cause that acceleration, including, in an
enclosed car, wind.
It may surprise you to know that I, myself, have actually taken a train.
Yes, really. I am not making this up. And I actually paid for my ticket.
Anyway, the way I usually tell if my train is moving is by small
accelerations, mostly the little side-to-side lurches that don’t occur when
the train is stopped on the track. However, this question supposed that the
train was running smoothly, so that logic would not work here.

As for answer D, you could look at the speedometer, but that would
undermine the key concept underlying this question, so I’m not listing it as
the “best” answer. Even so, let’s examine this answer more closely. If there
is no way to tell that you are moving, how do speedometers work? Does
your train’s speedometer have its own smaller speedometer to look at? No,
most speedometers work by measuring, effectively, the rotation rate of the
wheels.
Question 2: You suddenly find yourself on a moving roller coaster—a type of
train. You then realize that you are holding a hot cup of coffee. Odd, but just the
thing you’ve been craving. Should you try to drink your hot cup of coffee?
A.    Yes, the principle of relativity holds on all trains, including roller coasters.
The hot coffee will move with you and the train, making it simple to drink.
B.    No, the accelerations of the roller coaster will splash coffee everywhere, so
better not.
C.    Yes, because even if the hot coffee sloshes out of the cup, you are not a wimp
and can drink coffee wherever you want.
Answer A, that it is OK for you to drink your coffee on a roller coaster
because the principle of relativity applies, is not the best answer. The
principle of relativity best applies to trains moving in one direction at a
constant speed, like the train in the previous question. Roller coasters, on
the other hand, are sure to undergo accelerations, and acceleration is
fundamentally different from speed. You can tell if you are on a train
undergoing acceleration, for one reason because you can see the coffee
slosh around in your cup.
It is therefore best not to try to drink your sloshing coffee on a roller
coaster, making B the best answer. Although surely you are tough enough
to endure the occasional hot splash of java, your roller-coastering neighbors
might not be as tough as you. They might volunteer to you, perhaps
unsolicited, perhaps loudly, their opinions about being splashed by your
hot coffee. Also, after the ride, looking at your clothes, your friends might
think you wet yourself.

Aside 2: “Nothing Can Go Faster than Light!”
Go to your local university. Go into the physics department, pick a random
student, and ask this student if shadows can go faster than light. Most likely
they will say “no.” But this student would be wrong.
As a physics professor at a US research-oriented university, I have been
asked to supply questions to students hoping to earn a PhD in physics at my
university. I consider this a privilege. On occasion, I have posed relatively
simple questions that ask graduate students to show, mathematically, that
spots of light on walls can go faster than light. To my eye, the questions are
not hard. I give them so many clues that the solutions are “straightforward”:
just follow the clues, sketch the geometry, do a little math, and get the right
answer. To my surprise, though, I have found that many students refuse to
follow even basic logic once they realize that it leads to a faster-than-light
solution. These students—many of whom already have a degree in physics—
have been afraid to write down a speed greater than the speed of light: c.
They were wrong.
As a professional physicist I have given presentations to other professional
physicists and been asked, effectively, to stop my presentation because I said
that laser spots on walls can move faster than light. I had no alternative but to
backtrack, argue, and try to give clear counterexamples to the much-repeated
adage that “nothing can go faster than light.” These curmudgeons were
wrong. I was able to provide proof, but they could not. Many other
professional physicists have been happy to hear the talk and even
complimented it.
As a researcher, I have submitted papers to recognized physics journals
and had them rejected because the journal editors—themselves professional
physicists—agreed that the paper must be flawed because “nothing can go
faster than light.” They were wrong. Other journals accepted the work. To
those who study the topic, these results are not controversial.
Now purists will tell you that if things really means things with mass, then
it is true that nothing with mass can pass you faster than light can. They may
claim that shadows, light spots, images, and the like are not things in the
material sense. They may tell you that a shadow or a light spot moving faster
than light is just a trick involving the superpositions of unconnected things, in
this case, photons. I understand this point of view, but I reply that most
people define shadows and images as things. And these can go faster than
light. Most of what you see around you are images, reflections, and shadows,
so these faster-than-light superpositions occur all around you all of the time.
So, let’s understand them. Let’s understand what they look like and whether
they allow faster-than-light communication or even backward time travel.

Question 3: What is an “inertial reference frame?”
A.    A lot of locations that are not moving relative to each other.
B.    A person who is not accelerating.
C.    The border around a picture of a comparatively inert gas.
D.    The last answer was actually really funny, and you should go back and read it
again.
A person who is not accelerating is in an inertial reference frame but
does not define it. Therefore, answer B is not preferred. Rather, a simple
definition of an inertial reference frame is given by answer A: a lot of
locations that are not moving relative to each other. When compared to
other frames, each has a smooth and constant relative speed. Everything in
an inertial reference frame moves at the same speed and in the same
direction. A common example is a train moving smoothly past a train
platform. The train and the train platform are in separate inertial reference
frames.
Let’s look closely at the term inertial reference frame. There “inertial”
refers to inertia, the ability of an object to remain in motion. “Reference”
indicates something that is referred to, and “frame” refers to all co-moving
space. In this book, unless stated otherwise, trains are considered smooth
inertial reference frames, no matter their speed relative to the platform.
Symmetrically, platforms are also to be considered smooth inertial
reference frames, no matter the relative speed of passing trains. In this
book, the term inertial reference frame will usually be shortened to just
frame.
Question 4: You stand on a train platform. A train passes you moving at 90% of
the speed of light. On that train, the engineer at the front throws forward a ball
moving at 90% of the speed of light, relative to the train, in the same direction
that the train is moving. Relative to you, does the ball move faster than light?
A.    Yes, since 0.9 c + 0.9 c = 1.8 c.
B.    No, because nothing with mass can go faster than light.
C.    The ball would rip a hole in the space-time continuum, ending all life and
rendering this question somewhat meaningless.

In conventional mathematics, it is true that 0.9 c + 0.9 c = 1.8 c. But it
is not physically true, and not true in the mathematics of Einstein’s special
relativity. In special relativity, near light speed, speeds add differently. A
result is that the engineer’s ball will not move faster than light relative to
you on the platform. Therefore, A is not the best answer. In fact, no matter
how fast the ball is thrown from the train, the ball will always move slower
than c relative to you and your entire frame.
According to special relativity, all speeds of mass-containing objects
moving past you—and so relative to you—must be less than c. This ball
and train example is no exception. You will just measure the ball’s speed as
closer to c than the train’s speed. Therefore, B is the best answer. To puzzle
over greater peculiarities involving adding really fast speeds, see the
Chapter Adding Really Fast Speeds.
Question 5: After an unusual lightning flash, you find that you are now the
engineer on a train moving past a platform really fast—just below c relative to
the train platform. Being the legendary fearless person that you are, you press on
the train’s accelerator. What happens?
A.    You feel the train accelerate—that’s why it’s called an accelerator. (Duh.)
B.    You feel almost no acceleration because you are already moving near the
fastest speed possible—the speed of light.
C.    You accelerate past the speed of light. Good for you!
D.    The accelerator pedal mysteriously breaks off and you accidentally kick it
elsewhere under the dashboard, but you can’t tell where because it is so dark
down there.
The best answer is A: you feel the train accelerate. The acceleration
feels just the same to you as any other acceleration. In general, you can

always accelerate, no matter what inertial frame you are in, and no matter
your speed relative to the platform. However, your speed relative to the
platform will change very little. As measured from the platform, your speed
did increase, but only from near c to even nearer to c. There is no limit to
acceleration because you can always get closer to c.
In these examples, I will usually say that the train is moving relative to
the platform. But isn’t it also true that the platform is moving relative to the
train—just in the opposite direction? Yes. Everything said here about the
train also applies in reverse to the platform. I could have picked the
platform to be moving and the train to be at rest. Although true to the laws
of physics, that seems counterintuitive to present-day Earth-bound
humans, so I will usually refer to the train as the moving object.
Question 6: Is it possible, in theory, to take a train that eventually moves away
from the station faster than light?
A.    Yes, if the universe is expanding fast enough.
B.    No, trains are made of mass and so are constrained to move, relative to the
station or anything else, slower than light.
C.    Yes, in theory. But in practice the ticket would be too expensive.
The speed of light is a local limit only. Within gravity, as portrayed by
Einstein’s general theory of relativity, it is possible to take a train, for
example, that eventually moves away from the train station at faster than
light, at least faster than the local speed of light. Therefore, A is the best
answer. The italicized words are key and, oddly enough, depend on how
distance is defined and how time is measured. In brief, though, local just
means really nearby.
Gravity does strange things to time and space, and therefore to speed.
In particular, observers at one place in a gravitational field can look at
another place in the same gravitational field and see clocks appearing to
run unusually fast or slow, and meter sticks appearing unusually long or
short. Distant trains can actually appear to move faster than light and, in
certain circumstances, really move away faster than light. Be assured,
however, that observers nearby to those distant trains will always measure

their speeds as slower than light. If these effects interest you, then you’re
reading the right book. More questions that hinge on them will be posed in
the Chapter Superluminal Cosmology.
Aside 3: Science: Data, Math, & Concepts
Many scientists like math, in particular mathematics that tracks some aspects
of reality. Many scientists also like data, in particular modern data taken by
cutting-edge experiments or spacecraft designed to explore an unknown facet
of our universe. For me, mathematical structures are usually cool, and
experimental data are frequently enlightening, but concepts are my favorite.
In this view, math is invented to help explain the data, and concepts are
invented to help understand the math. In this book, I skip over most of the
data. I try to hand-wave away most of the math and get right to the really
cool concepts.

CHAPTER 2
Superluminal History
What did humanity know about the speed of light before Einstein? It
depends on the year. Long ago, measuring the speed of light was not even
possible, and so light was usually assumed to move infinitely fast—and
reasonably so. Conversely, just a few years ago, in a modern physics lab,
light was effectively stopped. How humanity progressed from not even
knowing which direction light travels in, to trying to detect the gloop light
travels through, to Einstein’s illuminating insights are explored in this
chapter—possibly including a few trick questions.
Question 7: When you see an object, does light go out from your eye to the
object, or from the object to your eye?
A.    From your eye to the object.
B.    From the object to your eye.
C.    Both, according to some theories of quantum mechanics.
D.    Neither, according to some theories of car mechanics.
I can remember contemplating this very question myself when I was
very young. My mom gave me the definitive answer. Or so I thought then.
This question, though, has an interesting history that predates us both.
In (even more) ancient history, many eminent scholars, for example the
famous ancient mathematician Euclid (circa 300 BC), claimed that the
logic behind answer A is correct: that light goes from your eye to the
object. In about 50 AD, this was an underlying reason why Hero of
Alexandria said that the speed of light was infinitely fast. He reasoned that

when you open your eyes, you see distant stars immediately, and the only
way this could happen is if light went from your eye to those stars instantly.
The idea that light actually goes from a source to the eye has been
debated since at least the time of Euclid and Aristotle, but was advanced
significantly—and so is frequently credited to—someone much later: the
Islamic philosopher Ibn al-Haytham in 1021 AD. Classical physics agrees
with al-Haytham, making B the best answer.
In modern times, a reason why answer C may be considered viable is
exemplified by a type of quantum experiment called “delayed choice.”
This is pondered in some detail in the Quanta section of the book.
Aside 4: The Quest for a Higher Level of Misunderstanding
My goal is not to bring you complete understanding. That is impossible.
Nobody understands this crazy stuff completely. Rather, my goal is to bring
you up to my level of misunderstanding. All teachers misunderstand the
material they are teaching at some level, and they usually cannot even raise
their students’ understanding to that level. As a professor of physics, trying to
attain my level of misunderstanding may be quite satisfying for many readers.
On some topics explored in this book, such as rapidly closing scissors and how
faster-than-light effects can create multiple images, I have published more
than anyone and so might be considered the leading authority.
Question 8: You stand on a hill at night holding a lantern covered by a dark cloth.
On a distant hill stands a friend also holding a lantern covered by a dark cloth. As
soon as your friend sees you uncover your lantern, they will uncover their lantern.
Is this a good way to measure the speed of light?

A.    Yes, this is how the speed of light was first measured.
B.    No, this method is too slow.
C.    It doesn’t matter since townsfolk will soon surround you with torches and
accuse you of practicing witchcraft and of trying to reveal that-which-
should-not-be-known.
Trying to measure c by uncovering lanterns was tried by many people
in the Middle Ages, and some even claimed success. Unfortunately, those
experiments really only measured the time it took to uncover the lanterns.
Therefore, although answer A correctly recounts some early attempts to
measure the speed of light, it does not correctly recount how the speed of
light was first measured.
In science, a reason why results from measurements can be deceiving is
called “systematic error” and is arguably one of the largest problems in
experimental science. The systematic error in this case would be not
accurately including the time it takes to uncover a lantern in the estimate
of light’s speed. Between hills on Earth, the time it takes to uncover a
lantern is longer than the time it takes light to travel between the hills.
Therefore, if this is not properly accounted for, the measurement of c is not
correct.
Even in modern times, sources of systematic error may not be known to
the experimenters, and so they incorrectly report a result as real. This is
one reason why science encourages repeatable results—obtaining similar
results by different scientists using different equipment and even different
methods.
Galileo Galilei was one of the eminent scientists who tried to measure
the speed of light by covering and uncovering distant lanterns. Eventually
Galileo came to realize that light was too fast to measure in this way,
making B the best answer. The first confirmed measurement of the speed
of light was conducted just a few years later and involved a distance much
vaster than between hills: the distance between Earth and Jupiter.
Question 9: When did humanity first measure the speed of light?
A.    In the time of the ancient Greeks.

B.    1600–1800.
C.    1800–1900.
D.    Last century.
E.    Yesterday during lunch.
Discovering arguably the most fundamental constant of nature might
be considered a milestone for a developing species. Dogs? Haven’t gotten
there yet. Cats? Not sure—they won’t say. Humans? We’re so smart, that
must have been long ago. And it was—in dog years. But in human years,
the first accurate measurement of the speed of light was less than 500 years
ago. The best answer is B, 1600–1800: 1676 to be exact. This is just a few
years after Galileo died. The person who qualified humans for the
advanced species club was the less famous scientist Ole Rømer, and the
way he did it was controversial, at least at first.
Question 10: Io, a moon of Jupiter, circles Jupiter once every 1.769137786 days.
(But I bet you knew that already.) Jupiter and Earth both orbit the Sun over a
much longer period of time. When Earth is moving further from Jupiter, however,
the time between eclipses of Io behind Jupiter appears to take slightly longer than
1.769137786 days. Why?
A.    Because it takes time for sunlight to reflect off of Jupiter.
B.    Because it takes time for Io to absorb and re-emit light from Jupiter.
C.    Because it takes increasingly longer for light to get to Earth when the Earth is
increasingly far from Jupiter.
D.    Traffic was terrible.
E.    It is best just to enjoy the world the way it is and not ask too many questions.

Although sunlight does reflect from Jupiter (otherwise we would not
see it), this does not affect the eclipse times for its moons. Therefore,
Answer A is not correct. Answer B falters because Io absorbs only a small
fraction of the light that we see from Jupiter. One problem with answer E,
in my opinion, is that such a view devalues curiosity, which, along with
vanity, are the two main drivers for discovering just about anything.
The best answer is C: when the distance between Earth and Jupiter is
increasing, it takes increasingly longer for light from Io’s eclipse to reach
us. If light were infinitely fast, the time between eclipses of Io would be the
same regardless of Jupiter’s distance from the Earth. Measuring this extra
delay of just a few minutes allowed Ole Rømer to compute that the speed
of light was about 220,000 kilometers per second, not that far from the
presently known value of about 300,000 kilometers per second.
One thing I like about Romer’s first determination of light’s speed is
that it seems, at first, rather unimportant. People are starving. Disease is
rampant. Who cares that light from the eclipses of a small moon around a
distant planet arrives a few moments early or late? In retrospect, however,
understanding the reason behind these strange eclipse timings was like

going through a door into a universe of greater understanding. This new
understanding 
eventually 
enabled 
satellites 
in 
Earth’s 
orbit 
to
communicate successfully, crops to grow more efficiently, and diseases to
be more effectively eradicated. Discovering and understanding a basic fact
in science can seem irrelevant to everyday life, but it can maybe—just
maybe—be the very start of a journey that takes everyone to a better life.
Question 11: Can constants of nature used to quantify the magnitude of electric
and magnetic forces be used to quantify the speed of light?
A.    Yes, because light is an electromagnetic phenomenon.
B.    No, since light is neither attracted nor repelled by electric or magnetic fields.
C.    Yes, but only after multiplying them by zero and then adding c.
A famous physicist in the 1800s, James Clerk Maxwell, described both
electricity and magnetism together for the first time in four famous
equations: Maxwell’s equations. Maxwell then realized that when there
were no charges at all, these equations still described electric and magnetic
fields. The reason was that these fields could oscillate around zero, and
these changing fields could then describe both the behavior and speed of
something that might seem unrelated: light. Therefore, the best answer is
A: yes, it is possible to quantify the speed of light in terms of constants used
to describe the magnitudes of electric and magnetic forces.
However, with the advent of quantum mechanics in the 1900s, it was
further realized that light exhibited behavior beyond that described by
Maxwell’s equations. As humanity’s understanding of fundamental physics
progressed, a new, more encompassing theory explaining light called
quantum electrodynamics (QED) was created that incorporated Maxwell’s
equations, quantum mechanics, special relativity, and other interactions
involving light. In the even more encompassing quantum field theory, after
all particles are removed, light is a result of fluctuations in the fields of the
remaining pervasive vacuum. Unfortunately, even today, aspects remain of
the nature and origin of this underlying vacuum that are not understood,
for example its magnitude. Therefore, at the most fundamental level, even

though light’s speed can be stated in terms of other constants, the real
reason for light’s speed cannot be derived and is not understood.
Question 12: Does the spin of the Earth cause light to appear to move slightly
faster in one direction?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.
C.    The Earth cannot be spinning, or we would all be flung off. Do your research!
The answer to this question caused a revolution. In the latter part of the
1800s, many top scientists believed that our Earth moved through
something called “aether,” and a race was on to detect it. One way to
confirm its presence was to measure how the Earth moved through it. A
good way to do that, it seemed, was to measure the speed of light in
experiments on the Earth rotating into the aether, and compare it to light’s
speed in another direction. This historically important test was first done in
1887 by Michelson and Morley. To the surprise of almost everyone, their
carefully controlled experiment found no effect. To the best the
experiments could tell, light moved at the same speed in all directions
regardless of how the Earth spun or even moved around the Sun. Given
Michelson and Morley’s result, now confirmed countless times, the best
answer is B: no, the spin of the Earth does not affect the speed of light
measured on the Earth in any direction. This amazing and revolutionary
result was particularly important to Albert Einstein in his postulating
special relativity in 1905.

CHAPTER 3
How to Make Light Bulbs Flash
Faster than Light
You have the ability to make things go faster than light. It’s not impossible.
There are many ways to do it. This chapter will describe one particularly
simple method: making a line of light bulbs flash so that light seems to
jump between them superluminally (faster than light). Moreover, how fast
these jumps appear to you, an observer, will be shown to be different from
how fast light actually does jump. By the chapter’s end, you may have
answered a few obvious questions wrong, but you’ll understand how the
superluminal cannot only be super-strange, but, on occasion, appear time-
backward.
Question 13: Walking through an empty void, you come across a long line of unlit
light bulbs. Suddenly one of the bulbs flashes—it turns on and then, very quickly,
turns off. One second after that, though, the next bulb flashes. One second later,
the next. And so on. The flash seems to “jump” between bulbs. How fast does
this bright spot move?

A.    Zero. Nothing is moving here.
B.    One meter per second.
C.    You can’t tell unless you know the distance between the lights.
D.    One blinky speed thing per fast go.
Let’s start with answer A. It’s true that no object with mass is really
moving here. The light bulbs all remain fixed. All we are talking about
here is, essentially, an illusion of motion. But even this illusion will turn
out to be, well, illuminating. Still, I don’t consider A to be the best answer.
With regard to answer B, the reason one meter per second is not
correct is because the question did not give the distance between the bulbs.
For all we know, each bulb might really be separated by one meter, making
this answer correct. But then again, they might not be. This is why answer
C really is the best answer. For example, if the lights are close together, the
speed that light jumps between them may be quite slow. Alternatively, if
the bulbs are far apart, then . . . well, read on.
The comic relief answer, D, was created because it is reminiscent of
answers some students have given me in the past. The logic is, to the best
of my understanding, that creating a word-salad of possibly relevant terms
may gain partial credit. In this case, however, it is not only wrong, it is silly.
Question 14: A piece of paper flutters down telling you the actual distance
between each of the light bulbs in the previous question. It says that they are all
separated by one light-year—a very large distance. Therefore, at the speed of
light, it would take one year for light to “jump” from one bulb to the next. Yet the

bulbs blinked only one second apart. Did the blinking pattern exceed the speed of
light?
A.    Yes, cool!
B.    No, nothing can go faster than light.
C.    Maybe. If I don’t pick an answer, then I can’t be wrong.
At the core of this question is the holiday lights illusion. Strings of
tangled lights, for example, hung up on holidays can blink in any pattern.
Sometimes, you may have noticed, lights near each other coincidentally
blink one right after the other so that the light seems to jump between the
bulbs. The same could be true, conceptually, for a single long row of lights,
and it is this effect that occurs here. In this case, though, the lights are so
far apart that the blinking pattern exceeds the speed of light. Therefore, the
best answer is A: the light flash “jumped” between bulbs much faster than
light can actually move between the bulbs.
Question 15: Back in the void, you stand again at the beginning of a very long
row of light bulbs, all fixed in a line. The piece of paper that flutters down tells
you that these bulbs are all separated by one light-second—the distance that
light travels in one second. Another fluttering paper descends saying that all of
the bulbs will blink at the same time. What do you see?

A.    You see all of the bulbs blink at the same time. Duh.
B.    You see the nearest bulb to you blink first, and then the next nearest blink,
and so on, in sequence.
C.    You see the farthest bulb from you blink first, then the second farthest, and
so on, in sequence.
D.    You get a series of inspirations as each bulb flashes, eventually causing you
to understand so much about your life and the universe that you black out.
If all of the bulbs blink at the same time, then the time it takes for the
light to reach you from each bulb is critically important in determining
what you see. The closer each bulb is to you, the shorter the time it will
take for the light from the bulb to reach you. Therefore, you do not see all
of the bulbs blink at the same time. So answer A is wrong.
The bulb that is closest to you will have the shortest time for its light to
reach you. Therefore, you see the nearest bulb blink first. After that, the
farther a bulb is from you, the longer it takes for you to see it flash, because
it takes longer for the light to reach you. So, to you, the bulbs appear to
blink in sequence from nearest to farthest. Therefore, answer B is correct.
What’s more, you will see a “wave” or illumination front of light move
away from you as each bulb blinks in sequence.
This raises the interesting question: how fast does this wave of blinking
appear to move away? Consider that you are standing at the location of one
of the bulbs that blinks at time zero. Now the first light bulb away from you
is one light-second distant. It will take one second for light to reach you
from this bulb. Therefore, the illumination front will appear to move out to
one light-second in one second. Now consider the second bulb. This bulb
is two light-seconds away from you, and since it blinked at the same time as
all of the other bulbs, light from it will arrive two seconds after the bulb
right under you blinked. Generalizing, this “blinking front” appears to
move away at c, the speed of light.
Aside 5: Subjective Appearance versus Objective Reality
Many things happen in physics that don’t depend on the point of view of a
single observer.
But many things do.

A good example is brightness. Apparent brightness is an observer-
dependent quantity. Apparent brightness is how bright a star subjectively
appears to an observer—perhaps you. It is how much energy you receive from
this star every second. The apparent brightness of the Sun during a clear day
is the highest of all stars. In other words, the Sun, during a clear day, looks to
you like the brightest star in the sky. By far.
Absolute brightness, in contrast, is an observer-independent quantity, an
example of objective reality. The absolute brightness of a star is how bright
that star really is—how much energy it emits every second. Absolute
brightness does not depend on the distance to an observer, the position of an
observer, or anything about any observer. The absolute brightness of our Sun
is just above average in comparison with other stars. To estimate “objective
reality” sometimes requires many subjective observers taking measurements
and later combining their results. What strange and powerful things blinking
lights can tell us!
Question 16: Is it really possible for a long row of light bulbs to actually blink at
the same time?
A.    Yes, why not?
B.    No, because it would take time for electricity to go down the row.
C.    Only in theory. It would be impossible to confirm in practice.
D.    Everything is possible if you just put your mind to it.
It is true that if the row of lights is on a single electric circuit, that
electricity must run down that circuit, and that will take time. However,
the blinking bulbs don’t have to be connected like that. They could all be
on separate batteries and controlled by independent timers. Therefore,
answer B is not correct. The best answer is A: yes, it is possible for a long
row of light bulbs to light up all at the same time. It might take planning,
but it is possible.
Also, to address answer D, not everything is possible if you put your
mind to it. Statements like this are, in my view, nonsensical psychobabble.
For example, try putting your mind into turning yourself into a cow right
now. How is that going? Are you now a cow? A key, in my opinion, is to try
to achieve reasonable goals.

Question 17: Is it possible for a long row of bulbs to appear to you to blink all at
the same time?
A.    Yes, why not?
B.    No, more distant bulbs would appear to light up later than closer ones
because light has a finite speed.
C.    It depends on where you are. From some locations this is possible; from
others it’s not.
D.    Yes, but if this is your best form of entertainment, then you need to get out
more.
The light from more distant bulbs does take longer to reach you, but
that does not mean that they always have to appear to blink later. It could
be that a distant bulb blinks early enough so that its light reaches you
earlier than even the light from a nearby bulb. Therefore, answer B
describes a situation where all the bulbs actually blink simultaneously in
objective reality. But that is quite different from how the bulbs may
subjectively appear to you to blink.
Answer C is correct in that location does matter, but incorrect in
general because there is always a way to get all of the bulbs to appear to
blink simultaneously. The way to do this is to arrange the system so that the
farther the bulb is from you, the earlier it is programmed to blink. This can
be done for all bulbs, whether they are in a line or not. And if you move to
a new location, you can again set this up by programming farther bulbs to
blink earlier. Therefore, the best answer is A.
Question 18: You again peer down the long row of lights. A new piece of paper
flutters down that says the bulbs will now blink in a sequence that moves toward
you slightly faster than light. What do you see?
A.    You see the most distant bulb blink first, then the nearer bulbs.
B.    You see the closest bulb blink first, then the more distant bulbs.
C.    You see all of the bulbs blink at the same time.
D.    You get the electric bill and wish you couldn’t see it.

To best understand this, start by considering just two bulbs—the closest
one and one much farther away. The faraway bulb blinks first, and when it
does, light from that far bulb starts toward you. Very soon after that, the
near bulb blinks and light from that close bulb also starts toward you. Since
the blink sequence is faster than light, the near bulb flashes before light
from the far bulb reaches it. Therefore, you see the near bulb flash first,
and then later you see the far bulb flash.
Generalizing now to the entire line of blinking bulbs, the closer a bulb
is to you, the earlier you see it blink. Therefore, you see an illumination
sequence of blinking bulbs move AWAY from you, not toward you. B is the
best answer.
If you had wondered, justifiably, if all of this is just semantics, then this
example shows clearly that it is not. In this example, there is a big
difference between objective reality (where the bulb blink sequence moves
toward from you) and subjective appearance (where the bulb blink
sequence appears to move away from you).
A key factor here is the speed of the blink sequence. We will delve into
that more in the next few questions. First, though, we will investigate
whether the direction of the blink sequence is important.
Question 19: Once again, you stand at the end of a long row of light bulbs. This
time, the bulbs blink in a sequence that moves away from you slightly faster than
light. What do you see?
A.    You see the most distant bulbs blink first, then the closer bulbs blink.
B.    You see the closest bulbs blink first, then the more distant bulbs blink.
C.    You see all of the bulbs blink at the same time.
D.    You get a second electric bill that arrived before you could pay the first.
Let’s analyze this using similar logic to the last answer. Again, you see
the closest bulbs blink first. To understand why, let’s consider only the
single closest bulb and one bulb far away. This time, the bulb closest to you
blinks first. So you see it first. End of story. Later, the more distant bulb
blinks. Light leaves this distant bulb and comes toward you, passes the

closest bulb well after it has blinked, and then finally reaches you.
Therefore, much later, you finally see light from this distant bulb.
Generalizing, taking the entire row of bulbs into account, you see the
nearest bulbs blink first, then the next closest bulbs, then the medium-
distance bulbs blink, and finally the farthest bulbs blink. Therefore, as with
the last question, the best answer is B. This time, though, there is rough
agreement between what really happens (objective reality) and what
appears to you to happen (subjective experience), because in both cases,
the blink sequence moves away from you.
Question 20: Which of the two bulb illumination sequences of the last two
questions appears to move away from you more quickly?
A.    The one from two questions ago.
B.    The one from last question.
C.    They both move away at c, the speed of light.
D.    They both move away at the same speed, which is faster than light.

E.    I don’t remember the last two questions and I’m too lazy to go back and read
them again.
This question is really hard, so if you get it right, please email me so
that I can send you a lot of money. To find the answer, start by picturing a
long row of bulbs. The bulbs blink in a sequence that moves toward you at
exactly c. Then, just as the light from a distant bulb’s flash reaches the next
closest bulb to you, that bulb will flash. The leading edge of the light from
the two bulbs will then proceed toward you together. The result will be
that you see both of these bulbs blink at the same time. Extrapolating to
the entire line of bulbs, you would see the entire line of bulbs light up all
at the same time. The blinking sequence therefore appears infinitely fast.
Now consider the same situation, but the blinking sequence comes
toward you slightly faster than light. Then you would see the nearest bulb
to you blink first. But only a short time later, the farthest bulb would blink,
and in between all of the other bulbs in this line would blink. In this case,
the illumination sequence would appear to move away from you at (nearly)
infinite speed.
Let’s go to the other side of light’s speed. Consider that the blinking
sequence toward you goes slightly slower than light. Then the light from
the farthest bulb would then slightly outrace the blinking sequence,
making it so you see the farthest bulb blink first, followed only a short time
later by the medium-distance bulbs, and concluding very quickly with a
flash by the nearest bulb. In this case, the blinking sequence appears to
move toward you at (nearly) infinite speed.
With each real flash sequence, we perceive a different apparent flash-
jumping speed, so let’s have a look at how the apparent perception
changes. For comparison, let’s list the real and apparent speeds of the
different blinking sequences:
Real (Speed in objective reality): Toward you at nearly infinite
speed, much faster than light
Apparent (How the speed appears to you): Away from you at the
speed of light

Real: Toward you slightly faster than light
Apparent: Away from you at nearly infinite speed
Real: Toward you at the speed of light
Apparent: All bulbs appear to blink simultaneously
Real: Toward you slightly slower than light
Apparent: Toward you at nearly infinite speed
Real: Toward you much slower than light
Apparent: Toward you much slower than light
Real: Stopped: no bulbs blink
Apparent: Stopped: no bulbs blink
Real: Away from you much slower than light
Apparent: Away from you much slower than light
Real: Away from you at just slower than light
Apparent: Away from you at just below half of light speed
Real: Away from you at light speed
Apparent: Away from you at half of light speed
Why: Add the time it takes for each bulb to blink to the identical
time it takes for light to reach you from that blink.
Real: Away from you at just above light speed
Apparent: Away from you at just above half of light speed
Real: Away from you at near infinite speed
Apparent: Away from you at near light speed
Returning to the question, you were asked to compare the second and
second-to-last cases in the above list. Although both blink sequences appear
to recede from you, the apparent faster of the two is the case where, in
reality, the blink sequence approaches you slightly faster than light. In that

case, the apparent recession speed is nearly infinite. In contrast, when the
blinking sequence actually recedes from you slightly faster than light, the
apparent recession speed is only just above half of light speed. Therefore,
the best answer is B.
In the preface to this chapter, it was said that time-backward things
would occur. Was that a lie? No. When a line of bulbs blinks in objective
reality so that the sequence really moves toward you, but you perceive that
it moves away from you, this happens because you see the bulbs blink in
time-reversed order. This novel feature may seem like a semantic nitpick
just now, but just wait. It will become crucially important as this book
develops.
Aside 6: Apparent Superluminal Motion in Quasars
Back in the 1970s, images taken of distant quasars revealed blobs moving
away from them. Soon, something very odd was noticed about some of these
blobs: they appeared to be separating from the quasars at speeds faster than
light. The astrophysics community tried to explain this in several ways, and
today there is an accepted explanation.
The solution is that these quasar blobs are not moving faster than light.
Rather, they are moving in a direction nearly toward us, the observers, at a
speed very near the speed of light. It is like the blobs are bulbs in a blinking
sequence coming toward us near the speed of light. This is a real case where
non-superluminal motion in objective reality appears like superluminal
motion in subjective appearance to an observer.

CHAPTER 4
Quick Questions
The speed of light is so strange that it has achieved mythical status. Many
questions about c and what it might mean can be found around the
internet. To scratch a few of these curiosity itches early in the book, a few
questions will be briefly answered here, with more full answers being given
later.
Question 21: Can something with mass move faster than light?
If that object with mass is not near to you (considered local to you in
relativity lingo), then yes. However, possibly the question you really wanted
to ask is “Can something with mass move by you locally faster than light?”
The answer there is possibly, but that possibility will not be considered
seriously in this book. Contrary to popular opinion, Einstein’s theory of
special relativity does not say anything directly about this. For example,
there is no statement saying “nothing with mass can move faster than
light.” It is even possible to manipulate the special relativity’s equations to
admit superluminal solutions, although just plugging in speeds greater
than c returns unphysical “imaginary” solutions.
Experimentally, here on Earth, things with mass have never been
found to go faster than light. There have been some famous claims of
superluminality, but in the end, after careful investigation, none of them
have ever proved true. Therefore, it is seems reasonable to conclude just
based on laboratory experiments that objects with mass cannot move faster
than light.

Theoretically, special relativity says that relative to you, a local object
with mass cannot be accelerated from below the speed of light to above.
The reason is that its energy, relative to you, keeps increasing the closer to
light speed it gets. There is not enough power in your local wall socket to
do this.
If objects with mass can’t go faster than light, then what is this book
about? Shadows, laser pointer spots, the pattern of blinking lights, and
illumination fronts can all go faster than light, in part because they don’t
have mass. This book is mostly about them. Distant galaxies can go faster
than light, in part because they are so far away. This book is also about
them. Light moves relatively slowly through water, glass, and other
transparent media, and so speeding particles with mass can exceed the
speed of light inside these media. This book is also about them. Entangled
particles know things about each other that may seem to be communicated
faster than light, even if they aren’t. This book is about them, too. In
general, though, for the rest of this book, it will be assumed that objects
with mass cannot zoom past you faster than light can in a vacuum.
Question 22: Why can’t I travel at the speed of light?
You can’t get enough energy to go that fast. This assumes that you were
referring to the local speed of light through vacuum, which is really a
fundamental limit. It’s like infinite knowledge—it can only be approached,
never achieved.
Aside 7: The Three Most Important Numbers in Physics
There are really only three important numbers in physics, I like to tell my
students, but you have to know what each number really means. These
numbers are zero, which really means something was too small to measure;
one, which means that we measured something and determined it is “one of
those”; and infinity, which really means that something was too large to
measure. For example, the answer to the question “What is the size of the
entire universe?” is usually stated as “infinite.” But really, we just don’t know.
What we do know is that the entire universe is too large to measure its size.
Let’s use these numbers to conceptualize the speed of light. Before five
hundred years ago, light was too fast to measure accurately, and so was

considered, effectively, infinite. Today, we know the speed of light and
compare other speeds to it. This comparison, mathematically a ratio, is
similar to setting c equal to one.
Question 23: Does time stop for a photon?
We don’t know. For one thing, photons—quantum pieces of light—
might not really travel at the fundamentally highest speed known
colloquially as the “speed of light.” If so, then relative to you, time only
goes very, very slowly for photons and does not stop.
Conversely, according to photons, we humans are the ones moving
really slowly. When a photon activates the stopwatch app on its super-light
smartphone, it sees seconds tick by at the same rate that you see seconds
tick by on your phone. Motion, and the comparative time-slowing that
comes with motion, is completely relative.
Question 24: If you were traveling at the speed of light and looked at a mirror,
would you see yourself?
This is an impossible question to answer exactly as written because if
you have mass, you cannot travel at the speed of light relative to anything
else with mass. If you were traveling only close to the speed of light, then
your mirror would work normally, and you would indeed see yourself.
Question 25: Is there a way to calculate c, or can we only measure it?
The value of c is determined from measurements, but not measures of
c—at least not anymore. The reason is that c appears in mathematical
equations where at least one of the other factors can be measured with
greater accuracy than c. Specifically, c appears in an equation with
something called α, the fine-structure constant, which can be more
accurately determined. The speed of light c is then defined to have an
exact value, along with all of the other constants in the α equation, except
α. Therefore, the measurement error in c is really transferred over from the
measurement error in α. What does this all mean? Let’s say that you now
measure c a bit more precisely than it has ever been measured before. After

you strutted around your lab giving your assistants enthusiastic high fives,
you would likely soon be told that your super-precise c will not replace the
current international standard value for c.

CHAPTER 5
Superluminal Tricks & Illusions
There are a lot of odd ways to try to get things to go faster than light. You
might draw an analogy between some of these efforts and Road Runner
cartoons where Wile E. Coyote formulates plans using products from the
Acme company to break the light barrier and pass the Road Runner. In this
analogy, the Road Runner is the speed of light. Some contraptions
suggested here may seem ridiculously obvious, but why they work—or
don’t work—may take some thinking. Finally, at the chapter’s end, a parlor
trick is described that will truly allow you to see into the past—a trick you
can even try at home.
Question 26: You buy a long straight pole. After a few beers, you decide to swing
the pole around. Why not? People will get out of the way. It will be fine. Can the
far end of the pole go faster than light?

A.    Yes. Increasingly far parts of the pole move increasingly fast to keep the pole
straight. Therefore, at some length, distant parts of the pole must swing
around faster than light.
B.    No, the pole is a material thing, so no part of it can ever go faster than light.
C.    Only after your third beer.
The logic in answer A might seem correct, and it might apply in a
universe without a material speed limit of c, but it does not apply in our
universe. A key concept here is, perhaps surprisingly, the rigidity of the pole
—the ability of the pole to remain straight. When you swing a long pole
around, the information that the pole is swinging starts at the end you are
holding and then moves outward along the pole at the speed that sounds
moves along the pole, which is slower than c. Therefore, at first, the far end
of the pole will not even know that you started swinging the near end.
Since it doesn’t know, it doesn’t swing. When one end of the pole is
swinging and the other end is not, the pole cannot remain rigidly straight.
This undermines the logic of answer A.
What will happen? If the poll is brittle, it will break, after which there
will be no force telling more distant parts of the pole to move around. If
the pole is flexible, it will bend and stretch. The pole’s future shape will
depend on its flexibility. What will surely not happen is that any part of the
pole will be accelerated to move faster than light. Therefore, the best
answer is B: no, the far end of the pole cannot go faster than light.
Question 27: You close a pair of scissors. Can the vertex—the place where the
two scissor blades meet—move faster than light?
A.    Yes, the vertex does not have mass, so it can move faster than light.
B.    No, scissors have mass and so all surfaces must move slower than light.
C.    Is this all you think about? Who cares whether this, that, or another thing
goes faster than light? Do yourself a favor, forget about c and just relax and
enjoy life.

The best answer is A: yes, the vertex of a pair of scissors can move faster
than light. Therefore, scissors can cut paper at superluminal speeds.
Consider first a pair of scissors of average size. Unfortunately, when you
close this pair of average scissors, its vertex will remain subluminal. One
reason is that this pair of scissors is just too small. To ramp up to light
speed, you need a really, really long pair of scissors.
But not just any superlong pair of scissors can break light speed when
closing. Logic for this was discussed in the answer to the last question: the
brittleness of the scissor blades will cause them to break before
approaching light speed.
To pass light speed, we need a special pair of scissors—one where the
“scissors closing” signal does not need to proceed down the length of the
scissor blades. There is such scissors, but it has only one blade and is
usually called a guillotine. Yes, the kind used to sever heads. But let’s not
lose our heads over this just yet. With the “guillotine scissors,” the
guillotine blade falls toward a horizontal and unmoving bar. Therefore, no
signal needs to travel along either the guillotine blade or the horizontal
lower bar. Analyses show that the smaller the angle between the blade and
the bar, the faster the vertex between them moves horizontally. At the
extreme, when the angle between the blade and bar is zero, the blade and
bar are parallel, and the entire falling blade would pass the entire lower bar
all at once. Then, the vertex between blade and bar would move at infinite
speed.

Near the extreme, when the angle between the blade and bar is small,
the vertex speed can exceed c.
Yes, really!
Question 28: You get up nerve up to do it—you close your pair of scissors so that
its vertex moves faster than light. For simplicity, you use the guillotine scissors
described in the answer to the last question. Now, however, you put a spherical
rock in the vertex, between the falling blade and the horizontal bar, as it is
closing. Will the rock move faster than light?
A.    Yes, the vertex motion is real and can transfer momentum.
B.    No, the rock is made of matter and cannot go faster than light.
C.    Only if you give the scissors a quick sign of “rock” first. If you sign “paper”
first, you will lose.
First of all, the vertex motion is real, faster than light, and really can
transfer momentum. So everything said in Answer A is correct—except the
“yes” part. No matter how small the rock, no matter how massive the
guillotine blade or the horizontal bar, and no matter how much faster than
the speed of light the vertex moves, the rock just cannot be accelerated to
above the speed of light. Fundamentally, this is because the rock has mass,
and according to Einstein’s special relativity, nothing with mass can be
accelerated from below the speed of light to above. In the frame of the
lower bar (not the vertex), the rock’s mass will effectively go toward infinity
as its speed increases. At some point, the falling blade will not be able to

accelerate the rock anymore. Therefore, the best answer is B: no, the rock
cannot be accelerated above the speed of light by the vertex.
About answer C: a pair of scissors can cut paper faster than light, but it
can’t move a rock that fast. Please consider this in your next game of rock,
paper, scissors.
Question 29: You find yourself in deep space. Far away, a misty sphere expands
at 99% of the speed of light. How fast does it appear to you to expand?
A.    Slower than 99% of c.
B.    99% of c.
C.    Faster than 99% of c, but slower than c.
D.    Faster than c.
E.    Did you know that not all questions have humorous answers? You didn’t? You
look upset. Are you upset? If you upgrade to the Pro version of this book,
then even this question will have a humorous answer.
Answer B would be correct if things always appeared just as they are.
But subjective appearance can be different from objective reality, as we’re
learning, and sometimes very much so when the speed of light is involved.
However, there is no way that I can find that you could measure the speed
of an opaque sphere’s expansion less than 99% of c. Answer A is not
correct.

Now there are several ways to measure the expansion rate of the distant
sphere. One is by measuring the Doppler shift of the material from the
sphere moving directly toward you. As you might know, the Doppler shift is
a color shift based on relative speed toward an observer. In this case, the
Doppler shift of the sphere will tell you that the material coming right at
you approaches at 99% of c. It might therefore seem like B is the right
answer, but there’s more!
If the line between you and the center of the expanding sphere had
distance markers, like mile markers on a road, then you could note the
time when the closest part of the sphere passes different distance markers.
From this, you would quickly conclude that the sphere appears to expand
much faster than light. The reason is similar to the case of the blinking
lights covered in the How to Make Light Bulbs Flash Faster than Light
chapter, but this time the motion near c was real, not an illusion.
There is a third way to measure the expansion speed of the distant
sphere, and that is by tracking its angular expansion—how large it appears
to get over time. If the sphere was misty but still transparent enough for you
to see through, you would find that a relativistically expanding sphere no
longer appears to be a sphere! It appears oddly elongated toward you.
Assuming now the opposite—that the expanding sphere is opaque—you

can still measure how fast it appears to expand angularly. Then, knowing
the distance to the sphere, compute its expansion speed. This, again, turns
out to be much faster than light. Therefore, D is the best answer.
Question 30: Can you make the Sun appear to move faster than light?
A.    Yes, just turn your head.
B.    No, nothing with mass can be accelerated to go faster than light. Also, being
small, you would have trouble accelerating the big Sun. So this is absolutely
ridiculous. But then again, perhaps this is so obviously ridiculous that it is
really possible.
C.    No, but you can make the Sun appear to move near the speed of light.
D.    Maybe, but first I would like to understand why the Sun is wearing
sunglasses.
E.    Only after your fourth beer.
As silly as it might sound, let’s look at answer A: that you can make the
Sun appear to move faster than light just by turning your head. The key
word here is “appear,” because this is strictly a subjective observer-
dependent effect. Surely, you’ve noticed that by turning your head quickly,
the Sun can appear to move quickly around. But how quickly?
Given the known distance to the Sun, the angular motion of the Sun
that happens when you turn your head can be mathematically converted to
a real speed. Crunching the numbers, if you turn your head so that the
Sun appears to you to shift 0.1 degrees in a second, then, at the distance to

the Sun, the Sun will appear to you to be moving superluminally.
Therefore, look no further, the best answer is A.
Thinking deeper, you don’t even need to turn your head! For the Sun
to appear to move superluminally, just keep your head fixed and gaze
straight out from the surface of the Earth. On the equator, for example, the
Sun’s normal horizon-to-horizon motion across the sky, which takes from
dawn to dusk, makes it to appear to move about 7.3 times of the speed of
light. Similarly, the spin of the Earth makes just about everything in the
cosmos appear to move faster than light, with one celestial exception: the
Moon. The Moon is too close. Did you think, when you started this book,
that most of the universe appeared superluminal? Yes, well, me neither.
Question 31: Because light is not infinitely fast, which of these statements is
true?
A.    Everything you see is in the past.
B.    Everything you see is in the future.
C.    Things close to you appear to be in the past, but things far away appear to be
in the future.
D.    Objects in the mirror are closer than they appear.
Consider an object across the room from you. Yes, OK, that thing you
bought at that place, and you got such a good deal! Good. Why haven’t
you used it more? Anyway, light takes time to reach you from this object.
Therefore, you see it not as it is now, but rather as it was when light left it—
in the past. It follows that the best answer is A: everything you see is in the
past. But since your room is small and light is fast, you see this object as it
was only a fraction of a second in the past. This remains true when you
look at yourself in a mirror. Yes, there you are. What’s going on with your
hair? Anyway, you are not seeing your present self. You are seeing yourself
as you were in the past, although for a typical room mirror, your reflections
is just a small fraction of a second in the past. You might find comfort in
considering this to be a secret superpower. You can see into the past! If you
could look into a distant mirror, you could see yourself in the distant past.

Therefore, a key reason you are not seeing your childhood self in a mirror
is because the mirror you are peering into is not far enough away.

CHAPTER 6
How to Make Laser Spots Go
Faster than Light
Laser spots can be fun for people as well as cats. For example, have you
ever tried shining a laser pointer into a textured crystal or a transparent
gemstone? Pretty cool, huh? But there is something even more cool that
you can do with a laser spot. You can make it move faster than light. How?
That’s what this chapter is about.
Question 32: Like with the pole in the Superluminal Tricks & Illusions chapter,
you swing your laser pointer around in a big circle from horizon to horizon. Can
the far end of your laser beam go faster than light?
A.    Yes. Increasingly distant photons from the laser must move increasingly fast
to keep the outgoing beam straight.
B.    No. The beam is composed of photons, and photons can only move at speed
c.
C.    Yes. Although the outgoing photons move at c, the beam curves into a spiral,
and the end of the spiral can move faster than c.
D.    This is a ridiculously simple question and, being smart, I only answer hard
questions. So, I will skip this one. Next!

First, there is no reason for these photons to remain in a straight line.
Now photons are so fast that it may seem, near your laser, that the beam is
straight. However, if you could see your laser’s beam on a larger scale—say,
to the Moon—you would see that it curves. The logic that photons must
move increasingly fast to keep the beam straight is flawed. At any finite
speed, a pivoting laser beam will bend. Through vacuum, photons always
move at the same speed; they don’t “speed up” to keep the beam straight.
For these reasons, answer A is not correct.
The statement of answer B is correct, but the conclusion, “no,” is
incorrect. Photons do all move at speed c, but that does not tell you the
speed of the end of the beam.
The best answer is C: yes, the far end of your laser beam can go faster
than light. Although each photon itself goes straight out from your laser,
the direction that each photon is emitted changes as the laser sweeps
around. The photons spread out as your laser turns, together making a
spiral. The further each photon gets from the laser, the further it will be
from the photon emitted just before it and the photon just after it. At some
distance from your laser, consecutive photons will be separating from each
other faster than light. Therefore, the spiral end of the laser beam stretches
faster than light. To reiterate: it is only the spacing between the photons
that is expanding faster than c. The photons themselves always move with
speed c.
Question 33: On a dare, you decide to break the beam from your laser pointer
into pulses by pointing it through a rapidly rotating fan. Your friend has a working
fan, so you could really do this! The laser pulses that make it through the fan start

out in a straight line, each one following the last. But then you slowly rotate the
whole shebang—you, your laser pointer, and the fan—in a circle. Each pulse is
made of many photons. Can these pulses go faster than light?
A.    Yes. Increasingly far pulses from the laser beam move increasingly fast to
keep the string of laser beam pulses straight. Therefore, distant pulses must
swing around faster than light.
B.    No, the pulses are composed of photons and photons can only move at c.
C.    The pulses move away only at c, but they can spread out superluminally.
D.    I don’t see why this is important. People are starving all over the world, and
all you seem to care about is some stupid speed limit!
The best answer is C: the photon pulses can spread out faster than
light. Grouping photons into pulses seems to add a new layer of complexity
to the previous question, but it doesn’t change the underlying logic. The
pulses—groups of otherwise unrelated photons—still move out from the
laser at speed c. Although the centers of these pulses move straight out
from your laser, your spin causes each pulse to spread out sideways. In
sum, not only do the pulses separate faster than light, but the pulses
themselves disperse faster than light.
Let’s look at answer D: yes, people are starving. Please do contribute
money and time to stop this. However, this should not mean that everyone
should stop pondering the world around them. On the whole, in my
opinion, understanding nature, including physics, can actually help to
alleviate world problems such as starvation, because it enables, for
example, technology that allows more food to be humanely created at a

lower cost. Consider GPS and lidar. Both of these technologies, which
specifically rely on photons moving at c, have been used to increase food
production.
Question 34: You find yourself at the center of a large dome that is one light-year
away in all directions. You shine your laser pointer in one direction but then move
it 180 degrees around to your other side in just one second. Does the spot that
your laser makes on the inside of the dome move from one side to the other in
one second?
A.    Yes, of course. What else could happen?
B.    No, the time it takes for your laser light to reach the dome increases the
travel time of the spot from one side to the other to much more than one
second.
C.    Nobody knows because nobody has ever created a dome that large.
The best answer is A: yes, the laser spot moves around the dome in one
second. Since the length of the laser spot’s path is π light-years, the laser
spot moves around the dome faster than light. The reason this is possible is
because the laser spot is just the impact sites of unrelated photons on the
dome. Just like the end of the laser beam can move faster than light, so can
the spot made by the laser beam’s end. The photons themselves never
move faster than light—only the spacing between the photons increases
faster than light.
Question 35: Is it possible to make the spot from your laser pointer move across
a nearby wall faster than light?
A.    Yes, the speed of the laser spot is unlimited.
B.    No, laser spots are made of light and are therefore limited to the speed of
light.
C.    All of the above.
The best answer is A: it is possible to move the spot from your laser
pointer across a nearby wall faster than light. This is not conceptually

different from the spot moving along the dome faster than light in the
previous question.
Question 36: Is it easy to move a laser spot across a nearby wall faster than light?
A.    Yes, it just takes a quick flick of your wrist.
B.    No, even with a wrist flick so quick it would impress your mother, the laser
spot will not even approach c, let alone exceed it.
C.    Maybe. It depends on how well trained the laser spot is.
The best answer is B: it is not possible for normal humans to do this.
Assuming that the wall is ten meters away, you would have to swing your
arm from side to side in about 0.00000021 seconds (210 nanoseconds) to
get the laser pointer to cross the wall at a superluminal speed. Doing this
might not so much impress your mother than convince her that you’ve
been replaced by a dangerous cyborg with a robotic arm.
Question 37: Is it easy to move a laser spot across the Moon faster than light?
A.    Yes, it just takes a quick flick of your wrist.
B.    No, even with a wrist flick so quick it would impress your mother, the laser
spot will not even approach c, let alone exceed it.
C.    There is no Moon. If there were, we would all run out of green cheese. But if
you look in the back of your refrigerator, you will find old cheese tinged with
green because you forgot about it. Do you understand now how everything is
related?
The best answer is A: yes, you can move a laser spot across the Moon
with just a flick of your wrist. Your mother would be very impressed! It is
actually quite easy. For example, if you swing your arm around from one
side to the other in a leisurely four seconds while pointing your laser
straight out, the spot would cross the Moon faster than light. The real
problem is seeing your laser spot on the Moon. The Moon is so far away
that the beam from your laser pointer becomes so dim that it is practically
impossible to see. You don’t have to tell your mom about this last part.

Bouncing high-powered lasers off the Moon not only happens, it is
good science. Timing reflections tells humanity the distance to the Moon
more accurately than any other method. Currently, five lunar
retroreflectors are on the Moon, left by NASA’s Apollo missions and the
Lunokhod missions of the former Soviet Union. They are still there and are
still being used. These lunar reflections, timed very precisely, tell us that
the Moon is spiraling away from the Earth at a rate of about 3.8
centimeters per year.
Question 38: At a shooting range, a dangerous acquaintance of yours shoots her
machine gun at a long flat wall. Your acquaintance pivots the gun’s barrel
horizontally across the wall at a constant angular speed, so that successive bullet
holes make a line. What is the fastest that the end of this line can extend?
A.    The speed of the bullets.
B.    Faster than the speed of the bullets, but slower than light.
C.    The speed of light.
D.    Faster than the speed of light.
E.    Slower than you can reach your car and peel away. After that, it doesn’t
matter.
The bullets act conceptually like photons from a laser. Their impact
points can move arbitrarily fast across the wall even though the bullets
themselves move much slower. This is just like the impact point of photons
from a laser that can move arbitrarily fast across a wall. Therefore, the best
answer is D: the speed of the bullet-hole line across the wall can exceed
the speed of light.
It is even possible, conceptually, to have a “bowling-ball gun” that rolls
out bowling balls at normal bowling speed until they consecutively impact
a wall in a line that extends faster than light. Taken to an extreme, you
could deploy turtles to crawl toward a wall at a leisurely pace that’s slow
even for turtles, and the line they make when they reach the wall could, in
theory, extend faster than light.

CHAPTER 7
How to Make Your Shadow Go
Faster than Light
Detailed scientific investigations have found that even people who don’t
have a laser pointer do have a shadow. Your shadow, you might have
noticed, looks a bit like you, but it’s typically flat and not as radiant. Your
shadow, though, can do things you cannot. For one thing, it can grow
much longer than you at sunset. Perhaps more impressive, though, is that,
unlike you, your shadow can move faster than light. How this happens is
what this chapter is about.

Question 39: You enter a dark room. You turn on a light bulb. This could really
happen! Eventually, all of the room walls become illuminated. To go from dark to
light, a wave of illumination must pass over the walls. The division between dark
and light is termed an “illumination front.” What is the fastest speed that an
illumination front crosses the walls?
A.    Slower than light. The time it takes for light to reflect from the wall results in
a reduced speed.
B.    Faster than light. It’s the name of this book and you would not be asking this
question if the answer was anything different.
C.    Exactly at the speed of light: c. The light that moves along the walls is still
light and is therefore still constrained to move at light’s speed.
The best answer is B: the division between light and dark will move
across the walls faster than light. To understand why, please read on.
Question 40: As before, you enter a dark room and turn on a light bulb. What is
the slowest speed that an illumination front crosses the walls.

A.    Zero.
B.    Greater than zero, but slower than light.
C.    Exactly at the speed of light: c.
D.    Faster than light.
E.    Super, super, super faster than even super-light.
F.    Why do you keep going into dark rooms? If you only went into lit rooms, you
wouldn’t have this problem.
Picture that you are in a slow-motion movie. In a dark room, you s-l-o-
w-l-y approach an unlit light bulb. You slowly turn on the bulb. Light
slowly goes out from the bulb to the surrounding walls, even though light’s
speed is always c. Now, clearly, the closest point on the closest wall to the
bulb is the first point illuminated. Consider next a point on the same flat
wall but further away. Eventually, light from the bulb will illuminate this
“far point,” too.
Now consider two distances. The first is the distance from the bulb to
the closest point. The second is the distance from the closest point to the
far point. These two distances added together are greater than a third
distance—the direct distance from the bulb to the far point. That’s because
a straight line is always the shortest distance between two points! Yet light
and the illumination front must pass this two-legged greater distance in the
same time it takes for light to cover a shorter distance—going directly from
the bulb to the far point. Since light travels at c to the closest point, and
light also travels at c to the far point, then the illumination front along the
wall must go faster than c to reach the far point at the same time as the
light that goes directly from the bulb.
This case was general. It could apply to any two points on the wall. Or
any wall. At any angle. Or any surface. Therefore all illumination fronts on
all walls move faster than light itself, making D the best answer.
Why don’t you notice this? Because you don’t live in slow motion. At
normal speed, your eyes and brain are just too slow to notice the
movement of illumination fronts. Your brain updates your view of the
world only about ten times per second. But within a tenth of a second, the
bulb has not only lit up the entire room, it could have done so a million
times over. That’s because, assuming the bulb lights up immediately,

rooms of normal human proportion become lit within one billionth of a
second. No human can see events that quick without time-lapse
photography. These fast speeds keep hidden the amazing world of the
superluminal.
But what if the room has long fluorescent tubes? Same thing. But what
if the fluorescent tubes flicker? Same thing, although each flicker creates
even more illumination fronts, with each front again moving across
everything faster than light. But what if the light bulbs are on dimmer
switches and brighten only very slowly? Same thing in theory, although this
can make it hard to notice.
Now that we see that illumination fronts can move faster than light, we
are ready to explore how a reverse illumination front—a shadow—can do
the same thing.
Question 41: You stand an arm’s length from a light bulb. On your other side,
away from the bulb and also an arm’s length away, is a wall where your shadow is
cast. You raise your arm. Yes, your shadow on the wall also raises its arm. You
didn’t even say “Simon says!” Now, consider moving the wall further away. Does
the speed that your shadow moves along the wall depend on the distance to the
wall?
A.    Yes, the farther the wall, the faster your shadow will move.
B.    No, your shadow will always move at the same speed.
C.    Your shadow shows you how to make a bunny rabbit by cupping your hands
and extending two fingers for the ears.
The best answer is A: the farther you are from the wall, the faster your
shadow will move. For example, when the wall is just past your arm, your
arm’s shadow moves just a little bit faster than your arm. When the wall is
an arm’s length away, then the speed of your shadow is about twice the
speed of your arm.

Question 42: Is it possible for the wall to be so far away that the shadow of your
arm moves across it faster than light?
A.    Yes, there is no limit to the shadow’s speed, not even the speed of light.
B.    No, the shadow’s speed can approach the speed of light but never exceed it.
C.    Since the shadow is composed of light, it must always travel at the speed of
light.
D.    Daily Double! I’ll take “Armed Shadows” for 200.
The best answer is A: by casting your arm’s shadow on a very distant
wall, and then moving your arm, even slowly, you can cause its shadow to
move faster than light. Note that it may take a long time for your shadow to
initially reach the wall because light travels always at c.
Question 43: Roughly how far does the wall need to be for your moving arm’s
shadow to move faster than light?
A.    About the length of a car.
B.    About the length of a football field.
C.    About the distance to the Moon.
D.    Far across the universe into the far infinite vastness of super-distant farness.
At the closest.

The best answer is C: for your shadow to move faster than light,
assuming a normal human arm-motion speed, the far wall has to be the
distance to the Moon or farther. The farther your shadow, the faster it
moves in response to your motion. Once your arm has absorbed or
deflected photons from the bulb, they are gone from the stream of photons
moving out from the bulb. Gone forever. They can no longer illuminate
any wall at any distance. In your home, shadows you cast probably move
much slower than light because your home probably does not extend out to
the Moon.
However, if the Moon is up, moving your arm at a normal speed
between your phone’s light and the Moon will create a shadow that moves
across the lunar surface faster than light. It’s that easy. What’s not easy is
seeing this shadow. At the distance of the Moon, your arm’s shadow will be
so faint that not even the best telescopes on Earth can see it.
Question 44: You now move your open hand between a flashlight and the Moon
so fast that your hand’s shadow moves across the Moon faster than light.
Between your spread fingers, however, are gaps where light streams through.
Don’t worry, these gaps are normal. Your fingers will be fine. Do these illuminated
gaps also move across the Moon faster than light?
A.    Yes, they are part of the whole shadow pattern.
B.    No, they are light, which is constrained to move at the speed of light.
C.    You decide to see a doctor about the projected gaps between your fingers
moving faster than light. Unfortunately, you can’t get past the receptionist,
who instead schedules for you a session with a psychologist.
The best answer is A: yes, the slats of light created by the gaps between
your fingers move just like your fingers’ shadows do. If they did not, you
would not recognize the shadowy outline of your hand on a nearby wall.
This is true on any wall, or moon, no matter its distance. This demonstrates
that not only dark shadows but all projected dividing lines between light
and dark (illumination fronts) can move across surfaces faster than light.

Question 45: Can the setting Sun cause your shadow to grow across the ground
faster than light?
A.    Yes, as before, there is no limit on your shadow’s speed.
B.    No, this is a trick question.
C.    How can such a simple question be so hard?
The best answer is B: no, the setting Sun cannot cause your shadow to
extend faster than light. This is because the light that defines the edge of
your shadow can only move horizontally across the ground at speed c at the
most. Answer C contains some truth: this question is a lot harder than it
looks!
Question 46: Can the rising Sun cause your shadow to shrink across the ground
faster than light?
A.    Yes, because the answer to the last question is irrelevant.
B.    No, I won’t fall for the same trick twice.
C.    Real scientists never assume that the Earth is flat.
The best answer is A: yes, sunrise can cause your shadow to shrink
faster than light. Although this question may seem like it describes the
symmetric time-reverse of last question’s situation, it does not. This
question, though, is also a lot harder than it may look! There are a lot of

strangely important details that come into play here that make answering
this question bizarrely complicated, including the non-flatness of the
Earth’s surface, and the time it takes to go from the darkness of night to
having a really long sunrise shadow. However, in sum, unlike with the
previous question, the rate that your shadow shrinks does not depend on
how fast light moves just above the ground, and so is not constrained to be
c or less. More about this can be found both in the previous chapter,
Superluminal Tricks and Illusions, and in the next chapter, Superluminal
Image Doubling.

CHAPTER 8
Superluminal Image Doubling
Through a glass lens, you can sometimes see things twice. Through the air
over a hot road, you can sometimes see the sky twice, which may make a
dry road ahead look wet. But in the world of the superluminal, you can see
things twice without any lenses at all. You can even make shadows and
laser spots appear double.
That this happens with a single laser beam was a complete surprise to
me and took me quite a while to understand. What motivated me was
trying to correctly answer what now are the first two questions in this
chapter. In essence, this book would not exist if it weren’t for the first two
questions in this chapter.
Sometimes, since then, a visitor will come to my office and politely ask
what I am working on. To introduce them to the shock and awe of the
superluminal, I ask them these two questions, being sure to tell them that I
got each of them wrong initially. Some visitors, to my surprise, get them
right almost immediately. How about you?

Question 47: You point your laser slightly away from an infinitely long wall.
Slowly, you spin around so that the laser points toward the wall. You continue
your spin all the way around. Where is the first place that laser light strikes the
wall?
A.    At the point on the wall closest to the laser pointer.
B.    Infinitely far down the wall.
C.    At some place between the closest point and infinitely far away.
D.    Brooklyn.
For the laser spot to reach the closest point to you on the wall, it first
had to illuminate the point just beside it. Therefore, the best answer is not
A.
Obviously then, the best answer must be B: infinitely far down the wall.
The point beside every point is always illuminated first, and the logical
extension of that goes all the way to infinity. Case closed? No so fast! The
problem is that it takes light an infinite time to go infinitely far down the
wall. Since clearly a laser spot impacts the wall near you in a short amount
of time. Infinity—and answer B—is also ruled out.
To my initial surprise, and perhaps to yours as well, the best answer is
C: the laser light first impacts the wall not nearest the laser, not infinitely
far away, but at some middle location. How is this tied to the speed of light?
Keep reading!
This is a good example of how seemingly simple questions involving
the speed of light can have intriguingly bizarre answers.

Sometimes, in Einstein’s special relativity, the maximum speed limit c
is important because of how time and space contort. In this chapter,
though, what is important is that photons are not infinitely fast.
In theory, much of what happens in this chapter can be applied to
other speed limits as well, for example the speed of sound as puzzled over
in the chapter Supersonic Booms.
Question 48: Which way does this laser spot move?
A.    It moves along the wall getting closer to your laser pointer.
B.    It moves along the wall getting farther from your laser pointer.
C.    Something different.
This question has one of the most counterintuitive answers in the
entire book. It took me quite a while to fully understand the correct
answer. But slowly, eventually, I realized which answer it must be and why:
C, something different.
What actually happens is that a pair of laser spots is first created on the
wall. It is also correct to say that an initial single laser spot immediately
divides in two. One spot then moves along the wall getting closer to you
and the laser pointer, while a second spot moves along the wall getting
continually farther away from you. So, both A and B are correct at the same
time! But since both are simultaneously correct, the situation is best
described as more complex, making answer C the best answer.
As strange as answer C may sound, it is not only correct, but it is not
even controversial. Now, surely, you’ve fiddled with a laser pointer. How
come you haven’t noticed this double-spot thing yourself? The reason is
that for any practical speed of pivoting your laser pointer, common room
walls are just too close and short for the second spot to be created.
Furthermore, even if the second spot was created, our sluggish human
brains process images just too slowly to notice.
To demonstrate this, let’s consider a laser-pointer scenario with typical
human-scale distances, but with an infinite wall. At the start, your laser
points slightly away from the wall and therefore makes no spot. Let’s take
the distance to the wall to be one meter. You now rotate your laser to turn

90 degrees in five seconds. In this case, the two spots would pop into
existence after about 0.0001 seconds at roughly 30 kilometers down the
wall. After that, the more distant spot would get even harder to see because
it dims and moves even farther away. To get the spot creation event to be
near you would require you to spin 90 degrees a billion times faster, which
might sound fun but is not survivable.
Detailed mathematical calculations show that both spots are born with
infinite speeds but going in opposite directions. The “near spot,” the laser
spot that starts toward the laser, slows down significantly as it passes the
laser, but then will pick up speed again after it goes by. Eventually, this
near spot will approach, but not pass, light speed as the spot continues
down the infinite wall. One way to understand this is to note that far down
the wall, the near spot and the laser light are moving almost parallel, so
that the spot speed is nearly matching light speed. At infinity, they are
exactly parallel, so that the near spot speed becomes precisely c.
The far spot will also continue down the wall, but in the opposite
direction. This spot’s speed will continue to decrease from infinitely fast to
approach light speed, but it will never become that slow. Its speed will
always remain slightly faster that c.
Finally, at the end of the day, you pack up your laser pointer and go
home. What will happen to the laser spots? Even long after you leave, the
spots will continue in their respective opposing directions along the infinite
wall. This is because, as stated previously, it will take an infinite amount of
time for each spot to reach infinitely far down the wall. The photons have
already left your laser, so they won’t be going home with you. Eventually,
each spot will be so far away that it will involve, effectively, zero photons.
However, given a continuous approximation of classical physics and special
relativity, the spots will continue along the wall forever.

Question 49: Why are there two laser spots on the wall, rather than three or
more?
A.    Photons have spin 1/2, so half of the photons spin out early, the other half
late.
B.    The time invariance of linear laser processes is Gaussian, as expected, and
the Gaussian bell curve has (exactly) two sides.
C.    The time of flight of the laser light plus the time of rotation of the laser is
always double valued.
D.    No one knows.
First, with regard to answer A, it is not true that photons have spin 1/2.
In physics, spin 1/2 means that the intrinsic angular momentum is the
value of the “reduced Planck’s constant,” usually written as ℏ, divided by
two. In fact, photons all have intrinsic spin 1. However, the spin of the
photon is not directly relevant here.
Answer B is physics gobbledygook. It is designed to sound correct, but
really means nothing. As a graduate student, friends and I would make up
physics-sounding gobbledygook for fun. From writing this answer, I find
that it is still fun! Please feel free to try this at home.
The best answer is C: the time it takes for the laser photons to strike any
place on the wall, when added to the time it takes for the laser to point to

that same place on the wall, is always double valued.
Here’s why: the time it takes for the laser to point toward wall locations
relatively near the laser is greater than the time it takes for light to reach
these same locations. However, the time it takes for the laser to point
toward wall locations relatively far from the laser is less than the flight time
of laser light to those locations. But the addition of those two times—the
time to turn the laser added to the time for the laser light to reach the wall
—can be exactly the same. It turns out that for any one time, there are
exactly two wall locations illuminated. Therefore, at any one time, there
are always exactly two laser spots—no more and no less—that occur on the
wall.
Question 50: Do you need an infinite wall, or an impractically long wall, to create
these two laser spots?
A.    Yes, that is why this two-spot effect has never been seen in practice.
B.    No, the faster you rotate the laser, the shorter your wall needs to be.
C.    No, because if you curved the wall into a sphere, it would still work.
D.    It doesn’t matter since there is no possible practical purpose to any of this.
Bizarre questions about impractical situations are not only useless but
wasteful.
This double imaging effect has been seen in practice, so answer A is
incorrect.
To explore answer B, it is true that if you increase the rotation speed of
your laser, you will move the place where two spots emerge closer to you
and your laser pointer. Therefore, the faster you rotate the laser, the shorter
your wall needs to be to host the two laser spots (called relativistic image
doubling and abbreviated RID). So technically answer B is correct.
However, in practice, given typical human distance scales, the time during
which the two spots appear will be much too short for the unaided human
eye.
Surprisingly, perhaps, answer C is also correct: no, you don’t need an
infinite wall. Two spots can be created on a sphere or any shape. To explore
answer C, let’s try a new thought experiment. Take your laser pointer and

shine it so that the laser spot moves across a sphere, for example a
basketball. Mathematically, the spherical surface of the basketball can be
considered a compactification of an infinite wall. In other words, you can
match each point on the infinite wall with a point on the sphere. Stated
differently yet again, you can take the infinite wall, smush it down, re-
stretch it, and wrap your basketball with it. It may not be pretty, but,
ignoring certain infinities, it can be done.
Now sweep your laser pointer across the basketball. For simplicity,
follow a center line that includes the spot closest to the laser. If you strafed
the ball with one continuous motion, you might guess that your laser
created a single spot that started on one side of the basketball and moved
around to the other side. But that’s not what happened. At first, two spots
were created on the ball. One spot was the normal spot that you expected
—a spot that indeed started near one side of the ball and went across to the
other side of the ball. But the creation and disappearance of the second
spot happened simultaneously and very quickly. This far spot started at the
same place as the near spot, but it went in the opposite direction.
Conceptually, this is just like sweeping your laser spot across a flat wall.
Question 51: Is this double-spot phenomenon (RID) observer dependent, or does
it happen in objective reality, independent of any observer?
A.    Observer dependent.
B.    Objective reality.
C.    Both, in this case.
D.    Neither. There is only one spot. Don’t be deceived by this tricky double talk.
The best answer is C: the image doubling occurs both in objective
reality and is seen by a subjective observer. Your laser really does place two
spots on the Moon simultaneously, even if nobody can see them. To better
understand this, suppose a line of video cameras is placed on the Moon all
along the path of the laser pointer’s spot(s). Each camera records the time
it was hit by laser light. Later, you travel to the Moon, visit each camera,
and read out all of the times they saw your laser spot.

You will find that one camera recorded the laser spot before any of the
other cameras. And this “first-place camera” was not at the edge of the
Moon, as seen from Earth, nor was it at the closest point on the Moon to
the Earth: it was in between. You then look at all of the times from all of
the cameras to find the second camera to record a spot. You find that it was
a tie: two cameras each recorded the same time. And the locations of these
cameras were on both sides of the first-place camera.
From the times that each camera recorded seeing your laser spot, you
can reconstruct when the spot was where and so reconstruct the paths of
your laser pointer on the Moon. It will become clear to you that two real
spots from your laser existed on the Moon simultaneously, and each spot
moved away from the other. This corresponds conceptually with what you,
an Earth observer, sees. Oddly, which camera recorded the spot first, and
which camera you saw from Earth become illuminated first, do not agree!
Unfortunately, explaining why is too complicated for this book.
Question 52: Assuming you could see your laser pointer’s spot on the Moon, how
would it appear to you to move as you swept your pointer from one side of the
Moon to the other?
A.    It would appear to move just like the laser points, from one side of the Moon
to the other.
B.    Two spots would appear at the same position and then move in opposite
directions away from the initial bright spot.
C.    Four spots would appear to move outward from the Moon’s center, similar to
the north, south, east, and west on a compass rose.
D.    There would be a loud crashing sound as the laser, more powerful than it
looks, splits the Moon in half. Soon NASA calls to remind you that they only
lent you this laser if you agreed to be careful, which, apparently, you were
not. So now they want their laser back. Your mom then calls to see if you are
OK because somebody broke the Moon.
This question is about subjective appearance. Previously, you were
asked about what actually happens: objective reality.
Even so, in this case what you subjectively see is conceptually similar to
what actually happens in objective reality. In sum, you would see two spots

moving away from each other, both originating from one location. The
more quickly you sweep your laser, the closer this initial location would be
to the center of the Moon. Therefore, the best answer is B: initially, your
single laser pointer would appear to place two spots on the Moon.
If the Moon was a flat disk on the sky and so not a sphere, your laser
would cast a single laser spot that would move simply from one side of the
lunar disk to the other. This would happen both in objective reality and be
what you subjectively see. But the Moon is not flat on the sky. The extra
depth of the edges of the Moon relative to its center is the underlying
reason for the image doubling effect. Because it takes time for light to
travel this extra depth to the Moon’s perimeter, the edge is not the first part
of the Moon lit by the laser.
Stated differently, starting with your laser pointing toward the edge of
the Moon, consider the time it takes for two different sequences of events.
The first sequence is light going from the laser to the edge of the Moon
and back. The second sequence is the laser pointer turning from the edge
to the Moon’s center added to the light going from the laser to the Moon’s
center and back. The time for these two sequences can be the same. When it
is the same, you see both the edge and center spot at the same time. This is
an example of subjective, and hence perceived, doubling (RID).
Question 53: Let’s go back to considering a laser pointer sweeping across a long,
flat wall, but now add a new twist. This time, the laser pointer is replaced by a
video projector so that the laser spot on the wall is replaced by a video. Your
projector originally points away from the wall, but then, as before, you turn the
projector slowly toward the wall, and eventually 180 degrees around. How many
images of the video exist on the wall simultaneously?
A.    Just the one, but you have to turn your head at the right speed to see it.
B.    Two, just like there were two laser spots. One video moves along the wall
toward the video projector, the other away.
C.    Three. All good things come in threes.
D.    Four. Oh forget it. You know it’s not four. Please go back and pick one of the
other answers.

Answer A is OK in that it would help to turn your head at the right
speed to best see a video as it crosses the wall. But that is somewhat besides
the main point. The main point is that, really, two videos exist on the wall
at the same time. And you would be able to see them both. Therefore, B is
the best answer.
This scenario is very similar, conceptually, to the already-discussed case
of shining a laser spot on the almost-infinite wall. The difference is that the
laser projects a single boring spot, whereas the comparatively interesting
video changes with time.
Question 54: The video image on the wall that is moving away from the projector
does something odd. What is it?
A.    It plays upside down.
B.    It plays like a mirror image.
C.    It plays time-backward.
D.    Godot arrives.
No action will occur that will flip any image of the video upside down.
The top of the video will remain the top in all of the images on the wall,
including the far image moving away from the projector. Therefore, answer
A is incorrect.
After an initial flash, two diverging images of the video occur on the
wall simultaneously: the near-projected video and the far-projected video.

Analysis shows that the far-projected video will be flipped left-for-right, as
in a mirror-image. This is just one way that this far-projected video is
different from the near-projected video. Answer B is correct, but it is not
the only correct answer. Perhaps the most surprising of the two correct
answers is C: time-backward. In a very real sense, this video image is time-
reversed. If the video was a Hollywood movie, all of the actors in the far-
video would move time-backward. The opening credits would be projected
last and in mirror writing. Even though two versions of the video play
simultaneously in different places, no scene from the video is ever
projected twice. The video moving toward you shows scenes that occur
after some middle point in the video and continues until the end of the
movie. In contrast, the video moving away from you depicts only scenes
that occurred before that same middle point in the movie, but displays
them time-backward until the beginning of the movie.
About answer D: Godot cannot arrive because, in the Samuel Beckett’s
Play Waiting for Godot, the character of Godot never left. In a movie where
a character leaves, the time-reversed version will show that same character
arriving. But that doesn’t work here, making answer D wrong.
Question 55: Before, it was described how the videos were projected on the wall
in objective reality. But what would you see as a subjective observer? Would you
see the time-reversed part of the video actually play time-backward?
A.    Yes, you, the viewer, would see the far-video run time-backward, just like in
objective reality.
B.    No, as an observer, you would see the time-reversed part of the video time
reversed yet again. Therefore, both versions of the video appear to you to run
normally—time-forward.
C.    You never find out because your rental period expired, and you didn’t feel like
paying $5.99 for another 48 hours.
The best answer is A: yes, you see the far version of the movie play
time-backward. Assuming you were near the projector, you would perceive
the videos similar to how they were projected onto the wall. Things can get
even stranger from the perspective of an observer who is far from the
projector, but that gets so complicated that it will not be discussed here.

Aside 8: My Singular Path to Image Doubling
What follows is how I came to this seemingly bizarre conclusion that there
must be relativistic image doubling (RID), something I had not heard of
before. Normally I would not have considered this process important, but I
found the process familiar and wondered if it was unique to me, which I was
guessing it was not. I therefore took notes on it and included them a social
media post (on the now defunct Google Plus). To my surprise, I got some
positive feedback on this post, and even a request by someone to include it in
a book they were writing. I did give permission, but that also gave me the idea
to include that story here.
I am in full research mode now with a developing science project. This
surely is a phenomenon common to many people in many fields of research
and development. Anyway, here is a snippet of this process, for me, this time,
part of the time. It is somewhat typical for me. I am writing short bits of my
budding new manuscript on a word processor, realizing I don’t know what I am
talking about, thinking through another key point, coming to a conclusion,
coming to another conclusion in contradiction to the last conclusion, and
realizing that I have framed the paper in a naive fashion and deleting sections
(but saving all drafts just in case). I start to write a new section, realizing I
don’t know what I am talking about, worrying that this whole project is going
nowhere new, being grouchy because if this is going nowhere then I am
wasting my time, comforting myself with the thought that at least now I
better understand something that I should have better understood earlier. I
stare at my whiteboard for stretches of several minutes, occasionally
sketching a small diagram or writing a key equation, thinking how cool this is
and wondering if anyone else understands this mini-subtopic in this much
detail, realizing a new potential search term and doing a literature search for it
in ADS (Astrophysics Data System) and Google, and finding my own work and
feeling reassured that perhaps I am actually a reasonable scientist. I find key
references that address some part of this idea that I didn’t know about and
feel like an idiot reading those papers, thinking how brilliant those authors are
and how I could never write papers this good, and realizing how much those
authors have missed on this topic. I make more small diagrams on my
whiteboard and stare at them, wondering how I could have been so clueless
only a few minutes ago. I start to rewrite a section in the paper while being
embarrassed about how naive the previous section about this was. I hit a
logical conundrum and realize that I still don’t know what I am talking about. I
write a small computer code to test out a small part of this idea, staring at the
computer output and thinking, “Oh, oh, oh, oh, yes that makes sense. What
an idiot I have been,” realizing that I am undergoing yet another “revolution of

thought” and that I need to think about this whole project from yet another
new angle. I walk around the building thinking about this even newer
approach, trying not to look in the candy machine because I don’t need those
empty calories. I return to my office and answer some email and check
Facebook. I take out a sheet of paper and fiddle with some math to see if this
this new approach really is useful, decide that this new approach really is
useful, derive a new equation, enter this new equation in the paper and write
some preliminary text to describe it, realize from a hole in the text that there
is yet another new aspect of this project to think about, go, “Oh, oh, oh, oh,”
and make a new diagram on my white board, wondering if this whole project
is converging, feeling grateful that I actually have the time just now to keep
chasing this idea, even if it goes nowhere, reaching a good “contemplation
point” that needs to be thought through before continuing, worrying that I am
too stupid to ever solve this contemplation point, then solving the
contemplation point and thinking how obvious it was and what an idiot I was
for not seeing its solution earlier. I go home, promising myself to keep
thinking about this last contemplation point because it might be more
complicated than I had previously suspected and wondering at home if this
project is going anyplace new or interesting, not being very optimistic and
agreeing with myself that if I don’t go through these cycles of mistakes,
understandings, and continued revolutions in my own thinking, I can never
produce anything new or interesting.

CHAPTER 9
The Many Speeds of Light
We’ve been pondering the speed of light as if it were a single speed, but it’s
not. Therefore, before we explore superluminal speeds across expanses of
space both great and small, including unfamiliar effects both cosmological
and quantum mechanical, let’s focus first on what the speed of light really
means just across plain old boring familiar space. Even then, it turns out,
light’s speed is both complex and extraordinary. How so? That’s what this
chapter is about.
Question 56: Which of these refers to c, the speed of light?
A.    How fast light passes you in a vacuum.
B.    How fast light passes anyone in a vacuum, even far away.
C.    How fast light passes everyone in water, always.
D.    See 4 across.
The best answer is A: c refers to the speed that light would pass you by
in a vacuum. Experiments designed to measure the speed of light relative
to you give different speeds inside different things. In a vacuum, its value is
the famous c. But in water, light travels slower, at only 75 % of c. And water
is not a unique light-slowing liquid. The speed of light is different inside of
all different things. (Later questions in this chapter will probe this in more
depth.) However, to the best that experiments can determine, the speed of
light in vacuum is the fastest of all of them, and so this we define as c.
Therefore, even though physicists call c the speed of light, this typically
mean the speed of light in vacuum. But there’s more!

The speed c refers only to a local measurement—a measurement of
light’s speed very near to you, the measurer. Conversely, if you get out your
telescope and measure the speed of light near a black hole, you will find
that even through a vacuum, the speed of light appears different there.
This is why answer B is not correct.
To summarize, whenever this book says the speed of light, or uses the
symbol c, this really means the speed of light in vacuum measured locally.
As appreciated first by Einstein, c is the same locally, everywhere, and
always.
Question 57: Does light really move at the speed of light c?
A.    Yes, by definition. Also, you just said that it did.
B.    No, because c is really an abstract concept.
C.    Nobody really knows.
D.    Does sound really move at the speed of sound? Does Waffles the Wonder
Llama (tm) really move at the speed of Waffles the Wonder Llama (tm)? Is
there truly nothing left to believe in?
The best answer is C: nobody really knows. The phrase speed of light
has also become synonymous with “maximum speed.” We refer to this
maximum speed as the speed of light semantically because light was the
first thing found that moves at least close to this maximum speed. However,
it may be that answer B is correct because the real maximum speed is ever-
so-slightly faster.
One possible reason why actual light doesn’t ever really move at the
theoretical maximum speed c is that light is always moving through or near
something, and this something will alter light’s speed, if only very slightly.
Quite possibly, the maximum speed might be considered itself a property
of the underlying quantum vacuum that pervades our universe.
Another reason why even light might not move at c is because it might
have a small amount of mass. If so, then according to special relativity,
photons of light can move close to, but not at, c. To understand why, we
start with the famous formula E = mc2, where m refers to the rest mass of
an object—the mass you would measure if this mass is at rest relative to

you. Give this mass a relative speed v, and the full formula for E has it
approaching infinity when v approaches c. Since photons do not have
infinite energy, it then follows that if they have even a tiny amount of rest
mass, they cannot be moving fully at c, the theoretical maximum speed.
Possibly very close to c, but not at c.
How much mass can photons have? Since physics does not, as yet,
answer this question theoretically, we can use experiments and
observations to set limits. Now, sometimes when I mention the possibility
that photons have a small amount of mass to another physicist, they
strongly disagree and cite a theoretical concept that would not work if
photons had mass. What I usually try to do then is to turn things around
and use the experiment that enabled this theoretical assumption to give
limits on photon mass. I reply that if the photon rest mass was smaller than
this, we just would not know. So instead of using theoretical arguments to
demand that photons have no rest mass, I prefer to use the practical
experiments that underlie these theoretical arguments to limit the photon
mass.
Finally, Waffles the Wonder Llama (tm) really does run at the speed of
Waffles the Wonder Llama (tm). I mention this because the publisher and
I have been threatened with severe legal action from the Waffles the
Wonder Llama (tm) World Enterprises if we did not make this clear.
Waffles, I might add, really enjoyed this book herself and even stamped it
with her signature paw print after completing it. This stamp, we have been
informed, does not imply endorsement by Waffles, her European handlers,
or any people, animals, or insects residing at Llama World Enterprises
Ranch & Delicatessen (tm).

Question 58: Which of the following are recognized measures of the speed for
light?
A.    Group velocity.
B.    Phase velocity.
C.    Front velocity.
D.    All of the above.
E.    Wait, there’s more than one? How come the type of light speed was never
specified in previous questions?
The best answer is D: All of the above. In one sense, photons are very
simple things, just pieces of light. But in another sense, photons are very
complicated. Among their complications are various speeds that are
associated with even a single photon. Since we are interested in things
going faster than the speed of light, it helps to understand which speed of
light we are referring to.
Question 59: If you measure the speed of a photon by timing how long it took to
go to a mirror and reflect back, what would you be measuring?
A.    Group velocity.
B.    Phase velocity.
C.    Front velocity.
D.    What the heck is front velocity?
E.    All of the above.
The best answer is A: group velocity. In many ways, light acts like a
packet of electromagnetic waves in which the electric field strength varies
within the packet. The speed of the main group of electric field peaks is
known as the group velocity. Typically, timed measurements of the speed
of light measure the group velocity.
Question 60: If you measure the angle that a photon makes when going from a
vacuum to water and used that to compute the speed of light in water, you would
be measuring:
A.    Group velocity.

B.    Phase velocity.
C.    Front velocity.
D.    Gr-ase-nt speedocity.
E.    No, really, what the heck is “front velocity?”
The best answer is B: phase velocity. A photon is composed of many
electromagnetic waves and is usually illustrated by a single wave that
represents the electric field strength. These waves can move inside the
entire photon wave packet. The phase velocity is a measure of how fast the
internal electromagnetic waves that compose photons move.
A common parameter that well indicates phase velocity is the “index of
refraction,” usually designated with the variable n. The index of refraction
is usually not determined by timing how fast photons move, but by
measuring how much photons refract—that is, how much they change
their angle of direction when they go from something into something else,
like from a vacuum into water. For light you can see—in the visible band
—moving through air and water near room temperature, you may be
pleased to know the phase and group velocities of light are very nearly the
same.
Question 61: What is the front velocity of light in water, which has an index of
refraction n = 1.33?
A.    c/1.33, but only if n refers to group velocity.
B.    1.33 c, but only if n refers to phase velocity.
C.    c (in vacuum).
D.    There was not enough information given to say.
E.    Thank you for finally trying to clarify front velocity!
The best answer is C: c (see?). Yes, this is surprising. The definition of
front velocity (finally!) is the speed of the very front of the packet of
electromagnetic waves that compose a photon. Yes, front velocity is a thing.
It differs from group velocity because group velocity is a measure of the
bulk, or middle, of the averaged wave packet. When a photon travels
through material that has movable charges, which is almost everything

except a vacuum, these charges can affect the speed and even the shape of
the electromagnetic waves internal to the photon. This changes both the
photon’s phase velocity and group velocity. However, these electromagnetic
fields cannot change the location of the very front of the photon’s wave
packet. If a photon goes through a tortured history of moving through all
sorts of gunk that slows down its phase and group velocities, the very front
of its wave packet may become increasingly hard to locate, but, at least in
theory, it is still there and still moving ahead at exactly the speed of light in
vacuum: c.
Question 62: What is the fastest speed that you can send a message through
water (with n = 1.33)?
A.    c/1.33.
B.    1.33 c.
C.    c.
D.    There’s some trick here, isn’t there? I can’t get another one wrong or I’ll flunk
this chapter!
In theory, the best answer is C: c. You can send a message even through
water at the speed of light in vacuum if the receiver can detect the front of
the wave packet. But that’s a big if. In practice, determining the very front
of a photon’s wave packet is very hard to do. Therefore, the best answer is
A, which is the photon’s group velocity.
Question 63: Is it possible for the phase velocity of light to go faster than light?
A.    Yes, why not? Go phase velocity, go!
B.    No, because all light speeds are constrained to be equal to c.
C.    No, because all light speeds are constrained to be less than or equal to c.
The best answer is A: yes, it is possible for phase velocity to be greater
than c. This has been confirmed many times. However, this will not allow
you to communicate faster than light. A key reason for this is that no part of
the photon’s wave can survive passing the wave’s front. The result is that
the photon’s front velocity of c remains the fastest way to communicate.

Question 64: Is it possible for the group velocity of light to go faster than light?
A.    Yes, why not? Go group velocity, go!
B.    No, the internal wave trick that works for phase velocity doesn’t work with
group velocity.
C.    No, all light speeds are constrained to be less than or equal to c.
D.    Look, when I was a kid, we knew what things meant. We had “speed” and
“light” and even “speed of light” and we were happy. You kids today don’t
know what to believe anymore, what with your “phase” and “group”
velocities of light. Who can tell?
The best answer is again A: yes. The group velocity of light can indeed
go superluminal, and this, too, has been confirmed many times. However,
again, this will not allow you to communicate faster than light.
Aside 9: Phase, Group, and Front Velocity of Light: A Train
Analogy
One way to picture photons is as packets of a moving and varying electric
field. A photon wave packet has similarities to a train with its locomotive at
the front and several passenger cars trailing. The speed of the locomotive,
relative to the platform, is the front velocity. This speed is always c, the speed
of light through vacuum, even if the train is operating under water. Now
suppose passengers in the cars represent the peaks of the photon’s electric
field. Further suppose that now all of the passengers stood up and started to
walk along the train’s central aisle, including between the cars, toward the
locomotive. The speed of the passengers, relative to the train platform, can
be considered to be the phase velocity. This shows that phase velocity can be
greater than c. The passengers must vaporize (painlessly) when they reach the
front of the locomotive. This shows that phase velocity cannot communicate
information faster than light.
Now suppose the train’s cars are held together by ropes. (Yes, the
passengers can walk across the ropes.) As the train goes, the passenger cars
can start to spread out behind the locomotive. The average speed of all of the
passenger cars is the group velocity. This may also be the speed of the central
passenger car. When the cars spread out, the group velocity is less than c.
When the cars bunch up, the group velocity is greater than c. Since the cars
cannot pass the locomotive, having a group velocity greater than c will not
allow superluminal communication.

To match this analogy to the figure earlier in this chapter, consider that
there is only one car and that each peak wave is the analog of one passenger.
Question 65: Why does light slow down in water?
A.    Light bounces around between water molecules.
B.    Water molecules absorb, briefly hold, and then re-emit the light.
C.    When moving through water, the electric and magnetic fields of the light
have an effect on the electric and magnetic fields of charged particles that
compose water molecules, such as electrons. These charged particles
respond by jiggling and so create their own varying electric and magnetic
fields. The combined fields of the initial light and the responding charged
particles have been found, mathematically, to move more slowly than the
initial fields inherent in the light.
D.    The speed of light gets watered down.
The best answer is C: the fields of the passing photon jiggle
surrounding atoms and molecules. A more detailed analysis is given in the
chapter Superluminal Colors. However, the last answer, D—that light gets
watered down—is so humorous that it should also be considered correct.
Comedy gems like that need to be nurtured, not dismissed.
Question 66: Transparent materials that slow down light have an index of
refraction of greater than one. Are there any substances where the index of
refraction n is less than one?
A.    Yes, since this n refers only to the phase velocity of light, not the group or
front velocity.
B.    No, because light there would then move faster than light in vacuum.
C.    Possibly in opaque substances. But it is so dark in there that no one really
knows what is going on.
The best answer is A, there are materials that have an index of
refraction of less than one. However, these n values refer to phase velocities
only. The fronts of these photons’ wave packets do not go faster than c, the
speed of light in vacuum.

CHAPTER 10
Superluminal Aquatics
There is a well-known place where even massive particles can go faster
than light: that’s inside something. That’s because the speed of light inside
anything is slower than the speed of light outside everything (but in a
vacuum). If a massive particle is zipping by near the speed of light in
vacuum, c, and then it goes inside something, its internal speed will be
greater than the internal speed of light. In this chapter, for clarity and
familiarity, the internal “something” is water. Let’s dive in!
Question 67: You decide to hold a race down the length of your lavish swimming
pool. (If you don’t have a lavish swimming pool, please purchase one before
continuing.) The contestants are a photon and the fastest massive particle you
can find. Which one wins?
A.    The photon.
B.    The particle.
C.    They both move at c, so it is a tie.
D.    Waffles the Wonder Llama (tm).
The best answer is B: the particle with mass wins the race. The particle
will eventually slow down from friction with the water, but not
immediately. Just after entering the water and for even the length of the
pool, a really energetic particle could remain moving near c, the speed of
light in vacuum. Photons, upon entry into water, drop almost immediately
to cwater, the speed of light through water, which is about 75% of c.

Aside 10: Cherenkov and Thermal Radiation
What happens to water when a charged particle such as a proton zips through
superluminally? Cherenkov radiation. The motion of the proton causes water
molecules in its wake, themselves composed of charged particles, to
accelerate and jiggle. The result is that they emit light. Now any charged
particle that accelerates emits light. And a proton moving through water at
any speed will create light as it slows through extra thermal radiation, emitted
in all directions. However, a superluminal proton creates a strange type of
light called Cherenkov radiation that only flies off at one angle. Fortunately,
this strange is just the type that this book keeps exploring. Now there are
other types of radiation created, but because this book is written on a
popular-level, thermal and Cherenkov will be focused on exclusively. Some of
the concepts reviewed in this chapter are conceptually similar to those that
occurred in the chapter How to Make Light Bulbs Flash Faster than Light.
Question 68: From far away, a proton moves toward you through water faster
than light in water. What do you see?
A.    Absolutely nothing.
B.    Cherenkov light.
C.    Extra-thermal light, “extra” because it glows above the normal thermal light
emitted by any pool of water with non-zero temperature.
D.    Both Cherenkov and extra-thermal light, but shifted toward the blue end of
the spectrum.
E.    A wet proton.
The best answer is A: you see nothing—absolutely nothing. How can
this be? Didn’t we just say that the proton causes water molecules to jiggle
and release thermal and Cherenkov radiation? Yes, but that light can only
reach you after the superluminal proton has passed you by because the
particle outraces the light. When you finally see this delayed light, the
proton is no longer moving toward you faster than light in water. This may
seem like a nitpicky detail, but the situation defines something called the
“superluminal void” and can lead to strange consequences, some of which
are explored in the chapter Superluminal Laser Spots: Level 2.

Question 69: You put on your scuba gear and go to the bottom of a pool. You
take out your phone and tap the video app. Then, a “fast” charged muon moving
faster than light in water comes straight down through the water toward you.
Where do you first see the muon?
A.    At the surface of the pool.
B.    At the bottom of the pool.
C.    Somewhere in between.
The best answer is B: you first see the charged muon at the bottom of
the pool as it hits your eye. This is because the muon, moving faster than
light in water, will strike your eye before any thermal or Cherenkov light it
triggered. The best answer is not A or C because, again, the muon always
precedes the thermal and Cherenkov light it creates.
Aside 11: What is a Muon?
Why did the previous question feature a muon as its example particle? It is
true that, conceptually, other charged particles would create the same
response. However, muons are common in cosmic-ray air showers—the
showers of particles that result when a high-energy particle from deep space
strikes the top of the Earth’s atmosphere. Muons are particles that are
charged like protons, but they are lighter and unstable—they break up into
other particles. Muons, though, can travel great distances through large vats
of water on the Earth designed to study cosmic-ray air showers.
Why didn’t I start using muons in these puzzles? Because muons are not
commonly known, and I wanted you, dear reader, to contemplate the effect
and not the particle. By leading with an unusual particle such as a muon, it
might seem that the unusualness of the particle helps it to create Cherenkov
radiation, which it does not. That said, muons are really interesting particles
that would rarely be detected on the Earth’s surface due to their instability
were they not moving near c.
Question 70: A “slow” muon moving slower than light in water goes straight
down and strikes your phone at the bottom of the pool. Where does the video
first show this muon?
A.    At the top of the pool.
B.    At the bottom of the pool.

C.    Somewhere in between.
D.    Please wait while I check the warranty to see if the phone is covered for water
damage.
The best answer is A: the muon is first seen at the top of the pool. This
is because any light created by the slow muon outraces the muon and will
strike your phone before the muon itself. The light emitted will be thermal
and not Cherenkov, by the way, since the muon was moving so slow.
Question 71: A “medium” muon initially moving faster than light in water goes
straight down the tank, as before, but this time it slows to subluminal before
striking your phone at the bottom. Where does the video first show this muon?
A.    At the top of the pool.
B.    At the bottom of the pool.
C.    Somewhere in between.
D.    It no longer matters because the water has been ruined and no one should
drink it.
E.    Hey D, what are you talking about? Who said this water was drinkable?
D.    Of course the water is drinkable—or was drinkable. Why wouldn’t it be?
E.    Because it’s pool water. Please do me a favor and don’t drink pool water.
D.    Oh, OK. Yes. I see. My bad. Oops.
The best answer is C: the decelerating medium muon is first seen on
the video somewhere between the top and bottom of the pool. Moreover,
since the muon creates thermal light during its entire run, your phone will
eventually record the muon at all locations along its track. Furthermore,
the muon will only be visible once at each location.
Therefore, what your phone records is one image of the muon moving
up, and, simultaneously, one image moving down. Both of these muon
images are visible to you and your phone at the same time. This is a type of
relativistic image doubling (RID) event first brought up in the chapter
Superluminal Image Doubling. Here, the image doubling occurs because
of the real deceleration of the particle toward the observer and not a
change in radial perspective.

Question 72: Does a fast muon moving faster than light through water emit its
Cherenkov light along the surface of a Cherenkov cone?
A.    Yes, and the closer the particle moves toward c, the narrower the Cherenkov
cone becomes.
B.    No, why would it?
C.    Only after Cherenkov published his paper about detecting the radiation in
1934. Before that, the muon would not know what to do.
The best answer is A: yes, the muon does emit its Cherenkov light
along the surface of a “Cherenkov cone.” This is the angle mentioned
previously into which Cherenkov light is exclusively emitted. In contrast,
the thermal light liberated by the muon is emitted in every direction.
Oddly, the direction in which an observer sees the brightest extra thermal
radiation is exactly the same direction the observer sees the Cherenkov
light flash. This direction is also the first place where relativistic image
doubling (RID) is first seen, as described in the chapter Superluminal
Image Doubling.
Question 73: What is a Cherenkov cone?
A.    The cone into which charged superluminal particles beam their light.
B.    A conical surface that moves along with a charged superluminal particle.
Observers on this surface perceive an extremely bright Cherenkov flash
generated by this particle.
C.    What Cherenkov’s dog had to wear around his head after a scuffle with
Schrodinger’s cat.
The best answers are A and B: charged superluminal particles beam
Cherenkov light into an imaginary conical surface that moves along with a
particle. On this surface, observers will see, momentarily, a bright flash of
Cherenkov light.

To understand this and review, let’s go through a series of increasingly
complex Cherenkov and thermal-light-generating scenarios. At first,
picture a muon coming directly at you through water much faster than the
speed of light in water. That muon strikes you first since it is moving faster
than the light it generates in the water. Next, you see thermal light from
when the muon was near you. Only after that will you see light from when
the muon was far away. This is the same situation, conceptually, as
described in the chapter How to Make Light Bulbs Flash Faster than Light.
Now let’s assume the same scenario but with the muon moving directly
toward you at exactly the speed of light in water. Then, the muon comes
toward you along with already-created extra-thermal light, since both the
muon and light move at the same speed toward you. Oddly, this co-moving
light accumulates like snow in front of a snowplow as the muon approaches
you since the old co-moving light does not go away. Therefore, you see all
of the built-up light at the same time in a quick flash, just as the muon hits
you.
Now stand by for the next added complexity. Really, stand by. Stand
slightly to the side and watch the next muon pass right by you. Assume this
muon is moving superluminally, meaning faster than the speed of light,
through water. Even though this muon may be moving at a (nearly)

constant superluminal speed, its speed toward you is dropping as it
approaches. When the muon passes nearest to you, its total speed is still the
same, but its speed toward you is, just then, zero.
To recap, when the muon was far away from you, its speed toward you
was nearly the same as its total speed: superluminal. Also, when the muon
was closest to you, its speed toward you was zero. Therefore, there must be
some place in the middle where the muon’s speed toward you becomes
equal to the speed of light in water. Since you are standing to the side, if
you point to this location, you will not be pointing along the muon’s line of
motion. The direction you are pointing is along the Cherenkov cone. At
this angle, both extra-thermal and Cherenkov light from a large section of
the muon’s path reach you within a very short period of time. So you see a
flash. When you do, you are, momentarily, on the Cherenkov cone of the
passing muon.

CHAPTER 11
Superluminal Laser Spots: Level 2
Let’s return to laser spots and light moving through a vacuum. With the
knowledge gained in the past few chapters, we are now ready to ponder
even more strange effects involving superluminal laser spots. For example,
we will investigate how the number of superluminal spots that you perceive
from a single laser beam can not only be one as usual, or two at times, but
sometimes even . . . zero?
Question 74: If a laser spot moves superluminally relative to you, does it move
superluminally relative to everyone?
A.    Yes, superluminality is transferable.
B.    No, not for people moving fast enough in the same direction as the spot.
C.    Where’s the joke answer? I now feel ripped off if there is no silly answer.
What, is this it? Are you kidding me?
The best answer is A: yes, if a laser spot moves superluminally with
respect to you, it will also move superluminally with respect to everyone.
This assumes that you and your friends have mass and are moving
subluminally relative to each other. Of course, laser spots are just a stand-in
for anything that can move superluminally, including shadows. Further, it
is also true that a laser spot that passes you subluminally (slower than light)
must then pass all observers with mass subluminally, too. Therefore, the
speed of light is not only a speed, but a dividing line.

Question 75: You stand near a long flat wall. A single laser spot on this wall
approaches you from far away, moving faster than light, and then passes you.
What do you see?
A.    A laser spot approaching from far away. Duh.
B.    A laser spot that appears to recede into the distance.
C.    A pair of laser spots first appears on the wall: one approaches, the other
recedes.
D.    Something completely different.
The best answer is C: you see a pair of diverging spots. Even though, in
objective reality, a single laser spot was in motion, it looked to you, a
subjective observer, like two spots were involved. This may seem bizarre
and obviously untrue, but hopefully the questions and answers that follow
will convince you that this is not only true, but really cool.
This situation may seem the same as the doubling of spots discussed in
the chapter Superluminal Image Doubling, but there is one key difference.
In that scenario, there really were two laser spots on the wall in objective
reality, and there really were two laser spots seen subjectively by the
observer. In this scenario, a single laser spot on the wall appears as two laser
spots to the observer. This is the same question, conceptually, as the row of
light bulbs with a flash pattern that appeared to be coming toward you.
Therefore, the answer is the same. Another reason I included this question
was to demonstrate that a row of lights is not a unique situation. Spots from
lasers can do the same thing, as can shadows. They can all move faster than
light, and they can all appear, to the subjective observer, double.
Question 76: A new laser spot moves toward you along the infinite flat wall.
You’ve seen so many laser spots by this point that you are no longer surprised.
This time, a piece of paper flutters down telling you that the emitted color from
this laser is green. You then see the spot from this laser approaching quickly.
What color does it appear to you to be?
A.    Green. That is the stated color of the laser. Duh.
B.    Blue. The spot is moving toward you, so its light gets blueshifted.
C.    Red. The spot appears to be moving away from you, so the Doppler shift goes
in the other direction and gets redshifted.

D.    No color. The color is infinitely shifted, so you cannot see it anymore.
E.    Nothing. This is because staring at laser spots will blind you. Didn’t your
mother warn you to be careful with lasers? Happy now?
The best answer is A: green, meaning no color change. When real
objects move relative to you, the light they emit becomes Doppler shifted.
The emitted light shifts toward the blue end of the optical spectrum if the
object with mass is moving toward you, but toward the red end when it is
moving away. This is because real objects can impart momentum to the
light they emit. And a change in a momentum can appear as a color shift.
But illumination fronts cannot transfer the energy or momentum of
motion to light they emit, so they do not show Doppler shifts. Since the
physical wall itself is (assumed) not moving with respect to you or the laser,
there is nothing to change the frequency of the laser light. Therefore, it
stays the same color. In this case, green.
Question 77: A laser spot moves superluminally along a wall. Since your internet
went down, you invite some friends over to stand and watch the spot from
different places. Is it possible that some of you see two spots, while others see
only one?
A.    Yes. The world is a different place to everyone who sees it.
B.    No, if any of you sees two spots, then all of you see two spots.
C.    There is only one spot. Look, I’m an editor for this book and I just have to let
you know that the author is trolling you. Apparently, this is all one big joke to
him. If you really do see two spots, then please, have your eyes checked.

The best answer is A: Yes. It is possible for friends to disagree and still
remain friends, especially about superluminal spot numbers. Although a
single spot moves superluminally in objective reality, some observers will
see it as a single spot, while others will see double. A key factor is whether
the real spot is moving toward each friend faster or slower than light.
Stranger yet, friends—even stationary friends—who see two spots may
even disagree as to when and where these two spots first formed. For
example, if two friends place their heads against the wall at different places
along the path of the spot, each will say that a pair of spots started from
near their own location, even though these locations could be far apart.
Note that this does not contradict the concept that laser spots that move
superluminally relative to you must then move superluminally relative to
everyone. That is because superluminal motion in general is a frame effect,
whereas spot doubling is an observer effect.
Question 78: Each of your friends sees the same superluminal spot move
differently, sometimes appearing twice at the same time. But can each of your
friends reconstruct objective reality—how the spot actually moved?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.
C.    Only if they are good friends. Casual acquaintances won’t be able to do it.
The best answer is A: yes, assuming their measurements of the spot are
numerous and detailed enough. Figuring out how to reconstruct objective
reality from subjective observations is a key element of science in general.
In relativity, it is common for people to refer to a “proper” frame of motion,
which usually means the frame of motion of an object itself.
Question 79: During the time when a single laser spot moves toward you faster
than light, what do you see?
A.    One laser spot moving toward you.
B.    Two laser spots—one moving toward you, one moving away.
C.    Nothing, but thanks for asking.
D.    A pair of laser spots that are stationary at the trans-Cherenkov point.

E.    That you should be reading an easier book.
The best answer is C: nothing. This is because you are in a
superluminal void. When moving toward you, a laser spot moving faster
than light will always precede the light that it emits. The only time you can
see such a spot is when it is not moving toward you superluminally. When
you are in the spot’s superluminal void, you can have no idea that the spot
is even there. How could this be?
The superluminal void phenomenon is quite strange and outside of
normal subluminal experience. Usually, when an object is far away, you
can always see it, no matter which direction it may be moving. Even a
distant object may just be (angularly) small and faint, but it is still there
somewhere. But this is not always true in the strange world of superluminal
motion. There, when an object moves toward you superluminally, it
appears neither small nor far away. That is because the object is not visible
to you at all. So long as the object continues to move toward you faster
than light, it is physically impossible to see.
Why? If the superluminal object has not passed you, then the light it
created has not yet reached you. You can only see light that has reached
you. Therefore, you cannot (yet) see it. Try as you might, deploy the largest
telescope you can find, look everywhere you can think of, you will see
absolutely nothing. In relativity lingo, it is said that the spot has “not yet
entered your past light cone.” Since no light from it has reached you yet,
you cannot know it is there. Not yet.
Example: When a particle moves through water toward you faster than
light in water, the first thing you see is nothing. There is literally nothing to
see. You are in this particle’s superluminal void. No light from near the
particle has reached you yet. Nothing. Darkness. (Then, suddenly—
FLASH!)
Example: When a laser spot moves along a flat wall toward you faster
than light, at first you see nothing. Again, you are in the laser spot’s
superluminal void. Darkness. It is not possible to know that a spot is
speeding toward you faster than light. (Then, suddenly—FLASH!)

Just when an object moves so that its speed toward you drops from
superluminal to subluminal, you exit the particle’s void, and you can see
the object. Oddly, you then see two images of the object simultaneously. At
the start, you see the flash of relativistic image doubling (RID). You then
see one item from the pair image continue to move (at least partly) toward
you, while the other moves away.
A superluminal void is a faster-than-light phenomenon that has no
slower-than-light counterpart. In contrast, if you see a subluminal object
once, then, so long as it remains subluminal, you can always see it.
Superluminal voids are subjective observer-dependent phenomena that
have no objective-reality counterpart. Voids are completely perceptual. A
void describes what an observer sees or hears, as the next chapter makes
clear.

CHAPTER 12
Supersonic Booms
Sound can act like light. For example, sound travels through air at a finite
speed, like light travels through a vacuum at a finite speed. A key difference
is that a vacuum is the ultimate defining medium for light—the medium
where light’s speed is the highest. Conversely, sound cannot travel at all
through a pure vacuum because sound is a compression wave, and a
vacuum itself cannot be compressed.
The speed of sound through a medium is usually much slower than the
speed of light through the same medium. Therefore, just like it is possible
for a massive object to go faster than light through a medium, it is also
possible for a massive object to go faster than sound through that same
medium. In the chapter Superluminal Aquatics, the medium was water,
and the massive object was a charged particle. Here the medium will be
air, and the massive object will be a supersonic jet.
[Caveat paragraph—please ignore unless you like gory details: Many
assumptions were made in this chapter in deference to attempting clarity
and brevity when pondering the supersonic. For example, it is assumed that
sound speed is similar everywhere, that shock waves travel at the speed of
sound, that all frequencies of sound travel at the same speed, that the jet
acts like a single point, and that nonlinear harmonics are not important.]

Question 80: Does a sonic boom occur when a jet first breaks the sound barrier—
meaning that it exceeds the speed of sound?
A.    Yes, by definition, even if no one hears it.
B.    No, that is a common misconception.
C.    No, because the boom occurs when the jet breaks the speed of light.
D.    The sound barrier cannot be broken. If it could, birds would be flying faster
than sound every day. Boom! Boom! Boom! We would hear it all the time as
birds flew by. Do you hear that? No, of course not. Neither do I. This sound
barrier nonsense is best forgotten, and the sooner the better. Let’s speak
nothing more about it.
The best answer is B: increasing speed to break the sound barrier does
not, by itself, create a sonic boom. A sonic boom is a subjective observer-
dependent phenomenon. (OK, listener-dependent in this case.) It is heard
later by a listener when the speed of a supersonic jet toward the listener
drops from above the speed of sound to below.
Question 81: What causes an airplane’s sonic boom?
A.    The sound of the airplane over a long period of time compressed into a short
period of time.
B.    A compression wave of air pushed by the plane.
C.    The Prandtl-Glauert singularity, a compression instability in air that occurs
when something decelerates from above the speed of sound to below.
D.    The integrated circuit chip SB-9000 that is built into all modern aircraft to
make them sound really cool.

The best answers are A and B: a sonic boom is composed of both time-
compressed sound and a compression wave of pushed air called a shock
wave. If an airplane came nearly right at you at exactly the speed of sound,
but just barely missed, you would hear this jet only as it passed you by.
Furthermore, you would hear the jet at (nearly) every place along its path
just as it passed you, too, because the jet’s sound is traveling right along
with the jet. The situation is similar to that described for a row of light
bulbs flashing in sequence at the speed of light, in the chapter How to
Make Light Bulbs Flash Faster than Light. Hearing all of this sound at
once makes it very loud. That is a sonic boom.
The Prandtl-Glauert Singularity (PGS) is a real thing and is related to
the sound barrier. Discovered for subsonic speeds, the PGS indicates that
infinite pressures might be expected for objects accelerating up through
the speed of sound. Some aerodynamic scientists even thought that the
PGS would keep objects from exceeding the speed of sound. It is now
known that the approximations that went into the PGS—assumptions that
work well at low speeds—don’t work well near sound speed. Therefore, as
cool as it is, the PGS has little to do with a sonic boom.
Question 82: An airplane comes toward you faster than sound and then passes
you. What was the plane doing when it created the first sound you hear?
A.    There is no “first sound” because you always hear the plane.
B.    The plane’s speed away from you was rising from below the speed of sound
to above.
C.    The plane’s speed toward you was dropping from above the speed of sound
to below.
D.    It was deactivating its cloaking device and preparing to fire its photon
torpedoes.
The best answer is C: the first sound you hear from the jet was created
when the plane’s speed toward you dropped from above the speed of sound
to below. Before then, you are in the jet’s “supersonic void,” a void just like
the superluminal void described in the chapter Superluminal Laser Spots,
Level 2.

To recap, when a supersonic airplane is moving toward you faster than
sound, at first you hear absolutely nothing. Straining to hear its faint
engines is a waste of effort. You are in its supersonic void. No sound at all
from the airplane is reaching you. There is nothing to hear. Shhhh!
Silence.
Question 83: What do you hear when an airplane’s speed toward you drops to
below the speed of sound?
A.    A sonic boom.
B.    The airplane’s engines.
C.    Your phone ring. It’s the pilot. She is asking you what you hear when her
airplane’s speed toward you drops to below the speed of sound.
The best answer is A: you hear a sonic boom that is the time-
compressed sound of the airplane moving through air, as well as a pressure
wave of air pushed away by the speeding aircraft. Note that you will not
hear this boom right away. It will take time for the sound to reach you.
Answer B can also be correct, as the loud burst of sound can include
engine noise emitted over a long period, but heard all at once. If answer C
is true, you should be careful about answering your phone.
Question 84: Now assume that the supersonic airplane has its engines off but its
radio on. A song is playing. After the sonic boom, what do you hear from this
radio?
A.    The song sped up.
B.    The song slowed down.
C.    The song played backward.
D.    The song playing both forward and backward at the same time.
E.    That Paul is a walrus.
The best answer is D: after the jet’s sonic boom, you hear the radio song
play both forward and backward. This assumes that sound from the radio,
in the frame of the air, is emitted in all directions. If so, the first thing you
hear while the airplane is moving toward you faster than sound is . . .

nothing, since you are in the airplane’s supersonic void. Then, suddenly,
you hear a sonic boom, which includes a shock wave as well as time-
bunching of the plane’s gliding noise and part of the radio song heard all at
once. Only later, filtering out everything but the song, do you realize that
you are hearing the same song twice.
For simplicity, let’s assume that you hear the song twice starting from its
middle. The sonic boom will take up much of the middle part of the song,
so aside from the boom, that part appears to be missing. One part of what
you hear is from near the beginning of the song played backward until the
song starts.* Simultaneously, you would also hear from near the end of the
song played forward until the song ends. This is just like the video being
swept by the wall faster than light in the chapter How to Make Laser Spots
Go Faster than Light. In this case, though, you soon realize that the song
was one of your favorites and it sounded really cool playing both backward
and forward, so you signal the pilot to go around again.
Question 85: After you hear the sonic boom of a jet, from how many different
directions do you hear the jet simultaneously?
A.    One.
B.    Two.
C.    Red.
D.    Blue.
E.    Mathematically an infinite number, but most of them are too faint to actually
discern.
The best answer is B: after a sonic boom, you hear the jet from two
diverging directions simultaneously. Each direction can be considered a
“sound image” in analogy to the optical images in cases involving light.
Note that in this case, there remains only one optical image of the jet since
the jet never went faster than light.
Question 86: Are the jet’s sound images Doppler shifted? In other words, do they
sound higher or lower in pitch than normal?

A.    Yes, because the jet is moving toward you, and the sound of anything with
mass moving toward you is Doppler shifted.
B.    No, since the air through which the jet is moving is not moving with respect
to you.
C.    We tried asking Christian Doppler, the first person to recognize this type of
effect, but we couldn’t reach him because he was fired from his job for
thinking about it too much.
The best answer is A for the jet, but B for the air. A quiet jet, for
example a supersonic glider, would still produce a sonic boom because it
makes sound just moving through the air and pushes ahead a pressure
wave. The sound that originates in the air itself is not Doppler shifted.
The noise from the moving jet would be different in pitch than when it
is not moving with respect to you. This is a Doppler shift. You can hear it
even from passing cars. Oddly, the two sound images from the supersonic
jet would each have different Doppler shifts since each has a different
motion relative to you. Noise from the sound image of the jet from the
approach direction would be higher in pitch than the sound image of the
jet emanating from a position farther along in the jet’s path.
With regard to answer C: back in 1842, Christian Doppler did get fired
from his job for postulating this effect, even after it was verified by
trumpeters passing on a train. In this case, they could take away his job, but
they couldn’t take away the truth—Doppler was correct. The shift exists, it
is named for him, and today more people remember him for this great
physical insight than for losing that job.
Question 87: Which of the following are sonic booms?
A.    The crack of a whip.
B.    Thunder.
C.    A sound of a gun going off.
D.    All of the above.
The best answer is D: All of the above are common examples of sonic
booms.

Question 88: What common item in your house can be used to create a sonic
boom?
A.    A spray can.
B.    A lit candle tied to a long piece of string.
C.    A towel.
D.    A smartphone playing the sound of a sonic boom.
The best answer is C: a towel. By flicking a towel just right, the far end
can act like a whip and move faster than sound. Although it sure seems
possible to create a sonic boom with a lit candle and a long piece of string,
for the life of me I can’t figure out how.
Question 89: Can the pilot of a supersonic airplane hear that plane’s sonic boom?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.
C.    Not directly, but the pilot can hear it reflected from a nearby mountain.
The best answer is B: no. If the plane flies straight and steady, then the
pilot cannot hear her own plane’s sonic boom. The boom is a listener-
dependent phenomenon critically dependent on something that creates
noise passing the listener supersonically. And the plane does not pass its
pilot near the speed of sound.
Because a sonic boom is listener-dependent, the airplane creates a
different sonic boom for each listener on the ground. Suppose the
supersonic jet flew over the train station where a long line of listeners was
standing on the platform waiting to participate in a question from another

chapter. Each listener would note the sonic boom happening at a different
time. And this isn’t because a single sonic boom takes longer to reach more
distant listeners. There is no single sonic boom. They all hear a sonic
boom when the plane is the same angle from each of them—the angle
when the speed of the plane toward them, specifically, drops below
supersonic.
What if the plane is approaching a mountain? Even though the plane’s
sonic boom hits the mountain and is even reflected, the pilot will not be
able to hear the boom because the plane outruns it.
Question 90: A supersonic airplane flies by above you in a straight line at a
constant speed and height. Do you hear the sonic boom before or after the jet
passes you?
A.    Before.
B.    After.
C.    Both. You hear an “advanced” sonic boom before the jet passes, but then a
“retarded” sonic boom after.
D.    Neither. You put in earplugs because you were worried that the pending sonic
boom would be too loud.

The best answer is B: you hear the jet’s sonic boom only after the jet
has passed over. A supersonic airplane is faster than the sound it emits, so
the plane goes by first.
Besides sound from the shock wave, the sound you hear from the
airplane that was compressed into the sonic boom was all created by the
plane as it moved toward you. However, it takes time for all of this sound to
reach you. During this time, the airplane moves toward a point directly
overhead. The distance the airplane must travel to get to this overhead
point is less than the distance the sound must travel to you. Also, the plane
is moving faster than sound. Therefore, since the plane travels a lesser
distance at a faster speed, it passes by overhead before you hear the boom.
Question 91: Thunder is a sonic boom. Is lightning the light equivalent of a sonic
boom?
A.    Yes, the sonic boom results from the initial light boom.
B.    No, the expanding air from lightning moves supersonically but not
superluminally.

C.    Thor, the god of thunder, throws lightning bolts. Everyone familiar with
Norse mythology knows this. I am not sure how this is relevant, but I just
wanted to get that out there in case it is important. Thank you for your time.
The best answer is B: no. Very little of the light in lightning comes from
Cherenkov radiation, which is created when particles move faster than
light in air. Cherenkov radiation is pondered the chapter Superluminal
Aquatics. A lightning flash mostly results from the sudden high
temperature of the air. However, in defense of answer A, many of these
particles start out moving faster than light in air and so do emit a small bit
of Cherenkov radiation.
*The possibly of backward sound from supersonic motion was first mentioned in 1896 by
the famous Lord Rayleigh, although he did not note that it could be accompanied by a
forward sound.

CHAPTER 13
How to Make a Magnetic Field
Move Faster than Light
You’re getting good at moving things like laser spots and shadows faster
than light. We here in the book’s control room are all very impressed! But
what about magnetic fields? Can you add “B-field” to your faster-than-light
(FTL) abilities list? Quite possibly, after reading this chapter.
Question 92: Is it possible to create a magnetic field without a magnet?
A.    Yes, and you just did that yesterday.
B.    No, that would be silly.
C.    Shhh! Are you trying to put magnets out of business? The magnetic field
industrial complex won’t allow that.
The best answer is A, it is possible to create a magnetic field without a
magnet. Just move around some electric charges. And a good way to do
that is to power up an electronic device. You probably powered up
something like that just yesterday. Then, electric charges—let’s call them
“electrons”—moved along wires and created magnetic fields around those
wires. You can even test this on an external wire with a standard compass.
Question 93: Is it possible to create a magnetic field without a magnet or electric
charges?
A.    Yes, I just did that yesterday.
B.    No, that would be silly.

C.    Maybe, but every time I buy a magnet I get charged.
The best answer is A: yes, it is possible to create a magnetic field
without even moving charges, and you did do this yesterday. The reason is
light. Light, among other things, is a time-varying packet of electric and
magnetic fields, which is why it is also called electromagnetic radiation.
This is true even though photons have no charge. And since you emit
infrared light every day just by being warm, you created some yesterday.
Question 94: If you grabbed a magnetic field line, could you pull around a
magnet?
A.    Yes, assuming you have enough energy.
B.    No, magnetic field lines are ungrabbable. Also, grabbing is rude and if you try,
you risk insulting the entire magnetic field.
C.    You can do anything if you believe in yourself enough.
The best answer is B, you cannot grab a magnetic field line because it
is conceptual. Magnetic field lines are usually drawn to help people
picture magnetic fields. They have no mass, and they emit no light. To find
the orientation of a magnetic field line at any one place, take a tiny bar
magnet and put it at that place. The tiny magnet will orient itself along the
field line. A common way to picture magnetic field lines is to place iron
filings around a bar magnet. These filing, when jiggled, will line up along
magnetic field lines. Even so, they are not themselves magnetic field lines.
Also, unfortunately, answer C is incorrect: you cannot do anything even
if you believe in yourself enough. That self-help book your friend was
reading is wrong. For example, you cannot grab a magnetic field line.

Question 95: Can magnetic field lines move faster than light?
A.    Yes.
B.    Yes.
C.    Yes.
The best answer is yes, magnetic field lines can move faster than light.
Consider a simple bar magnet that can rotate through a line midway
between its north and south poles. Consider first that the magnet rests with
its north pole pointing up. Now spin the magnet around so that after one
second, its north pole is down. Stop the magnet at this second position.
In both positions, magnetic field lines loop around the magnet,
connecting the north and south poles. Magnetic field lines in the first
position can be easily identified with magnetic field lines in the second
position. The rotated change in these lines moved out from the rotated
magnet at the speed of light.
Let’s consider the field lines of this magnet out at Jupiter. It will take
about forty minutes for light and any change in the bar magnet’s field to
reach Jupiter. Then, angularly, in the one second, the magnetic poles flip.
But the only way to do that far from the magnet is if those distant magnetic
field lines moved faster than light.
Question 96: Can electric field lines move faster than light?
A.    Yes, they are conceptually similar to magnetic field lines.
B.    No, unlike magnetic field lines, electric field lines connect to electric charges,
and since these charges have mass, they are constrained to move below

light’s speed.
C.    Sometimes, but only if Electra, queen of electricity, decrees it.
The best answer is A: yes, electric field lines can move faster than light.
This brings up the question, what is an electric field line? The answer is, it
is a conceptual line of constant electric field strength. Additionally, the
direction of an electric field line is that of a small, accelerating positive
charge if released at rest in the electric field. Put down (and then pick up)
enough infinitesimally small charges and you can map out the entire
electric field around some charges. Connecting the directional arrows of
constant field strength gives continuous field lines. It is possible to create
an electric field version of a bar magnet by placing an object with a positive
electric charge right next to an object with a negative electric charge.
Electric field lines, although conceptual, can be pictured going from the
positive to the negative charge.
Now you can do the same experiment as you did with the bar magnet.
First orient the positive charge just north of the negative charge. Stop.
Then slowly spin them around so that one second later, the negative
charge is north of the positive charge. Again, stop. Again, consider that the
change in the electric field moves out at the speed of light. Again, consider
that very far from the charges, say at Jupiter, the positive and negative poles
flipped in one second. When matching up electric field lines between
those two flipped orientations, the only way they can flip that fast that far
away is if the electric field lines moved faster than light.
Question 97: You rotate a magnet around so that when north is up, that means
our home team won the game, and when north is down, that means the visiting

team won. The magnet is small, and you can easily spin it to one orientation or
the other within one second. The magnetic field of your magnet is then measured
far away, say at Jupiter. Since magnetic fields can move faster than light, can you
use this to communicate with your friends at Jupiter faster than light?
A.    Yes, the only problem is that the magnetic fields of most small magnets can’t
be accurately measured out at Jupiter.
B.    No, the fastest a change in the magnetic field here on Earth can be felt out at
Jupiter is c, the speed of light.
C.    Please don’t do this unless your friends on Jupiter pay for the service. Physics
isn’t a charity, you know.
The best answer is B: you cannot send messages to Jupiter this way.
This is conceptually similar to shining a laser out to Jupiter. The fastest that
laser photons can go out to Jupiter is c. If you sweep a laser around, its end
spot can sweep across Jupiter faster than light, but the information still
always originates at the laser and only moves away at c.
Similarly, when you rotate the magnet, the information that it has
changed position moves out to Jupiter at speed c. The change in the
magnetic field may sweep across Jupiter faster-than-light, but the
information still always originates at the magnet and only moves away at c.

CHAPTER 14
Superluminal Colors
Do all the colors of light move at the same speed? Through common
transparent substances such as air, water, or glass, light moves at different
speeds than if moving through the vacuum of space. What’s more, light
that enters a seemingly transparent substance is eventually replaced by
light reradiated by that transparent substance. This means that you have
likely never seen your true self—just a version reradiated by the air. There
are puzzles on these topics, and more, in this chapter.
Question 98: Is darkness, like shadows, caused by dark radiation?
A.    Yes, this is how we see dark things.
B.    No, radiation is “light,” not dark.
C.    Dark radiation is only emitted and absorbed by dark matter.
D.    In the Shadow World, you are your shadow’s shadow. Think about it.
Dark radiation is not how we see dark things, so answer A is wrong.
Objects appear dark because either they absorb light, emit a lesser amount
of light than their surroundings, or—like shadows—reflect a lesser amount
of light than their surroundings. Therefore, B is the best answer. Regarding
answer C, a hypothetical type of dark radiation really has been postulated
between types of hypothetical dark matter particles. However, this type of
dark radiation has never been detected, and many consider it quite
speculative.
A different type of dark radiation has been suggested in a hypothesized
universe known as Randall-Sundrum cosmology. This dark radiation is

suggested as being important in the early universe, presumably before an
inflationary epoch where the universe expanded exponentially. Even if
true, this dark radiation would be so diluted today that it would be
practically unobservable.
But what about a commercially available black light? Does it emit dark
radiation? No, a bulb labelled “black light” emits not only visible light but
ultraviolet. Normally, ultraviolet is too blue to see, but it can excite
chemicals put in clothes, sometimes by laundry detergents, to make them
appear brighter. These fluorescent chemicals absorb unseen ultraviolet
light and re-emit that energy into light with colors that we can see,
including violet. This makes washed laundry appear to glow. So when
commercials for detergent say that they make your clothes “whiter than
white,” that is actually true.
Question 99: Which of these is not a form of light?
A.    Radio.
B.    Microwaves.
C.    Infrared.
D.    Visible.
E.    Ultraviolet.
F.    X-ray.
G.    Beta ray.
H.    Gamma ray.
The best answer is G. Beta rays are just fast-moving electrons or their
positively charged—and relatively rare—counterparts called positrons.
Neither are a type of light.
Past that, all of the rest really are different energies of the same thing:
light. The answers list is sorted, top to bottom, by increasing energy.
Furthermore, in the visible band, light can be divided into recognizable
colors, sometimes abbreviated as ROY G BIV, which stands for red,
orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet, again sorted by increasing
energy.

Question 100: Which of these is not a property of light?
A.    Speed
B.    Energy
C.    Wavelength
D.    Frequency
E.    Spin
F.    Orbital angular momentum
G.    Mass
H.    Boardwalk
The best answer is G, only mass is not a property of light. To
summarize the rest, we know that the local speed of light in vacuum is
always c. Light also carries energy. The higher the energy, the shorter the
wavelength and the higher the frequency. Light also has an inherent
angular momentum, which can be considered spin. This spin shows itself
as photon polarization and is different from a photon’s orbital angular
momentum, which is defined relative to external objects. Orbital angular
momentum is a relatively newly understood aspect of light and is still being
researched.

Question 101: What type of light travels the fastest through the vacuum of
space?
A.    Radio waves.
B.    Visible light.
C.    Gamma rays.
D.    They all travel at the same speed.
E.    Quik Lite (not available in stores).
The best answer is D: all types of light travel at the same speed through
empty space. This is why when we say speed of light, we don’t say what
type of light.
One of the best examples of how light’s speed is found independent of
the light’s energy is within gamma-ray bursts. These explosions occur
across the universe, but gamma-rays of different energies are seen to arrive
here at earth nearly simultaneously.
Question 102: Which color of visible light travels fastest through water?
A.    Blue, because blue light has the highest energy.
B.    Yellow, because that’s where our Sun is brightest.
C.    Red, because red light has the longest wavelength.
D.    Black, but no one can tell since it is invisible.
The best answer is C: red light moves the fastest through water. It has
been known for hundreds of years that red light bends the least when going
from air to water, and we now know that the bending angle is one
indication of speed. In modern mathematical terms, the index of refraction
n of water is color dependent, with red light having a slightly lower n than
blue. However, the index of refraction usually refers to the phase velocity of
light—the speed of waves internal to light.
More closely related to the actual speed of light, as measured by
external observers, is light’s group velocity. Even so, the two are usually
pretty close for common substances like air, water, and glass. And that is

what we are assuming here. For more puzzles on this topic, see The Many
Speeds of Light chapter.
About answer B: our Sun appears mostly white because it is bright at all
of the colors that we can see. However, the color in which the Sun appears
the brightest above the Earth’s atmosphere is toward the green side of
yellow. The reason the Sun appears to grounded earthlings more yellow is
because so much blue light is scattered away by the Earth’s atmosphere.
That scattered light also makes the sky blue.
Question 103: Why does red light travel faster than blue light through water?
A.    Water molecules are themselves deep blue in color and so are less likely to
reflect passing red light.
B.    Light’s speed through water is determined more by rare ions than common
neutral molecules. These charged ions are accelerated by the fields of the
passing light, which takes energy and so reduces speed.
C.    Electrons in water molecules vibrate naturally in the ultraviolet. Blue light,
closer in energy to ultraviolet, causes these electrons to vibrate more, which
creates fields that, when added, slow down the combined field.
D.    No one knows.
E.    It is in a bigger hurry.
The best answer is C. To dig deeper, let’s look at the relative ability of
water to absorb different colors of light. Microwaves are a good place to
start; they are so red that you can’t see them. Water is relatively opaque to
microwaves because it absorbs this light very easily, causing water
molecules to spin. This reaction is used by your local microwave oven to
heat up water, because spinning molecules bump into other molecules,
giving them motional energy, as they spin down. And motional energy is
heat.
Higher-energy infrared light—still too red to see—causes water
molecules to vibrate, not spin, when absorbed. Although efficient heaters,
infrared light is more easily absorbed by surface layers of food and so may
leave food centers cold.
On the high-energy side of visible light is ultraviolet—light too blue for
humans to see. Ultraviolet light is also easily absorbed by water molecules,

but the absorbed energy is used to jump electrons into higher energy states,
which is different again from spin and vibration.
Visible light (i.e., that we can see) happens to fall into an energy-
absorption desert for water, between vibration for infrared and excitation
for ultraviolet. This is why water is relatively transparent to visible light.
Photon absorption’s less extreme cousin is photon jiggling—the ability
of the photon’s electric and magnetic fields to jiggle nearby water
molecules as it moves through. This occurs because water molecules are
composed of charged protons and electrons that react to these fields. Since
electrons are much less massive than protons, they jiggle the most and so
emit the most light.
But what about color? Left to their own, electrons in water molecules
jiggle at certain rates. Photons with fields oscillating at one of these rates
(called frequencies with light) are in the ultraviolet. Blue photons with
optical frequencies near this intrinsic vibration rate cause the water’s
electrons to jiggle more, which creates more electromagnetic waves that
get merged with the photon’s original wave. Given the extra distances to
surrounding and jiggling water molecules, together with the time delay to
get these molecules jiggling, the combined wave moves slower, on the
average, than the original photon wave. Red photons cause less water
jiggling, and so move faster: answer C.
Many pictures of Earth from afar show that the Earth’s oceans are blue.
This is mostly because blue light is not only slowed more than red light in
water, but is more scattered, too.
Question 104: Is light emitted into water eventually replaced by the reradiation
of light by the water itself?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.
C.    Only in classical theories, not quantum theories.
D.    This is a paranoid fantasy. Water would never do that.
The best answer is A: yes: water molecules—themselves composed of
charged particles—create electric and magnetic fields triggered by a

passing photon that eventually can be considered replacing that photon’s
electromagnetic fields. The distance over which this occurs is called the
“extinction length” and was first recognized and calculated by Ewald and
Oseen in 1915. The extinction length of visible light in air is only about
one millimeter. Therefore, most likely, you have never actually seen
yourself directly. You have only seen the air’s reradiated, indirect version of
you.
Question 105: The color of which element is caused by the speed-of-light limit?
A.    Gold
B.    Silver
C.    Copper
D.    Soup
The best answer is A: gold. The outer electrons in gold move so fast
they move nearly at c. This causes them to absorb blue light better than
other colors including red. Reflected light that includes more red than
blue can appear gold.
The cause of the reddish color of copper is different. It is caused by
electrons transitioning between energy levels.

PART II
UNIVERSE
Chapter 15
How Fast Is Light?
Chapter 16
Superluminal Reflections in Astrophysics
Chapter 17
Superluminal Cosmology
Chapter 18
Superluminal Galaxies
Chapter 19
How to Go Warp 2
Chapter 20
Superluminal Gravity
Chapter 21
Superluminal Black Holes
“The universe expands faster than light.” I’ve heard this many times, and as
a high school student was mesmerized by it. Back then I had no idea why. I
just knew that this seemingly insurmountable limit c could somehow be
surmounted far away. Now that I am a professional physicist who has
published papers about cosmology, I better understand why. I can’t tell my
high-school self what I have learned, but I can tell you. If you then find a
way to tell my high-school self, I would be much obliged.

CHAPTER 15
How Fast Is Light?
Light can go just about anywhere on Earth faster than you can blink. But
Earth is small, so let’s think big. Light takes long enough to cross the solar
system, the galaxy, and the universe that we don’t have to avoid blinking.
The great distance between Earth and Jupiter was a key factor enabling
Ole Rømer to first measure light’s speed back in 1676. Developing an
appreciation for just how fast light is—that’s what this chapter is about.
Question 106: How fast is the speed of light (in a local vacuum)?
A.    299,792,458.000000000 meters per second exactly.
B.    It depends on the photon’s wavelength.
C.    It depends on the wattage of the bulb. For example, light from a 75-watt
bulb is slightly faster than light from a 60-watt bulb. This is why the 75-watt
bulb is brighter.
D.    It depends on how gullible you are. If you’re really gullible, then the speed of
light is six florples per horseradish cheeseburger. If not, then it’s one of the
other answers.
The best answer is A—even with all of those zeros! Surprisingly,
perhaps, the speed of light in vacuum is now defined by humans to be an
exact number. This is because it is directly related to other constants that
can be more accurately measured. At its root, the real measurement
uncertainty for the speed of light now comes from the related, almost as
interesting, but more accurately determined fine-structure constant.

The speed of light in vacuum does not depend on its wavelength. Every
wavelength of light—which means every color of light and every type of
light, from radio waves to gamma-rays—travels at the same speed in a
vacuum, to the best modern physics can tell. This remarkable fact agrees
with the equivalence principle, which says that gravity attracts all things the
same, including electrons, baseballs, light, neutrinos, and asteroids. Early
folklore about the equivalence principle holds that Galileo dropped two
balls of different masses from the Leaning Tower of Pisa and found that
they both hit the ground at the same time.
Question 107: What does “one light-year” mean?
A.    The time it takes for light to travel over one year.
B.    The distance light travels in one year.
C.    The speed that light travels during one year.
D.    A year spent in a room with a light.
The best answer is B: the distance light travels in one year. To be clear,
for answer A, the time it takes for light to travel over one year is, well, one
year. For answer C, the speed that light travels during one year is c, the
speed of light. The light-year is a unit of distance.
Question 108: How fast is the speed of light in terms of the size of the Earth?
A.    Light takes about 0.0001 second to circle the Earth.

B.    Light can circle the Earth about seven times in one second.
C.    Light takes about 2 seconds to go from New York to London.
The best answer is B: light can circle the Earth about seven times in
one second. Although Earth’s gravity is not high enough to cause light to
circle the Earth, radio communication around the globe works by radio
waves—a form of light—continually reflecting off the ionosphere.
Question 109: Without googling it, how long would you guess it takes light to go
from the Earth to the Moon?
A.    About 0.0001 seconds.
B.    About one second.
C.    About one minute.
D.    About 8 light minutes.
E.    There’s no evidence that light can go to the Moon. All light ever detected has
been here on Earth. Think about it.
The best answer is B: about one second. More precisely, light takes
about 1.3 seconds to go from the Earth to the Moon. Therefore, we Earth
dwellers can only see the Moon as it was about 1.3 seconds ago.
Oh, and light has been seen on and around the Moon, not only by
robotic probes but, at the time of this writing, by 24 astronauts.
Question 110: How long does it take for light to go from the Sun to the Earth?

A.    Less than one second.
B.    Between one second and one minute.
C.    Between one minute and ten minutes.
D.    More than ten minutes.
The best answer is C: between one and ten minutes. More precisely,
light takes about eight minutes to go from the Sun to the Earth. Therefore,
were the Sun to disappear, we Earth dwellers would not know this until
about eight minutes later. Starting then, quite possibly, there might be
some concern.
Question 111: How long does it take for light to go from the Sun to the nearest
star, Proxima Centauri?
A.    Less than a month.
B.    Between a month and a year.
C.    Between 1 year and 10 years.
D.    More than 10 years.
E.    What we think of as stars are really artificial lights used by the government to
control us. I am endangering myself by telling you this, so it must be true.
The best answer is C: between 1 and 10 years. More precisely, it takes
about 4.24 years for light to reach Proxima Centauri from the Earth or
Sun. Since Proxima Centauri has planets, it would be possible to exchange
messages with inhabitant of these planets, were such inhabitants to exist,
and were they not too busy texting each other.
But isn’t Alpha Centauri the closest star, not Proxima Centauri? This
popular misconception occurs because Alpha Centauri is a system
containing three stars: Alpha Centauri A, B, and C. And another name for
the closest of these stars, Alpha Centauri C is . . . Proxima Centauri.
Question 112: How long does it take for light from the Andromeda galaxy, the
nearest major galaxy to our Milky Way galaxy, to reach Earth?
A.    Between 1 and 10 years.
B.    Between 1,000 and 10,000 years.

C.    Between 1 million and 10 million years.
D.    Why would light want to come to us from Andromeda? Is it not happy there?
The best answer is C: between 1 million and 10 million years. More
precisely, the distance to the Andromeda galaxy, also known as M31, is
about 2.5 million light years. This means that it takes 2.5 million years for
light to get here from there. Therefore, any inhabitants of M31 would be
seeing the Earth now as it existed before the dawn of humans.
Question 113: Is it physically possible for you to go the Andromeda galaxy in
your lifetime, given that it is over a million light-years away?
A.    Yes, if you go fast enough.
B.    No, since you will not live a million years.
C.    Look, it’s physically possible for you to take that lampshade off your head
and admit that your neighbor’s party has been over for two days now, but
that doesn’t make it easy.
The best answer is A: yes, in theory you can visit the Andromeda galaxy
in your lifetime. If you travel near enough to the speed of light relative to
the Earth and Andromeda, you will experience a length-contracted
distance between them. Length contraction, like time dilation, is a verified
special relativistic effect. The main problem is engineering: currently
humanity does not know how to accelerate you to high enough speeds.
This topic is pondered in great detail in the chapter How to Go Warp 2.
Question 114: How old are the oldest photons that reach Earth?

A.    Between 10 million and 100 million years.
B.    Between 10 billion and 100 billion years.
C.    Between 10 trillion and 100 trillion years.
D.    Photons don’t age.
E.    Recent carbon-12 dating has uncovered photons as old as 6.2 salsa-years.
The best answer is B: many billions of years as measured on Earth. The
oldest light we see comes from the cosmic microwave background (CMB)
radiation. These photons last bounced off an electron about 13.7 billion
years ago.
But wait. There is another answer: the age of the photon measured on
the photon itself! If we assume that photons travel at the full speed-of-light
limit, the universe appears length-contracted to, well, zero, as seen by the
photon. Therefore, crossing this zero length takes zero time. This is why it
is said that “time does not pass for a photon,” and why answer D can also
be considered correct.
About the last answer: E. There is no such thing as carbon-12 dating,
because carbon 12 does not decay over time like carbon 14. Also, photons
contain very little carbon. Oh, and salsa is a condiment.

CHAPTER 16
Superluminal Reflections in
Astrophysics
Suppose you see a flash of light. OK, but now suppose you see that flash of
light reflected from a giant space ring. You could see that single flash
reflect from different parts of that ring at different times. Moreover, you
could even see that one flash reflecting from several parts of the giant ring
at the same time. If you keep watching, the reflection of that single flash
could even appear to move around the ring in some very strange ways.
Exactly how strange will be explored in this chapter. All of these ways have
one thing in common though: you guessed it—they all move faster than
light.

Question 115: A star is in the very center of a circular ring of gas. The entire star
erupts, emitting a bright, spherical flash of light. Which part of the circular ring is
illuminated first?
A.    The part closest to the observer.
B.    The part closest to the star.
C.    The entire ring is illuminated at the same time.
D.    Is the star not feeling well? Should we stop for a minute and take its
temperature?
The best answer is C: the entire ring is illuminated at the same time.
Since every part of the ring is equidistant from the star, light takes the same
time to reach each part of the ring from the central flash, at which time the
entire ring lights up. There is no observer in this question, so the answer
can’t be A. This situation is therefore true in objective reality, meaning that
it is observer independent.
Question 116: Again, a star occupies the very center of a circular ring. Again, the
entire star erupts in a single bright flash of light. This time you watch from above

the ring and directly above the star. Which part of the circular ring do you see
illuminated first?
A.    The part closest to you.
B.    The part closest to the star.
C.    The entire ring appears to you to be illuminated at the same time.
D.    The answer you have requested is not in service. Please hang up and answer
again.
The best answer is C: the entire ring appears to you to be illuminated at
the same time. Every part of the ring is the same distance both from you
and the star, so light travels the same distance to every part of the ring, then
again the same distance from each part to you. So no part appears
illuminated first.
Question 117: The same star flashes again at the giant ring’s center. This time,
though, you watch from the side and far away. From this vantage point, the
semitransparent gas ring appears flat. Which part of the circular ring do you see
illuminated first?
A.    The part closest to you.
B.    The part closest to the star.
C.    The entire ring appears to you to be illuminated at the same time.

D.    My name is Pat, and it is my job to come up with D answers. I usually try to
come up with something silly or witty, but I am having trouble with this one. I
am worried, though, that if you don’t choose D more often, I will lose my job.
And I really need this job. I would be grateful if you would choose D here and
help me out. Thank you in advance.
The best answer is A: the part closest to you. Even though the ring is
illuminated all at the same time in objective reality, light from the near
side of the ring will reach you, the observer, before light from the far side of
the ring. This is because, to reach you from the far side, light must first
cross the entire ring. This is another case where there is a big difference
between subjective appearance—what you, the observer, see—and
objective reality.
Question 118: The entire star flashes again in the ring center, and again you
watch from the side. At the most, how many images of the flash do you see
reflected from the ring simultaneously?
A.    One: there is only one flash.
B.    Two: with each image positioned on opposite sides of the ring.
C.    Three: one in the center, two around the edges.
D.    Four: this is twice as good as two.

The best answer is B: you see at most two images of the central flash. It
may help to realize that you will eventually see the flash reflected once
from every point on the surrounding ring, just not all at the same time.
Therefore, after you see the central flash, you could make a video of the
reflection moving around the ring. In this video, the first part of the ring
you see illuminated is the point on the ring closest to you. After that, the
video will show the reflected image of the flash making its way from the
part of the ring closest to you to the part of the ring farthest from you.
Between these times, there will always be exactly two locations on the ring
that appear to be illuminated by the stellar flash at any one time: one on
each side of the flash.
Question 119: The same entire star flashes yet again in the ring center, and again
you watch from the side. How fast does each image of the flash move on the ring,
as seen by you, the observer?
A.    The images don’t move.
B.    Fast, but not faster than light.
C.    At the speed of light: c.
D.    Faster than light.

E.    If the star keeps flashing, then maybe it’s broken. These problems should all
go away after the star is fixed.
The best answer is D: faster than light. You may have guessed this
already from reading this chapter’s introduction and the book’s title. Think
of it this way: These flash images must appear to go from the front of the
ring to the back of the ring in the same time that it takes light to cross the
ring. Therefore, the image of the light on the ring must move a greater
distance—half the circumference—in the same time that light crosses the
ring. To cover this greater distance in the same time, the images must
appear to move, on the average, faster than light. In fact, a more detailed
calculation shows that this turns out to be always true—not only “on the
average.”
Question 120: The same scenario occurs again, but this time the star lies just a
bit off from the ring’s center, but still in the ring plane. The entire star flashes.
Which part of the ring is illuminated first?
A.    The part closest to the observer.
B.    The part closest to the star.
C.    The entire ring is illuminated simultaneously.
D.    The question states clearly that the star is lying. Therefore, you can’t believe
it. So there is no reliable answer this question.
Since there is no observer in this question, the answer cannot be A.
Light moves away from the star in a spherical bubble expanding at the
speed of light. This expanding bubble strikes first and hence illuminates
the ring at the closest point to the star. Therefore, the best answer is B.

Question 121: The same scenario occurs again, and again the star lies in the ring
plane but just off the ring center. Immediately after the closest part of the ring is
first illuminated by the flash, how many places on the ring are then
simultaneously illuminated by the flash?
A.    One, since there is only one flash.
B.    Two.
C.    More than two.
D.    You have reached your free-question limit. Oh, you bought the book? Sorry,
please then log in to continue.
After the initial illumination, the next closest parts of the ring to the
flash will become illuminated. But there are two of those: one on either
side of the closest location to the flash. Therefore, the best answer is B: two.
Question 122: Same scenario: A flashing star lies slightly to one side of the ring’s
center. How long after the first part of the ring becomes illuminated does the last
part of the ring become illuminated?
A.    Zero time: immediately.

B.    A very short time—much shorter than the time it takes for light to go from
one side of the ring to the other.
C.    The time it takes for light to go from one side of the ring to the other.
D.    Longer than the time it takes for light to go from one side of the ring to the
other.
E.    Let’s say the star is in a box. Then the ring never becomes illuminated. What’s
your fancy science say now?
The best answer is B: the last part of the ring becomes illuminated in a
very short time after the first part. Were the star exactly in the ring center,
this time difference would be zero because the flash would illuminate the
entire ring simultaneously: answer A. But when the flash occurs off the
ring center (slightly to one side), the time difference can be small but not
zero.
Question 123: Same scenario: Ring, star, off-center flash. Is there any place you
can go to see the entire ring light up at once?
A.    Yes, at the center of the ring.
B.    No, sorry.
C.    Yes, on the exact opposite side of the ring center from the flash.
D.    Yes, just outside the ring on the same side as the flash.
E.    In a way. Go to the Flashing Lounge on the starship’s Ring Deck and order
something called “The Entire Star.” Trust me. That will move you off center.
The best answer is B: no, there is no place in the universe where you
could see the entire ring light up simultaneously. Geometrically, there is
no position you can be where the light travel times—from star flash to ring
to you—are all equal.
Question 124: What is the highest number of images you could possibly see,
simultaneously, for a ring around an off-center flash?
A.    One.
B.    Two.
C.    Four.

D.    I can’t see anything through these dark sunglasses. So, zero.
The best answer is C: the highest number of images of the flash you
could possibly see on the ring simultaneously is four. Unfortunately, there
is no easy way to understand this. You can join generations of scientists
drawing oodles of figures on a white board and cursing more than a bit,
and this answer may become clear. (If you try, it might help to know that
four is the maximum number of intersection points possible between a
circle and an ellipse.) Or you can trust me. Fortunately, I am trustworthy
person.

CHAPTER 17
Superluminal Cosmology
To better understand how our universe can expand faster than light, it
helps to first better understand our universe. Towards that goal, let’s go
right at some of the coolest and strangest concepts that occur in the
modern study of our universe.
Question 125: Is there a “Big Bang National Park” where the universe started?
A.    Yes. It is (about) 13.7 billion light-years away and (nearly) toward the
constellation of Aries.
B.    No, that would be silly.

C.    We think so, but we don’t know what is really in there because we can’t
afford the admission fee.
The best answer is B: no, there is no Big Bang National Park. Einstein’s
general relativity accurately describes the universe as a whole, specifically
through solutions called Friedman-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker (FLRW)
cosmologies. These cosmologies predicted an expanding universe that was
first verified in the early 1900s. Now, in the early 2000s, it fits well with
measurements of distant galaxies all separating from each other at high
speeds. This grand separation is a phenomenon due to the big bang
“explosion” itself. General relativistic FLRW cosmologies describe how
this expansion progresses given the internal matter and energy.
In these cosmologies, the big bang happened everywhere in the
universe, not just in one place. Long ago, just after the big bang, every
place in the universe was, simultaneously, hot and dense. Then,
everywhere at once, matter and light cooled, eventually becoming what we
see as the present universe. Therefore, in modern cosmology, there is no
single place in the universe where the universe started, and so no central
park where you can go and buy a snow globe of our universe. An
alternative but equally correct view is to consider that the big bang
happened everywhere, no matter where you are. Therefore, you are already
in the Big Bang National Park, you always have been, and you can’t leave.
Question 126: Does the expansion of the universe cause this book to expand?
A.    Yes, but this expansion rate is so slow you don’t notice it.
B.    No. Only the minds of the people reading this book are expanding.
C.    Yes, but you can’t see this book expand because you are expanding at the
same rate.
D.    B was the funny answer this time. Please go back and read B again. It was
really funny. B.
The best answer is B: no, the expansion of the universe has no effect on
this book. That’s because this book, be it paper or electronic, is held
together by electromagnetic forces that remain constant as the universe

expands. You are held together by the same forces, so that you, too, are not
expanding with the universe. In this case, the funny answer, excuse me, the
really funny answer, B, was also the correct one.
Question 127: What is the difference between the observable universe and the
entire universe?
A.    There is no difference. All you can see is all that there is.
B.    The observable universe is the portion of the entire universe that can be
observed.
C.    Both universes are really only inside your mind, so any difference is just
semantic.
D.    There will be no silly answer to this question because the silly answer to the
last question was so silly that it used up all the silliness over a three-question
radius.
The best answer is B: everything you can observe is in the observable
universe. The entire universe is all that there is—something surely far more
vast.
For a single observer, the farther away something is, the longer it takes
light from it to reach you, and the younger it appears to you when you
finally see it. The edge of the observable universe is defined by how far you
can see since the universe began. You can’t see back further in time than
the big bang because light from that far away has not yet had time to reach
you.
Additionally, the very distant universe that you can see is so old that it
appears nothing like the nearby universe. The most distant part of the
universe that you can see—after putting on your microwave glasses—is
light from the cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation, which
appears the same in all directions. Light from the CMB was reflected by
smoothly distributed matter in the early universe, matter that did not yet
form into stars or galaxies. When this matter cooled, protons acquired
electrons, which made the universe quickly go from opaque to transparent.
The photons that had been bouncing around then flew free across the
universe, and are seen today as the CMB.

In contrast, let’s now consider the entire universe at a single moment in
time. The entire universe exists in objective reality, regardless of how it
may subjectively appear to any observer. Therefore, when considering the
entire universe, how long it takes for light to reach you or any observer
from anywhere is just not important.
At the present time, every place in the entire universe is considered to
be similar, at least in the simplest and most common solutions of modern
cosmology. Galaxies similar to our Milky Way are everywhere. Where does
the entire universe end? No one knows. Since it is larger than we can
measure, we consider it effectively infinite.
Question 128: What is the entire universe expanding into?
A.    A larger space that is currently empty.
B.    The question is meaningless since the entire universe is uniform and infinite.
C.    A fourth spatial dimension that becomes increasingly discernible on larger
scales.
D.    Pudding. Blue pudding.
The best answer is B: the question is meaningless since the best current
model of the entire universe has its contents being spread evenly and its
size being infinite. The picture many people have of a 3D universe
expanding into empty 3D space is not the model that is current accepted
and has not made modern verified predictions. Rather, the model that fits
better and has made verified predictions is mathematically simpler. It has
the entire universe filled with stars and galaxies to infinity. And even so, it
is still expanding.
A common but slightly flawed analogy is an expanding balloon. From
the perspective of a two-dimensional (2D) creature confined to the surface,
the balloon expands, but there is no direction on the balloon’s surface that
the 2D creature can go to get off. Since most humans are 3D creatures, we
know there really is a third spatial dimension into which the balloon
expands. The slight flaw is that there is no similar fourth spatial dimension
into which our real 3D universe is expanding. In standard modern
cosmology, these three dimensions of space—plus time—are all there is.

Question 129: What is “concordance cosmology?”
A.    It is the cosmology originally deduced from observations taken from
Concorde jets when they were flying high up in the atmosphere in the 1990s.
B.    It is the currently most popular cosmology.
C.    It is the cosmology defined by the subtle flavonoids of the Concord grape.
Cosmology is the science of our universe as a whole, and throughout
history there have been many concepts of the universe. However, in the
past few years, data from modern telescopes favor a description of the
universe well described by a small set of parameters now collectively
known as “concordance cosmology.” So the best answer is B.
Concordance cosmology infers, from statistical fits to data, that our
universe is composed of (about) 70% dark energy, 25% dark matter, and 5%
regular matter. Dark energy is an unknown form of energy—really strange
stuff—that neither emits light nor dilutes as the universe expands. It also
gravitationally repels matter! Dark matter gravitates like normal matter and
dilutes as the universe expands, but it does not emit light so far as we can
tell. Examples of regular matter include stars, galaxies, you, and me.
Regular matter is made of mostly protons, neutrons, and electrons. Only a
small fraction of the present energy in the universe, less than 0.1%, is
photons.
Since dark matter dilutes as the universe expands, it must have been
more concentrated in the past. Therefore, we can extrapolate back and find
a time in the history of the universe when dark matter was gravitationally
dominant over everything else, including dark energy and radiation. And
even 
before 
that, 
radiation—mostly 
gamma-ray 
photons—were
gravitationally dominant over everything else, including dark matter.
Concordance cosmology accepts a statistical fit of the current local
expansion rate of the universe, called the Hubble constant or Ho, to be
about 70 kilometers per second per megaparsec. Here, “megaparsec” is a
unit of distance approximately equal to the distance light could travel in
3.6 million years. Therefore, for every 3.6 million light-years of separation

between two galaxies, the universe’s expansion adds to the speed of
separation another 70 kilometers every second.
Concordance cosmology is based on careful measurements of distant
galaxies, supernovas, and the cosmic microwave background over the past
30 years. Although other cosmologies are possible, in this book, in general,
concordance cosmology will be the assumed best descriptor of our
universe.
Question 130: Is there a special speed that is at rest relative to the observable
universe?
A.    Yes. This is a special inertial reference frame.
B.    No, all speeds are relative.
C.    No, but there is a speed at rest relative to the entire universe.
D.    There are two “no” answers but only one “yes.” Therefore, the democratically
elected answer is “no.”
The best answer is A: yes, there is a special speed that is at rest relative
to the observable universe. All around us, we detect light coming from
every direction. Quite prominent is microwave light, called the cosmic
microwave background (CMB) radiation. This radiation is known to have
originated in the early universe long ago and far away. Surprisingly,
perhaps, sensitive observations have found that the CMB is very slightly
stronger toward one direction on the sky. This asymmetry is interpreted as
being caused, in part, by our motion toward that direction. Neglecting
gravitational infall, were we at rest with respect to the CMB, it would
appear to us the same in every direction. This defines a special inertial
frame—a rest frame—relative to our observable universe.
Strangely, though, every place in the universe has its own rest frame
relative to the CMB. And stranger still, all of them are moving with respect
to each other. In general, the farther some location is from you, the greater
the speed difference between its cosmological standard of rest and yours.
Moreover, all nearby rest frames are simply related by Hubble’s Law. An
early calibration of this law was completed last century by once-college

basketball star Edwin Hubble. His name may sound familiar because there
is now a space telescope named after him.
Let’s look at the silly answer D. I was once on a bus where the driver
missed a stop. Relax, it happens. The passengers voted by majority not to go
back, even though it would have taken only a few extra minutes. I am not
making this up. Taken to an extreme, the passengers could have elected to
make no stops at all. I am a strong believer in democracy, but this and silly
answer D show that not everything should always be determined by a
majority vote.
Question 131: Are you, personally, right now, at rest relative to the observable
universe?
A.    Yes, by definition of the observable universe.
B.    No, because, for example, the Earth orbits the Sun, which creates relative
motion.
C.    I don’t think it is appropriate to answer personal questions in a public book
like this.
The best answer is B: no, you are not at rest with respect to the
surrounding observable universe. Sorry. Not only does the Earth circle the
Sun, but the Sun orbits the center of the Milky Way galaxy, the Milky Way
moves relative to the Andromeda galaxy and the Local Group of galaxies,
the Local Group of galaxies falls toward the Virgo Cluster of galaxies, and a
large nearby volume containing relatively few galaxies repels us away from
it. Additionally, measurements show that even considering all of that
motion, we still move in an unexpected direction. What else is out there?
We don’t know!
Question 132: Did the universe ever expand faster than light in the past?
A.    Yes, in an epoch known as “inflation.”
B.    No, that would be silly.
C.    Yes, because distant parts of the universe are always expanding away faster
than light.

D.    Will this be on the test? I have to know because I got the last question wrong,
and I really need to pass this book.
The best answer is “yes,” our universe has expanded faster than light in
the past. Of the two “yes” answers, C is better than A. Why? First of all,
most modern cosmologies incorporate an ancient epoch of rapid expansion
now referred to as inflation. Soon after the big bang, but before the CMB
radiation was liberated, the expanding universe became dominated by an
unusual and gravitationally repulsive dark energy that moved parts of the
universe away from each other at speeds that increased exponentially fast.
Even once-neighboring objects quickly became so far apart that they could
no longer see each other or communicate. After this rapid-expansion
inflation period ended, nearby parts of the universe started to become
reconnected again.
However, the most distant parts of our universe always move away from
each other faster than light. They always have, and they always will.
Cosmology doesn’t need inflation to create superluminal speeds.
Moreover, these superluminal speeds don’t violate special relativity
because, in general, relativity, which incorporates special relativity, the
speed of light limits only the local relative speeds of objects.
Question 133: Currently, are parts of our observable universe expanding away
faster than light?
A.    Yes, the most distant parts.
B.    No, because if we can observe it, it must be expanding away slower than
light.
C.    Yes, because we offended them long ago and now they want nothing more to
do with us.
The best answer is again A: yes, even today, distant parts of our
observable universe are expanding away faster than light. As time goes on,
more and more of our observable universe expands away faster and faster,
even passing the speed of light. More about this is given in the next chapter
Superluminal Galaxies.

It may be helpful to visualize this in two ways: one from what we see
happen as subjective observers, and the other as what really happens in
objective reality. As subjective observers, the galaxies we see in the distant
universe were not expanding away faster than light when they emitted the
light we now see, or we would not see them. However, we do not see them
as they are today. We only see them as they were in the distant past because
it takes light a long time to reach us. Today, these objects are both farther
away and moving away faster—the farthest even receding away
superluminally.

CHAPTER 18
Superluminal Galaxies
In the last chapter it was revealed that the distant universe is moving away
from us faster than light. But that was theoretical, abstract, and tied to the
presently popular concordance model of the continually expanding
universe. But what about things with mass that emit light in that universe—
things like galaxies. Galaxies are not abstract. They are real and massive
and . . . gone from our view? Can distant galaxies, even though they have
mass, also move away faster than light? And if so, do they disappear from
view? That’s what this chapter is about.

Question 134: Why do distant galaxies move away from us faster than light?
A.    Because the entire distant universe is expanding away faster than light, and
galaxies are caught up in this expansion.
B.    Because the universe had an inflationary epoch early on that caused
superluminal expansion, which is still going on.
C.    Because dark energy is causing the distant universe to accelerate in its
expansion.
D.    Perhaps if you were nicer to these distant galaxies, we wouldn’t have this
problem.
The best answer is A: the entire distant universe is expanding, and
distant galaxies are caught up in this expansion. This would be true even if
the universe did not have a previous inflationary epoch of exponential
expansion. This would also be true even if the universe did not have dark
energy, an energy that is creating a present-day accelerated expansion. This
is why C is not the best answer. So long as the expansion speed of distant
galaxies increases with distance in an infinite Friedman-Lemaître-

Robertson-Walker cosmology, as it does for concordance cosmology, then
there is no limit on the speed of distant galaxies.
But how can these galaxies recede away faster than light? Because the
speed of light is a local speed limit only. It does not apply to distant objects.
Therefore, although the fastest that a galaxy could pass you by is c, the
fastest a distant galaxy can move away from you is without limit.
Question 135: OK, so distant galaxies are expanding away faster than light. But
what about galaxies nearby in the observable universe? Are any of these galaxies
currently moving away faster than light?
A.    Yes, lots of them.
B.    No, or by definition they would not be in the observable universe.
C.    Yes, but none that I can point to, because light from them hasn’t reached us
yet.
For concordance cosmology, the best answer is A: yes, there are galaxies
in the observable universe—galaxies that you can see and even point to—
that have superluminal recession velocities. This question is tricky because
the word currently refers to right now, everywhere in the universe—not just
here on Earth.
As subjective observers, we see increasingly distant galaxies only as they
were increasingly far in the past. Outside of any observers, in objective
reality, where it is the same present time everywhere in the universe, these
galaxies are really much farther away. Therefore, distant galaxies that used
to be in the observable universe and were expanding away slower than light
have now accelerated to be moving away faster than light. Please see the
chapter Superluminal Cosmology to ponder questions about the difference
between the entire universe and the observable universe.
Question 136: You see a galaxy. You shine your laser pointer toward this galaxy.
Will your laser light ever reach that galaxy?
A.    Yes, if you can see the galaxy, then you know that there is a light path to it.
B.    No, the expansion of the universe is just too great.
C.    It depends on the distance to the galaxy.

D.    Did you ever think that your laser might blind someone in that galaxy?
Please, put that dangerous thing away before innocent aliens go blind.
The best answer is C: whether your laser light ever reaches that galaxy
depends on that galaxy’s distance. The expansion of the universe puts very
distant galaxies out of reach. Life on these galaxies will never know that we
earthlings exist, even if we try to signal them with high-powered lasers. For
concordance cosmology, galaxies that we see having a cosmological
redshift greater than about three (3) are too far out for the light we emit
today to catch up to. In the future, even closer galaxies will stop being able
to receive our signals. Even worse, because sideways motions of galaxies are
generally unknown, distant galaxies could be moving to one side fast
enough so that any light we send would go right past them and miss.
Aside 12: Cosmological Redshift versus Doppler Redshift
Let’s start with just plain redshift. In general, a redshift is an energy shift in
observed light towards the red end of the spectrum—the lower energy end.
The term “red” in redshift comes from red being the light with the least energy
among colors visible to humans. A redshifted photon is less energetic than a
non-redshifted photon. It is also possible for photons to appear with a
blueshift, meaning a shift in wavelength toward blue that makes the photon
appear more energetic.
A common misconception is that a redshift makes an object appear more
red. That is possible, but it is also possible that a redshift could make an
object appear more blue. An example is an object that emits a lot of light just
a bit too blue for you to see: a blue bump. Then, when redshifted, this blue
bump may become visible as a lot of blue light that wasn’t visible before. So
here, a redshift made the object appear more blue.
There are two known ways for a photon to appear redshifted: relative
motion and gravity. Let’s start with relative motion. When an object moves
away from you, for example, the photons you see from it still have speed c
when you see them, but lower energy. This drop in energy is a redshift.
Spectral redshifts caused solely by relative motion are called Doppler shifts,
as they were first hypothesized by Christian Doppler in 1842. Doppler shifts
are an observer-dependent phenomenon.
The second way that a photon can appear redshifted is caused by gravity.
When you see a photon emitted from a region that has stronger gravity than
you, it arrives having the usual speed c, but lower energy than if there were no

difference in gravity. Spectral redshifts caused solely by relative gravity are
called gravitational redshifts. Gravitation redshifts are also observer
dependent.
When we measure a cosmological redshift, we don’t know how much of
this redshift is due to relative motion and how much is due to relative gravity.
The best we can do is attribute it to a combination of the two.
The redshift due to relative motion can itself be broken into two
components: the expansion of space and motion relative to the expansion of
space. Special relativity limits only the second term: motion relative to space
itself, or more concretely, an object in that space. The first term—the relative
expansion of space—is inherently a general relativistic phenomenon, which is
why distant objects can have superluminal speeds.
Question 137: If you see a galaxy now, will the expansion of the universe ever
make this galaxy disappear from your view?
A.    Yes, as the universe expands this galaxy will eventually accelerate to move
away faster than light and will then disappear from view.
B.    No, if you see a galaxy once, you can always see it.
C.    It depends on both the distance and the redshift of this galaxy.
D.    Error 5x6e7: Galaxy out of range. Please restart universe.
The best answer is B: if you see a galaxy now, you will always be able to
see it. In theory, the galaxy will never disappear from your perspective. This

question is so hard that there are popular accounts of cosmology that
actually get this wrong. So please, as before, put your helmet on before
proceeding.
For concordance cosmology, the most distant photons you can see will
be from the cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation. There will
never be a time when the CMB radiation completely drops out of sight.
Never. This CMB radiation may dim and redden considerably as the
universe expands, but it will always be visible. The same logic applies to all
galaxies between you and the CMB.
This does not mean, though, that you will get to see this galaxy grow
old and die, even if you could live forever. Rather, you would see this
galaxy age at an increasingly slow rate. The situation is conceptually similar
to what you see when an object falls into a black hole. As will be described
in the chapter Superluminal Black Holes, this falling object will never
completely disappear from your view. Rather, it will appear to slowly freeze
in a position near the event horizon, even though it may have fallen
through the event horizon long ago. In practice, though, after a long time
the image of the galaxy will become so dim that it will be unobservable.

CHAPTER 19
How to Go Warp 2
Is warp speed possible? In Star Trek (tm), starships zip about at warp
speeds, with the implication that these speeds are faster than light. But is
this really possible? Given that starships have mass, the obvious answer is
no, but a more complicated answer is sort of. What does that mean? That’s
what this chapter is about.
Question 138: Is it possible for you to visit a star that is 250 light-years away in
your lifetime?
A.    Yes, just go really fast.
B.    No, it takes at least 250 years, which is too long to survive.
C.    It depends. Do you have relatives there?
The best answer is A: it really is possible, at least in theory, to visit a star
even 250 light-years away in your lifetime. First, to be clear, a light-year is a
unit of length. It is the distance that light travels in a year. Next, there is a
common misconception that if you travel at (near) light speed, you will
arrive 250 light-years away in 250 years of your own travel time. This is not
correct because it does not take into account length contraction in
Einstein’s special relativity. What is true is that if you travel near the speed
of light relative to Earth, you will arrive 250 light-years away from the Earth
in just over 250 years in time as measured on Earth. For you and your loyal
crew on this fast interstellar starship, however, it can take much less time.
This concept of special relativistic length contraction can be used to
make sense of the concept of warp drive in the Star Trek (tm) fictional

universe. You just have to define warp right. In Star Trek, warp 1 is
described as referring to the speed of light, while higher warps refer to
speeds faster than light, but exactly how depends on the specific Star Trek
series, episode, or even scene. Sub-warp refers to speeds slower than light.
Going near the speed of light can, however, create travel similar to
warp. Specifically, 250 light-years can become, after special relativistic
length contraction, much shorter, allowing your ship to traverse the
distance even within your lifetime. More generally, if the technology to
build a near–light speed starship existed, you could use it to visit not only a
star 250 light-years away, but even stars far across the Milky Way galaxy.
Aside 13: Are Time Dilation and Length Contraction Related?
Yes. They are conceptual siblings. Let’s say that during a shopping spree you
barely remember, you bought a bunch of identical clocks. Rather than return
them, you put them all in a long row with an equal spacing between them.
Next, you contact your pilot friend from the Supersonic Booms chapter and,
together, you go soaring over the line of clocks. Looking down, you see that
because of length contraction, the clocks are spaced closer together than you
set them, whereas because of time dilation, each clock you pass runs
relatively slow.
These two effects are related because they both involve the same speed-
dependent factor. One way they differ, though, is that time dilation always
occurs, but length only contracts along your direction of motion.
Are time dilation and length contraction real? Yes, in some ways. For
example, muons created by cosmic rays at the top of Earth’s atmosphere
would almost always decay into other particles before reaching the Earth’s
surface if time dilation were just a bookkeeping device.
Is there any way that time dilation and length contraction are not real? Yes,
in some ways. For example, if you move quickly along a very brittle stick, the
stick will length-contract but not break.
More on time dilation and length contraction can be found not only later in
this chapter but in the section Relativity & Communication, in particular the
chapter Superluminal Simultaneity.
Question 139: It is said that time does not pass for a photon. What does this
mean?
A.    Photons have no internal structure, so nothing can act as an internal clock.

B.    Due to special relativistic time dilation, compared to time on Earth, time in
the photon’s own frame does not pass.
C.    That photons cannot travel past clocks without checking the time.
The best answer is B: in the inertial frame of photons themselves, time
does not pass.
In terms of length contraction, this is because, to a photon moving at c,
the entire universe length-contracts to zero length. So, if the photon had its
own clock, zero time would pass as it crossed the universe.
OK, but do photons have clocks? No. Internal structure has never been
measured for photons. True, photons have a wavelength and a
corresponding frequency, but these are measured in our frame, not the
photon’s frame. To the best we can tell, relative to our frame, time dilation
for photons is infinite, which of course might just mean that it is too large
to measure.
Aside 14: The Three Strata of Subjective Appearance
As an alert reader of this book, you may already know that objective reality is
an abstract concept estimated only by combining measures of subjective
appearance. But did you know that there are different strata of subjective
appearance? This will be very important in the later section titled Relativity &
Communication, but it’s already useful here.
The most basic stratum of subjective appearance involves only one single
observer. This observer—perhaps you—holds a single position. Position-
dependent measurements include the distance and apparent brightness of
another single object relative to you. When relative speed is included, the
Doppler shift is also something measured by a single observer, and will change
dramatically when the object passes your position, for example.
The second stratum of subjective appearance encompasses a group of
observers all sharing the same velocity. These observers are in the same
inertial reference frame. Frame-dependent measurements include time
dilation and length contraction of another inertial frame moving relative to
your inertial frame. The position within a frame is not important.
The third stratum of subjective appearance encompasses a group of
observers all sharing the same gravity. A gravity-dependant measurement is
gravitational redshift.

[Caveat paragraph—please ignore unless you like gory details: Why is the
third stratum gravity and not acceleration? Aren’t they the same? No. If you
look at a star from the surface of the Earth, that star’s light becomes
gravitationally redshifted as it falls toward you in Earth’s gravity. If you were
accelerating instead—even matching Earth’s gravity at one-gee away from
the star—the star’s light would only be Doppler redshifted by your relative
velocity at the time of measurement. The redshift would not depend on your
acceleration. Back in 1905, Einstein knew about this possibility, called the
clock hypothesis, when formulating special relativity. It has been confirmed to
high accuracy today. More about this can be found in the chapter
Superluminal Simultaneity.]
Are there more strata? For example, the next higher type of motion past
acceleration is called “jerk.” Does a set of observers having the same jerk—or
who are in some sort of jerk-equivalent field—have some special importance?
The answer is . . . I don’t think so. Currently I am unaware of any examples in
this category.
Last, let’s look again at objective reality. We may now better understand
that we have to peel back many observational strata to get to it. You have to
reverse engineer the perspective of individual observers, taking out the
Doppler shift they measured, for example. You have to reverse engineer the
perspective of the inertial frame, taking out relative time dilation and length
contraction, for example. Last, you have to reverse engineer the perspective
of relative gravity, backing out a measured gravitational redshift, for example.
All of this has to be done relative to some object that has a different
position, velocity, and gravity than you. In relativity, objective reality typically
refers to characteristics such as durations and lengths that are measured by
the object itself, of itself. This “self-perspective” of an object is called
“proper.”
Question 140: What is the correct destination star for a demonstration of special
relativistic length contraction?
A.    Polaris.
B.    Spica.
C.    Betelgeuse.
D.    How could there possibly be a correct answer to this question? The
destination star cannot matter.

The correct answer is D: there is no correct answer to this question.
The destination star for a demonstration of special relativistic length
contraction really doesn’t matter. Therefore, let’s use Spica. You might
already know that Polaris is the north star, and that Betelgeuse is a big red
star toward the constellation of Orion, but what do you know of Spica?
Spica is a blue giant that is the brightest star toward the constellation of
Virgo. Also, Spica may turn out to be a nice place!
Aside 15: Speeding Toward Spica
Let’s say that you find the star Spica so intriguing that you decide to visit. You
look Spica up on Wikipedia and find that it is (about) 250 light-years away.
Suppose this distance is constant and exact. Then, according to you and your
Earth friends, light takes 250 years to get to Spica. If you go at a speed close
enough to c, length contraction causes this distance to shrink considerably, so
much so that you can get there within a normal human life span.
To help fill in details, this aside is followed by a table of numbers titled
Travel Time to Spica. The first column of this table lists a speed that you might
use to travel from Earth to Spica. A number like 0.1 c means 0.1 times the
speed of light, which is 10% of the speed of light. The second column lists
something called gamma (γ) that will be explained in a math aside after the
table. The third column lists the distance to Spica in light-years that you
would experience in your speedy starship if you went at the constant speed
listed in column 1. Last, the fourth column lists the time in years it would take
you to go from Earth to Spica, as measured on your starship.
The table numbers show, effectively, that you cannot drive to Spica in your
lifetime going at a speed normal for a car. Even if you could find a road, even if
you could generate gravity to drive on this road, even if you could speed along
at a constant 100 kilometers per hour, it would take you over a billion years to

get there. This is not only the time it would take as measured by you in the
car. It is also very nearly the time it would take you as seen from someone
watching on Earth, as well as someone on Spica.
Since reality isn’t much fun here, let’s suppose that you could somehow
instantly jump up to a really fast speed relative to Earth, unrealistic as this
may be. You then coast out to Spica at that speed. Let’s go much faster than
100 kilometers per hour. Let’s go 10% of the speed of light (v = 0.1 c). At this
speed, you will reach Spica in about 2,487 years, as measured on your
starship.
A person watching from a spaceport platform on Earth would time your
trip at about 2,500 years, just a few years longer than you timed yourself. This
time would also be measured by any platform moving with the Earth—in
Earth’s inertial frame—which includes Spica. So far, no problem. But strap
yourself down because in this fictional adventure, you’ve got higher gears.
You use the next gear to go at 0.707 c, which, for math enthusiasts, is
really meant to be c/2. At that speed, the time it takes you to reach Spica, as
measured by you in your starship, is only 250 years. You might need to be
cryogenically frozen to make it alive, if that is even possible. But now there is
an interesting coincidence: the time it takes you to get from Earth to Spica, as
measured by you in your starship, is very nearly the time it takes light to get
from Earth to Spica, as measured on Earth. They are both 250 years. This can
be called warp 1. Unfortunately, the time it took for you in your starship to go
from Earth to Spica, as measured on Earth, is 
 years, or about 354
years.
To review, at warp 1, it takes you the same time to reach Spica, as
measured on your starship, as it takes light to reach Spica, as measured on
Earth. In other words, Spica is 250 light-years away, as measured on Earth,
and it takes you 250 years to get there, as measured by you in your starship.

Aside 16: What Is γ?
The Distant & Travel Time to Spica Table shows how long it would take you to
get to Spica, given different constant speeds relative to Earth. The first
column in this table lists your speed. The second column is something called γ
(spoken “gamma”), a Greek letter commonly used by physicists and
astronomers to describe how close to c something is traveling. The
mathematical definition of γ is 
 but you don’t really need to know
this equation to understand many of the attributes of γ. A key trait is that the
larger γ is, the closer to the speed of light you are traveling. Only if γ could
reach infinity (∞), would something be moving at the speed of light. The
variable γ is used because it is cumbersome to count 9s when saying that
something is traveling very close to the speed of light. For example, when v =
0.99995 c, (meaning 99.995% the speed of light) it is simpler to just say that γ
≈ 100 rather than have people try to count the number of 9s. (Note that ≈ is a
mathematical symbol that means “approximately”.)
Question 141: Given how warp 1 has just been defined, is warp 2 possible?
A.    Yes, just go twice as fast as warp 1.

B.    No, that would require going faster than light, which material things cannot
do.
C.    Yes, just go at (about) 0.8944 c.
D.    I don’t know how 0.8944 c was computed in the last answer, but it is so
specific that it must be right. So I choose answer C.
The best answer is C: it is possible to define warp 2 in the same way as
warp 1, which in this case corresponds to a speed toward Spica of (about)
0.8944 c. Why? At that speed, you will get there in 125 years, as measured
by you in your starship. This is half of 250 years, the starship travel time for
warp 1. Although deviating from most Star Trek definitions of warp 2, this
definition of warp makes sense using real physics.
Now let’s spook out some Romulans and go even faster. According to
the table named Distance & Travel Time to Spica, if you travel at (about) v
= 99.504% c, you will get to Spica in 25 years. We can call this warp 10,
because it is 1/10th of 250 years. At v = 99.995% c, you will get there in 2.5
years, which we will call warp 100. The higher your warp, the sooner you
arrive in your inertial reference frame on the starship. In the frame of Earth
and Spica, though, earthlings and Spicans (pronounced “Speeshens”—
don’t ask how I know) will measure you taking just over 250 years to get
there—a little more than light itself. Therefore, when you finally get to
Spica, things might be very different. For example, your favorite podcasts
broadcast from Earth might be in their 253rd (yearly) season.
By now it is clear that traveling near to light’s speed will allow you to go
to any star in our Milky Way galaxy in your own lifetime. The real problem
in doing this is engineering. It is not currently possible to engineer a
starship to go that fast. Alternatively, although not discussed here, you can
also see all of the sights of our Milky Way galaxy in the relative comfort of a
constant “one-gee” acceleration—the same amount you feel on Earth’s
surface.
Question 142: In the Superluminal Galaxies chapter, we puzzled over the idea
that there are galaxies so distant that light from your laser pointer will never
reach them. Can you reach them yourself, though? In other words, if you go fast
enough, can you go anywhere in the entire universe?

A.    Yes, at high enough relative speed, any cross-universe distance will contract
so much that you can cross it.
B.    No, if photons themselves cannot ever reach that far, then neither can you.
C.    It depends on the inertial frame: in the frame of Earth, you will never reach
the distant universe, but in the frame of your spaceship, you will.
D.    It depends on the observer: an observer on Earth will never see you reach the
distant universe, but you on your starship will.
E.    It depends. Did you remember to charge the TARDIS? You forgot again, didn’t
you? OK then, you aren’t going anywhere.
The best answer is B: there are places in the distant universe that you
can never reach, no matter how fast you go. This is because whether an
event happens or not does not depend on the moving frame. If you eat a
pizza in your frame, for example, there is no frame where you do not
eventually eat this same pizza. That you can never visit the distant universe
in any frame assumes, though, that the universe will continue to expand
forever, in particular as currently predicted by concordance cosmology.

CHAPTER 20
Superluminal Gravity
Light is electromagnetic radiation, so it is tied to electric and magnetic
fields. But gravitational radiation is not. So, how fast does gravitational
radiation go? Does gravity itself have a speed? That is what we will ponder
in this chapter.
Question 143: Which of these is the fastest?
A.    The speed of light.
B.    The speed of gravitational radiation.
C.    The maximum speed of information transfer.
D.    The speed of the Flash (tm) after a second cup of coffee.

The best answer is all of the above, which wasn’t listed (sorry). The
speed of light, humanity is finding, is not limited to light. It is also the
speed at which gravitational waves—also called gravitational radiation—
moves, neutrinos move (nearly), and locally created information moves. It
also provides a practical limit on the speed of the Flash (tm) even after a
third cup of coffee. It is the fastest speed that any nearby thing containing
mass has ever been confirmed to go. In sum, the speed of light is really not
a property of light. It is a general theoretical limit on speed.
Question 144: Can the value of c be derived?
A.    Yes, from the value of the zero-point energy in quantum vacuum.
B.    No, the speed of light is fundamental.
C.    Yes, from the strengths of the electric and magnetic fields.
D.    I have a friend who can derive it, even from nothing. She can derive anything
from anything: c, math, Bitcoins—anything. Even while doing her taxes.
She’s that smart. And she’s going to get a big refund, too. You’ll see.
The best answer is B: no, the speed of light cannot be derived. It is true,
though, as answer C alludes, that there is a mathematical relation between
the speed of light and the strengths of the electric and magnetic fields. But
to say that speed of light can be derived from them indicates that they are
more fundamental than c, and that is not clear.
Question 145: Can G, the constant used to quantify the magnitude of a
gravitational force, be used to quantify the speed of light?
A.    Yes, because the speed of light also limits gravitational phenomena.
B.    No, the constant G has nothing to do with the speed of light.
C.    D.
D.    C.
E.    Either C or D, but not both.
First, let’s clarify what G is: G is best known for its appearance in both
Newton’s law of gravitation and Einstein’s theory of gravity in general
relativity. It basically tells how strong gravity is. And compared to electric

attraction and repulsion, per particle—such as an electron or proton—
gravity is very weak. The reason we are held down to the Earth, and the
reason the Earth goes around the Sun, is because weak gravity always adds
up, whereas powerful electric forces, with positive and negative charges,
tend to cancel out.
Are these two fundamental constants, c and G, related? No, G has no
place in any fundamental description of the speed of light, so far as
modern physics can tell. Therefore, the best answer is B: no. However,
Einstein’s theory of gravity in general relativity, postulates that the speed of
gravitational waves is the same as the speed of light.
Question 146: Does gravity travel at the speed of light?
A.    Yes, gravity is carried by gravitons, which move at speed c.
B.    No, gravity is geometry and does not travel at all.
C.    Yes, since changes in gravity move at the speed of light.
D.    No, since gravitons can move faster than light.
E.    My lawyer advises me against making any definitive statements on this topic
at this time.
In general relativity and similar gravitational theories, space-time is
considered geometric, and geometry just is. It doesn’t have a speed. In this
view, the best answer is B: gravity has no speed. However, even in general
relativity, changes in gravity do move. Such changes may create
gravitational waves, a type of radiation similar to light that was directly
detected for the first time only in this century. In one historic case, both
gamma rays and gravitational waves arrived within two seconds of the same
distant explosion that was many millions of light-years away, giving
observational 
evidence 
that 
gravitational 
waves 
move, 
at 
least
approximately, at the same speed as light.
Many gravity experts think that general relativity is only an
approximation 
to 
a 
quantum 
theory 
of 
gravity, 
like 
classical
electromagnetism is only an approximation of a quantum theory of light
(quantum electrodynamics, or QED). If so, then gravity should have a
graviton to match QED’s photon. Groups of gravitons would then act as

gravitational waves, like those recently detected, and which seem to travel,
at least approximately, at the same speed of photons: c.
However, forces in QED and quantum gravity can be described
mathematically as being carried by virtual particles. These mathematical
entities may even be considered to move, at times, faster than light. Since
virtual particles can be considered completely theoretical constructs,
meaning they are incapable of being detected individually, the best answer,
in my opinion, remains answer B.
Question 147: It takes light about eight minutes to go from the Sun to the Earth.
Given this, toward which direction is the Earth gravitationally attracted?
A.    Toward where the Sun is right now.
B.    Toward where the Sun was eight minutes ago.
C.    Toward where the Sun will be eight minutes from now.
D.    Please don’t gossip about who the Earth is attracted to; for one reason,
because we all know that the Sun is more attracted to Jupiter.
This simple question is one of the most fundamental in physics, and
there have been hot debates with different answers over the hundreds of
years that it has been contemplated. Even today, there are people who
think the most accepted answer is wrong. In short, though, the best
modern answer is B: the Earth is attracted to where the Sun was eight
minutes ago. However, because of a perhaps surprising complication, the
Earth acts in many ways like it is attracted to where the Sun is right now.
Put on your hyperdrive jumpsuits because some of the arguments involve
speeds that are—you guessed it, everyone together now—faster than light.
One reason that this question is so fundamental is because, from a
single observer’s perspective, an unusual effect called “aberration” is
important. Astronomical aberration, as it is more formally called in this
context, makes your sky bunch up in your direction of motion. The effect
of aberration on the Earth is not something that needs to be teased out
using delicate laboratory experiments under pristine conditions. Here, the
laboratory is our solar system, and the result is observationally indisputable:

the Earth remains in a stable orbit around the Sun. We are just trying to
understand why.
Let’s move toward understanding aberration with an extreme analogy.
Let’s say that during the coming apocalypse, you begin to be chased by a
zombie. Even worse, it starts to rain. To stay as dry as possible, should you
run faster or slower? When you stand still, the rain comes directly down on
you. When you run, you get hit in the face by the rain. The faster you run,
the more the rain drops appear to come from in front of you, and the more
rain drops hit you in the face. The slantedness of the rain that you perceive
is a type of aberration. If you could run at infinite speed, no rain would hit
you from above. All rain would hit you head on.
Aberration is not confined to raindrops. It also occurs with light. If you
stand still with the Sun directly overhead, sunlight acts like rain and
illuminates only the top of your head. If you run, though, sunlight will also
hit you from the direction that you move. Since light moves so fast, you
have to run really fast to notice this effect. Near the speed of light, sunlight
hits you from the front, and it even looks to you like you are running
toward the Sun.
Now let’s go back to the Earth orbiting the Sun. Does aberration affect
gravity? From the perspective of the Earth, the aberration from Earth’s
orbital motion will cause the Sun to appear not purely to the side, but
slightly ahead. But this means that the Sun’s gravity pulls the Earth slightly
forward, not only sideways. This should cause the Earth to speed up. If the
speed of gravity is the same as light, this forward attraction, over billions of

years, would cause the Earth to spiral out away from the Sun. This is not a
good way to end a zombie apocalypse.
But there is an easy way out: just speed up gravity. The faster gravity
goes, the lesser the aberration, the longer it takes for the Earth to spiral out
of the solar system. At infinite speed, aberration goes away, and the Earth
responds to where the Sun is right now: answer A. A modern analysis shows
that the speed of gravity only billions of times faster than light will keep
Earth life friendly. Problem solved? Not so fast.
There is also a hard way out. Keep the speed of gravity equal to the
speed of light, but put in another effect to stabilize the Earth’s orbit. With
this effect counteracting aberration, the Earth can be attracted to where the
Sun was eight minutes ago, answer B. Then update Einstein’s theory of
gravity (general relativity) to incorporate this effect. But wait, we should
first check to see if general relativity has this effect already built in. We did.
It does.
What kind of strange effect is this? One way to describe it is as a type of
magnetism. When you move past an electric charge, you not only feel the
electric field of this charge, but a “correction term” that is the magnetic
field. This allows opposite charges to orbit each other without destabilizing
aberration. An analogous thing happens with gravity in general relativity.
The correction term there is speed dependent and is related to
gravitomagnetism. Should we check to see if gravitomagnetism exists
elsewhere? We did. It does.
Gravitomagnetism is now known to be true experimentally regardless of
which gravitational theory is used to make the calculation.
Question 148: Is light gravitationally attracted to mass?
A.    Yes.
B.    No, because then light would accelerate, meaning that it could then move
faster than light.
C.    We don’t know. General relativity doesn’t address this.
D.    Yes, this is why moths circle around lights.

The best answer is A: yes, light is attracted to mass. Although
speculation about this effect is hundreds of years old, the first observational
evidence for what is now known as “gravitational lensing” occurred in 1919
during a total eclipse of the Sun. Comparing background star positions
before and during the eclipse showed that the mass of the Sun must be
attracting passing starlight to change the apparent star positions.
As with gravitomagnetism, light’s attraction to matter is now known to
be true observationally, so it doesn’t depend on any gravitational theory.
Question 149: Is light gravitationally attracted to other light?
A.    Yes, light is very attractive.
B.    No, only matter can generate gravity.
C.    We don’t know. General relativity doesn’t address this.
D.    No, because if so, turning on a light bulb would cause it to implode. You’d
hear buzzing sounds as photons attract each other and curved around, then
smacking sounds as they collided. A small black hole would soon form, and
then, humorously, the whole Earth would be sucked in. Come to think of it,
perhaps it is safer if we just keep all lights turned off for a while.
The best answer is again A: yes, light is not only gravitationally attracted
to matter, it is also gravitationally attracted to other light. In Einstein’s
general relativity, any energy both generates gravity and responds to gravity.
Light, specifically, is gravitationally attracted to other light even more
strongly than it is attracted to regular matter. Although, as of yet, there is no

single specific measurement of light gravitationally deflecting other light,
this effect is inferred not only from gravitational theories but from the
gravitational behavior of the early universe.
Early in our universe’s history, its gravity was dominated by light. This
time period is now known as the “photon epoch.” If light were not attracetd
to other light, our universe would have expanded much faster in the past
leaving a different expansion history than we measure. Who cares what we
think? Well, things like the relative abundance of elements depend on the
universe’s expansion history and that is something we can measure.

CHAPTER 21
Superluminal Black Holes
If black holes keep light in, then how does gravity get out? Does it move
faster than light? It might seem that the concepts of superluminality and
black holes are unconnected opposites, because the first is about light
while the second is about dark, but actually the two are linked. How this
connection works is what we contemplate in this chapter.
A Black Hole Parable
You wake up in a galaxy ruled by a queen and king—on alternate days.
Sadly, everyone who asked them how this works has ended up beheaded.
The realm is famous for a big black hole that resides near a major space-
way. Sadly, the makers of this space-way have since been beheaded. Years
ago, the king gave the queen her now favorite gift: a space-watch. This
present, many believe, was partly to avoid being beheaded. Unfortunately,
while resetting the royal guillotine, the space-watch became in need of
repair. Impressed by your responses to previous questions in this book, they
give you a call.

Question 150: A phone call commands you to take the queen’s royal space-
watch in for repair. Due to a traffic jam near the guillotine-resupply superstore,
you slammed on your space-car’s breaks and the space-watch flew out the space-
window and fell toward the black hole. Through your car window, you can see the
watch as it approaches the event horizon. How fast does the watch appear to
run?
A.    Faster than normal.
B.    At normal speed.
C.    Slower than normal.
D.    After losing the watch, a better question is, how fast can you run?
The best answer is C: the space-watch appears to you to run slower
than normal. This is because you are seeing it nearer the black hole, where
time runs more slowly. The light you see from the watch is gravitationally
redshifted, meaning that not only does the watch appear to run slow, but
each photon you see from the watch is also shifted toward a more red color.
Redshift is a subjective observer effect. In objective reality, the watch runs
at its normal speed. In other words, if you were right there with the watch,
it would appear to run as usual.
Question 151: Do you see the space-watch fall into the black hole?
A.    Yes, what else could you possibly see?
B.    No, you see the watch approach the event horizon increasingly slowly. But
then it seems to freeze just outside the event horizon.
C.    No, because you were too busy reading this book.
The best answer is B: you will never see the space-watch fall into the
black hole. As it nears the radius of no return—the event horizon—the
watch becomes so dim and redshifted that you would not be able to see it
without your telescopic space-goggles. When you do see it, the watch’s
time advances so slowly that it appears effectively stopped.
Question 152: Can you go get the watch?

A.    Yes. Although it may take a tremendous amount of energy, in principle you
could do it.
B.    No, the watch is really gone. All you see is just an old image.
C.    It depends. Do you have to pee first?
The best answer is B: if the watch appeared to approach the event
horizon, then it is really gone in objective reality. What you see,
subjectively, hovering above the event horizon, is just an old image.
But this space-watch has a video-recorder app! What did it see? It shows
the watch falling through the event horizon and approaching the
singularity at the black hole’s center. The watch video does not show the
watch freezing just above the event horizon. To reiterate, the freezing is a
subjective illusion visible to observers outside the event horizon.
But couldn’t you scoop up the watch if you went after it immediately?
Yes, but if you don’t act right away and grab the watch before it gets near
the event horizon, all hope will be lost. By then there is just no way to
recapture the actual space-watch, even theoretically. If you were to chase
after it, you would always see an image of the watch ahead of you.
OK, but let’s say you lowered yourself into the black hole, say tethered
to distant spaceship with a strong Acme-brand rope. Shouldn’t you then be
able to grab the watch and be pulled back out by the rope? No. Once you
pass the event horizon, there is no rope strong enough to hold you.
Question 153: If you decide to chase the infalling watch, would it be possible to
know when you cross the event horizon?
A.    Yes, just look at your feet.
B.    No, the event horizon is not a true boundary. You could glide past it and
never know.
C.    Yes, just look out the window.
D.    It depends. Do you still have your head?
The best answer is yes, and the answers to both A and C summarize
two reasons why. Let’s first think about answer B, though. To begin with, it
is true that a black hole’s event horizon is not a hard boundary in the sense

that there is no wall there that you hit on the way in. It is also true that if
you closed your eyes, you could pass through the event horizon without
knowing it. For a big black hole, the relative gravity between your head and
feet can be too small to notice. In this case, you would not undergo
spaghettification—meaning you would not be stretched into a long strand
like spaghetti—as you passed the event horizon. But answer B is not the
best answer because there are ways to know that you are passing it.
One way is given by answer C: just look out the window. As you
approach the event horizon, the stars in the distance appear to shift and all
collect into a hole directly opposite the black hole’s center. Just before you
pass the event horizon, the stars appear all bunched up into a single point.
Another way to tell that you are passing the black hole’s event horizon
is to look at your feet, assuming you are approaching feet first. When your
feet reach the event horizon, they will appear infinitely redshifted and so
disappear, as seen by your head. You can see this even without looking out
the window.
Epilogue: The watch is not lost! As the big black hole evaporates, you
can collect all the relevant emerging particles and rebuild it good as new!
Sadly, for this massive black hole, the entire evaporation will take billions
of years. By that time, unfortunately, its operating system may no longer be
supported by the space-watch industry.
Question 154: Does light falling toward a black hole speed up?
A.    Yes, everything that falls toward a black hole speeds up, including a photon.
B.    No, although the energy of the falling light will increase, its speed will remain
the same.
The best answer is B: no, light falling into the black hole does not
speed up, at least not as measured by anyone who the light passes. Even in
Einstein’s theory of gravity as part of general relativity, the local speed of
light is always c.
However, if you looked into a place where gravity is different, then you
could measure light there as having a different speed. Take the case of the
space-watch falling toward the black hole. According to the owner’s

pamphlet, at least the part written large enough to see, the watch “ticks” by
emitting and absorbing photons. The speed of light is therefore important
because it determines the time between ticks. But since time runs slower
nearer the black hole, the time you see between photon emission and
absorption is longer, which is an observer-dependent phenomenon that
means light can appear to move slower. But at the watch itself, light still
appears to move at c.
Question 155: Does gravity have to travel faster than light to get out of a black
hole?
A.    Yes, because everything slower than light stays inside a black hole.
B.    No. Even though gravitational waves move at c, gravity itself has no speed.
C.    Yes. Even though gravitational waves move at c, the virtual gravitons that
transmit gravity can go faster than c.
D.    No, since matter never appears to fall in, the matter’s gravity also never
appears to fall in.
E.    No one knows.
F.    Why would gravity want to leave a black hole? Is it not nice in there?
The best answer is E: nobody really knows how gravity gets out of a
black hole. To quote the famous physicist Richard Feynman, “There is no
model of the theory of gravitation today, other than the mathematical
form” (The Character of Physical Law, 1965). This means, to my
understanding, that the equations that describe gravity, in particular
Einstein’s general relativity, are measured as being accurate even though
we don’t really understand why, and even though we can’t construct a
mechanism that underlies the mathematics. For example, those rubber
sheets frequently used to illustrate gravity are visualizations and don’t give
an answer. Even so, let’s try to understand the answers listed.
Let’s start with answer A. According to general relativity, matter moving
slower than c stays inside the black hole’s event horizon, making answer A
seem correct. Also, with regard to general relativity and answer A, an
insightful visualization is that space itself is falling like a waterfall toward

the black hole. As it falls inside the event horizon, its speed becomes
superluminal.
This makes it clear that matter and light—confined to light speed or
less—must stay in the black hole. But just because matter and light must
stay in the black hole doesn’t mean that their gravity does. Why not? We
don’t know.
What about answer B, that gravitation has no speed? This makes sense
considering that geometry has no speed, and that general relativity is
frequently associated with geometry. But what about changes in geometry?
Surely these changes must move with some speed. General relativity
indicates that both gravitational waves and changes in geometry move at c,
the speed of light. Past that, since general relativity does not give a
mechanism, it does not address how gravity and changes in gravity get out
of a black hole.
Let’s look at answer C. First, virtual particles are thought by many to be
a purely calculational tool in quantum mechanics. They are used to
calculate real forces and appear to go between real objects and are
therefore said to be “exchanged.” Attempts to create a quantum theory of
gravity may employ virtual gravitons to transmit gravitational force. These
virtual gravitons may be hypothesized to go faster than light in these
theories, but they are not hypothesized to have the ability to carry away
locally created information.
About answer D: since nothing appears to fall into a black hole visually,
perhaps the gravity of infalling matter does not disappear, just as its image
does not disappear. One problem I have with this explanation is
understanding what happens to the gravity of the matter that was already
near the star’s center when the black hole formed. It seems that its image
was never outside the event horizon, so both its image and gravity would be
trapped inside as soon as the event horizon forms. What also bothers me
about answer D is that the hovering image of infalling matter is extremely
dim due to extreme gravitational redshifting. Shouldn’t such dimming also
affect the gravity of the hovering matter? If so, then the gravity of infalling
matter should be much less than normal.

Answer E is the best answer, in my opinion, because our understanding
of this black still has holes. Observationally, the existence of black holes is
demonstrated by general relativity and high-precision measurements of
great mass confined in small volumes. These measurements include bursts
of gravitational waves from distant merging black holes, and images of
supermassive black holes near the center of nearby galaxies. But although
these measurements fit the mathematical framework of general relativity,
they don’t really reveal the inner workings of black holes.
Question 156: Can wormholes be used to go faster than light?
A.    Yes. Since the passage of time through a wormhole is constant, separating
the input and output can be used, in principle, to go any speed, even
superluminal.
B.    No, because wormholes do not exist.
C.    No one knows for sure.
D.    Only if the apple is rotten in really strange ways.
The best answer is C: no one really knows. Wormholes are theoretical
constructs that seem to work in some versions and interpretations of gravity,
in particular general relativity. But none has ever been found in nature, so
they might not really exist.
A key hypothesized behavior of wormholes is that something goes into
a black hole somewhere then goes through a wormhole and finally comes
out of a white hole somewhere else. White holes are theoretical constructs
similar to black holes except that matter can only come out, not go in. Like
wormholes, white holes might not really exist. However, if they do exist,
and if the white hole is far away from the black hole, and if whatever fell in

comes out after only a small time delay, then faster-than-light motion,
including possibly the faster-than-light transport of locally created
information, could be achieved. There is, currently, zero observational
evidence that this occurs.
Question 157: If you accelerate to near the speed of light, could you become a
black hole?
A.    Yes, that’s how many black holes form.
B.    No, relative to yourself, you are always the same, and you are not a black
hole.
C.    Look, it takes years of training to become a black hole. You don’t just speed
up and declare it. Life isn’t like the movies. What kind of universe do you
think this is?
D.    First you start out as a white hole. As you speed up, you become a yellow
hole and then a green hole. Only when you can move really fast and pass a
test can you become a true black hole. Then you can go to competitions
where black holes fight it out to rule the universe.
The best answer is B: no. In Einstein’s general relativity, the energy of a
passing mass increases with its relative speed, and that energy does
gravitate. Therefore, if you pass a space station in your spaceship at any
speed, the kinetic energy you have relative to the station is felt by that
station gravitationally.
At zero speed, you will have a rest energy given by the famous E = mc2,
where m is your rest mass. In your own frame, you are always not moving,

of course, so your energy is always given by this equation. For example, if a
spaceship passes you at any speed, even near c, it will not change your rest
mass. Only if you decide to increase your rest mass (say, by eating) or
increase your density (say, by compressing yourself) could you possibly
collapse yourself into a black hole. And if you are a not a black hole to
yourself, you are not a black hole to everyone, regardless of their relative
speed.
Alternatively, maybe you really are a black hole. Here are some
questions to ask yourself to find out. Do you look good in black? Do you
sometimes feel that you are in a hole? Have you ever felt that the world was
closing in on you? OK then, I think we know the answer.

PART III
RELATIVITY &
COMMUNICATION
Chapter 22
Direct Attempts at Superluminal Time Travel
(Using Relativity)
Chapter 23
Superluminal Simultaneity
Chapter 24
Adding Really Fast Speeds
Chapter 25
Superluminal Smartphones
Chapter 26
Superluminal Communication
Now you know how to create shadows that move faster than light. But can
you use these shadows to communicate? And supposing you could, would
this allow you to send messages back in time? In this section, we explore
this fundamental puzzle in physics.

CHAPTER 22
Direct Attempts at Superluminal
Time Travel (Using Relativity)
Let’s say you’ve finished reading this chapter, initially hoping to find a
direct way to use relativity to go back in time but didn’t find one.
Frustrated, you then decide you want to send a message back in time to
before you started reading this chapter to stop yourself from reading it. How
might you go about doing this? Remembering the book’s title, you wonder
if perhaps the simplest way is to just send a message faster than light. This
chapter will investigate what happens if you try, using only Einstein’s
special relativity.
Question 158: If you keep accelerating, can you go faster than light?
A.    Yes, acceleration always makes you go faster without limit.
B.    No, you can only approach the speed of light, not pass it.
C.    If you keep accelerating, perhaps the accelerator pedal is stuck. This really
happened to me! I consider myself lucky that the brakes on my dad’s old car
were stronger than the accelerator. (If this happens to you, I now know, shift
quickly to neutral, even though that definitely won’t take you faster than
light.)
The best answer is B: no. Einstein’s special relativity says that objects
with mass cannot just smoothly accelerate from below the speed of light to
above, because the object’s energy goes infinite along the way. Once above
c, it is not even clear how to quantify the object’s mass and energy.

Answer A is true in the sense that your speed, relative to something
else, can keep increasing indefinitely. And despite your acceleration
seeming constant to you, your speed relative to something fixed only gets
increasingly close to c and never exceeds it.
Experimentally, there is no present evidence for any Earthly objects
having mass moving faster than light. Such an amazing result would surely
be reported. Actually, such super-c speeds have been reported, but, so far,
none of these reports have ever been confirmed. Therefore, even outside of
theory, c is the record speed limit here on Earth. This topic also comes up
in the chapters Superluminal Trains, Superluminal Tricks and Illusions,
and in great detail in the chapter Adding Really Fast Speeds.
Question 159: If you keep accelerating, can you go back in time?
A.    Yes, of course.
B.    No, or we would be tripping over time travelers all over the place.
C.    Not enough information was given.
D.    Let’s hope so, because then you could go back to a time before you kept
accelerating.
The best answer is B: no, continued acceleration will not cause you to
go back in time. Things on Earth and out in the cosmos undergo a large
range of accelerations, and never has anything arrived from the future, so
far as we know.

Question 160: If you could suddenly jump to above light speed and move ahead
superluminally, could you go back in time?
A.    Yes. Jumping to above light speed was the hard part.
B.    No. What kind of crazy universe do you think we live in?
C.    Not enough information was given.
D.    Can fairies wave magic wands? Since you cannot move faster than light, this
question makes about as much sense.
The connection between superluminal motion and backward time
travel is so strange that both yes and no answers have merit. That makes
this answer a bit long, so please bear with me, although on the positive side
this answer does involve a lot of clones.
First, answer A is true: jumping to above the speed of light is so hard
that it does seem impossible. A reason for this in special relativity is that the
energy of an accelerating mass approaches infinity at light speed. Objects
near infinite energy tend to dominate the universe in crazy ways that make
continuing this line of reasoning physically unreasonable. Therefore, I
wouldn’t call A the best answer.
Let’s now look at answer B. Suppose you find out that you are only one
of many clones, and all of your clones, all the same age as you, are now
lined up along a local road. Moving along your row of clones slowly, each
clone directly across from you will always look a bit older. For example,
each clone in this row, as you pass them, will have slightly longer hair.
What you want to know is if you increase your speed to superluminal,
could each passing clone then have shorter hair—meaning that you are
going back in time?
To test this, you set up a long row of cameras directly across from your
clones. Admiring your familiar inquisitive nature, they don’t seem to mind.
On the top of each camera is a light bulb that will flash just when this
camera takes a picture. As described in the chapter How to Make Light
Bulbs Flash Faster than Light, you can program the cameras so that they
take pictures and so the connected bulbs light up in a sequence that moves
faster than light (FTL). So, you program them to do this. Of course,
neither the cameras nor bulbs ever move FTL. Neither moves at all. You

later download all of the camera images and make them into a video. What
does the video show?
The video shows your clones getting older. Even when the speed of the
flashes and image- takings approaches infinitely fast, your clones always
age. They never get younger. Therefore, in the frame of you and your
clones, the best answer is B: superluminal motion is not so easily related to
backward time travel.
This answer involved motion in only one direction. The chapter How
to Go Warp 2 further explores FTL motion in one direction, while the
chapters Superluminal Communication and Craze c will explore what
happens if faster-than-light motion occurs in two directions—there and
back. That turns out to be even more strange.
Question 161: If you could go back in time, could you then go faster than light?
A.    Yes, it’s that simple.
B.    No, time and speed are not the same thing.
C.    Irrelevant. Speaking for myself, if I could go back in time, I would not care to
go faster than light, because I would be too busy making vast sums of money
with my unique knowledge of the “future” stock market. I would not want to
call attention to myself by also moving faster than light.

The best answer is A: yes, if you could go back in time, you could also
go faster than light. Potential causality problems are discussed in the
Superluminal Communication chapter, but let’s ignore them for now.
Suppose you could walk into a fancy time machine and go back in time
one year at your current location. You then would have one year to go
wherever you want! Let’s say you spend this year in your fancy time
machine’s super-fancy basement eating ice cream and playing video
games. Then, just before one year elapses and your old timeline resumes,
you come out of the basement and go across the street. After exactly one
year, you would then have gone from your fancy time machine to across
the street from your fancy time machine in zero time. Now speed is
calculated as distance over time. But here time was zero, so the speed is
arbitrarily high, which we can modestly call superluminal.
Question 162: Why is time travel tied to the speed of light and not another
speed?
A.    Because light is the fastest thing we know.
B.    Because light is fundamentally connected to time.
C.    Because c is key in special relativity.
D.    Because we tried tying time travel to the speed of a donkey, but that didn’t
work out very well.
The best answer is C, because the speed of light is key in special
relativity. Answer A is not true since shadows, for example, can travel faster
than light. Answer B is true in the sense that light must be in motion, and
motion is fundamentally connected to time.
Answer C, though, is the best answer because c is the critical speed in
special relativity, and it is assumed here that light moves at this critical
speed. There is nothing really special about the “speed” in the “speed of
light,” nor in the “light” in the “speed of light.” What is special is the
physics—the special relativity physics. Only at near speed c in special
relativity do things like time and space go crazy.
Question 163: How fast is the speed of time?

A.    Zero: time is not moving.
B.    Although time is considered to flow, it has no intrinsic speed.
C.    c.
D.    Faster than light.
E.    One clock tick per one clock tick.
The best answer is C: c, the speed of light. In special relativity, in order
to make time act like a dimension equivalent to length, it must be
multiplied by a speed. And the only speed that makes sense is c. This is
equivalent to considering that time itself moves at speed c. Then, the space
and time dimensions are together called “space-time.”

CHAPTER 23
Superluminal Simultaneity
Have you ever seen two things happen at the same time? Perhaps you saw a
coincidence so remarkable that you asked someone nearby, “Did you see
that?” That person might put down their slice of pizza and ask, “I’m sorry.
Do I know you?” You might be surprised to know that regardless of what
type of pizza this person was eating, be it pepperoni, cheese, or even Dijon
mustard, if that person was moving with respect to you, they would likely
not 
have 
considered 
those 
two 
separate 
events 
as 
happening
simultaneously, as you did. To them, one event happened first, even if only
slightly. In relativity, simultaneity is strange. Explored extensively by
Einstein, simultaneity is speed dependent. In this chapter you will get to
contemplate just how strange simultaneity is, how it necessarily involves
faster-than-light phenomena, and, perhaps as an unexpected bonus, how to
know if aliens from Andromeda are attacking.
Question 164: You stand at a bus stop as a bus passes going north. In the exact
middle of the bus sits your bus friend. (Let’s assume that you are so friendly that

you have friends on all major modes of transportation.) Just as your bus friend is
passing, you quickly reach in the window and turn on their radio—a radio that not
only emits sound but transmits radio waves. Now this bus has been specially
designed to have LED lights mounted at both ends. Each LED will flash when it
receives radio waves from your friend’s radio. According to your bus friend, which
LED appears to flash first?
A.    The LED at the bus’s south end.
B.    The LED at the bus’s north end.
C.    Your friend sees both bulbs flash at the same time.
D.    Your bus friend becomes too busy listening to the song on the radio to notice
any flashing lights.
The best answer is C: your bus friend sees both LEDs flash at the same
time. To your bus friend, the smoothly running bus is not moving, and the
north and south LEDs are the same distance away. There is no reason why
one of the LEDs would appear to flash before the other.
Question 165: The other bus passengers also see the north and south LEDs light
up. Those closer to the north LED see it flash first, while those closer to the south
LED see it flash first. Which LED do passengers say really flashed first?
A.    The north LED.
B.    The south LED.
C.    Both LEDs flash at the same time.
D.    It doesn’t matter since a true bus friend would have gotten off at the last
stop and bought you ice cream. Think about it.
The best answer is C: both LEDs blink at the same time. All of the bus
passengers, having already read this book, know that it takes radio waves the
same time to go from the radio to each LED. Even though some
passengers saw one LED flash first, they know the reason is that they were
closer to it. Therefore, the bus passengers will say that both LEDs really
flashed at the same time.
Question 166: To recap, as the bus passes, you turn on the mid-bus radio that
then emits radio waves that cause the end-bus LEDs to flash. Standing at the bus

stop, you are able to see both LEDs at the bus’s north and south ends. This is
helped by the fact that the entire bus is made of clear plastic. Which LED do you
see light up first?
A.    The north LED.
B.    The south LED.
C.    You see both LEDs flash at the same time.
D.    All you can think about is that the bus didn’t stop and now you will be late for
work.
The best answer is B: you see the south LED light up first. During the
time that the radio waves were moving to the ends of the bus, and the time
that light from the LEDs was moving toward you, the bus continued
moving north. Therefore, the total distance from the radio to the south
LED to you became less than the similar distance to the north. Since light
always moves at c, you see the south LED light first. Note that this question
involved a subjective observer: you.
Question 167: This is a popular bus route and many people are lined up waiting
for the bus, both to the north and south of you. When the bus passes, they all see
both LEDs flash, and, later compare notes. In the frame of the bus stop, which
LED do they say flashed first?
A.    The north LED.
B.    The south LED.
C.    Both LEDs flashed at the same time.
D.    Your bus stop companions to your north say the north LED, while your
companions to the south say the south LED.
E.    For some reason they, too, seem more concerned with why the bus didn’t
stop.
The best answer is B: your bus stop companions come to the
conclusion that, in the frame of the bus stop, the south LED flashed first.
Here’s why: in the inertial frame of the bus stop, radio waves headed north
at speed c. But during the time that these radio waves were in flight, the
bus itself moved slightly to the north. Therefore, these radio waves had to
travel more than half the bus length to reach the north LED.

Similarly, your bus stop companions also agree that radio waves headed
south at speed c. But during the time that these radio waves were flying, the
south end of the bus moved slightly to the north. Therefore, these radio
waves had to travel less than half the bus to reach the south LED.
Therefore, your bus stop companions agree that even though those closer
to the north LED saw the north LED flash first, in the inertial frame of the
bus stop, the south LED really flashed first.
This is a strange result. If you remember, in the inertial frame of the
bus, both LEDs flashed at the same time. However, in the inertial frame of
the bus stop, the south LED flashed first. The surprising conclusion is that
not only can observers disagree on which LED lit first, but entire frames
can also disagree.
Aside 17: The Two Strata of Simultaneity
In sum, two kinds of simultaneity can be defined. The first can be called
“position simultaneity” or “single observer simultaneity.” This is what a single
observer actually sees. A single observer notes when each of two LEDs
appears to blink as they see them. An example is a bus passenger in the
middle of the bus watching the two LEDs at the front and back. If these LEDs
flash simultaneously in the frame of the bus, light from each LED flash will
reach this middle bus passenger at the same time. Therefore, of course, this
passenger will see these LEDs appear to flash at the same time.
A second kind of simultaneity can be called “velocity simultaneity” or
“frame 
simultaneity.” 
This 
is 
simultaneity 
as 
determined 
by 
the
measurements across a single inertial frame, for example a group of people
on a bus all moving at the same velocity. Consider a person near the front of
the bus when the two LEDs flash simultaneously in the bus frame. This person
sees the front LED flash first, but also knows that this LED is closer. This
passenger therefore does not perceive position simultaneity. However,
knowing the distance to each LED, this passenger can compute that both
LEDs really flash simultaneously in the frame of the bus. This is the most
common type of simultaneity discussed in special relativity, and is usually just
called “simultaneity.”
These simultaneity strata are related to the subjective appearance strata
described in a previous aside.
Is there a third type of simultaneity, such as “acceleration simultaneity?”
Good question, but no. Experiments show that there is not. The original
conjecture that there is not acceleration simultaneity is part of something

called the clock hypothesis, and Einstein was well aware of it when he
formulated special relativity back in 1905.
Question 168: As measured by you and everyone in the frame of the bus stop,
the light flash “jumped” from the south LED on the bus to the north LED. How
fast did the light flash jump?
A.    Faster than light.
B.    Slower than light.
C.    At exactly the speed of light.
D.    It depends on how fast the bus was moving.
The best answer is A: the flash jumped from the south LED to the
north LED faster than the speed of light. The speed of the bus will not
change the character of what happens: the jump will always be faster than
light. To reiterate, so long as the LEDs flashed simultaneously in the frame
of the bus, the flash will appear to jump superluminally from one LED to
the other in the frame of the bus stop.
Question 169: You (standing at the bus stop) and your bus friend (sitting on the
moving bus) synchronize your watches to momentarily agree on the time in the
middle of the bus. This happens as the bus goes by. At that exact moment, do you
and your bus friend also agree on the time at the north end of the bus?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.
C.    Exactly twice a day, assuming one of the watches is broken.
The best answer is B: no, you disagree on the time at the front of the
bus. This is a direct result of the logic that, in general, two inertial frames
can only synchronize their clocks at one location. How far off will the
clocks at different ends of the bus be, as measured in the bus stop frame?
Good question! This will be puzzled over in the chapter Superluminal
Smartphones.

Question 170: You stand at the bus stop, now wondering if the next bus will
stop, when a bicycle races by. As the bicycle rider passes, you sync your watch to
the rider’s watch. Just then, will you and this bicycle rider agree on what time it is,
presently, in the Andromeda galaxy?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.
C.    It depends on how Andromedecians keep time.
D.    That topic of conversation is unlikely to come up.
The best answer is B: no, even though you and this bike rider have the
same location and agree on the time at that location, your relative motion
will cause you to disagree on what time it is in Andromeda. In fact, for the
previous example and because of the known distance to Andromeda, you
will disagree by years. This might mean that in the frame of the bus stop,
dangerous Andromedecians are deciding right then whether to attack
Earth, while in the frame of the bus, these same Andromedecians might
have already decided to forget about it and go back to bed. This
discrepancy has been called the Rietdijk–Putnam argument, or the
Andromeda Paradox when illuminated by the famous physicist Roger
Penrose.
Question 171: No bus has stopped, it is getting really late, and night begins to
fall. You decide to entertain your fellow waiting bus stop companions by setting

up a telescope and pointing it toward the Andromeda galaxy. As the next bus
passes without stopping, you notice that the passengers on that bus have also
set up a telescope and are looking at the Andromeda galaxy. Just as that bus
passes, do you both see this galaxy as it existed at the same time?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.
C.    Hold on, you’re still waiting for your morning bus even hours later, when it is
getting dark? What? And when this bus also doesn’t stop, instead of giving
up and going home, or phoning the bus company to complain, you look at
the Andromeda galaxy? What kind of physics is this?
The best answer is A: yes, both the bus passengers and your bus stop
companions see the Andromeda galaxy as it existed at the same time. For
example, if a supernova went off and was seen by you and your bus stop
companions, this supernova will be seen (nearly) simultaneously by you
and the passengers on the bus that wouldn’t stop.
The underlying reason for this is that the lack of long-distance
synchronization does not affect the photons arriving here from Andromeda.
These photons move at c, not faster or slower, and don’t care how fast you
are moving. Beyond a Doppler shift, what we see the Andromedecians
doing when we look at them from far away is the same.

CHAPTER 24
Adding Really Fast Speeds
What happens if you add two really fast speeds? Do you get a speed greater
than c? Here’s an example. Let’s say you see an ant—a really fast ant—
running by at near the speed of light. Now let’s say this ant throws out
ahead a rubber tree plant, also going near the speed of light relative to the
ant. Does anyone know that ant can’t make that rubber tree plant move
faster than light relative to you? Yes, unfortunately, according to Einstein’s
special relativity.
OK, but what about the shadow of a rubber tree plant? Shadows, we
have learned, really can move faster than light. Does anyone know that the
ant can’t make the shadow of a rubber tree plant move faster than light? Do
you have high (speed) hopes?
More generally, how do you add speeds when one of those speeds is a
shadow or a laser spot already moving faster than light? Strange things, I
can assure you. This chapter explores just how strange.
Question 172: You wake up on the observation deck of a busy spaceport. A
starship zooms by slightly below the speed of light. The ship’s engineer Spotty
(named for a like of laser spots) fires the ship’s laser cannon to create a spot on
the spaceport deck that moves at exactly the speed of light in the direction of the
starship as measured by Spotty on the starship. What is the speed of this laser
spot as measured by you on the spaceport?
A.    Slower than light.
B.    Faster than light.
C.    Exactly c.
D.    Something completely different.

E.    Let’s all hope that this laser cannon was set on “low” or the spaceport might
get cut in half.
The best answer is C: exactly the speed of light. The speed of light is
always the same no matter how fast the people measuring it are moving,
and no matter how fast the source emitting it is moving. Therefore, the
speed of the starship does not matter. Your speed does not matter. If the
spot speed is c in one inertial reference frame, it is c in all frames.
It also does not matter what is moving at c. It could be light itself, some
particle like a neutrino, a surprised turtle (OK, the last two can move only
very close to c), a shadow, or—as highlighted here—a laser spot. Whatever
it is, if its speed is c in one frame, it is c in all frames.
Question 173: A starship outbound from the Sun shoots by your Earthly
spaceport at 0.9 c (which means 90% of the speed of light). These high speeds
don’t impress you anymore. This time, the starship’s laser cannon creates a spot
moving across the spaceport at 2 c, also outbound, as measured on the starship
—and so in the starship's frame. How fast does this spot move as measured on
the spaceport—and so in the spaceport's frame?
A.    Slower than light.
B.    Faster than light.
C.    Exactly c.
D.    Something completely different.
E.    Why would they try to make a spot move so fast? Don’t they care about the
laws of physics?

The best answer is B: the laser spot also moves faster than light in the
spaceport’s frame. If a speed is measured as moving faster than light in one
inertial frame, it will also be measured as moving faster than light in any
other inertial frame, supposing that its speed relative to the starship is
slower than light.
Question 174: In the previous question, in which frame does the spot move
faster?
A.    The starship frame.
B.    The spaceport frame.
C.    The same speed in both frames.
D.    Something completely different.
E.    Why does everything have to be so competitive? The most important thing is
that both spots have fun.
The best answer is A: the spot moves faster in the starship frame. This is
true even though the starship and the spot are moving in the same
direction in the frame of the spaceport, making it seem like the speeds
should add.
Specifically, as counterintuitive as it may be, the laser spot would be
measured as moving about 1.04 c in the spaceport frame, slower than the 2
c measured in the starship frame.
The key reason behind this strange result is simultaneity. The lack of
simultaneity between moving frames leads directly to the inability to
synchronize multiple clocks between moving frames. Therefore, clocks in
a row that all display the same time in the spaceport frame do not all
display the same time in the starship frame, and this affects the speed
measurement.
Aside 18: How to Add Fast Speeds
I am now going to give an equation. Yes, this is mathematics. I know I said
back in Aside 3 that this book focuses on ideas and not math, but back then, I
was young and idealistic and trying to get you to buy the book. I still believe,
though, what I said about concepts, but sometimes concepts are made more

clear and more exact if good mathematics can be found to describe them.
Also, sometimes an equation is just so cool and relevant that it just begs to be
included.
The adding fast speeds equation is
where v is the speed of the starship measured in the frame of the spaceport, u
is the speed of a laser spot in the frame of the starship, and w is the speed of
the laser spot as measured in the frame of the spaceport. Of course, the
spaceport, starship, and laser spot can be replaced with anything you want,
for example, driveway, ant, and shadow of a rubber tree plant. For exploration
purposes, we will allow speeds in this list to be faster than light. It is
postulated that the equation still works with speeds above c.
In light of this equation, let’s look again at the first question in this
chapter. Say the starship was moving at v = 0.9 c relative to the spaceport,
and the laser spot was moving at u = c relative to the starship. Then the
adding fast speeds equation tells us the speed of the spot relative to the
spaceport is 
 This shows why, mathematically, the
answer was C: c.
See?
One more example. Let’s crunch the numbers for the last question before
this Aside: a laser spot moving at 2 c emitted by a starship moving at 0.9 c.
Then, plugging v = 0.9 c and u = 2 c in the adding fast speeds equation gives
 as suggested in the answer to that question. So, the
laser spot was seen to move at only about 1.04 c in the frame of the
spaceport. Believe it now?
It is possible to “math along” with many of the questions in this chapter to
see how the best answer comes about precisely. In my opinion, however, this
might take you too far away from the really cool concepts that underlie the
math, so I don’t suggest it.
Question 175: The next outbound starship to pass the spaceport fires its laser
cannon so as to create an even faster outbound spot in the starship frame—
moving at 100 c. But how fast does this spot move in the spaceport frame
compared to the spot moving 2 c in the starship fame?
A.    Faster.
B.    Slower.

C.    Same speed.
The best answer is A: faster. If this were a race, the 100 c spot would
beat the 2 c spot in both the starship and spaceport frames.
In the frame of the spaceport, oddly enough, the race would be much
closer. The reason is that even though the laser spot moves at 100 c in the
starship frame, it moves only at about 1.11 c in the frame of the spaceport.
This places it at just a bit faster than the 1.04 c spaceport speed of the 2 c
spot.
Question 176: Unbelievably, the next passing starship, also cruising outbound at
0.9 c, fires its laser cannon to create a spot moving outbound along the floor of
the spaceport at nearly infinite speed in the frame of the starship. Does this spot
also move at nearly infinite speed in the frame of the spaceport?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.
C.    Look, maybe there’s a reason why so many people are rocketing out of the
solar system. Maybe they know something. And maybe they’re trying to tell
you with those laser spots. Come to think of it, doesn’t the Sun seem a little
brighter than usual today?
The best answer is B: no, the near-infinitely fast spot in the starship
frame moves only about speed 1.11 c in the frame of the spaceport. This
limit is wmax = (c/v) c, which can be found from the adding fast speeds
equation. The result is that the closer u is to infinity in the frame of the
starship, the closer it is to (c/v) c in the frame of the spaceport. In the
previous questions, since v = 0.9 c, an infinitely fast outgoing spot in the
starship frame moves, in the frame of the spaceport, outbound at (1/0.9) c,
which is 1.11111 . . . c.
Question 177: Is there any laser spot speed in the starship frame that will be
measured as moving infinitely fast in the spaceport frame?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.

C.    You know, if I bought a book about carpentry, things wouldn’t be this
strange.
The best answer is A: yes, there is such a spot speed. What is it? To find
out, start with the starship’s speed being v relative to the spaceport. Have
the starship’s engineer create a laser spot that moves with speed u = –(c/v) c
relative to the starship. The negative sign indicates that u is in the inbound
direction (toward the Sun), the opposite direction of outbound in the
frame of the starship. Then the same spot will move infinitely fast in the
frame of the spaceport.
Let’s explore this with real numbers. Have the starship move outbound
at v = 0.9 c relative to the spaceport. Then, have the starship’s engineer fire
its laser to create a laser spot moving u = 1.10 c (inbound) in the starship
frame. The result would be that people (or turtles, Wookiees, whatever) in
the spaceport would measure the spot’s speed as nearly infinitely fast
outbound.
Similarly, a slightly faster inbound spot with a speed of u = 1.12 c in the
starship frame would be measured in the spaceport frame as also having a
nearly infinitely fast speed, but headed inbound.
Not fast enough for you? OK, then text the starship’s engineer to
project the laser spot even closer to u = 1.1111 . . . c in the frame of the
starship. The closer it gets, the faster the spaceporters measure the spot
speed.
Question 178: Why wasn’t relativistic image doubling mentioned in this chapter?
A.    Because no spot speed dropped from above the speed of light to below.
B.    Because only moving frames were discussed, not single observers.
C.    It would have been if the point of view of you, the spaceport observer, was
ever individually considered.
D.    Because the author forgot, and the readers were too polite to bring it up.
To understand the answer, it may help to remember that two types of
relativistic image doubling (RID) are discussed in this book, one occurring
in objective reality and the other that needs a subjective observer to be

seen. (For a RID review, please see the chapter Superluminal Image
Doubling.) Therefore, although answer A is correct in that no laser spot
speed dropped from superluminal to subluminal, this only means that no
RID occurred in objective reality. It does not mean that an observer on the
spaceport—you, for example—would see only a single spot. Therefore,
answer A is partly correct, but not the whole story.
Answer B is also partly correct, but incomplete, for the same reason:
only motional frames were discussed in this chapter, not single observers.
To recap, you might really see RID subjectively, even if the racing laser
spot remained single in objective reality.
Answer C is best because it captures the subjective nature of seeing
image doubling. Standing on the spaceport, the fast spot would pass you
by. As it passed, its speed toward you would drop to below light speed even
though the speed of the spot itself did not. At the drop, you would start
seeing two images of the same spot.

CHAPTER 25
Superluminal Smartphones
Stumbling out from a vanishing time portal, you find yourself back on the
familiar train platform of Chapter 1, but this time you are holding a quite
unusual smartphone. Cool! Tapping around, you discover that there is a
strange app called Sync that can send out a signal at the speed of light
along the train platform. This signal causes all platform phones being held
by your platform companions—who are still there lining the train platform
on both sides of you as far as the eye can see—to synchronize to your
phone’s time. A notification suddenly appears informing you that your train
friend is in the middle of the approaching train and holding a similar
phone with a similar app. Your train friend’s phone, though, can sync all of
the train passengers’ phones to its time. Can all phones together be
synched to read the same time? And how is this related to superluminal
speeds? That’s what this chapter is about.

Question 179: As your train friend passes, you reach in the window and tap your
two phones together, setting each phone to 10:00 exactly and triggering both
Sync apps. When one of your platform companion’s phones receives your phone’s
10:00 sync signal, to what time does it set?
A.    10:00.
B.    10:00 plus the time it took for the sync signal to reach it from the 10:00
phone.
C.    Look, it’s obvious that the writer of this book is having trouble spelling “sink”
correctly. Given the cost of editing, we now request that you take a black
Sharpie, go through the book or digital display device yourself, and make the
corrections—change “sync” to “sink.” Thank you for your help in this matter.
The best answer is B. Because it takes time for the sync signal to go
between phones, the time is later at the distant syncing phone when it
receives the sync signal. Assuming the later-syncing phone knows its
distance from the signaling phone, it will know how much past 10:00 to set
its time. For example, a platform phone that is one light-minute away from
the 10:00 platform phone would set its time to be 10:01 when it receives
the platform sync signal. (The same thing occurs between your train
friend’s train phone and all of the train passengers’ phones.)
Question 180: Just a few minutes ago, your friend’s train was moving toward you
at 90% the speed of light. You felt the draft of the oncoming train but

courageously stood your ground. Who said that exploring the nature of the
universe’s most fundamental speed would be easy? Then, just at 10:00, the train
passed. Now, five minutes later in your platform frame, your phone shows the
time of 10:05, as expected. At this exact moment in the platform’s frame, what
time does your train friend’s phone read?
A.    Before 10:00.
B.    Between 10:00 and 10:05.
C.    10:05.
D.    After 10:05.
E.    The screen shut off and now says “Please enter your passcode.”
Then best answer is B: between 10:00 and 10:05. The reason is that, as
measured in the platform’s inertial frame of reference (frame), time
appears to run slow in your train friend’s frame. It runs so slow that less
time has passed on your train friend’s phone. Specifically, at that exact
moment, your train friend’s phone shows the time of 10:02:11 (10 hours, 2
minutes, and 11 seconds).
There is one aspect of this thought experiment that needs clarification,
although it’s a bit nitpicky: What does “that exact moment” really mean? In
the frame of the platform, when your platform phone reads 10:05, this
means that 10:05 is also displayed by every synced phone along the
platform in the platform’s frame. This is because these phones were synced
by the Sync app, which sent a signal along the platform at c. In other
words, all platform phones share the same “platform” inertial frame. Thus,
they share the same “when.”
OK, but what does “that exact moment” mean in the train frame? As
puzzled over in the Superluminal Simultaneity chapter, a single moment
in time defined across one motional frame is not a single moment in time
across another frame. So, let’s be clearer. At 10:05 on your platform phone,
there are platform companions that have phones that also read 10:05 at that
exact moment. One of them will be directly across from your train friend
when your phone reads 10:05. What does your train friend’s phone read
when the directly adjacent platform companion’s phone reads 10:05? That,
in more detail, was the question asked here.

Question 181: To the passengers on the train, do their own train phones appear
to run slow?
A.    Yes, this is a result of special relativistic time dilation.
B.    No, since all phones have similar constructions, they all appear to run at the
same rate.
C.    No, the platform phones actually appear to run faster in proportion to the
speed of the train.
D.    Only if the train’s Wi-Fi signal is weak.
The best answer is B: no, the train passengers’ phones appear to the
train passengers themselves to run at the same rate as always. Similarly, the
platform phones appear to you and your platform companions to also run
at the same rate as always. How can this be? One way to think about this is
to consider that the train passengers’ brains slow down to the same rate as
the phones. Oddly, the train passengers will also think that you and your
platform companions slow down similarly, which, quite frankly, is
somewhat insulting.
Question 182: Your train friend keeps posting on social media that their train is
stationary and that you and your platform companions are moving at 90% c in the
other direction. Fair enough. Five minutes pass in the train frame, after which
your train friend’s phone reads 10:05, as expected. At that exact moment, what
time does your phone read?
A.    Before 10:00.
B.    Between 10:00 and 10:05.
C.    10:05.
D.    After 10:05.
E.    Phones can’t read. That technology won’t be available until 2034.
The best answer is B: between 10:00 and 10:05. The situation is
symmetric between the train and the platform. Since all motion is relative
and direction doesn’t matter, the answer is the same: 10:02:11. In sum, to
your train friend, your phone ran slow.

Question 183: How can time slow down for both you and your train friend? If
time runs slow for one, shouldn’t it run fast for the other?
A.    Yes, this chapter is all wrong. Please try reading a better chapter.
B.    No, this chapter is all right. Please keep reading this chapter.
C.    Actually, time runs at the same speed on both the platform and the train.
The best answers are B and C. Every frame experiences its own phones
always running at the same rate, regardless of what trains (or platforms)
may pass by, and regardless of what speeds they may be going. Also, every
frame experiences phones in all passing frames as running slow.
Aside 19: Three Equations for Mixing Space and Time between
Two Moving Frames
Please skip this aside if math is not your thing. It is possible to understand this
entire chapter and even the rest of the book without these equations. But if
you don’t mind a little more math, then these three equations may make the
concepts clearer.
This aside will focus on the most basic math used by Einstein and others to
describe special relativity and how clocks differ between frames using three
simple algebraic equations. I know I promised you only one equation back in
the Adding Really Fast Speeds chapter, but back then I was young and
idealistic and trying to get you to read the rest of that chapter. The concepts
in this chapter are really key in laying the groundwork for the later chapter
Superluminal Communication, where we puzzle over what happens if you try
to communicate using superluminal texts.
The first equation of the three, the “distance equals velocity times time”
equation, is as simple as it sounds:
xp = vtp,
where xp is the position of your moving train friend relative to stationary you
in the frame of the platform, v is the speed of the train relative to the
platform, and tp is the elapsed time since the 10:00 phone tap in the frame of
the platform. Generally, the subscript p means “platform,” short for “as
measured in the frame of the platform.” Similarly, the subscript t means
“train” and is short for “as measured in the frame of the train.”

The second equation will be called the “relativistic position equation” and
reads
This formula, a Lorentz transformation, gives xp, which is the distance
between you and a train passenger in the frame of the platform. It gives this
distance in terms of xt (the distance between you and the train passenger in
the frame of the train) and tt (the elapsed time since the 10:00 phone tap in
the frame of the train).
Describing the equation in words, the first term gives the distance
between you and this train passenger at tt = 0, the time of the 10:00 phone
tap. The second term gives the changing position of the train passenger as the
train moves along the track. The denominator shows the relative distortion in
time and space between the two platform and train frames.
The third equation, another Lorentz transformation, will be called the
“relativistic time equation” and reads
This equation gives the time of events in the platform frame in terms of
distances and times of events in the train’s frame. The second term here is
quite strange but really interesting. It describes the non-synchronicity in time
between the train and platform frames. As before, the denominator shows
relative distortion. Both the relativistic position and time equations were
formulated by Einstein in a way to make sure that everyone measures the
same speed of light c for any relative speed.
Because the platform and train frames are interchangeable, all three of
these equations could be written with the subscripts p and t switched, but
with the velocity v going to v in the other direction.
That’s it. In terms of equations, besides the “adding fast speeds” equation
given in the Adding Really Fast Speeds chapter and the E = mc2 equation that I
snuck in earlier, which you knew anyway, you’re done, equation-wise.
Question 184: When your (platform) phone reads 10:05, you look directly across
into the passing train. What time do you read on the train phone directly across
from you?

A.    Earlier than 10:05.
B.    10:05.
C.    Later than 10:05.
D.    Something completely different.
E.    You look into the eyes of the train-phone holder and make an emotional
connection found only in Disney movies and physics books.
The best answer is C: the adjacent train phone reads a time later than
10:05. Specifically, calculations show that the time will read 10:11:28. How
can this be? Was I lying to you when I said that train phones run slow? No.
This train phone does run slow in the platform frame—it just shows a later
time. The key reason for the difference is time synchronization. The train
phone across from you at 10:05 was not synchronized with your phone at
10:00. It was synchronized with your train friend’s phone up the track.
That’s very different. As puzzled over in the chapter Superluminal
Simultaneity, it is not possible to synchronize all phones across all frames
—only phones across one frame.
When you tapped phones with your train friend, both phones reset to
10:00. Each phone then synced the other phones in its own frame. As fast
as light could travel, all of the platform phones began to read the same
time as your platform phone—all in the platform frame. Similarly, as your
train friend’s phone sync signal raced both up and down the track, all of
the train phones began to read the same time as your train friend’s phone
—all in the train frame.
OK, but how do the times on the just-synced train phones compare to
your platform phone? Calculations from the relativistic position equation
and the relativistic time equation reveal that train phones approaching
from the south now read ahead of your platform phone, while train phones
receding toward the north now read behind your platform phone.
After synchronization, all phones in all frames advance forward in time,
never backward. According to the platform frame, though, all of the train
phones run slow. Therefore, when you look across at the adjacent train
phone, you see a phone that was synced to a time in the future of your
phone, but then ran slow.

In sum, when your platform phone shows 10:05, the train phone
directly across from you shows 10:11:28, while up the track, your train
friend’s train phone shows 10:02:11. The earlier time on your train friend’s
phone was caused by time-slowing, but the later time on the adjacent train
phone was caused by the oddity of cross-frame time synchronization.
Question 185: At 10:05 on your phone, you point your camera toward your
receding train friend up the track. You then pinch-zoom the image and see for
yourself the time your friend’s smartphone displays. What time do you see?
A.    Before 10:05.
B.    10:05.
C.    After 10:05.
D.    Just that your train friend was checking Instagram.
The best answer is A: the time you see on your train friend’s phone is
before 10:05. The time you see is actually 10:01:38, which is even before
10:02:11. The time you see incorporates not only the seemingly slow speed
of the train’s phones, but the time it took for the light to reach you from
your train friend’s phone.
Question 186: You keep watching the pinch-zoom image of your friend’s
receding train phone. How fast do you see the time on it advance?
A.    Slower than your phone.
B.    At the same rate as your phone.
C.    Faster than your phone.
D.    Your phone’s power runs out, so now we’ll never know. “Don’t worry,” you
said. “Eighteen percent is plenty of power,” you said.
The best answer is A: you see your friend’s train phone run slower than
your phone. Actually, your friend’s train phone appears to advance at an
even slower rate than you would expect from simple Lorentz cross-frame
time-slowing. The reason is that there is an additional Doppler shift on the
time that is not included in the usual Lorentz time-slowing factor between
moving frames. This Doppler effect is observer dependent and affects not

only the apparent color of the display, but the speed at which time on it
appears to run. Platform companions to the north of your train friend—
now seeing the phone approach—could pinch-zoom your train friend’s
phone and see it run faster than the usual Lorentz time slowing.
Question 187: Is there a speed of an approaching train where you would see that
train’s approaching clocks run at the same speed as your platform clock?
A.    Yes, the Lorentz time-slowing in the moving frame can be exactly offset by
the Doppler time-quickening.
B.    No, because all clocks in motion appear to run slow.
C.    No, because all clocks directly approaching you appear to run fast.
D.    Yes, but only for one location on the approaching train—not for all
approaching clocks in general.
The best answer is C: no, because the Doppler shift will cause all
approaching clocks to appear to run at a faster rate than your static
platform clock. For a direct approach, the Doppler time-quickening will
always overpower Lorentz time-slowing.
After the train goes by, the Doppler time-quickening will switch to a
Doppler time-slowing, so that both the observer-dependent Doppler effect
and the frame-dependent Lorentz effect will work together to show the
clocks on the receding train as running slow.

CHAPTER 26
Superluminal Communication
Looking more closely at your new smartphone, you now see an app that
you hadn’t noticed before: FTL Text. After clicking on it and quickly
scrolling past a user agreement saying something about “not being
responsible for causality violations,” you confidently click “Agree” and find
out that this app sends out texts faster than light (FTL). Given your
newfound knowledge that shadows and laser spots can travel faster than
light, perhaps this app uses this type of FTL technology to communicate!
Wait, but how can it? Hmmm. What would happen if you used this app?
That’s what this chapter is about. [This chapter concludes the book-long
arc about how relativity connects faster-than-light and back-in-time
messaging.]
Question 188: Simultaneously, you send two superluminal text messages to your
train friend. One travels over the platform, which is static relative to you, while

the other travels along the moving train. Which message reaches your train friend
first?
A.    The platform text.
B.    The train text.
C.    They both arrive at the same time.
D.    It depends on whether there is a dining car on the train and how hungry your
text is.
The best answer is C: both the platform and train texts arrive at the
same time. The two messages travel side by side regardless of the speed of
the floor below.
Aside 20: Same Setup, New App: FTL Text
The next few questions will continue the line of questioning used in the last
chapter: Superluminal Smartphones. The main difference is that now your
smartphone can use FTL Text to send out superluminal texts.
To recap, you stand on a train platform in a long line of platform
companions. All of your platform companions’ smartphones are synchronized
to yours. A friend of yours is approaching on a train moving at 90% of the
speed of light (which can be written 0.9 c) relative to you. All of the
passengers on the train have their smartphones synchronized to your train
friend’s smartphone. When your train friend passes you, both of your phones
read 10:00 exactly. With this setup, the powerful new FTL Text app, and the
results of the previous chapters, we are finally ready to explore what happens
if we try to communicate superluminally! Ready?
Question 189: At 10:05, you adjust the slider on your FTL Text app to send out a
superluminal text message at 1,000 times the speed of light (1,000 c), relative to
the platform, to your train friend. At that moment, your train friend, moving at
90% of c (0.9 c), is 4.5 light-minutes up the track in the inertial frame of reference
of the platform. Your FTL text is so fast that it takes just a fraction of a second to
reach your train friend, in the platform frame. One of your platform companions
is standing directly adjacent to your train friend when the FTL text is received by
your train friend. At that time, what time does that platform companion see on
their own phone?
A.    Just after 9:55.

B.    Just after 10:00.
C.    Just after 10:05.
D.    What happened to the a.m. or p.m.? Is there no night or day in this world?
The best answer is C: just after 10:05. Since all of the platform phone
clocks are synchronized, when one reads 10:05, so do they all. In the frame
of the platform, the FTL text moves so fast that little platform time passes
before it is received. Therefore, your platform companion’s phone has not
had much time to advance past 10:05. Specifically, my computer program
calculates that about 0.27 seconds will have passed, so your platform
companion’s phone reads 10:05:00.27 (10 hours, 5 minutes, and 0.27
seconds).
Question 190: When your FTL text is received, what time does your train friend
read on the adjacent platform companion’s phone?
A.    Just after 9:55.
B.    Just after 10:00.
C.    Just after 10:05.
D.    Something completely different.
E.    They won’t tell you, but from the troubled look on their face, it was
something really strange.
The best answer is C: just after 10:05. Specifically, your train friend
would read exactly the same time on the platform companion’s phone as
would your platform companion: 10:05:00.27.
The point here is, again, that a phone displays what it displays. Anyone
in local proximity to the phone can read it and it will read the same, no
matter the reader’s relative speed. The physical principle that demands this
is called “locality.”
Question 191: When your FTL text is received, what time does the adjacent
platform companion read on your train friend’s phone?
A.    Between 9:55 and 10:00.
B.    Between 10:00 and 10:05.

C.    Just after 10:05.
D.    Your session has timed out. Please try syncing again.
The best answer is B: between 10:00 and 10:05. Your train friend’s
phone, as well as every phone on your friend’s train, runs slow compared to
every phone on the platform, as determined in the frame of the platform.
In the platform frame, five minutes on a platform clock takes about 2
minutes and 11 seconds on the slow-ticking train clock.
But that time slowing is not the whole story. To know what time your
train friend’s phone reads, the travel time of the FTL text must be
included. Including that, the time on your train friend’s phone reads
(about) 10:02:10.50.
Question 192: When your FTL text is received, what time does your train friend
read on their own phone?
A.    Between 9:55 and 10:00.
B.    Between 10:00 and 10:05.
C.    Just after 10:05.
D.    OMG! Can you mind your own business for even two seconds? They don’t
need to tell you about every FTL text they receive.
Your train-friend’s phone reads 10:02.10.50 for everyone near the
phone. As this time is between 10:00 and 10:05, the best answer is B.
Question 193: To review, you sent your superluminal FTL text at 10:05 platform
time, and your train friend received it at 10:02:10.50 train time. Did your
communication go back in time?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.
C.    In some ways but not in others.
D.    It is not possible to say.
E.    Oh no. I didn’t realize that strange contradiction. Do I need to go back and
reread the previous questions from this chapter?

The best answer is C: your text went back in time in some ways but not
in others. Your message was indeed received at an earlier time in the train
frame, and so in this sense went back in time. However, your
communication did not go into the past of the platform frame. In the
platform frame, your message was sent at 10:05 and arrived just after 10:05.
Considering just your inertial frame, which is also the platform’s inertial
frame, the text did not go back in time.
One might attribute this back-in-time effect as just a clerical difference
between the synchronization of platform phones and train phones. In
general, platform clocks just do not agree with train clocks. Is that so bad?
Question 194: To review (again), you send a 1,000 c superluminal text (FTL text)
at 10:05 platform time, and your train friend receives it at 10:02:10.50 train time.
Immediately upon receipt, your train friend decides to reply with a superluminal
text back. This reply FTL text moves at 1,000 c in the train frame. What time does
your phone read when you receive this reply text?
A.    Before 10:05.
B.    10:05.
C.    After 10:05.
D.    Something completely different.
I am not going to answer this question now. You are not ready for it.
Things are going well in your life just now—I can tell—and finding out the
answer to this question might be too jarring.
OK, OK, I’ll answer it. Calm down! The answer is A: before 10:05.
What? To be clear, you receive the return text before you sent the initial
text. Does this sound OK to you? How is your life going now?
Question 195: Which direction did your superluminal text go?
A.    From you to your train friend.
B.    From your train friend to you.
C.    It depends on the frame.
D.    It depends on your sanity.

The best answer is C: it depends on the frame. In your platform frame,
your superluminal text went from you to your train friend. However, in the
train’s frame, your superluminal text went from your train friend to you.
The two frames do not agree. This strange directional switch is pondered in
greater detail in the chapter Craze c.
Things get even stranger if you consider that information in the text
you sent was unknown to your train friend. How could your train friend
reply to a text incorporating information unknown to them? A situation like
this is called a “causality violation” when the relation between cause and
effect becomes reversed. The situation featured here is one of many
paradoxical situations that can occur when causality is violated. To make
sense of our world, it is usually postulated that causality cannot be violated.
Question 196: It is the next day. On this day, when your train friend again passes
you at 0.9 c, not only are both phones synced to 10:00, but identical notifications
appear on each phone. Both alerts say that when that phone’s time progresses to
10:05, it will automatically send a 1,000 c superluminal text to the other phone
unless it has already received a superluminal text from the other phone. What
happens?
A.    Your phone sends the superluminal text at 10:05 platform time, but does not
receive a text from your train friend’s phone.
B.    Your phone receives a superluminal text before 10:05 platform time, so does
not send out a text.
C.    Your phone sends a superluminal text at 10:05 platform time and then
receives a superluminal text from the other phone.
D.    Your phone neither sends nor receives any texts.
E.    There is no logically consistent answer to this question.
The best answer is E: there is no logically consistent answer to this
question. We’ve worked a long time to get here, and we have finally
reached the true root of the problem with superluminal signaling. Whew!
Please, put this book down for a minute and go around and give everyone
you see a high five.
Let’s review, if your phone sends out its 1,000 c superluminal text at
10:05 platform time, then your train friend will receive your text at

10:02:10.50 train time. Therefore, your train friend’s phone will not send
out a superluminal text to you.
However, the situation is symmetric between the platform and the
train. Therefore, if your train friend’s phone sends out a 1,000 c
superluminal text at 10:05 train time, then your phone will receive it at
10:02:10.50 platform time. According to the pre-programmed app, your
phone will not send out a superluminal text if it received one first.
Therefore, your phone will not send out a superluminal text.
Now consider both results together: each phone will not send out a
superluminal text because each phone has already received a superluminal
text from the other phone. But if each phone did not receive a text, it
would send out a text. There seems to be no logical way out. This type of
causality violation was noted even by Albert Einstein himself soon after he
formulated special relativity.
When applied to time travel more generally, the paradox is called the
grandfather paradox. The idea is that if you went back in time and killed a
grandparent before they had your parents, you could not exist to go back
and kill a grandparent.
To review, when fast superluminal messages are exchanged, we saw
that, if the communicators were separating, it was possible that the return
message would arrive before the first message was sent, violating causality.
In this case, you and your train friend were separating. Is that important?
Question 197: After learning all of this, your train friend decides to return and
never travel again. It’s just too dangerous for grandparents. On your train friend’s
return trip back to you, you decide to send another FTL text asking your train
friend to also reply faster than light. Do you receive a reply before you send your
FTL text?
A.    Yes, and now you get to decide whether to send the original text or not. You
are in “causal limbo!”
B.    No, you receive the reply message only after you send your message.
C.    There is no logical answer to this question.
D.    If I stop reading this book, will the universe go back to normal?

The best answer is B: you receive the reply text only after you sent your
text. There is no causal paradox here. Causality violations only occur when
the two communicators are moving away from each other. Even then, as
puzzled over in the Adding Really Fast Speeds chapter, the
communication speed must be faster than w = c2/v, where v is the
separation speed between the two communicators.
Question 198: How far back in time can superluminal messaging work?
A.    Only back to the time you send the message.
B.    Only back to the time when your phone was made.
C.    Only back to the time when you first read this chapter.
D.    Only back to the time your friend put a fork in that electrical outlet.
E.    Infinitely far back in time.
F.    Something completely different.
The best answer is E: in theory, superluminal messaging like this can
go back in time without limit. To better understand this, let’s go back only
to 10:00 when your train friend was passing you. Remember that your
friend’s train is headed past at 0.9 c. Furthermore, let’s assume that every
platform phone is synced to your phone no matter how far away it is.
Similarly, every train phone is synced to your train friend’s phone. Last,
let’s now push the FTL text app sliders all the way up to “infinitely fast,” so
that you can both send infinitely fast texts in your respective frames.
Now let’s look at the times on the phones. Let’s start with the platform
phones. All of the platform phones read the same time, which FTL texts
between them can verify. In other words, at the exact moment of 10:00, in
the frame of the platform, all of the phones along the platform read 10:00.
But what do the train phones read? In the frame of the trains, they all
read the same. For example, at 10:00 when your train friend was directly
across from you, all of the phones along the train read 10:00 in the frame of
the train.
But at 10:00, what do the train phones read in the frame of the
platform? Now comes the big difference. In the frame of the platform,
approaching train phones read times after 10:00, while receding train

phones read before 10:00. This is caused by the second “synchronization”
term in the “relativistic time equation” in the Superluminal Smartphones
chapter. Superluminal messages create time travel from the lack of
synchronicity between moving frames!
For example, at the exact moment of 10:00 in the platform frame, a
train phone that is one light-hour to your north, as measured in the
platform frame, reads 9:06. (Yes, this train is unusually long.) Therefore, an
infinitely fast FTL text sent from your platform phone at 10:00 would arrive
at this train phone when this train phone read 9:06, 54 minutes before you
sent it.
But the train really doesn’t matter. Or the phone. Or the person
holding the phone. Or 10:00. Let these things fade away. Any physical
thing that is moving away from you experiences time in your past. Any
physical thing moving toward you experiences time in your future.
The finite speed of light saves us from having back-and-forth light-
speed communications that go into the past. But superluminal
communications can do it. And, if the speed is fast enough, there’s no
limit.
Question 199: Your train friend returns. You both go into the train station and
compare phones. Do your phones again read the same time?
A.    Yes, since the motion was always symmetric, neither phone can be ahead of
the other.
B.    No. Your train friend had to accelerate to get back, so your phone aged more.
C.    This cannot be the famous twin paradox since you and your train friend are
not twins.
The best answer is B, your phone shows a later time. And yes, this is the
famous twin paradox in special relativity. Therefore, in theory, your train
friend could have returned to find the “Train Station of the Apes” far in
your future. The reason why your train friend is in your future, and that
you are not in your train friend’s future, is that your train friend actively
turned around, and so experienced multiple frames of motion. In contrast,

you experienced only one. That seemingly small technicality makes all the
difference.
Question 200: Shadows and laser spots can move faster than light, similar to FTL
texts. Can you use them to send superluminal messages?
A.    Yes, and we should move to implement this before our enemies do.
B.    No. Even though shadows and laser spots can move FTL, they cannot
transfer messages FTL.
C.    No. Even though shadows and laser spots can move FTL, they cannot
transfer locally created messages FTL.
D.    Not with shadows. They have a shady past.
The best answer is C: shadows and laser spots cannot transfer locally
created messages faster than light. Why not? Since you can make shadows
and laser spots move faster than light, why not use them to communicate?
Let’s look at laser spots. Your fancy new phone can send out laser
photons at c but not faster. These photons can create a moving laser spot,
which can move between points on a wall faster than light. But the
information originates at the laser, not at the laser spot on the wall.
Incorporating the time it takes for the laser light to go out from the laser to
the wall slows the information transfer. In fact, since the laser light travels
at speed c, the speed of information transfer from the laser—where the
information originates—to anywhere else is c at the fastest.
This is why you can use your phone to create laser spots that move
along distant walls FTL, but you can’t use your phone to create FTL texts
that move away from your phone FTL. The FTL app, as described, cannot
exist.
The same logic applies to shadows. The information content in the
shadow is created at the object casting the shadow, not at the wall where
the shadow is cast. Therefore, even though a shadow may move across a
wall faster than light, the information that is being transferred always moves
away from the light blocker at the speed of light, not faster.

PART IV
QUANTA
Chapter 27
Superluminal Quantum Shapes
Chapter 28
Superluminal Quantum Paths
Chapter 29
FTL Double-Slit Experiments in Your Basement
Chapter 30
FTL Double-Slit Observations across the Universe
Chapter 31
Superluminal Entanglement in Your Basement
Chapter 32
Superluminal Entanglement across the Universe
Chapter 33
How to Send Information Back in Time
Let’s stop pretending that light is familiar. It may be satisfying to think that
light is like a miniature bowling ball, because we understand bowling balls.
It may also be satisfying to consider that light mimics a water wave, because
we understand water waves. But really, light is rooted in the strange world
of quantum mechanics, a world that can be fantastically different from our
classical expectations. Therefore, the speed of light—and what it means to
go faster than light—is also rooted in quantum mechanics. In this section,
we puzzle over some of the strange but fascinating ways that faster-than-
light speeds may occur in quantum mechanics.
Aside 21: The Meaning of “Quanta”
Quanta is the plural of quantum. Quantum mechanics is the study of the
mechanics of the quantum, where “quantum” is a single quantity of the most

fundamental units of matter and energy, and “mechanics” describe how those
basic units act. Usually, “quantum mechanics” refers to quantum behavior
well below the speed of light and ignores particle-particle interactions.
Quantum theories exist, though, that work near light speed. These theories,
although more accurate, are usually much more complex.
At slow speeds, among other simplifying assumptions, quantum field
theory becomes the familiar quantum mechanics. String theory, given a few
limits and simplifying assumptions, becomes quantum field theory. Most
relevant to this book, though, is the quantum field theory called “quantum
electrodynamics” (QED). QED is spectacularly successful at making many
predictions involving photons and electrons. Since QED is not a standard
English term, in this book, quantum mechanics, when regarding photons, will
usually mean QED.

CHAPTER 27
Superluminal Quantum Shapes
A sphere is a shape. A blood cell has a shape. If we are to puzzle over the
speed of light limit, perhaps it would help to better understand what light
is, including its shape. That’s what this chapter is about, but let’s start with
two warm-up questions.
Question 201: What is the length of a photon?
A.    Its wavelength: the most commonly discussed photon length.
B.    Its coherence length: the distance over which a photon can have a quantum
interaction with other parts of itself.
C.    Its string length: the length of a photon in string theory, which is about 10−33
meters (also known as the Planck length).

D.    Zero: since any finite length moving at c appears relativistically contracted to
nothing.
E.    Photons have no clear or definite length.
The best answer in my opinion is E: photons, in general, have no clear
or definite length. This lack of definiteness can be attributed to several
origins. For one thing, it depends on our lack of certainty about when and
where the photon will interact next.
But photons are even more complicated. One way to estimate a
photon’s length by finding something called its “coherence length”—the
length suggested in answer B. As stated in the answer, the coherence
length of a photon is the distance over which a photon can have significant
quantum interactions with other parts of itself. A key interaction is
something called quantum interference, where the probability of a photon
being detected can be up to twice the probability expected normally
(called constructive interference) or as low as zero (caused by destructive
interference).
The coherence length is very different from the photon’s wavelength.
Many lasers emit photons that have a wavelength much smaller than the
width of a human hair but have a coherence length much longer than a
swimming pool.
It is also possible to define the length of a photon as the length of a
photon string in string theory. There, the photon and most fundamental
particle strings all have a length of about 10−33 meters, called the Planck
length. The Planck length is roughly defined as the scale where gravity and
quantum mechanics collide. However, no physical measurements directly
indicate that photons would have this length, which is why I did not choose
C as the best answer.
It is also possible to define the length of a photon by how long it takes
to interact, and then multiplying this time by the speed c to get a length.
One such interaction process is the absorption of a photon by an atom or
molecule. However, the times involved in the lab are usually so short
compared to how fast lab equipment operates that that the results say more
about the lab equipment than the photon.

Let’s now assume that a photon really does have some length—a length
it would measure in its own frame. For this to be possible, the photon
could only be moving really close to c. Then, by Lorentz contraction, the
photon length determined by observers in our motional frame would be
near zero—possibly too short to measure.
But what about if the photon was moving directly toward you?
Wouldn’t the effects discussed in the chapter How to Make Light Bulbs
Blink Faster than Light mean that you should see the length of the photon
as infinite? Yes! This observer-dependent Doppler lengthening will
overpower the speed-dependent Lorentz shortening so that the photon will
appear too long to measure. However, to observe the photon length like
this, you would have to see different parts of the approaching photon along
its length. Which you can’t. Which brings us back to answer E, that
photons have no clear or definite length.
Aside 22: What Is Interference?
You wake up in a void holding two flashlights and notice a small, circular disk
hanging from a thread a few meters away. Being smart, you figure out what to
do: you turn on a flashlight and center it on the disk. The disk shines with
reflected light. No surprise there. OK, now what? That was too simple. There
must be a surprise somewhere.
What about the second flashlight? That must be it. Carefully, without
diverting the beam from the first flashlight, you now also shine the second
flashlight at the same disk. But then the disk goes dark. It has stopped
reflecting light! What? When you turn one flashlight off, the disk again shines.
It doesn’t matter which one you shut off. What is happening?
A note flutters down that says that the second flashlight is designed to
emit light that arrives at the disk “totally out of phase” with the first
flashlight. The photons from the flashlights “interfered.” Specifically on the
dark disk, they displayed destructive interference.
You look more closely at the second flashlight and notice a dial that says
“phase.” So you now twist the phase dial on your second flashlight to read
“photons arrive totally in phase with first flashlight” and again shine it at the
same disk. The disk is now doubly bright. This is also caused by interference
between the two flashlight beams, but now with constructive interference.
Can this really happen? Interference, yes. But total darkness? Well, there
were a few tricks. The main trick was that there must have been light that

missed the disk. That’s because both flashlights emit energy that cannot just
disappear. Therefore, there must be as much constructive interference
(doubly bright) as destructive interference (totally dark). In everyday life, light
from normal flashlights has many photons of different phases, which hides
this cool effect.
Question 202: What is the width of a photon?
A.    0, really meaning that it is too small to measure.
B.    0.187 meters exactly.
C.    The photon’s wavelength.
D.    There is no single well-defined width.
E.    7. Or 8. No, 7 was right. OK, 6.
The best answer in my opinion is, again, D: photons have no single
well-defined width. Perhaps the most obvious guess at photon width is
answer C, the photon’s wavelength. But when picturing a photon, that
width seems to be measured along the photon’s length in its direction of
motion. So how can we define width for a photon?
Here is one idea: suppose you had an opaque wall and shined your
laser at it—a laser emitting light of some wavelength. Since the wall is
opaque, it will not allow the laser photons to pass, neglecting tunneling.
Now, let’s poke a hole in the wall. If the diameter of this hole is much
larger than the wavelength of the laser’s photons, then these photons will
pass through. But things get interesting when we dial down the diameter of
this hole.
With lasers, an increasing fraction of the laser light diffracts and spreads
out after passing through the hole. As the hole diameter becomes smaller,
less laser light passes through. One might guess that this is due to the width
of the light beam, but this occurs even when single photons are emitted
toward the hole’s center. Furthermore, the photons that do pass are
deflected at the hole into wider angles. This can be described by
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle: ∆x∆px > ℏ/2. The small hole constrains
∆x so that ∆px; the uncertainty in the photon’s sideways momentum
increases after passing the hole.

As increasingly smaller hole sizes are considered, fewer photons pass, as
expected. However, even when the hole size becomes much less than the
laser photon’s wavelength, some photons still pass. Perhaps, then, a good
measure of photon width is the smallest radius of a hole that passes a good
fraction of incident photons. Different from photon wavelength, this gives
a second way to define photon width.
But there is yet another way to define photon width—the radius of an
atom or molecule that can absorb a photon. Such atoms can be much
smaller than the wavelength of the incident photon. An example of this is a
21-centimeter radio wave (photon) that can be absorbed by a hydrogen
atom, an atom much smaller than 21 centimeters (cm). A 21-cm photon is
absorbed (or emitted) when the electron in the hydrogen atom flips its spin
relative to the atom’s proton.
Given these three different methods that each return different measures
of photon width, it seems reasonable to conclude that none of them is
uniquely correct. This can be interpreted as saying that photons have no
single well-defined width.
Question 203: What is the shape of a photon?
A.    A cylinder with rounded edges.
B.    A small ripple of a vast field.
C.    A short vibrating string.
D.    A photon has no shape.
E.    The shape of a photon cannot be known before it is measured.
F.    You’re not supposed to ask vague questions like this. Real science involves
asking only real experimental questions that result in real numeric answers.
The best answer is D: photons have no shape, although
mathematically, they can be accurately modeled as ripples in larger fields
(answer B) and vibrating strings (answer C).
Most objects that we experience every day are classical and have no
obvious quantum behaviors. It is human nature that when we come across
a new object, we compare it to things from our mental library of already-
experienced objects. And these classical objects have shapes. Therefore, we

humans just haven’t developed intuition about how quantum things
appear.
Photons, though, are inherently quantum mechanical. In this quanta
section of the book, we will ponder many of the ways that photons and
other quanta are just different from classical objects and from classical
definitions of shape. It is only when many quantum objects act together do
they show familiar “classical” behaviors and appear to have a shape as we
understand it.
Question 204: Do different photons have different shapes?
A.    Yes, photons are like snowflakes. Each is different and has a different shape,
but there are so many that to deal with them all, it is easiest to consider
them similar.
B.    No, photons are all identical.
C.    Photons can become out of shape if they don’t exercise.
The best answer is B: no, photons can all be considered identical. But
only in certain ways. Photons are identical in that any set of photons
created to have the same properties, for example energy, momentum, and
spin orientation, start out as being indistinguishable. Yet these seemingly
similar photons can come out of seemingly similar experiments differently.
For example, they can be detected in different places and with different
spins. What is the same is the probability map of where the photon might
be detected, for example, and the probability of it having a predicted spin.
Let’s look more closely at answer A: photons are like snowflakes. Suppose
you capture two snowflakes and look at them under a really powerful (and
cold) microscope. At least at the molecular level, you would find
differences. This is because snowflakes are combinations of a huge number
of water molecules clustered around a bit of grit. Even though the water
molecules arrange themselves on a six-sided crystal, that crystal has
imperfections such as molecular gaps. Also, each edge of the snow crystal
will acquire new water molecules slightly differently. In sum, with so many
water molecules involved and with so many possible positional

combinations, including gaps, it is statistically unlikely that any two
snowflakes will be the same.
Not so for photons. No known microscope will magnify a photon to see
little gaps in the internal structure. Or strands of photon hair. Or little
photon feet. Why not? Two reasons. First, no known microscope can see
that small. Second, to the best of our understanding, such small details just
don’t exist. Therefore, all photons are assumed to be structurally simple
and identical. And this type of exact minimal similarity is true well beyond
photons. Electrons and the most indivisible fundamental particles such as
neutrinos, muons, and quarks are also thought to be similarly simple and
identical.
Question 205: How can a large photon—a radio wave with the long wavelength
of 21 centimeters—be absorbed by a small hydrogen atom?
A.    21 centimeters is just a number and doesn’t correspond to anything that
really measures 21 centimeters.
B.    It takes a long time for a hydrogen atom to absorb a long-wavelength photon
—the time for a whole wavelength to pass the small atom.
C.    The atom oscillates over 21 centimeters during absorption.
D.    Energy is really the defining quantity for atoms, not size. The hydrogen atom
gains a small amount of energy when the 21-cm photon is quickly absorbed
even though nothing in the atom measures or moves 21 cm.
E.    It can’t. Physics is just a set of empirical postulates that are not guaranteed
to be consistent with each other.
F.    Oh no! You’ve found a glitch in the matrix of physics that proves that we all
live in a flawed simulation.
The best answer is D: energy is really the defining quantity when it
comes to photon absorption and emission. Although it is true that electrons
oscillating on a metal antenna can create photons with wavelengths similar
to the electron oscillation length, these same electrons can also create
photons of the same wavelength using much shorter oscillations. Reversing
this example shows that a small atom can absorb a long-wavelength
photon.

Question 206: If you stop a particle with mass, does its wavelength change from
finite to infinite at a speed faster than light?
A.    Yes, and that’s OK.
B.    No, the wavelength approximation doesn’t apply at speeds much slower than
light.
C.    Massive particles have wavelengths?
The best answer is A: the wavelength of a particle can expand to
infinitely long when that particle is stopped. To better understand this, let’s
look at answer C and admit that yes, massive particles can have
wavelengths. These wavelengths are called de Broglie wavelength and are
defined with velocity v in the denominator, which is why this wavelength
goes infinite when v goes to zero. Now, just because the wavelength of a
particle with mass can expand (or contract) faster than light does not mean
that momentum or any information moves faster than light. In fact,
although the wavelength is a distance, the particle’s speed over that
distance is not tied to any speed. Additionally, there are no known
experiments where such a fast wavelength change moves momentum or
locally created information faster than light.
Aside 23: What Is a Wave Function?
There may be many interpretations of quantum mechanics, but they all try to
interpret the same thing: the quantum wave function. In its simplest
conceptual and spatial form, the wave function of a “thing” just gives the
probability of that “thing” being detected in some place at some time.
A classical example involves your dog. Say you don’t know where your dog
is in right now. For amusement, you might guess probabilities: a 25% chance
of being in the in the front room, a 50% chance of being upstairs, and a 25%
chance of being outside. These probabilities are like a wave function of your
dog.
Suppose, then, that you see your dog outside. That is like a
“measurement” of your dog. Your measurement “collapses” your pooch’s
wave function to be 100% outside. At measurement, the old wave function
vanishes instantly since you know the exact whereabouts of your dog.
Wave functions in quantum mechanics usually describe objects with mass,
but what do they say about photons that have no mass? Then, in some simple

circumstances, the electromagnetic field can be a useful substitute, in
particular when light acts like a wave. And that is what will be used here.
In reality, only quantum objects have simple wave functions. Your dog is so
big and complex that it does not act, as a whole, quantum mechanically. There
is, though, an important question to contemplate: who let your dog out?
Question 207: A photon goes through a small hole—like the one that we used
previously to try to define photon width—after which experiments show that its
wave function fans out dramatically. The wide wave function means that the
photon could hit almost anywhere on a screen past the hole. But the photon does
hit somewhere, and only in one place. What happens to the rest of the wave
function? How fast does it change?
A.    The wave function instantly collapses everywhere to zero: faster than light.
B.    The wave function collapses at the speed of light.
C.    Wave functions can only grow or shrink at the fundamental frequency of the
wave, which is slower than the speed of light.
D.    No one really knows.
Einstein was not happy with the standard quantum mechanical answer
to this question. That answer is A: the wave function collapses instantly and
everywhere at once and therefore superluminally. Einstein called that
answer “spooky action at a distance.” How does the wave function in one
place know to go to zero when the photon is measured someplace else? In
quantum lingo, this is part of the quantum measurement problem.
Einstein acknowledged that quantum mechanics was a good theory in that
the mathematical predictions it made were useful. But because of effects
like this, he considered quantum mechanics to be incomplete. There had
to be, he thought, more to the story.
Today there remains much uncertainty, at least between contrasting
interpretations of quantum mechanics, about what happens to the wave
function of a particle as it is being measured and afterward. This indicates
to me that no one really knows, making D the best answer.
But what about a subjective observer? Surely, an observer far away
would not know immediately that the photon has been absorbed
elsewhere. Before that, definite information about the photon’s demise

could only approach at the speed of light. Until then, the observer may
hold out hope that they will be the lucky one to detect the coveted photon.
Therefore, for a subjective observer, B is also a reasonable answer.
Question 208: Can a photon bounce off another photon?
A.    Yes. Things bounce off each other all the time. Why not photons? Good for
them!
B.    No. Photons are bosons and bosons never interact.
C.    Yes, but only if there is a third particle nearby to carry away excess energy or
momentum.
D.    No. Since photons have no solid surface, they just go right through each
other.
The best answer is A: yes, two photons can collide. The collision “cross
section” between photons is another indication of each photon’s size and
shape. This cross section, though, differs depending on the photon’s energy
and what the photon hits. These photon cross sections are also very small.
Therefore, when colliding with a detector, the entire cross section might all
be attributed to the detector, which is why we are focusing on photon-
photon collisions.

The second answer, B, may seem correct to those who have learned
that all elementary particles can be classified into two types: interactive
fermions and noninteractive bosons. Although it is true that the photon is a
boson, it is not true that bosons, in general, do not interact. What bosons
don’t do is obey the Pauli exclusion principle. Fermions alone do that,
which keeps you from falling through the floor, for example.
However, it is true that photons specifically, being massless and
chargeless bosons, do not, in general, interact with each other much.
That’s why it is a perhaps surprising experimental fact that photons can
collide. The reason is really interesting: it is because photons, being
quantum particles, have a small chance of acting like another particle. And
some of these other particles do interact and collide. However, a photon
width consistent with measured collisions is really small—only around
10−20 meters.

CHAPTER 28
Superluminal Quantum Paths
Speed, you might think, is measured along a path. Cars travel along paths
—which I personally call “roads.” And cars have speeds along those roads,
sometimes measured by a devices I like to call “speedometers.”
Light also travels along paths. Or does it? Believe it or not, even that
statement is controversial in quantum mechanics. If you insist that photons
do travel along paths, then light’s speed can even be—yes, you guessed it—
faster than light. How that might happen that is what this chapter is about.
Aside 24: Understanding Quantum Mechanics
“I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics.” —
Richard Feynman (Character of Physical Law)
“Insanity is doing the same thing over and over again, but expecting
different results.” —Rita Mae Brown
“[Quantum mechanics] refers to ensembles of systems and not to
individual systems.” —Albert Einstein
Since quantum mechanics depends on performing the same experiments
over and over (creating Einstein’s “ensemble”) and expecting different results,
then by Brown’s definition and Feynman’s observation, understanding
quantum mechanics requires that you be insane.
Question 209: A photon goes from a light bulb through an empty universe to
your eye. What path does it take?
A.    0-paths: It does not take any path. How the photon gets from the bulb to
your eye is not a useful question because it is not measured along the way.

B.    1-path: It takes a single path that is a straight line because that is the
shortest distance between two points.
C.    ∞-paths: It takes infinitely many paths, one of which is a straight line, some
of which are slightly curved, and others that make strange curlicues going
around.
D.    It takes a path to your ear. Check your ear. See? Oh wait, that’s a coin. Sorry.
Different trick. My bad.
Although answer C is my personal favorite, answers A, B, and C all
apply in three different interpretations of quantum mechanics. These are
explained next.
Aside 25: The Three Types of Quantum Paths
0-paths: The first type of quantum path is “0-paths.” In this interpretation of
quantum mechanics, photons and particles do not take paths. With regard to
photons, the only important events are the photon emission and absorption.
Since the photon was not measured or detected going between the two, how
it got there is not important. The most famous 0-paths interpretation of
quantum mechanics is the Copenhagen interpretation.
1-path: The second type of path useful in quantum mechanics is the
“single path” usually abbreviated here as “1-path.” The most famous type of
single path occurs in classical mechanics. Believed to be the only path possible
for particles before the advent of quantum mechanics, the classical path was
detailed in the 1600s by Isaac Newton and remains the best way to describe
how big objects get from one place to another.
There is, however, another type of 1-path solution for light, one that is not
determined by classical mechanics. Here, a photon takes one path to a final

position predicted only by the photon’s quantum mechanical wave function.
Since the wave function gives only probabilities of where the photon will be
absorbed, this other 1-path solution includes an invisible wave that is
otherwise obscured.
“Is it true that the particle doesn’t just ‘take the right path’ but that it looks
at all the other possible trajectories? . . . The miracle of it all is, of course, that
it does just that.” —Richard Feynman (Feynman Lectures on Physics, Book 2,
Chapter 19-1))
∞-paths: The third type of quantum passage is called here “∞-paths.”
These paths are generally described by the path-integral formulation of
quantum electrodynamics (QED), first mentioned by Paul Dirac and later
expanded on by Richard Feynman. Taken literally, ∞-paths means that a
photon does not take just one path from emission to absorption, but every
allowable path that it can take, and all simultaneously.
Now ∞-paths is not controversial as a calculational tool, but to consider
that photons really do take all possible paths between emission and detection
—that is controversial. The ∞-paths interpretation may seem new and
strange, but it is quite likely that you have heard of it before. For example,
you may have heard that when two slits in a screen are open, a single photon
can go through both of them, not just one. You can puzzle over several
thought-provoking situations about this in the chapter FTL Double-Slit
Experiments in Your Basement.
A second way you have heard of the ∞-paths interpretation of quantum
mechanics is through the Schrodinger’s cat experiment. There, a cat in a box
can be characterized as both dead and alive. In quantum lingo, the cat is said
to be in a quantum superposition of the possible states of the cat that you
might see when you open the box. Although photon paths are more abstract,
the single cat being thought of as both dead and alive before you open the
box is conceptually similar to a single photon taking more than one path
before you see the photon.
If this isn’t crazy enough for you, there are even more interpretations of
quantum mechanics that are, again, very different. These include the many
worlds interpretation (cat found alive in one world, but dead in a parallel
world) and the transactional interpretation, just to name two that come up
briefly elsewhere in this book. Past that, these will not be further discussed.

Question 210: A small block is now placed directly in the line between the light
bulb and your eyes. What do you see?
A.    The small block (duh).
B.    Not the small block because the bulb illuminates only the other side (reverse
duh).
C.    A dim glow around the small block.
D.    That you need to find out who is placing these small blocks or you will
forever be kept in the dark.
The best answer is C: you see a dim glow around the block. The name
for this phenomenon is “diffraction,” but it can be quite satisfying to
understand using ∞-paths logic.
Let’s look first, though, at answer B: that you can’t see the block
because light only illuminates the other side. This is the classical 1-path
interpretation, which is logically correct using classical physics, where a
photon is modelled as, say, a single miniature bowling ball. But how then
do you see a glow around the block? The dim glow really occurs. It doesn’t
disappear when you change which interpretation of quantum mechanics
you prefer. Answer B just does not describe reality!
The 1-path classical interpretation also has conceptual difficulties. For
example, using classical logic, there is nothing for this miniature bowling-
ball photon to bounce off of that would bring it around the block and to
your eye. The block does not emit some attractive force that pulls around
photons previously headed in another direction.
For you to see a glow around the block, there must be light paths that
go around the block. In the ∞-paths world, before the block was placed,
these paths would have mostly cancelled each other out, making them

much fainter than the paths that went directly between the bulb and your
eye.
With the block in place, though, the direct paths don’t occur because
they hit the block so that the highest-intensity paths are now those that go
around the block. The block enhances the intensity along some of the
around-the-block paths because it ends some paths that would have
destructively interfered with them.
Aside 26: How a Single Photon Can Take Infinitely Many Paths
In the ∞-paths interpretation of quantum mechanics, a single photon takes
every path possible from a bulb to your eye, and there are infinitely many of
them. This does not mean that every direction you look will have the same
brightness. How brightness is determined is pretty strange, so before reading
on, please put on a helmet to keep your brain from exploding. A good
explanation of how this ∞-paths method works is given in a popular-level
book by Richard Feynman, one of its developers.
Picture that an imaginary wheel rolls once along each possible path—a
wheel with a notch at the top. As the wheel rolls along a path, the notch,
which started at the top when the photon left the light bulb, goes around and
around. The radius of the wheel is the wavelength of the photon, assumed
here to be very small compared to the length of the path itself. When the
rotating wheel reaches your eye, the final location of the notch is recorded. All
of the notch locations from all of the paths from each direction out from your
eye are then similarly recorded together on something we’ll call a “total
brightness circle.”
The total brightness circle is centered on the origin of an x and y axis.
Therefore, for a path where the notch came in straight up, it would be
recorded as (x,y) = (0,1). Straight down: (0,–1). At the far right: (1,0). Far left:
(–1,0). Some random orientation: possibly (–0.90,0.44). All final notch
locations must fall on the circle’s perimeter. [Math note (please ignore is

annoying): Orientation (–0.90,0.44) does fall on the circle’s perimeter since
(−0.90)2 + (0.44)2 = 1]
For each photon path coming in from one direction, we get a final notch
location. What should we do with all of them? Add them up! First, sum all of
the x values, and then, separately, sum all of the y values. At the end, draw a
line that connects (0,0) to (xsum, ysum). We’ll call this the “total brightness
line” from that direction. The length of this line—even if one or both of xsum
and ysum is negative—will be positive. The length of this line tells us
something very important: how bright the bulb appears to your eye from that
direction. The longer the length of the total brightness line, the brighter the
bulb appears to you, with brightness being built up over many photons.
For the unobstructed case, why does light appear to come directly from
the bulb to your eye? Why don’t you see light coming from every direction?
This is because there are paths that go from the bulb to you that are just
slightly different than the direct line. Therefore, these paths have nearly the
same length so that the wheels rolled on them arrive with their notches nearly
aligned. Therefore, these notches, from the direction toward the bulb, add up
with very little cancellation. It turns out that this is the only direction with a
group of paths where this happens. From other directions, all other paths
contribute wheel notches that are averaged out by other notches located, on
the average, uniformly around the total brightness circle.
Now let’s go back and use this technique to explain why the edges of the
block in the last question appeared bright. Without the block, those directions
appeared dark because all paths cancelled each other out. With the block,
many paths end at the block, leaving more near-block paths uncancelled. So
now these near-edge paths contribute the most uncancelled paths—and so
after many photons come in from that direction—now appear bright.
The bulb could emit many different colors of light, and each color would be
represented by a wheel of a different radius. High-energy light then
corresponds to short wavelengths and small wheels. Those wheels go around
many times along a path. Low-energy light corresponds to long wavelengths
and big wheels. Those wheels go around fewer times along the same path.
Question 211: Is the photon’s wave function the same as the paths in the ∞-
paths quantum formalism?
A.    Yes, they are just two ways of speaking of the same thing.
B.    No, but the ∞-paths formalism can be used to compute the wave function at
any time. In general, the paths contain extra information that is not included

in the wave function.
C.    According to the Photon Instruction Manual, Section 4, which I am sure you
read because you clicked “I Agree,” it is not actually the function of a photon
to wave. Some photons do it just to be polite.
The best answer is B: no, the paths are different from the wave
function. The photon’s wave function is a fundamental entity in quantum
mechanics that can be computed by several different means, one of which
uses ∞-paths math. The wave function at any place and time gives the
probability that the photon will be measured at that place and time. The
wave function does not say which paths a photon may take to get there.
However, adding up the contributions of all possible paths will give the
wave-function probability of the photon being measured at a given place
and time.
Question 212: How can a photon have only a single speed if it takes every
possible path?
A.    0-paths: The question is irrelevant because photons do not take paths.
B.    1-path: Photons take one path and have speed c all along this path.
C.    ∞-paths: The speed of photons along paths is not actually specified. This
speed can be superluminal so long as the time it takes between emission and
absorption is consistent with c.
D.    This is just semantics, not physics.
The best answer is C: In the mathematics of the path-integral
formalism of quantum mechanics, the speed of photons along the paths is
not specified. Therefore, they can have any speed, even a speed faster than
light (FTL), just so long as the speed actually measured between emission
and absorption is consistent with c. In the wheel analogy, the speed of the
wheel along the path was not given and is not important in determining
which paths appear brightest.
However, I do think that it is conceptually useful to consider that
photons always travel at speed c along each of the infinitely many paths
taken. Although speculative, this ∞-paths-c model helps make clear, for
example, why the photons in experiments, when timed, always have a

speed consistent with c. It also clarifies why the photons seen around the
edge of blocks always have a measured speed consistent with c, including
the extra distance of going around the edges. This model, pioneered by
Feynman, is explored in more detail in the Craze c chapter in the
Speculation section.
Question 213: You turn on your living room lamp and see the first photon from it
a fraction of a second later. In the ∞-paths model, this one photon took an
infinite number of paths to reach you. Did any of these paths go around the
planet Jupiter?
A.    Yes, and on these paths the photon went faster than light.
B.    No, paths that far away are not allowed.
C.    Do you see what craziness results when you assume photons take not only
one path but lots of paths? Also, don’t you think Jupiter’s got enough to do
already?
The best answer, according to conventional ∞-paths-FTL, is answer A:
even a photon traveling from your living room lamp takes some paths that
go around Jupiter before they reach you. And along those long paths, the
photon travels, as advertised, faster than light. Speculation about possible
limits to paths like these are contemplated in the chapter Craze c.
Question 214: What about photons moving through a fog? When you shine a
laser pointer through a fog you can see its path. Does a fog stop photons from
taking every possible path?
A.    Yes, the fog acts like a measuring device all along the photon’s path, so
photons can take only the illuminated path through the fog.
B.    No, the fog is just smoke and mirrors and doesn’t matter conceptually.
Photons still take every possible path.
C.    Finally, a sane question! This fog totally shows that this stupid “∞-paths”
nonsense is just fancy-sounding drivel.
The best answer is B, the fog does not matter. Photons that reflect off
the fog’s water droplets are not taking paths to the detector. They are taking
paths to you! That is why the fog can be considered a type of “smoke and

mirrors”—because the fog particles appear as smoke and reflect like
mirrors.
Even so, it does seem reasonable to assume that the photons that hit fog
particles were part of a line of photons going directly across the fog along a
single path. Why doesn’t the fog show any of these ∞-paths that this chapter
has been claiming? Einstein once questioned Heisenberg about how such
a fog seems to show that the 0-paths interpretation could be flawed.
To understand, let’s first consider that the photons you see were
reflected from fog particles. In the ∞-paths interpretation, there are two sets
of paths that each of these fog photons is taking. The first set is between the
laser and a fog particle, and the second set is between the fog particle and
your eye.
In the first set of paths, a single photon can be considered to be taking
every path from the laser to the fog particle that it hit. You are not seeing
those paths. You just see illuminated fog particle. In the second set of
paths, a single photon comes from that fog particle to you. This is just like
the case of looking at the light coming from a bulb puzzled over earlier this
chapter. You see light primarily from the direction of the fog particle
because light on other paths destructively interferes.
Let’s now consider paths that went from the laser directly to the
detector. You did not see them as they traveled undetected along the whole
route. Photons that did not hit fog particles are still taking every possible
path to get to the detector. They are not affected by the photons that were
reflected off this direct path by fog particles.
In this case, in the ∞-paths worldview, nature seems mischievous: the
illuminated fog particles line up, which seems to indicate that the photons
took a single route straight across. Where you don’t see the fog particles,
there are paths every which way. However, these paths cancel each other
out. Is nature deceptive? One approach to answering this question is to give
a single photon a simple choice of taking one of two distinct paths. Which
path will it take? Or will it take both? That’s what we will ponder in the
next chapter.
Aside 27: How ∞-Paths Create the Uncertainty Principle

A single photon goes through a small hole like the one considered in the
Superluminal Quantum Shapes chapter. Consider now that past this hole,
every photon path continues on in a straight line to a nearby wall. If the hole
is small compared to the wavelength of the photon, then the difference
between the path lengths to many places on the wall are also smaller than the
photon’s wavelength. Therefore, these paths will interfere constructively, and
the photon could end up almost anywhere on the detection wall.
If the hole is big compared to the photon’s wavelength, however, the paths
that go through different places in the hole will end up differing by more than
the photon’s wavelength, in particular for paths that bend significantly at the
hole. These highly bent paths will therefore end up interfering destructively,
on the average, leaving mainly the low-bending paths—straight out from the
hole—to interfere constructively. Therefore, the photon will likely end up in a
small circle on the detection wall.
In sum, the smaller the hole, the wider the spray of constructive-
interference photon paths from the hole, and the larger the spot on a screen
past the hole where a photon will likely be detected. This is called diffraction.
But this is also a geometric demonstration of the uncertainty principle. This
∞-paths geometric reconstruction of Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle is
discussed in Feynman’s book QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter.

CHAPTER 29
FTL Double-Slit Experiments in
Your Basement
Dig a basement. If you have a basement already, dig a sub-basement. Good
job. Thank you! Now, just next to the south wall of your new basement,
place a light bulb. Just north of the bulb, place a big sheet of cardboard
parallel to the south wall. Excellent. Now make two vertical slits in the
cardboard right next to each other. The idea is that light from the bulb will
go through these slits and make a pattern on the north wall. Very nice.
Now go upstairs and make up some story about where you’ve been all day.
What you have created is a double-slit experiment. This experiment has
been described as one of the most important in all of physics and the single
most basic experiment at the heart of quantum mechanics. Each photon
from the bulb goes through one or both slits and impacts the north wall. If
information exists on which slit each photon goes through, the brightness
pattern on the north wall will be just two bright stripes—fuzzy versions of
the projection of the bulb through each slit onto the wall. But if
information does not exist on which photons went through which slits, the
brightness pattern on the wall will be different. Then the illumination
pattern on the north wall will be a series of thinner fuzzy stripes that
become increasingly dim toward the east and west walls. These stripes are
an interference pattern between the light emerging from the two slits. The
brightest bands are due to constructive interference, while the dimmest
bands are due to destructive interference.

Question 215: Can the double-slit experiment produce an interference pattern
when only a single photon is released at a time?
A.    Yes, because photons can also interfere with themselves.
B.    No, photons can only interfere with other photons.
C.    50% yes and 50% no. (Because quantum mechanics.)
The best answer is A: yes, individual photons can interfere with
themselves. Dirac is famous for saying that photons only interfere with
themselves, although modern experimentation has shown that is not
strictly true.
In the 0-paths interpretation, an immeasurable wave function goes out
from the bulb, goes through the two slits, and impacts the north wall.
When striking the north wall, the entire wave function collapses at once as
the photon is detected. Where the photon is detected is quantum
indeterminate, with the likelihood detection determined by the strength of
the wave function at different places along the north wall.
Alternatively, in the ∞-paths interpretation, each photon takes every
possible path between the bulb and the north wall. Since two slits are open
between the bulb and the wall, paths go through each slit. When reaching
the north wall, the quantum phases for all of the paths are added, which
here includes paths going through both slits. Opposite quantum phases
cancel each other out: destructive interference. Similar quantum phases
add to each other: constructive interference. When all the phases from all
the paths are added, those places with more constructive interference
appear brighter than places with more destructive interference. This is the

same as the total brightness line used in the analogy in the Superluminal
Paths chapter.
Aside 28: The Difference between Observer Ignorance and
Quantum Indeterminacy
Quantum theory treats ignorance and indeterminacy differently. If something
is knowable but you don’t know it, you are ignorant of it. If something is
quantum indeterminate, then not only does nobody know it, it may be
unknowable.
Here’s an example. An electron heads toward the two slits of a double-slit
experiment. Your friend sees it go through one of the slits but your friend
doesn’t tell you which one. Therefore, you are ignorant of which slit the
electron went through. As more electrons fly, you remain ignorant of which
slit each electron went through. However, since the impact screen where the
electron lands shows no interference, you deduce that each electron did go
through only one slit. There are some strange exceptions to this that I will not
go into here.
Alternatively, for another set of electrons, an interference pattern appears.
Even though in this case your ignorance of which slit each electron goes
through seems the same, there is a difference. In this case the “which slit”
information was quantum indeterminate. You will not be able to find anyone
or any recording device able to tell you which electron went through which
slit.
Therefore, the difference between observer ignorance and quantum
indeterminacy is more than just words. It is physical and measurable.
Ignorance is an observer-dependent effect, but quantum indeterminacy is
embedded in observer-independent objective reality.
Alternatively, 
“observer 
ignorance” 
can 
be 
termed 
“subjective
uncertainty,” while “quantum indeterminacy” can be termed “objective
uncertainty.” Phrasing it like this makes it more clear that the first is a
subjective effect seen by a specific observer, while the second is always true in
objective reality.
Note, though, that there is debate as to whether objective reality even
exists in quantum mechanics. An example hypothetical experiment named
“Wigner’s Friend” posits that Wigner and his friend may collaborate on an
experiment where each not only achieves different results, but each interprets
it as objective reality. For example, Wigner’s friend may live in a box with
Schrodinger’s cat and knows firsthand if this cat is dead or alive, while Wigner
stays outside the box and considers the cat both dead and alive. For this book,

however, a single objective reality will be assumed, even in the quantum
world, in particular after measurements are made.
Question 216: In the corner you find that fog machine you used for that crazy
party you hosted last year. Remember? Anyway, it still works, and you use it to
create a light fog around your entire basement. Between the slits and north wall,
you now see two bright areas emanating from the slits and extending to the
north wall. You go up close to the north wall and look closely at it again. What do
you see?
A.    You see no interference lines because the fog has forced photons to go
through individual slits.
B.    You see interference lines because the fog did not force the photons to go
through individual slits.
C.    You see a strange shadow cast into the fog of someone coming toward you
with an axe.
The best answer is B, you would still see an interference pattern,
although fainter. It is fainter because photons that hit fog particles do not
hit the north wall.
Furthermore, you notice that photons that hit fog particles just past the
slits are illuminated in only two bright areas—one going out from each slit.
There, photons appear to have gone through just one slit. Far from the slits,
however, fog particles appear to have several bands of dark and light,
indicating interference. Therefore, far from the slits, photons appear to
have gone through both slits.
This is so strange that we should ponder it more. Near the slits, it looks
like 100% of the photons went through just one slit. Far from the slits, it
looks like 100% of the photons went through both slits. But aren’t these the
same photons? No new photons were created after the slits. And this works
just the same when the bulb releases only one photon at a time.
Question 217: Do photons transition from going through one slit to going
through both slits as they move away from the slits?
A.    Yes, the more a photon moves away from the slits, the more it goes through
both slits.

B.    No, photons must go through either one slit or two. There is no “transition.”
C.    It depends on the observer. Even distant photons can go through one slit if
an observer wants them to.
D.    It depends on inanimate trackers. If a photon can be tracked as going
through only one slit, then that photon will go through only one slit.
E.    Insert your own joke here and receive 10 LaughCoins!
The most important point is that answer A is wrong, however logical it
may seem. Considering that a photon can change its past as it moves does
not align with any interpretation of quantum or classical mechanics.
Therefore, what seems like it must happen just cannot.
Let’s start with the 1-path interpretation from classical mechanics. If
Isaac Newton understood that when a single photon at a time is emitted
from the bulb that interference bands appear in the fog only far from the
slit screen, he would be at a loss to explain it. He might just throw his arms
in the air, give up physics, and spend the rest of his days tracking down
currency counterfeiters. Alternatively, he might be very grateful to you for
calling this to his attention and possibly go on to invent part of quantum
mechanics back in the 1600s.
OK, but how about the ∞-paths interpretation? The ∞-paths calculation
is a quantum sum over well-defined paths. There are no “photon goes
through one slit but then, without going back, changes to going through
both slits” paths in the sum. So, seemingly logical answer A does not even
occur in the strange logic of ∞-paths quantum mechanics.
[Caveat paragraph—please ignore unless you like gory details: In ∞-
paths, a photon rarely goes through just one slit. What is meant by
“through just one slit” in ∞-paths is that the quantum sum of paths through
one slit add constructively much more than paths through the other slit.]
In the 0-paths interpretations, there is no philosophical problem. Since
photons are not associated with any paths, they are also not associated as
going through any slits. A popular catchphrase for this 0-paths headache-
avoidance system is “shut up and calculate.” Since answer A assumes paths,
it is not favored even here.
Past that, answers B, C, and D are all OK in different quantum
interpretations.

Question 218: If a photon is considered to go through both slits, is it considered
to have different speeds through each slit?
A.    Yes. Although it is possible, in theory, that the speeds are the same, the
probability is practically zero.
B.    No. The photon always has speed c on every path, even through both paths
of a double-slit situation.
C.    The path-integral calculation that sums up paths does not attribute speeds
to these paths.
D.    This question is nonsensical because photons do not take paths. Also,
photons are not moving points. Also, photons do not have regular quantum
wave functions.
The answer to this question is not known, and all of these answers can
be considered correct in different quantum interpretations. Even so, all
interpretations are designed to agree with measurements.
About answers A and C: since the ∞-paths interpretation does not
dictate the photon’s speed along these paths, each photon may be
considered to have a different speed through each slit. Speeds can even be
superluminal. The only constraint is that the measured total photon flight
time of each photon must be consistent with c.
Even so, I like answer B the best. Demanding the photon move at
speed c on each path does not change the expected brightness and even
explains detection times in other cases, such as when one slit is covered.
Question 219: You shift the screen with the two slits from side to side. Can this
cause the interference pattern on the north wall to shift faster than light?
A.    Yes, interference patterns are strange and strange things can do even
stranger things.
B.    No, the interference patterns are made of light, and light must move at c.
C.    Shifting the slit screen will kill the interference pattern.
D.    The slits slide off the screen and onto the floor. You couldn’t just leave it
alone, could you?
The best answer is A, the interference pattern can shift faster than light.
Here, the interference pattern is similar to a spot created by a laser beam.

The laser spot’s motion is not the motion of a real object that can transfer
momentum, but rather the orchestrated arrival of unrelated photons. The
interference pattern between the two slits also does not transfer momentum
but orchestrates the arrival of unrelated photons.
Question 220: If you move the slit screen in a set pattern, can you use the
shifting interference pattern on the north wall to communicate faster than light?
A.    Yes, why not? Soon you’ll be famous!
B.    No, that would be wrong.
C.    It depends on the pattern. Some patterns are forbidden, while others are not.
D.    I asked my mom this same question when I was a kid. “Shut up,” she said.
“Eat your ice cream,” she said.
The best answer is B: no, you cannot send faster-than-light messages by
shifting the slit screen. Even though the interference pattern shifts
superluminally on the wall, the photons that go from the slit screen to the
north wall move only at c. Since you are trying to communicate from the
slit screen to the north wall, you are limited to c.
Question 221: You notice that the distance between the bands on the north wall
is slightly larger than the width of your head. You decide to stand directly in front
of one the bright bands and look back toward the screen with two slits on the
south side of your new basement. Can you see both slits?
A.    Yes, why not?
B.    No, the slits are too fuzzy to discern individually.
C.    You step on a roller skate unexpectedly and roll into a discarded vacuum
cleaner. You can’t remember what happened next yourself, but you soon
discover a video of it on TikTok.
The best answer is B: no, you cannot resolve the slits. They appear
together as one fuzzy blob. Squinting won’t help, assuming you already
have good vision. The photons you see went through both slits and you are
standing in a place where their brightness constructively interferes.

Alternatively, you could (carefully) step to either side and stand in a
darker region where the light from both slits combines and destructively
interferes. At the theoretical minimum, it would be completely dark, and
you might have trouble believing that any light at all was passing though
the slits.
Question 222: The next day, you go down to your new basement and find a metal
bar near the north wall at eye level connecting the east and west walls. In the
middle of this bar is a big lens wider than the distance between the interference
bands. The bar can be rotated so that the big lens is either parallel to the floor, or
parallel to the south wall. In the latter orientation, you can look through the lens
toward the south wall and the slits, which you now do. You remember that,
without the lens, the slits appeared too close together to discern individually. You
stand in a bright band and then rotate the lens so that you look through it. Can
you see both slits?
A.    Yes, each slit is now clearly visible.
B.    No, the slits are still too fuzzy to discern individually.
C.    You remember that the local observatory reported that the big lens from one
of its telescopes was missing, and you wonder where it could have gone.
The best answer is A, yes, through the lens, each slit is now clearly
visible. Be sure to be standing in the right place—near the focal point of
the lens—when you look through.

Question 223: Since you can now see both slits, can you tell which photon goes
though which slit?
A.    Yes. When a photon goes through a slit and then hits your eye, the direction
toward that slit—and only that slit—momentarily lights up.
B.    No. Sometimes in response to a single photon, both slits appear to light up,
and then you can’t tell which slit that photon went through.
C.    No. Sometimes in response to a single photon, a direction midway between
the two slits momentarily lights up, and then you can’t tell which slit that
photon went through.
D.    You decide there must be more important things to do with your life than
trying to match photons with slits in your basement.
The best answer is A: yes, you can now tell which photon goes through
which slit. For each photon, a single slit will light up. You will never see
both slits light up from a single photon because a single photon can only
be detected once by your eye.
Let’s think about this using the ∞-paths interpretation. There, didn’t the
photon really go through both slits? Yes, but paths that went through one
slit add constructively much more than the paths that went through the
other slit. Therefore, when measured, the photon direction is much more
likely to line up with one slit than the other. It is unlikely that the photon
would appear to line up with a direction midway between the slits. Here
and in the rest of the book, in the ∞-paths interpretation, this is what is
meant when a photon is said to go through just one slit.
Question 224: You can rotate the lens so that you can just as easily look through
it as not look through it. Can you control whether photons will go through one slit
or two by whether or not you look through the large lens?
A.    Yes, you are that powerful.
B.    No, just because you can see what is going on doesn’t mean you can control
it.
C.    If you would just turn off that annoying light, you wouldn’t have this
problem.

Both answers A and B can be considered correct, but my favorite
answer is A: yes, you are that powerful. What is not controversial is that
what you do is perfectly correlated with the result. If you choose to look
through the large lens, you will see photons arriving from individual slits,
and if you choose to rotate the bar so that you do not look through the lens,
your small eye, with comparatively blurry vision, will see photons that
interfered and so went through both slits.
This situation is a type of Wheeler’s delayed-choice experiment,
because it was first proposed by John Achibald Wheeler in 1978. An
amazing feature of this experiment is that, in theory, you can delay your
choice about how you look at the slits until after a photon has passed the
slits.
Note that any observer or camera at the north wall looking through the
lens at the slits will only observe photons going through one slit. Therefore,
it is really the lens that is important, not the specific observer. The lens
makes the photon paths that go through it quantum-determinate, which
breaks the interference pattern. When the lens is rotated sideways, then
photons cannot go through it constructively, so they still take paths that are
quantum-indeterminate and interfere.
What is controversial is whether this was cause and effect. Did rotating
the lens so that you could look through it cause the photons you saw to go
through just one slit? Or did these photons already pass through a single
slit, and you just measured it?
Alternatively, perhaps you should give in, endorse the 0-paths
Copenhagen interpretation, and just stop thinking that photons take paths.
Last, perhaps your basement is so small that there was feedback
between you and the slits. If so, what if the slits were really far away? Could
there be feedback even then? These questions and more will be pondered
next in the chapter, FTL Double-Slit Observations across the Universe.

CHAPTER 30
FTL Double-Slit Observations
across the Universe
Let’s scale this up. Perhaps the quantum strangeness of the double-slit
experiments in your basement—described last chapter—was not strange
enough for you. Perhaps the small size of your basement, when compared
to how far light can go in just a second (almost to the Moon), just made
quantum strangeness unimpressive for you. So here’s what we’re going to
do. We’re going to do it all again across the universe. At such large
distances, say over a million light-years, does quantum strangeness persist?
Unfortunately, upon close inspection, it turned out that expanding your
basement to probe quantum strangeness across the universe was not fully
covered by this book’s budget. Fortunately, nature itself provides us with a
double-slit experiment that does just this, and it is centered on an object
called a gravitational lens. When a galaxy, for example, lines up in front of
a distant quasar, it becomes a gravitational lens and splits the image of that
background quasar into multiple images, two that we will focus on here.
[Caveat paragraph—please ignore unless you like gory details: We will
typically assume that both images are nearly the same brightness, and that
if you timed a photon on one path, it would arrive nearly at the same as the
time as on the other path with a difference less than the coherence time.]

Suppose that the two quasar images that go on opposite sides of the
gravitational 
lensing 
galaxy 
are 
observed 
with 
two 
telescopes
simultaneously: one large and one small. The small telescope cannot
resolve both quasar images, and so peering through it shows the two quasar
images as a single blurry blob. You can’t tell which photons came from
which quasar image.
The large telescope, however, has a lens so large that it can resolve the
two quasar images. Peering through it, you can see the two quasar images
separately, so you can tell which photons came from which image.
The small telescope is now placed just in front of the large telescope. It
blocks only a small fraction of the light that would have impacted the
larger telescope.
Now consider a single photon that was released from the quasar toward
the galaxy gravitational lens. This photon passed through the galaxy lens
long ago and is now detected by both the small and large telescopes. When
you look through the small telescope, you cannot tell which side of the
galaxy this photon passed. In contrast, a telescope friend looking through
the large telescope can see which side of the galaxy lens the photon passed.
Question 225: Can your telescope friend looking through the large telescope tell
you, the person looking through the small telescope, which side of the galaxy this
photon passed?
A.    Yes, that sounds OK to me.
B.    No, you are seeing part of an interference pattern involving both images,
which means the photon you saw went around both sides of the galaxy lens,

not just one side.
C.    Something completely different.
D.    If this telescope person was really your friend, they would let you look
through the large telescope too.
The best answer is C: something completely different. This is because
this scenario is not possible, given that detection destroyed the photon. If
one telescope detects the photon, then the other telescope cannot detect
that same photon. Therefore, either the small telescope saw the photon
and the photon went around both sides of the galaxy, or the large telescope
saw the photon and the photon went around only one side. This may seem
like a nitpick, but individual photon identity is a key factor in double-slit
experiments.
[Caveat paragraph—please ignore unless you like gory details: Now, it
is possible in some limited capacity to detect photons without destroying
them. Such weak measurements can make things more complicated, but
they can’t defeat the underlying principles. As with the rest of this book, it
is assumed that photons are destroyed when they are measured.]
Why did we assume that the inability of the small telescope to resolve
both images was equivalent to seeing an image that went past both sides of
the galaxy, not just one? As discussed last chapter, that is because the small
telescope fits completely inside one band of the interference pattern
created by both images. And to see constructive interference, for example,
both images need to be operating.
Question 226: Why does the size of the telescope matter? Little telescope, big
telescope. Who cares? Doesn’t a single photon go through only a small part of the
lenses (or mirrors) in any telescope?
A.    Yes, each photon goes through only a small part of any telescope. Therefore,
it does not matter if the telescope is big or small, so long as it is big enough
for the photon to pass.
B.    No, even a single photon goes through an entire telescope, including every
part of every lens and mirror. Therefore, the telescope’s size is important
even for individual photons.

C.    The size of the telescope is only useful mathematically. Trying to figure out a
photon’s path through the telescope is not important to science and can lead
to philosophical confusion.
D.    The size of the telescope is primarily useful socially. The bigger the telescope
you use, the more you will impress your friends, and the more invitations you
will receive to lavish science parties.
The first three answers to this question could have been prefaced 1-
path, ∞-paths, and 0-paths, respectively, like they were in the Superluminal
Quantum Paths chapter. Answer A may seem right, but it is actually a
classical 1-path answer and does not fit the quantum situation being
analyzed here.
The best answer is B for the ∞-paths interpretation of quantum
mechanics, but C for the 0-paths interpretation. My preferred answer is B,
where single photons, each taking multiple paths, go through the entire
telescope.
Alternatively, answer C, summarizing the 0-path interpretation, may be
considered correct where the mathematical wave function of the photon is
advanced through the entire telescope, although the photon itself only
appears at the end where it is measured.
Question 227: Consider now many quasar photons that pass the galaxy lens.
Suppose again that the large telescope can resolve both quasar images, while the
small telescope in front cannot. In general, did the quasar photons seen by the
large telescope pass the galaxy lens on only one side, while quasar photons seen
by the small telescope pass the galaxy lens on both sides?
A.    Yes, that’s how it works.
B.    No, because all observed quasar photons passed the galaxy lens long before
either telescope saw them.
C.    Something completely different.
D.    After such a long trek, these quasar photons will surely be tired and may not
remember where they’ve been.
For quantum interpretations that attribute paths to photons, the best
answer is A: yes, the small telescope primarily detects quasar photons that

passed on both sides of the galaxy lens, while the large telescope primarily
detects quasar photons that passed on only one side. Oddly—really oddly—
OK spectacularly oddly—the second part of answer B is also true: all of
these photons passed the lensing galaxy not only before either telescope
saw them, but long before either telescope was even built.
Question 228: Suppose you suddenly move the smaller telescope to a new
position, but it’s still in front of the large telescope. Will the quasar photons
recorded by the small telescope still pass around both sides of the galaxy lens,
while quasar photons detected by the large telescope pass just one side?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.
C.    Photons do not take paths.
D.    Please don’t move the small telescope too suddenly because that may scare
the photons away, and then you won’t see anything.
The best answer is A: yes, given that photons take paths. Even though
the galaxy lens that is splitting the images is far across the universe, you can
instantly change which photons went on one side of the galaxy to photons
that went on both sides of the galaxy just by moving the small telescope.
This works even though the observed photons passed the galaxy long ago.
The decision to move the small telescope is called a delayed choice. This is
because the choice of how to observe the quasar’s photons was delayed
until the photons were past the lens.
Question 229: When you move the small telescope to a new position in front of
the large telescope, you create information that tells some quasar photons—
those measured by the small telescope—to go around both sides of the galaxy
lens, not just one side. How fast does this information cross the universe?
A.    Slower than the speed of light.
B.    Faster than the speed of light.
C.    At the speed of light.
D.    Back in time.
E.    Please read carefully, as some of our answers have recently changed. Press
“A” for answer. Press “O” for an operator. Please don’t press “T” because time

is not an operator.
The best answer, in my opinion, is D: back in time, assuming photons
take paths. As outlined in the Superluminal Communication chapter,
there is no positive speed—superluminal or otherwise—that you could
send a message from yourself that reaches the galaxy at an earlier time in
your reference frame. There is a negative speed that can do this, meaning a
speed in the other direction. That would mean that the message would go
from the galaxy to you.
Stated differently, your choice is directly correlated with the photons
going around one side of the galaxy lens—or both—long ago. The past
becomes involved because the photons passed the galaxy lens millions of
years ago before you were born.
Now there is a way to think about this that does involve a negative
speed (speed in the opposite direction), but that involves a concept even
more forbidden to some (including me) than superluminality:
predestination.
Aside 29: Free Will & Retrocausality versus Predestination
Path-following quantum interpretations can themselves be divided up into
two philosophies. The first is that the observer has free will to choose how
they observe, in particular whether they will choose to see images with paths
that go around one side of the galaxy or both. The type of free will assumed in
this book includes both situational self-awareness (sentience) and a random
(quantum indeterminate) component. For example, say you kinda want
chocolate ice cream, but you would be OK with vanilla. When it’s your turn to
order, you will probably choose chocolate, but when including a whimsical
thought, which could be quantum random, you might surprise everyone,
including yourself, by suddenly ordering vanilla. That whimsical quantum
random component means that it was physically impossible to guess your
choice beforehand with 100% accuracy.
In this free will philosophy (and others), the observer’s delayed choice
creates information that goes back in time, a connection that is called
retrocausality.
Alternatively, another philosophy holds that the observer does not have
free will. For example, once a photon passed on one side of the galaxy, or both
sides, the observer was destined to measure that photon only as they did. If

you were that observer, in this view, you did not make a delayed choice. In
fact, you did not make a choice at all. You played your pre-written part.
Predestination like this can even be tracked back to the beginning of time.
Even so, you might take comfort in knowing that the “which side” path
information could then travel to you from across the universe at the normal
speed of light, not superluminally.
Between these two choices, my favorite philosophy is free will, which
enables retrocausality. I therefore believe currently that you can choose how
you observe, and that this information can go back in time. But do I choose to
believe this, or was I predestined?
Of course, if you don’t believe that photons take paths, then you don’t
have to worry about those paths involving free will or predestination.
Question 230: Can you use your free will to invoke retrocausality and send
messages back in time to the distant galaxy?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.
C.    Only if you are willing to pay the surcharge for being “out of causal network.”
The best answer is B: no. Generally, no one has ever found a way to
send back-in-time messages or signals, including cases conceptually similar
to this one. This is pondered in some detail in the chapter How to Send
Information Back in Time, where the difference between “information”
and “message” (or “signal”) is also examined.
Question 231: A photon has energy that gravitates. Suppose a single photon
takes both paths around a galaxy lens. Does the gravity of this photon emanate
from both paths?
A.    Yes, and this can be used by an observer at this galaxy to determine if the
photon took one path or two around the galaxy.
B.    No, general relativity does not allow for this.
C.    Sometimes, when Lieutenant Specificity allows for this.
D.    No one knows.
The best answer is D: no one knows. This experiment has never been
done but would be of interest because it involves both gravity and quantum

mechanics. With regard to answer B, Einstein’s general relativity is
formulated with particles and photons having exact positions, so it is not
clear how general relativity works if a photon appears, quantum
mechanically, to be in two places at once.
Even so, many quantum mechanics would likely guess that answer A
will ultimately turn out to be correct. If so, perhaps an observer at the
lensing galaxy noted that a local mass was slightly more attracted to one
path around their home galaxy, meaning the photon took that path. This
determination would then negate any “free will” version of a delayed
choice you could make later on Earth.
A conceptually similar experiment is shooting electrons at a double-slit
experiment. Each electron can interfere with itself even though it has
mass. However, if you illuminate each electron with low-energy radio
waves as it goes through the slits, you can find out which slit each electron
went through. However, it will destroy the interference pattern.

CHAPTER 31
Superluminal Entanglement in
Your Basement
Famous Experimenters Alice and Bob
You make two new friends, Alice and Bob. Your old friends tell you that
they are famous for conducting interesting physics experiments, so you ask
them to conduct some of these experiments for you. Because you are
reading this book, a book they admire, they don’t charge you their regular
$100,000 fee. See, this book has already earned you back more than it cost!
After arriving at your house and exchanging pleasantries over tea, they
spend thirty minutes lugging heavy machinery down the steps into your
basement. In the corner they stack several small boxes labeled “Danger:
Matter AND Antimatter: Do Not Shake.” Each box, you are told, contains
a single electron (the matter) and a single positron (the antimatter). When
Alice and Bob are out at their van getting more equipment, you ignore the
warning and shake one of the boxes anyway. Nothing happens.
Donning welder’s masks, Alice and Bob get to work. After some loud
clanging, a bit of smoke, and moving your double-slit experiment off to one
side (or both sides, not sure), they set up some experiments. In their first
experiment, one of the boxes containing an electron and positron (known
as “e-/e+”)—both quantum particles—is moved to the center of your
basement. Alice explains that when you push the button on the top of the
box, the positron and electron will interact, acquire opposite spins, and
then shoot out from the box in opposite directions—the electron toward

Alice on the south side of your basement, and the positron toward Bob on
the north side. These particles are said to be “entangled.”
Bob explains that in quantum mechanics, these quantum particles can
be measured as having only one of two spins along any axis. Alice then
explains that there are three spatial directions, known as dimensions.
Adapted to your basement, these are the “up/down” direction between your
basement floor and ceiling, the “east/west” direction between the east and
west walls of your basement, and the “north/south” direction between the
north and south basement walls. Alice tells you that the entangled particles
will be moving along the north/south direction.
Question 232: Particles: Quantum; Alice: Up/Down; Bob: Up/Down
On cue, you press the button, releasing the two quantum particles from the
central box. Alice measures her particle as spin “up” around the up/down
direction. Bob will also measure the spin of his particle around the up/down
direction. Will Alice know that Bob will measure the spin of his particle as “down”
around the same up/down direction before Bob measures it?
A.    Yes, Alice is that smart.
B.    No, that would require faster-than-light communication.
C.    Not always, but often more than random.
D.    Maybe Alice should just mind her own business and not be so concerned with
what Bob may or may not measure.
The best answer is A: Yes, Alice is that smart. If Alice measures one
spin, she knows instantly that Bob must measure the opposite spin around
that axis. Otherwise, the total spin of both particles combined would not be
zero, so spin angular momentum would not be conserved—something that
has never been seen before.
Aside 30: Measuring the Spin of Unentangled Earth Globes
Alice now reveals another type of box. This one is bigger. Two standard globes
of the Earth are to be inserted into this box. Soon afterward, the box will
shoot out one globe toward Alice and the other toward Bob. The starting
points and destinations of these two Earth globes are the same as the e+/e–

particles. Each globe is spinning like the Earth does, with east leading west.
The combined spin of the two globes is zero, just like for the quantum
particles. What is not known is the direction of the north poles for the globes
coming out of the big box. The box mixes this up, so the north pole of Alice’s
globe is not only random but initially unknown to both Alice and Bob. Because
angular momentum is also conserved for the globes, the only thing that is
certain is the north pole of Bob’s globe will be pointing in the opposite
direction—180 degrees around—from Alice’s globe.
Question 233: Particles: Classical; Alice: Up/Down; Bob: Up/Down
You press the button, and a pair of globes are released. Alice’s globe arrives
with its north pole pointing at an odd angle that is more toward the ceiling than
the floor. Therefore, Alice marks her globe crudely as “spin up.” Alice now knows
that Bob will measure the spin of his globe to have its north pole more toward the
floor than the ceiling. But will Alice know this before Bob actually makes the
measurement?
A.    Yes, Alice is that smart.
B.    No, that would require faster-than-globe communication.
C.    Yes, but since Bob can see both globes all the time, he also knew what he
would measure.
D.    You remember that the local library reported two of its Earth globes missing,
and you wonder where they could have gone.
The best answers are A and C. Just like with the quantum particles, as
soon as Alice measures her globe, she knows what Bob will measure. Also,
since both Alice and Bob can see the globes coming—because they are big
and slow—they both knew this as soon as the globes were visible. So far, no
surprises. Isaac Newton, if asked, would not find this particularly
surprising. (But keep reading!)

Question 234: Particles: Classical; Alice: Up/Down; Bob: East/West
Alice and Bob say they will now change one thing to see what happens. This
time, Bob will make his measurements not around the up/down direction, like
Alice, but around the east/west direction. First come the globes. Alice measures
her globe as spin down because its north pole points more toward the floor than
the ceiling. With what accuracy can Alice predict that Bob’s globe’s north pole will
point more toward the east wall than the west wall?
A.    50%— equivalent to random chance.
B.    100%. It will always be opposite to Alice’s spin.
C.    110%. If athletes can give this much, so can Alice and Bob! Go Globe
Spinners!
The best answer is A: 50%. If Alice’s globe’s north pole pointed more
toward the floor, then to be the opposite and to conserve angular
momentum, Bob’s globe’s north pole must point more toward the ceiling.
But that doesn’t say anything about pointing east or west. Both directions
are equally likely. Therefore, Bob’s globe has a 50% chance of having its
north pole pointing more toward the east wall as it does pointing more
toward the west wall.
Isaac Newton, if he were there, might shrug. “Meh.”
Question 235: Particles: Quantum; Alice: Up/Down; Bob: East/West
Alice and Bob repeat the experiment, except this time with quantum particles.
After the particles are in flight, Alice decides to measure (and then measures) her
particle around the up/down axis as being spin down toward the floor. With what
probability can Alice predict Bob’s quantum particle measurement spinning
around an east/west axis?
A.    50%—equivalent to random chance.

B.    100%. It will always be opposite to Alice’s spin.
C.    Wait, is Alice really a cat, or am I seeing things again? Has anyone seen my
reading glasses? OK, just a second. Oh, I see. That’s just a humorous
representation of Alice. OK. But Bob really is a dog, right?
The best answer is again A: 50%. As far as Alice can tell, Bob’s particle
has a 50-50 chance of its spin axis pointing east or west. Again, in this case,
quantum and classical mechanics agree.
Isaac Newton, if he were there, might say “Still not impressed.” But
there’s more.
Question 236: Particles: Classical; Alice: Up/Down; Bob: Midway between
Up/Down and East/West
Globes again. This time Alice measures her approaching globe as having its
north pole pointing, again, more toward the ceiling than the floor: “up.” Bob will
measure his globe at an angle that is midway between up/down and east/west.
With what accuracy can Alice predict that Bob’s globe will be measured with its
north pole pointing more toward the direction midway between up/down and
east/west, rather than the opposite direction?
A.    50%—random chance.
B.    75%—better than random.
C.    85%—super-better than random.
D.    120%. A similar answer to a previous question was so funny it’s been
renewed. But this time, it’s an extra 10% funnier!
The best answer is C: 75%: better than random. That is because Bob’s
globe’s north pole direction has two constraints that each give Alice a clue
about Bob’s globe’s orientation. First, Alice knows that Bob’s globe’s spin
must be opposite to the up direction measured along the up/down axis of
Alice’s globe. Second, it must be in one of the two hemispheres
measurable by Bob. Of those two hemispheres, there is 75% chance of it
being in one, and 25% chance of being in the other. To maximize her
chances, Alice chooses the 75%er. If you like geometry you can check this,
but that is the correct answer.

Isaac Newton, if he were there, might nod and give you a thumbs up.
“Of course.” Isaac yawns. Perhaps he is getting bored.
Question 237: Particles: Quantum; Alice: Up/Down; Bob: Midway between
Up/Down and East/West
Same as last time, but with quantum particles. After the quantum particles fly,
Alice decides to measure (and then measures) her particle along the up/down axis
connecting the floor and ceiling. This time Alice happens to measure her particle
as having spin up toward the ceiling. That means that Alice can now predict with
100% accuracy that Bob will measure his quantum particle as spin down if Bob
measured it along the same up/down axis as Alice. But Bob does not. Bob now
measures his particle again along an axis midway between up/down and
east/west. With what accuracy can Alice predict the spin of Bob’s particle around
this axis?
A.    50%—random chance.
B.    75%. It’s just geometry.
C.    85%. One of these days this will be the correct answer and then you’ll all be
sorry.
The correct answer is C: 85%.
Newton, if he were there, might suddenly stand up, put his hands on
his head, and emphatically say, “What?!” Isaac insists Alice cannot do that,
so they run the experiment many more times, and Alice shows that she
really can predict Bob’s particle’s spin with 85% accuracy. Isaac sits down,
ashen, confused. “This can’t be!” Isaac keeps repeating. Although a great
scientist in his day, this 85% answer cannot be found in Newton’s way of
understanding the world.
As you might guess, the quantum probability for particles is computed
differently than the classical probability for globes—only the latter of which
Newton was familiar with. The quantum probability is computed by
projecting the length of a stick pointing midway between the up/down and
east/west axes onto the up/down axis. Picture the shadow of the stick on the
up/down axis with a light source coming fromthe west. The projected
length of this stick’s shadow is about 0.707 of its actual length (actually 
for math buffs).

Bob’s particle must again satisfy two constraints. First, its spin must be
opposite to the spin of Alice’s particle. Past that, Bob’s particle’s spin must
be either along the direction that Bob measured it, or in the opposite
direction. Using projection, the probabilities of each are about 85% and
15%. To maximize her chances, Alice chooses the direction closest to
“down”—the 85%. In other words, in the world of quantum mechanics,
Alice really can predict the spin of Bob’s particle with an accuracy of 85%.
This type of experiment was not done in Einstein’s time, although it
was inspired by a paper led by Einstein. It was the physicist John Stewart
Bell in 1964 who first realized that this type of lab experiment could tell,
rather directly, the difference between the quantum and classical worlds. It
has only been in the past fifty years that experiments like this have been
carried out and have verified the 85%.
Question 238: 75%? 85%? Who cares? It’s just 10%! Why does the probability of
guessing particle spins matter?
A.    The difference can be used as the basis for a new type of computer.
B.    The difference implies a superluminal connection between particles that is
new to physics.
C.    It shows that there really is a difference between quantum logic and classical
logic.
D.    All of the above.
E.    No one cares. We’re just trying to sell books here.
The best answer is D: all of the above. As far as answer C goes, here’s
where superluminal communication comes in: let’s separate Alice and Bob
by a really large distance. Then, after Alice measures her particle’s spin, she
can instantly guess the spin of Bob’s quantum particle with 85% accuracy,
no matter how far away Bob is. This goes beyond what was thought possible
in our classical world. How do the particles do this? How do they know?
This is what all of the commotion about entanglement and
superluminal communication is about. This is why Einstein called
entanglement “spooky action at a distance.” This is why so many physicists
over the past fifty years have been arguing like crazy. This is why similar

results have been measured and checked again and again. When Ole
Rømer in the late 1600s found that the eclipse times for Jupiter’s moon
were just a little off due to the finiteness of the speed of light, humanity
went through a door to greater understanding. This result, that the
quantum probabilities are “a little off” from classical probabilities, is a
modern-day door. And we don’t yet know the limits of our future
understanding.
Question 239: Why can’t Alice and Bob use this method—measuring entangled
particles to communicate? For example, why can’t Alice tell Bob who won a ball
game even faster than light?
A.    Because Alice can’t control what spin she will measure. Therefore, even if
Bob’s particle is perfectly correlated, Bob will never know that his spin is
opposite Alice’s until Alice tells him what spin she has measured at normal
light speed.
B.    Because this was only one measurement. To send a clear message, Alice
would need many measurements to build up a probability distribution.
C.    Because Bob always cheats. Alice knows this, so she will cheat Bob first. Now
do you understand why Alice and Bob are always on opposite sides of the
room?
The best answer is A. Alice and Bob can’t control the results of their
measurements. They can control where they make their measurements.
They can even control the angle between the axes of their measurements.
But they can’t control what measurements will result. Therefore, they will
never know that they are measuring opposite spins until they communicate
later, and at only light speed.
For example, let’s say that Alice told Bob to decide that spin up means
that the home team won. Even so, Alice cannot force her particle to be
spin up without breaking or changing its entanglement with Bob’s particle.
Therefore, Alice just cannot tell Bob who won.
Question 240: Alice has not given up. She is determined to use quantum
entanglement to tell Bob who won the ball game before he receives the official
light-speed transmission. Alice therefore decides to measure her particle along

the up/down axis when she wants to tell Bob that the home team has won, but
along the east/west axis when the visiting team has won. Bob will always
measure his particle around the up/down axis.
Now Bob makes many copies of his particle and measures each one around
the up/down axis—the same axis that Alice did for her one particle. Bob knows
that if his measurements keep being all up or all down—either one—that the
home team won. Alternatively, if Bob’s particles measure up 50% of the time, and
down the other 50%, then the visiting team has won. Why won’t this work?
A.    Bob will always measure a 50% mix of ups and downs, which he can’t
decipher.
B.    Copied particles don’t retain entanglement.
C.    Just being able to determine up and down is not enough information to
communicate.
D.    Bob didn’t bet on this game.
The best answer is B: copied particles do not retain entanglement. It is
just not possible to “clone” entangled particles like that! The result will be
that Bob will always measure an equal mix of ups and downs, so answer A
is also good.
In sum, although information appears to go between quantum particles
faster than light, that information cannot be used for communication.
Alice cannot use entanglement to tell Bob anything.

CHAPTER 32
Superluminal Entanglement across
the Universe
At its simplest, two quantum particles are entangled if they share a
quantum property, such as momentum or spin. Determining a quantum-
entangled property for one of these entangled particles also determines it
for the other, even if the other particle is far away. Wait. How can that be?
Can this be used to send superluminal messages, even across the universe?
That’s what this chapter is about.
Question 241: Are you and your romantic partner entangled quantum
mechanically?
A.    Yes, if you have ever touched.
B.    No, you are both too big.
C.    The romantic part of you wants the answer to be yes, while the rationalist
part of you doesn’t see how this is relevant to anything important. Have you
considered intra-brain mediation?

The best answer is A: yes, you and your romantic partner are quantum
mechanically entangled if you have ever touched. Actually, there are ways
that you could even become entangled without touching, but that is too
complicated to explain in a book this short.
Unfortunately, since you and your partner really are big objects
composed of many continually interacting quantum particles (like carbon
atoms), much of your entanglement has gone away because these
interactions have effectively “measured” many of your entangled particles.
But not all. Also, the entanglement you experience is tremendously
complicated, so it is not practically feasible to unravel. Lastly,
unfortunately, your mutual entanglement cannot be used for any sort of
communication. For communication, I advise something called “talking.”
Question 242: Is everything that collides entangled?
A.    Yes, that’s the way entanglement works.
B.    No, only quantum particles can be entangled.
C.    Only if its insured. Otherwise, it didn’t happen.
The best answer is A: yes, everything that collides becomes entangled.
Consider momentum—when two particles collide, momentum becomes
entangled.
Question 243: Is everything in the universe entangled?

A.    Yes, because nothing stands alone. If something did stand alone, it might not
be entangled. But then again, we might not even know about it.
B.    No, things too far away cannot be entangled.
Both answers are possible, but my favorite answer is A: everything is
entangled, which applies not only to the visible universe, but to any parts of
the universe that have previously been in contact. This applies to most
particles you would generally encounter. Measuring particles may drop
their entanglements with some other particles, but other entanglements,
including entanglement with the measuring apparatus, may remain.
With regard to answer B, it is possible, in theory, for there to be distant
parts of our universe that not only are outside of our observable universe
now, but they have always been outside and disconnected from us, and so
not entangled.
It is also possible to create an individual unentangled particle. One way
to do this is to engineer a high-energy particle collision, and then measure
or destroy all of the resulting particles, except one. That one particle is
then, for the time until it interacts, unentangled with any of the other
particles created in that collision.
Question 244: Can the two slits in the double-slit experiment be entangled?
A.    Yes, this is what connects entanglement to the double-slit experiment.
B.    No, entanglement only applies to things that have measurable properties like
spin, momentum, or strangeness.
C.    It doesn’t matter, since the designation here is just philosophical, not
experimental.
D.    Possibly. But first the slits have to fill out the application form and then get it
approved by the National Entanglement Council of the Gullible.
The answer to this question is presently unclear, at least to me. My
present opinion is that the best answer is C: it doesn’t matter, since
designating the two slits as entangled will not affect any measurable
properties of the particles encountering those two slits.

When I first considered this question, though, I thought the best
answer was B, the slits were not entangled, because I considered the slits to
be just locations in empty space with no measurable properties.
To my surprise, though, one of the science reviewers of this section of
the book disagreed. This reviewer considered that the positions of the slits
were known, that the slits occurred on a larger screen, and that the screen
itself had entangle-able properties. These were enough to attribute
entanglement to the slits, making answer A the best, in this reviewer’s
opinion. Other science reviewers, however, appeared to agree with my
original answer.
There are two reasons you might be surprised here. First, you might not
have expected that this book was reviewed for science accuracy at all. In
actuality, most of this book was systematically reviewed by at least two
professional scientists, and some sections were reviewed by as many as five.
I am not making this up. I therefore apologize if you have enjoyed dissing
the book’s content. Please don’t be swayed. For all I know, many of the
reviewers were drunk, and one may even have had soup for breakfast.
A second reason for your surprise may be not knowing that scientists
sometimes disagree. Don’t scientists all just recite truths they memorized
from the Great Book of Science? No. Scientists might all agree on many
established basics, but they disagree on things at the cutting edge. They
might disagree, for example, because each supports a different cutting-edge
theory that makes different predictions. Those disagreements are usually
settled, eventually, by an experiment testing which prediction is right. In
some branches of science (and there are parts of quantum mechanics that
are famous for this), everyone agrees on what past experiments have
revealed and what future experiments will show, but disagree as to why. It
seems to me that this is where we are with this question, and why answer C
is now my favorite answer.
[Caveat 1—Please skip this paragraph if you don’t like nitpicking: It is
interesting to note that, considered as a whole, the vacuum of empty space
is considered to have a quantum zero point energy that could be involved
in entanglement.]

[Caveat 2—Please skip this paragraph if you don’t like jargon:
Entanglement is about the quantum “states” of some “thing,” but that
“thing” can really be multiple things with large inter-thing distances. A
quantum state can be a possible result of a measurement. One point in the
disagreement is whether two open slits are just two unrelated and otherwise
empty spaces that really have no relevant or shared quantum states.]
Question 245: Is it possible to break the entanglement between two existing
particles?
A.    Yes, do almost anything to one of the particles because entanglement is
fragile.
B.    No, there is almost nothing you can do. Without measuring or destroying one
of the particles, they will remain entangled forever.
C.    It is possible but not always advisable. Yesterday we broke entanglement
with a green sock and then couldn’t find it. This is why Bertlmann’s socks
don’t match.
The best answer is B: unless measured or destroyed, once two particles
are entangled, they are always entangled for as long as each shall live. To
tell the whole story as an epic fairy tale, after two particles first interact with
each other (but before they interact with other particles), they are
entangled and it is relatively simple to find out how. With every
interaction, though, each particle becomes additionally entangled with
other particles, making the initial entanglement between the two harder to
discern. In theory, if you knew each interaction exactly, you could reverse
engineer them all to figure out the original entanglement. In practice, after
a few interactions, doing this is practically impossible, making the initial
entanglement effectively lost.
It is possible, however, to really break entanglement by either
measuring a particle or destroying it. For photons, this book assumes that
measurement destroys the photon. In general, the entangled property of
the measured particle can show itself in the other particle when it, too, is
measured. Entanglement could, in principle, to be transferred to the
implement of destruction and so live on.

Question 246: If you measure an attribute (like spin) of one entangled particle,
how fast does this attribute transfer to its distant entangled partner?
A.    There is no transfer. There is only correlation, and even that can only be
found later.
B.    Slower than light.
C.    At the speed of light.
D.    Faster than light.
E.    Not only faster than light, but back in time.
Retrocausality: The best answer, in my opinion, is E: not only faster
than light, but back in time. Here, entanglement experiments become
conceptually similar to double-slit experiments. The back-in-time
retrocausal effect is listed because the particle’s entangled twin, whenever
and wherever it is measured, may show the correlated attribute even if it is
measured first! If Alice has free will to measure her particle as she chooses
with a quantum indeterminate component, Alice affects Bob’s
measurement even if made at an earlier time.
Predestination: Alternatively, Alice might not have the free will to
measure her particle as she chooses. Perhaps, even if Bob made his
measurement first, Alice was predestined to make her measurement as she
made it. Here, both measurements result from other previous actions
communicated at speed c, making answer C preferable conceptually.
However, all actions could be considered predetermined right from the
beginning of time, so no direct attribute transfer between particles is really
needed at any speed. This is the “predestination” interpretation that was
pondered previously in the FTL Quantum Double Slits across the
Universe chapter.
Question 247: If you change an attribute (like spin) of one entangled particle,
how fast does this same attribute change in its distant entangled partner?
A.    The other particle doesn’t change.
B.    Slower than light.
C.    At the speed of light.
D.    Faster than light.

E.    Not only faster than light, but back in time.
Retrocausality: The best answer is A: the other particle doesn’t change.
Changing one entangled particle without measuring it has no effect on its
entangled partner. For example, if Alice destroys her photon, Bob’s photon
is still there. If Alice bounces her photon off of a mirror, Bob’s photon does
not suddenly change direction to match Alice’s photon. Last, if Alice
changes the spin of her photon, this likely has no effect on the spin of Bob’s
photon.
Alternatively, if you change your particle in a way that includes a
measurement, so that you can know what the changed attribute was. Then
that attribute will correlate to a similar measurement of its distant
entangled partner, making, like the last question, E the preferred answer.
Predestination: Here, too, answer A is the best. The attributes and paths
of both particles were predestined long ago, and changing the attribute of
one particle does not alter this.
Question 248: Using entanglement, can you change the distant universe
instantly just by blinking?
A.    Yes, so please stop blinking. You are annoying distant aliens.
B.    No, blink away. Nobody knows or cares.
C.    Blink twice if you are too caught up in reading a book that asks bizarre
questions.
Retrocausality: My favorite answer is A: assuming free will, and
assuming that your blinking creates a measurement of a particle or
particles in or around your eyes, then yes, you can change the distant
universe instantly just by blinking. Each blink then affects the
measurement result of an entangled particle. Given the nature of
retrocausality, this even works back in time. What you cannot do, either
instantly or back in time, is send a message to the distant universe. Any
message you try to send through entanglement will always appear random
until additional information about how to understand that message is
communicated at the speed of light or slower. Even so, the aliens should

not be annoyed since you were not able to control their actions with your
blinking.
Predestination: Assuming everything is already determined, B is the best
answer. The attributes and paths of blink-affected entangled particles were
predestined long ago, even in the distant universe. You did not change
these attributes or paths by blinking.

CHAPTER 33
How to Send Information Back in
Time
You can’t go back in time. I have received numerous emails from well-
meaning people asking me how to do this, and I can’t help them. What I
could do, if they asked, is tell them how to send information back in time,
at least in a way that involves quantum mechanics and assuming they have
free will. Although this may not help them, how this works is strangely
fascinating. That’s what this chapter is about.
Question 249: Does the Moon exist when you are not looking at it?
A.    Yes, of course. Where would it go?
B.    No, in quantum physics, things should not be considered to exist between
observations.
C.    No one can be sure.

D.    The Moon asked the same question about you earlier and we had to admit
that we didn’t know.
The best answer is A: yes, the Moon really does exist even when you are
not looking at it. Was this an obvious question? Perhaps, but consider that
this question was asked quite famously by Einstein when he was thinking
deeply about whether quantum mechanics made sense. With this question,
Einstein was actually criticizing the roots of quantum mechanics. In
particular, he was showing annoyance with the Copenhagen (0-paths)
interpretation, which says that it is not important to know what happens to
objects between measurements. Einstein, of course, believed that the
Moon really was there even when he was not looking at it and posed this
question ironically.
In our modern view, even the 0-paths Copenhagen interpretation says
that the Moon exists outside of your view. This is, in part, because it is
frequently being “measured” by interactions between its own particles and
impacting photons. Therefore, the best answer is A.
Surprisingly, perhaps, if the Moon was an isolated quantum object, like
a photon going through vacuum, then, between observations, this version
of the Moon could be considered not to exist by some modern 0-path
quantum interpretations. More precisely, this Moon, between observations,
would not have well-defined measurable quantities such as position,
momentum, and energy.
Question 250: Can you change the Moon, instantly, just by looking at it?
A.    Yes. Good for you!
B.    No, the fastest you could change the Moon would be with light you send to
the Moon, but that would take over one second to arrive.
C.    Yes, but please don’t stare at the Moon too hard because others might want
to look at it later.
The best answer, in my opinion, is A: yes, you can change the Moon,
instantly, just by looking at it. This opinion is based on my belief that we
have free will.

Retrocausality: Assuming free will, one way to change the Moon,
instantly, is to use retrocausality. This can be done by using retrocausal
entanglement discussed in the chapter Superluminal Entanglement across
the Universe.
[Caveat—Please read only if you like minutia and gory details: Is it
possible to have retrocausality without free will? Yes, in my view, it is
possible because it is the actions that result from your free-will decision
that actually cause the retrocausality. These actions could take place
without you or anyone’s free will. To ensure things go the way you want,
though, you choose which retrocausal-causing actions you prefer with your
free will.]
For example, particles created midway between you and the Moon
could be entangled and reach you and the Moon at the same time. Then,
the way that you measure your entangled particle would then affect the
Moon’s entangled particle, and hence the Moon itself, instantly. This also
works for photons and particles entangled on the Moon, where your
measurement could even affect the Moon’s past.
Generalizing, since everything is entangled at some level, every photon
you see, every sound you hear, and every measurement you make affects
the entire rest of the universe in some way. Not only in the future, not only
the present, but in the past, too.
Predestination: The previous retrocausal explanation assumed that you
had the free will to choose your actions. Let’s now assume that you don’t.
Then, no matter what experiment you do, no matter what measurements
you make, no matter what you do or even think, you are not instantly
changing the Moon. Generalizing, you are not instantly changing
anything. With your behavior, you are just acting out your part in a grand
universal play, which includes the Moon, where all actions were
predestined.
Question 251: Can you send a message to the Moon, instantly, just by looking at
it?
A.    Yes.

B.    No, the fastest you could send a message to the Moon would be with light
sent to the Moon, which would take over one second.
C.    OK, but don’t give away any of Earth’s secrets.
The best answer is B: no, you cannot send an instant message to the
Moon. The fastest message or signal you can send travels at light speed,
taking about 1.2 seconds to reach the Moon.
But why not? If we can change the Moon instantly, why can’t we send a
message to it instantly? Or even back in time? Because even assuming free
will and retrocausality, the information that is transferred superluminally,
or back in time, is indistinguishable from random noise. It can only be
decoded later by an answer key that was determined later and then sent at
light speed or slower.
Is back-in-time information really even information if it cannot be
identified as such? Good question! You, in the present, will be the first to
know this back-in-time information, for example, whether a photon went
through one slit or two. But you will know now what happened back then,
even though the back-then people did not.
Question 252: Can your cheering affect a live sports game you are watching?
A.    Yes. The time it takes light to go from you to the game is likely so small that
your cheering could carry information to the game that could actually affect
it.
B.    No, the game is too far away. They won’t hear you.
C.    How do you know that I cheer at sporting events? Maybe I keep quiet. You
don’t know.
The best answer is A: yes, your cheering could affect a live game you
are watching in person, on TV, or on online, assuming the game is nearby.
To demonstrate this, picture that you are watching the game with your
antimatter twin and that you give each other a high five when your team
scores. Quite possibly, the resulting explosion would disrupt the game,
among other things.

Realistically, of course, your cheering will likely have only a minuscule
effect on the game, for one reason because you don’t really have an
antimatter twin, now do you? (Be honest.) Therefore, unfortunately, your
surely more modest cheers will likely be lost in the noise of everyone else’s
cheering efforts.
Question 253: Can your cheering affect a previously recorded game you are
watching online?
A.    Yes, why not?
B.    No, your actions today cannot affect what happened yesterday or any day in
the past.
C.    I’m not sure, but if it does, I am going to keep rewatching old World Cup
games until my country wins.
The best answer is A: yes, your cheering could, in principle, affect a
game even seen on an old video. Again, this answer assumes you have free
will that enables retrocausality. The reasoning is the same as given in the
previous question about changing the Moon instantly, just by looking at it.
Retrocausality: How can this be? Assuming you have free will to act
how you want, your action determines how retrocausality kicks in. As
detailed previously in the Double-Slit chapters, examples of retrocausality
occur in experiments such as the delayed-choice experiment, first analyzed
by Feynman’s PhD supervisor John Archibald Wheeler. To recap, in a
double-slit experiment, it is actually possible to make a conscious decision
to delay measuring photons at the detection screen until after they have
surely passed the double-slit screen. Doing this has no effect on a perfect
correlation between how photons were measured and whether each
photon went through either one or two slits in the past. So, let’s say these
two slits were at the previously recorded game. Then, assuming you have
free will, your decided action now could retroactively affect the game back
then. This assumes that, back at the game, not only did the recording not
show whether each photon went through one slit or two, but that it was not
determined at all.

Realistically, even though this works in theory, it would not work in
practice because the game was surely not an isolated quantum system. Any
photons you receive now, for example, would surely have been jostled
about so much that they would effectively have lost any retrocausal
information. Therefore, this is also conceptually similar to the Moon still
being there when you are not looking at it.
Predestination: The best answer assuming predestination is that you
cannot affect the previously recorded game: answer B. In the purely
classical version, this universe is like a game of billiards where the billiard
balls just keep knocking into each other as they bounce around the table.
Every ball-striking-ball interaction is completely determined not only by
earlier interactions, but, in principle, since the “big break” when the whole
billiard game began. In this deterministic view, you are just another billiard
ball bouncing around the table of life, so you cannot choose where you go
next.
Question 254: Can your cheering change the known outcome of a previously
recorded game you are watching now?
A.    Yes, just so long as no one tells you the outcome of the game before you see
it.
B.    No. Light you see now cannot change the past.
C.    Not sure, but maybe this is why I am no longer allowed to stream old games.
Or I let my subscription lapse – one of the two.
The best answer is B: no, your cheering cannot change the known
outcome of a previously recorded game. Answer B holds true for both free-
will retrocausality and non-free-will predestination philosophies, but let’s
focus first on the tougher one: retrocausality via free will.
Retrocausality: Say the old video shows the players stopping the game
and, strangely, performing a double-slit experiment. The photons from this
experiment were then sent on a long and isolated path and are only
reaching you now. You now get to make a delayed choice about how to
observe these photons—an observation that could retroactively determine
whether, back at the old game, the photons went through one slit or two. If

which-slit information were determined back during the old game, for
example if one slit were blocked and so the photons were forced through
the other slit, you would find that no matter what you did, the photons you
saw did not interfere and continued to act like they went through that one
slit.
Alternatively, which-slit information might not have been known at the
old game. In this case, you would find that it does matter how you observe
the old photons. Your free-will-determined observation now retroactively
determines, back at the old game, whether the photons went through one
or both slits. What power you have! Unfortunately, though, you will be the
first to know this. The old video could not show or announce it.
To recap, retrocausality only works on information that is previously
unknown. The best answer is B because this game has a known outcome.
However, even though your current free-will action retroactively
determined whether photons passed through one slit or two back then, and
even though that which-slit information was not known back then, your
action could still affect the game in unknown and unknowable ways. It just
can’t affect known and knowable information, including which-slit
information.
In sum, assuming retrocausality, you can affect a game in the past, but
you cannot change a previously known outcome.
Predestination: Analysis using the predestination philosophy is easier.
With predestination, again assuming the game on the old video shows a
double-slit experiment releasing photons that are only arriving at you now,
you will always measure the photons in a predetermined way. It doesn’t
matter if the result of the experiment was known back at the game or not.
The answer is again B.
In sum, assuming predestination, you cannot affect a game in the past,
and so you also cannot change a previously known outcome.
Let’s say you want to be difficult and do the opposite of what the old
video shows. Say that the video actually shows that the photon goes
through only one slit because the other slit was closed shut. Going rogue,
you decide to observe the photon now in such a way to make it do
something different—in this case go through both slits back at the old

game. What happens? You find that the photon still goes through only the
one slit. The path of the photon was determined long before you observed
it, and you cannot undo it. And this is true for every interpretation of
quantum mechanics. In general, different quantum interpretations differ in
what the results of quantum measurements mean, but they all agree on
what the results will be.

PART V
SPECULATION
Chapter 34
Craze c
Chapter 35
What Happens if c Changes?
Chapter 36
Are There Other Limits Like c?
Chapter 37
Epilogue
Chapter 37.1
Glossary (minimal wording)
Chapter 37.2
Image Credits
So far in this book, some strange concepts involving superluminal speeds
were contemplated. In some cases, these concepts were so strange that they
didn’t really make sense. Should we just be satisfied with that? Should we
just ignore important but seemingly nonsensical concepts and pretend that
everything is OK? If that’s what you want, then you might want to stop
reading this book. Alternatively, we can explore these strange concepts and
try to understand them better. Good scientists, at times, do the latter. And
one way to begin to explore deeper starts with speculation. That’s just what
we will do in this section.

CHAPTER 34
Craze c
In any field, find the strangest thing and then explore it.
—John Archibald Wheeler
Previous chapters have explored, so far, areas of what we know or at least
kind of know. In this chapter, we set off into “OK, I see what resulted from
that historic experiment, but what would happen if we did a slightly
different experiment, one designed to explore a really strange part of that
historic experiment that doesn’t seem to make sense?” Speculation like this
can be more than entertaining—it can point the way to better
understanding. Sometimes, this is how science advances. Science is more
than a set of facts that needs to be told. It is also a frontier that needs to be
explored. That frontier is where we’re headed in this chapter.
Question 255: Let’s go back to the basic double-slit experiments. Near the slits,
each photon can be identified as going through only one slit. You can confirm this
by holding up a piece of cardboard just after the slits. Then only two bright bands
appear—no interference. Far from the slits, each photon can be identified as
going through both slits. You can confirm this by moving the cardboard screen
back from the slits—multiple interference bands appear. Consider that the bulb
now releases a single photon. After the release, can you force this photon to go
through one slit or two just by shifting the cardboard up or back from the slits?
A.    Yes, you are a photon engineer! :)
B.    No, you are a passive photon observer. :(
C.    Neither, since photons do not take paths. :|
D.    Cardboard is so cheap. Shouldn’t a fancy book like this use silver detection
screens? They would look much nicer, and you could use them again in your

next book!
This question gets at the heart of delayed-choice experiments, and the
three philosophies about them that are reviewed here: retrocausality,
predestination, and indeterminacy. Both answers A and B can be attributed
to ∞-paths and 1-path interpretations of quantum mechanics, where answer
A falls into the retrocausality category, and answer B can be classified as
predestination. Answer C can be assigned to the 0-paths Copenhagen
interpretation, where the location on the cardboard that the photon
suddenly appears is just attributed to quantum indeterminacy.
The term “delayed choice” applies because you can choose where to
observe a photon not only after it has been released, but also after it has
passed the slits (or image-splitting galaxy). Although the term delayed
choice seems to imply retrocausality because of the word “choice,” the first
person to consider this conditional conundrum, John Archibald Wheeler
in 1978, would surely have chosen answer C: that there is no conundrum if
you just stop considering that photons take paths.
In my view, being a fan of ∞-paths and free will, the best answer is A:
you are a photon engineer. This means that you have the ability to
determine now what this photon did at the slits even after it passed them.
I like this example because it so simply demonstrates the amazing
strangeness of the most famous experiment in quantum mechanics. Just
moving a cardboard screen back from the slits changes how photons go
through the slits. And these photons passed through the slit(s) before they
hit the cardboard. And this works even if you release a single photon at a
time. This is the strange universe we live in.
Question 256: Let’s return to the question in Superluminal Quantum Paths
where a block was placed between you and the light bulb. When a photon from
the bulb goes around the block and hits your eye, in which direction does this
photon push your eye?
A.    In the direction directly away from the light bulb.
B.    In the direction directly away from the side of the block the photon passed.
C.    It is not possible to measure the direction of a single photon like that.

D.    Photons don’t really go around blocks. You believed that?
The best answer is B: your eye will (slightly) recoil away from the
block’s side. When this happens, you might then wonder, how is
momentum conserved? The answer is strange. The block itself acquires
momentum in the opposite direction from your eye. One really odd thing
about this is that the photon pulled the block toward it as it passed, creating
an attractive force for a short time. People sometimes wonder how
attractive forces are created in a worldview where force is generated by
miniature bowling balls colliding and therefore pushing everything away.
This is one example of how.
In the ∞-paths interpretation, the photon still took many paths around
the block, and the actual momentum transfer is a weighted sum over all of
them.
Question 257: Let’s now go back into the living room in the Superluminal
Quantum Paths chapter and again turn on the lamp. The first photon out again
hits your eye just a fraction of a second after being emitted. Assuming, again, the
∞-paths paradigm, it was concluded that some of these paths looped around
Jupiter. Let’s ponder that some more. Is there any limit to how far these paths can
go?
A.    Yes, the edge of the observable universe.
B.    No, the only limit is your imagination.
C.    Yes, the distance a photon could go and return at speed c over the
uncertainty in the measured times of emission and detection.
D.    Jump point 4 on the Kessel Run, but nobody knows why.
The standard answer is B: there is no limit. But there is another answer,
a more speculative one, that I like better. Which answer is it? Not so fast.
Before we go there, let’s look first at answer A, the edge of the visible
universe. Since the speed of the photon along the longest of the ∞-paths
can be much faster than light, including visible light, it doesn’t much
matter where the edge of the visible universe is. Answer A is wrong. More
relevant is the edge of the entire universe, but that wasn’t listed as an
answer.

A key reason that the correct answer B bothers me is that whatever
happens out at distant Jupiter seems like it should be irrelevant to paths
between the lamp and me. Now the standard ∞-paths philosophy, which I
will now label ∞-paths-FTL, says that what happens at Jupiter is mostly
irrelevant because the paths out there mostly interfere and collectively
cancel in brightness, making them mostly immeasurable.
But “mostly” is not “always,” and it seems to me that there is no
guarantee that these paths cancel exactly. Therefore, possibly, a devious
demon (not you, you’re a nice person) out by Jupiter could purposefully
block some paths with the goal of making the summed interference of
other paths not add to zero. This demon (OK, it could be you, but only if
you had a bad morning) could then block and unblock these paths to send
a signal to Earth from Jupiter—one that would go faster than light. And
hopefully, by this point in the book, you realize that FTL signaling has
never been realized.
What to do? Well, let’s analyze my favorite answer: C. Implied in this
answer is a variant of ∞-paths where the photon’s speed along all paths is
always limited to c. I will label this variant ∞-paths-c. Here, there are still an
infinite number of paths, but being confined to c and given even a crude
limit on the time between emission and detection, these paths are all
confined to be near the lamp and you. It’s like there is an opaque spherical
dome out there past which photon paths cannot go. And Jupiter and most
of the universe are out past that dome.
Now, I am not the first to consider such a ∞-paths-c variant. In early
chapters of his popular book QED, Richard Feynman slyly demonstrated
this nonstandard ∞-paths-c variant without calling attention to its difference
from the standard ∞-paths-FTL model.
Why isn’t ∞-paths-c the standard ∞-paths variant? Because, so far, it has
not been shown consistent with standard quantum electrodynamics, as ∞-
paths-FTL has. And standard quantum electrodynamics explains
experimental data impressively, at least on Earthly scales.
Question 258: How many paths do shadows take when they cross a wall?
A.    0-paths: shadows should not be considered to take any path.

B.    1-path: shadows take a single path.
C.    ∞-paths: shadows can be considered to take all possible paths across a wall.
D.    All three previous answers are correct in different interpretations of
quantum mechanics.
E.    Be careful. Answering this question may lead you down a path of darkness!
The best answer is B: shadows take just a single path. Newton, if he
were here, might stand up and exclaim, “Finally something that matches
my calculations!” But how can this be? Isn’t everything really quantum
mechanical?
Picture that the wall is covered with light sensors that absorb photons.
As the shadow progresses, these sensors will unambiguously report
darkness, one after the next. There is no room for any other interpretation.
Just before the darkness, each sensor reported the detection of a photon.
And each measurement was the collapse of a wave function, not a
continuation of a wave function. The ∞-paths formalism works only
between measurements.
The world of shadows is a really strange place. Shadows have no mass.
Shadows can move faster than light. Shadows can take a single path. Come
to think of it, the world of shadows is a really normal place. It has many
features that humanity used to think applied to light in our real world!
Question 259: Let’s now go back to the Alice and Bob entanglement puzzles. As
you descend your basement steps to see what the experimental duo is up to now,
you find that Bob has dozed off, while Alice is scrolling rapidly on her phone. You
clear your throat.
Alice puts down her phone, and, after waking up, Bob confesses that they are
both upset that they could not find a way to use entanglement to communicate
superluminally. Bob then suggests a new plan where he changes his particle
measurement apparatus in a completely different way: he places twenty-six
atomic clocks on a wall around a hole. When Bob’s particle goes through this
hole, its spin will cause gravity to be slightly stronger in the direction of the spin,
so that the clock in that direction will run slightly slow compared to the other
clocks. Why twenty-six, you wonder? The twenty-six clocks correspond to letters
in the alphabet. Alice will then measure each of her particles at a different angular

orientation to spell out a message to Bob, one letter at a time. Why won’t this
work?
A.    Quantum spins create only spherically symmetric time-slowing, so all the
clocks will read the same.
B.    The particle spin does create more time-slowing at some angles, but it is
never possible to measure it.
C.    Alice doesn’t change her particle by measuring its spin, so Bob’s particle
remains unaffected.
D.    Bob can’t afford twenty-six atomic clocks.
The best answer is not known. This interesting thought experiment is
described in detail in an article titled Spin-Spacetime Censorship
(Nemirovsky, Cohen, & Kaminer in 2022). Since no FTL communication
scheme has ever been shown to work, most scientists would agree that any
experiment designed to create FTL communication must have some fatal
flaw. But in this experiment, it is still unclear what that fatal flaw is.
Question 260: Through how many spatial dimensions does light move?
A.    One.
B.    Two.
C.    Three.
D.    Four.
E.    Ten.
F.    Twenty-six.
G.    Nobody is sure.
H.    x. Please solve for x.
The best answer is C: light moves through three spatial dimensions, to
the best that modern physics experiments can tell. One such experiment is
measuring the thermodynamic energy of a gas, a quantity that
demonstrably increases the more spatial dimensions a gas moves in. Data
from this experiment indicate three spatial dimensions.
Now time is occasionally considered to be another spatial dimension,
for one reason because it is convolved with the three spatial dimensions in
Einstein’s special relativity. However, this convolution does not change the

underlying number of physical dimensions: in all frames, there are always
three spatial and one temporal dimension.
There is a common misconception that gravity, specifically Einstein’s
general relativity, involves four spatial dimensions, but it does not. General
relativity involves only three. However, these three could involve
something called “curvature,” which would result, for example, in a sphere
having a three-dimensional volume that is different than (4/3)πR3.
Speculation does exist in the modern physics literature that there might
be four spatial dimensions (Kaluza-Klein theory), ten total spatial
dimensions (string theory), and even twenty-six spatial dimensions (another
variation of string theory). However, there is no clear experimental result
that demands any more spatial dimensions than three. Postulating them
may make the math behind some physical theories more succinct, more
symmetric, more encompassing, and even more elegant, but it should not
be taken as experimental proof.
Question 261: Can we humans use the superluminal expansion of our universe to
send out spaceships faster than light?
A.    Yes, why not?
B.    No, that would be silly.
C.    No one knows for sure.
D.    We decided to ask Miguel Alcubierre, who has published speculation about
this very idea. Unfortunately, his voicemail said that today he is vacationing
in a distant galaxy—but he is due back tomorrow.
The best answer is A, yes, the expansion of the universe can be used by
spaceships to move away superluminally. This already works for galaxies
(an odd form of spaceship) far across the universe. This idea was pondered
previously in the Superluminal Trains chapter. A key reason for this version
of superluminosity is that c is a local limit only. It is the fastest speed that
anything with mass can pass you.
Interestingly, there have been attempts to create a cosmology-based
engine to create superluminal speeds, even close by. In 1994, Miguel
Alcubierre speculated that a drive might exist that allows nearby spaceships

to travel faster than light. The basic idea is to create a small bubble where
space expands exponentially, like in some versions of inflationary
cosmology. Then, step into this bubble for a superluminal wild ride. Then
step out.
Of course, this has never been tried in practice. Seemingly
insurmountable problems include a need to include negative mass,
something that, although not strictly ruled out, currently has no
observational basis.
Another problem is that even if we were given some negative mass gift-
wrapped in a magnetic bottle, the technology to incorporate it into a
working engine does not exist today.
Question 262: Will the Emdrive being constructed by NASA enable faster-than-
light travel?
A.    Yes.
B.    No.
C.    Maybe, but we will never know for sure because the government will cover it
up.
D.    Stop with the foolishness.
The best answer is D: stop with the foolishness. Although there has
been much discussion on the internet about something called the
“Emdrive,” this device, as described by every web page about it that I can
find, conveniently ignores some well-tested laws of physics. I therefore put
it in the “foolish” category and will not consider it further. Next!

Question 263: Let’s now return to the train station and further explore the
strange connection that relativity makes between superluminal motion and
backward time travel. Reentering the station, your train friend is still there and
eager to help with more experiments. After a far-reach and speculative
discussion, you focus in on a perplexing question: assuming that you and your
train friend, when departing, exchanged superluminal text messages, must these
messages go back in time?
A.    Yes, all returned superluminal messages will arrive before they are sent.
That’s why the limerick in the prologue of the book is worded as it is.
B.    No, some returned superluminal messages will not arrive before they are
sent. The limerick in the prologue is wrong.
C.    This book has a limerick?
There are reasons why both answers A and B can be considered the
best choice. In sum, closed-loop superluminal messaging, where an
original message is sent and, upon receipt, a return message is sent back to
the source of the original message, can happen without the return message
arriving 
before 
the 
original 
message 
was 
sent. 
Superluminal
communication does not always involve backward time travel, even in the
strangest case of the two communicators moving apart.
A key point is the speed of the faster-than-light (FTL) texts. If this speed
is far faster than light, then the return FTL text will arrive before the
original FTL message is sent. But if the FTL text is sent only a little bit
faster than light, than it can return after it is sent and not involve backward
time travel. There is a critical speed—also dependent on the speed of your
away-moving train friend—that divides the realm of the communicating
with the past from the realm of communicating with the future.
Therefore, the reason why answer A could still be correct is because, if
you read the limerick carefully, the limerick says “far faster than light”—
emphasis on “far.” Given this qualifier, if the young lady Bright was herself
the superluminal message, she could indeed return before she left.
Alternatively, a reason answer B can be the best is not only because it is
more general, but also because young ladies like Bright tend have mass,
and there is no known way to get anything with mass to go FTL.

But wait, things get even stranger. Previously, in the train examples, I
was trying to avoid discussing relativistic image doubling (RID) because it
would make understanding these situations more complicated. But RID
can be crucially important in connecting the faster-than-light to the back-
in-time. Therefore, if you’re up for it now, put on your (doubled) crash
helmet, and let’s go zooming toward crazyville.
To start, previously, we never really made a big deal over which
direction the really fast FTL texts were going. Let’s make a big deal about
that now. For far FTL texts, it is possible that both the original FTL text
and the return FTL text both go in the same direction. What?
Boring Slow Texts That Don’t Go Back in Time
OK, let’s slow down and do the easy subluminal (slower than light)
“normal” text case first. The following is in time order for you:
•    You compose the original text.
•    You send it out and it disappears from your phone.
•    It goes to your train friend’s phone.
•    It is received on that phone and stays there.
•    Your train friend sees it and composes a reply text.
•    The reply text is sent, disappearing from your train friend’s phone
and moving toward your phone.
•    The reply text arrives at your phone and stays there.
Why did the texts disappear when sent? That wasn’t physics. It was
editing. Disappearing texts were a choice made to create a more
understandable scenario. Were text copies to have remained on the
sending phones, they might create confusion when we next delve into the
crazier far FTL texts next.
Fascinating FTL Texts That Do Go Back in Time
Let’s do the same exchange, but now use FTL texts moving, yes, far faster
than light. Here is the time-ordered play-by-play in this case, in your frame,
as shown by a more detailed analysis.

•    First, a pair of return FTL texts appear on your phone before you
sent your original FTL text. Yes, you read that right. The reply FTL
text appears first and doubled!
•    One of these reply FTL texts leaves your phone toward your train
friend’s phone, while the other text just stays on your phone.
•    Only after that do you compose and send your original FTL text.
Your original FTL text disappears from your phone as it is sent.
•    Both the reply FTL text and your original FTL text move toward
your train friend’s phone, with your original text moving faster (your
frame).
•    Your original FTL text arrives at your train friend’s phone.
•    Your train friend composes the FTL reply text and sends it.
•    The reply FTL text arrives from your phone to your train friend’s
phone. Yes, to reiterate, in your frame, even though your train
friend sent the text, it does not go to you. Instead, it arrives at your
train friend’s phone from you.
•    Just as your train friend sends their reply FTL text, it merges with
the arriving reply FTL text from your phone and disappears from
your train friend’s phone. The only version left of the reply FTL
text is on your phone.
•    Your original FTL text remains on your train friend’s phone.
What’s the Same?
As with the slower texts, your original FTL text is created on your phone
and ends up on your train friend’s phone, while the reply FTL text is
created on your train friend’s phone and ends up on your phone.
What’s the Difference?
A key difference was that the far FTL texts have two relativistic image
doubling (RID) events, whereas the slow regular texts had none. The first
RID event occurred before anything else, and the second after everything
else.
But why do we have to include these crazy RID events? Because
tracking the times and directions of the FTL texts shows that is what

happens. Superluminal communication is, perhaps, stranger than you
thought because it involves these odd double events. Backward time travel,
it turns out, is not “straightforward” or even, more accurately, “straight
backward.” At least in this case, in your frame, it involves odd doubling
events.
Oh, and your train friend tells you later, back in the train station, a
different version of the same story. In the train frame, your train friend says
all of the far FTL texts really went from their phone to yours! (A similar
situation to this is discussed in Chapter 10 of the book It’s About Time by
N. David Mermin.)
Welcome back from crazyville. Please, try to go on with your life.
However, before removing your (doubled) crash helmet, please check your
phone to see if anyone has replied to the texts you are thinking of sending.
Question 264: Can particles tunnel through solid objects faster than light?
A.    Yes, and this has been measured in the lab.
B.    No, why would they?
C.    Tunnels are made with large rock-crunching machines. If you look closely at
these machines, there is no button that you can push that says “go faster
than light.” Case closed!

The best answer, according to physics literature, is A: tunneling can
happen faster than light. This question has been debated and
experimented upon since at least 1932 and discussed at length in a key
paper by Thomas Hartman in 1962. Therefore, it is now known as the
Hartman effect.
Let’s back up: what is tunneling? In the world of quantum mechanics,
quantum tunneling refers to particles being able to go right through things.
As you might expect, the thicker a “thing” is, such as a wall, the less chance
that a particle tunnels through to the other side. But sometimes it does!
The speed of tunneling is a controversial topic. Numerous lab
experiments have been dedicated to measuring this speed, and analyses
frequently concentrate on time as measured by the particles doing the
tunneling. The superluminal claims result from unusually little time
appearing to progress on the internal clocks of these particles when they
tunnel. Therefore, when the thickness of the barrier is divided by this time
inside the barrier, speeds faster than light result. Inside the quantum
tunneling community, some physicists think they are investigating a
phenomenon that may lead to true superluminal signaling.
However, and perhaps you have been hoping there would be a
“however,” tunneling has, so far, never been used to communicate faster
than light. Feel better now? There is much disagreement as to why,
though, and some physicists seem to expect that FTL communications will
be demonstrated in the near future.
The situation might be considered either fascinating or embarrassing.
Outside of the quantum tunneling community, some physicists think that
the claims of superluminality during tunneling must be wrong and that the
tunneling community itself needs to figure out why or suffer future
embarrassment. This would make answer B most correct.
Being a physicist from outside the quantum tunneling community, my
opinion is that tunneling will never be found able to practically
communicate faster than light. Therefore, in my opinion, B is the best
answer.

Question 265: A tachyon is a hypothetical particle with mass that is constrained
to always move faster than light. According to a popular extension to special
relativity, what happens to the energy of a tachyon as its speed increases?
A.    Its energy increases.
B.    Its energy decreases.
C.    Its energy always remains the same.
D.    You are finally mentioning tachyons now, in the last section? Shouldn’t the
word “tachyon” be all over this book?
The best answer is B. Tachyons are hypothetical particles that are
“trapped” on the high side of the speed of light, always moving
superluminally. The total energy of a tachyon decreases the faster it goes,
and increases if it slows. Tachyons may be fun to think about, but there is
no evidence that they really exist. That’s why they are not mentioned more
frequently in this book. Shadows and laser spots, which can move faster
than light, do exist and are not tachyons.
Question 266: Is it true that no one has ever directly measured the speed of
light?
A.    Yes, if “directly” means measuring light’s speed moving in one direction only.
B.    No, the speed of light is one of the most accurately measured constants.
C.    Wait, wait, wait. Is this question implying that this whole book, and much of
physics, is based on a quantity, c, that has never been directly measured?
The best answer is A: there is actually controversy as to how to measure
the speed of light in the most accurate way possible, and it is just not as
“straightforward” as it might seem.
The “one-way speed of light” is defined as how fast light travels in one
direction, but it is not trusted as an accurate way to measure light’s speed
because it necessarily involves an observer that is not near to the emitter.
The key problem is the difficulty of synchronizing clocks accurately in two
different locations. So far, no one-way speed of light has ever been
measured that did not end up being controversial.

The “two-way speed of light” depends on a reflected beam. Because it
involves only a single observer located in the same place that the light
beam is emitted, it is considered much more reliable. In general, two-way
claims are not so controversial.
Historically, Einstein himself noted the difficulty in measuring the
speed of light using only one direction, and therefore explicitly stated that
he was assuming that light moves at the same speed on both legs of a two-
way measurement.

CHAPTER 35
What Happens if c Changes?
OK, OK, perhaps you now concede that it is not possible for you, yourself,
to go faster than light. Your shadow can do it, but you: no, sorry. But wait,
maybe you were too focused on yourself. What would happen if you
tinkered with light itself?
For example, light can be slowed by directing it into water. But perhaps
there are ways of slowing light much more, so much that you can outrun it.
Or even outwalk it. Alternatively, perhaps there are ways of speeding light
up. What happens then? That’s what this chapter is about.
Question 267: Can you increase how fast light moves through water by moving
the water (making it flow)?
A.    Yes, flowing water forces even light to move with it.
B.    No, this would violate the speed invariance of light.
C.    Maybe, because deliberate vagueness is my thing now.
The best answer is A: yes, flowing water does affect the speed of light.
To be clear, in the frame of the water, light always has the same speed.
However, in your frame, where water flows, the speed of light in the
direction that the water flows is slightly faster than the speed of light in
other directions. Directing light through flowing water is not a way to get
photons moving faster than light, though. The fastest you can get is the
familiar maximum limit c. And water is not special. This is also true for
light’s speed through flowing air, for example.

Oddly, a flow-induced speed increase does not happen through a pure
vacuum because the vacuum of empty space does not flow relative to any
object. Therefore, the speed of light in a vacuum is the same in every
direction.
Question 268: Can light be stopped and then restarted?
A.    Yes, I read about this online somewhere.
B.    No, the speed of light is fundamental.
C.    OK, so if light gets stopped, then I myself can go faster than light simply by
walking, right? So, this whole book, you had me contemplating how only
mass-free things like shadows and laser beams can be superluminal. But
now, if the implication of this question is correct, it turns out that I could
have included my very self in this list. This is unfair! (But also cool.)
D.    Only by Waffles the Wonder Llama (tm).
The best answer is A: yes, you read about this online somewhere. There
really are ways to stop light and then restart it. One way to make this work
is to first find some material that absorbs passing light but then re-emits it
on command, like when you hit it with just the right color of other light.
One might not call this “stopped light” since it was just absorbed for a
while, and not an infinite while. But then again, if it didn’t have such a
clickbaity title as “stopped light,” then you might not have read about it
online somewhere.

Another way to “stop” light is to keep it bouncing back and forth
between two close mirrors. When the mirrors are close enough, a “standing
wave” of light can be set up between them so that no momentum is being
transported. This can be considered stopped light because the light isn’t
going anywhere. The light can then be “restarted” by removing one of the
mirrors. You might now worry that no mirror is perfectly reflective, so
eventually the light will diminish, which is true. However, it is also true
that you can put a light-amplifying substance between the mirrors to
compensate. Lasers, in fact, use just such a substance.
Of course, it is quite easy to slow light by directing it into any
transparent material like air, water, or glass. Then, speeds of light labelled
phase velocity and group velocity can become much slower than c, the
speed of light across a vacuum. These were pondered back in the chapter
The Many Speeds of Light. Last, you could also stop light by directing it
into a black hole, but then you might have trouble getting it restarted
again.
Question 269: Can light exist without a vacuum?
A.    Yes, light is a self-contained entity and can exist anywhere, even without a
vacuum, and even in your refrigerator after you close the door.

B.    No, that’s why we keep saying “the speed of light in vacuum.”
C.    You cannot get rid of a vacuum. Putting particles in the vacuum does not get
rid of its underlying presence.
D.    Whatever. I’ll believe anything at this point.
The best answer, in my opinion, is B: light needs a vacuum to exist.
Vacuum used to mean the absence of everything—and it still does when
referring to anything that can transfer momentum or information—like
particles with mass and light. In recent decades, though, quantum field
theory, with some help from concordance cosmology, has taught humanity
that even if you take away all particles and light, something still remains:
fields. These underlying fields not only define a modern vacuum but are
crucial for building everything else, including particles and light.
Question 270: Can a vacuum be changed to speed up light?
A.    Yes, you can’t go faster than light, but you can make light go faster.
B.    No, because it is not possible to change the underlying vacuum of the
universe.
C.    It depends on whether the vacuum uses a HEPA filter. Vacuums that don’t
use HEPA filters can actually make light dirty, which could cause you
embarrassment when your physics friends visit.
The best answer is A: it might really be possible to increase the speed of
light in vacuum by changing the vacuum. One type of experiment along
this line involves something called the Casimir effect where two metal
plates are brought very close together—so close that some underlying
quantum field vacuum fluctuations are changed. The potential increase in
light speed between these plates is named the Scharnhorst effect. To date,
however, this effect has not been demonstrated experimentally, and the
speed increase might be well below modern science’s ability to detect.
Question 271: Did light have the same speed in the early universe?
A.    Yes, so far as we can tell.
B.    No, the speed of light has been steadily increasing.

C.    Light has no speed. If it did, you wouldn’t be able to see things because the
emitted light would get away. Checkmate scientists!
The best answer is A: light has always had the same speed so far as we
can tell. There has been much speculation about this, though. New and
speculative theories gain acceptance, typically, by predicting unique results
for new measurements. So far, as with many spectacularly sounding new
and speculative theories, this has not been done for measurements
involving light in the early universe. Most cosmologists therefore stick with
the simpler assumption that c has not changed over time.
Question 272: What would happen if we reduced the speed of light to the speed
of a cat?
A.    Nothing major. Everything would be pretty much the same.
B.    Big changes. The universe would look and work much different than it does
today.
C.    Odd things. For example, by the time you returned home from work, your
little kitten would be a fully grown cat. Also, when walking quickly to work,
things in front of you would appear to move in a fast frenzy, while things
behind you would appear to move like slow molasses.
D.    Unexplainable things. For example, light would catch mice and not eat the
food you put out for it even if light liked this exact same food just yesterday.
The best answers, in my opinion, are B and C: big changes and odd
things. Let’s look at answer B first. To start, let’s clarify that what is meant
by reducing c is reducing the fundamental maximum speed limit, not just
the speed that photons move. Then, it seems possible that reducing c could
cause our universe to be drastically different—possibly so different that
neither humans nor cats would exist. I don’t think much research has been
done on this. Also, it is not clear how the conclusions of such research
could be full tested.
The first part of answer C is based on the famous twin paradox in
special relativity. There, twins are separated with one staying home and the
other speeding away near c, later returning to find themselves older than
their twin. The situation is a paradox because each twin could consider the

other twin to be the one going off and returning older. The paradox is
resolved by realizing that one twin must switch inertial frames—something
that will result in relative aging. Were c much lower, just going to work in a
fast car near the reduced speed of light in this odd universe, turning
around, and coming back home later could bring about the same twin
paradox.
The second part of answer C is based on the Doppler effect, as it
applies to not only shifts you would see in apparent colors, but also to how
fast things appear to move. Moving toward a friend’s wristwatch, for
example, would make it appear to you to tick faster. Also, all light from the
forward direction, including light from this watch, would appear shifted to
higher energy called a blueshift. This effect depends on the observation of
a specific observer: you in this case. To your friend wearing the watch—a
different observer—it would appear at the normal color and to run at the
usual rate.
The opposite is true for objects behind you. In that direction, watches
appear to you to run slower, and each photon would also be shifted to
lower energy called redshifting.
Famous fictional stories about how the world might look at low c were
written by George Gamow in his Mr. Tompkins stories. However, these
stories did not take into account observer-dependent phenomena such as
Doppler shifts.
Question 273: What would happen if we increased the speed of light to ten times
its present value?
A.    Nothing major. Everything would be and appear pretty much the same.
B.    Big changes. The universe would look and work much different than it does
today.
C.    Odd things. For example, by the time you returned home from work, your
fully grown cat will have reverted back to being a little kitten. Also, when
walking quickly to work, things in front of you would appear to move like
slow molasses, while things behind you would appear to move in a fast
frenzy.
D.    Unexplainable things. For example, your dog would stop barking at your
vacuum cleaner even if it barked at this same vacuum cleaner just yesterday.

In my view, a higher value for c would have less obvious consequences
than a low value. This gives a better reason for choosing answer A,
“nothing major,” than in the previous question. It seems possible, to the
best of my speculative guessing ability, that increasing c might not much
affect your life, your cat’s life, or even your dog’s life. A key reason is that
none of you move anywhere close to the regular speed of light, nor do any
whole macroscopic objects you encounter in real life.
However, I am really not sure that “nothing major” would result. Just
like mentioned in the previous answer, any change in c might well cause
big changes in our universe—so big that humans and dogs could no longer
exist. Answer B is also possible.
One sure difference between our present universe with the c we know
and love and a universe with a much higher value for c would be rooted in
astronomical observations. For example, in a high-c universe, it is unlikely
that Romer would have discovered the speed of light in the late 1600s
because the needed timing accuracy would not be available until later.
From there, even this little tweak should cause history to unfold differently.
Answer C, though, just cannot be correct. No matter c’s value, and no
matter your speed relative to c, there is just no known way for your cat to
revert to being a kitten.
Question 274: Let’s return to entanglement but this time use photons. Two
entangled photons move out in opposite directions through air. Now let’s think
about that air. Charged particles in air, it is known, react to the photons by
jiggling around. The reactions replace the original photons with a new packet of
electromagnetic radiation within one millimeter. Are the new photon packets
entangled?
A.    Yes. The air doesn’t matter since its electromagnetic components are
unmeasured.
B.    No. Air jiggling disrupts direct entanglement. This is why direct entanglement
only works through a vacuum.
C.    Beyond one millimeter is OK, but not too far.
The best answer is C, since jiggling nearby air molecules only slightly
reduces entanglement with each interaction. The study of this effect is

called quantum decoherence. Experiments show that photons can retain
measurable quantum entanglement even after traveling hundreds of
kilometers through air.
Question 275: Is there any advantage to being able to see the world at
superluminal speeds?
A.    Yes, because then you could see the world in 3D.
B.    No, because everything would look the same, only slower. Much slower.
C.    Only if you could join the Avengers, although you might be the most boring
Avenger.
The best answer is A: yes, because then you could see the world in 3D.
Now most of us already see the world in 3D because we have two eyes.
With two eyes, your brain takes the slightly different pictures captured by
each eye, searches for differences, and interprets them as three-dimensional
(3D) depth. But seeing at superluminal speeds opens up the third
dimension in a different way.
To understand how, let’s look at plain (also plane: 2D) photography.
There, most cameras use glass lenses to create a single “flat” 2D
photograph with no direct indication of depth. Were a camera able to
record a video tracking superluminal speeds, though, it could record how
the light from a camera flash reflects as it spreads over an object. And the
spread depends on that object’s 3D depth.
Keeping track of 3D changes can be considered another form of light
detection and ranging (LIDAR, often just written as lowercase lidar).
Normal lidar works slightly differently, as light is sent out in several specific
directions and timed for how long it takes to reflect back. Multiplying the
time delay by the speed of light then reveals the distance to all of these
directions. Do this in enough directions and a 3D image of an object
illuminated by the lidar light can be constructed.
Question 276: You wake up and suddenly realize that you can see faster-than-
light motion. What does your room look like?
A.    Pretty much the same as with regular speed, but slower.

B.    Everything appears a uniform gray.
C.    Like a music video with a dancing zebra.
The best answer is C: your room could look like a music video with a
dancing zebra. What? To begin to unravel this, let’s start with the reason
why you can’t see this at normal speed: because your human eye-brain
combination only presents to you a movie that updates about every one-
tenth of a second on the average. On a nanosecond time scale, though, a
hundred million times faster, several differences would appear immediately
obvious. First, objects would appear about a hundred million times
dimmer. Therefore, really, the room would appear not gray, but almost
completely dark.
However, if your eyes could take in sufficient light and your brain could
process images sufficiently fast, then all of the physical objects would just
sit there and not move. Where’s the dancing zebra?
Look at the walls. As described in the chapter How to Make Your
Shadow Go Faster than Light, simply turning on lights in a room causes
the room to become illuminated superluminally. In other words, the lines
between dark and light cross the walls faster than light. But at the
nanosecond time scale, you can see that! Assuming the two room lights
themselves turn on instantaneously, you see the walls, furniture, your
frozen-but-confused roommate, and even that white horse that followed
you home yesterday as they become illuminated. Illumination fronts, with

their superluminal speeds, progress noticeably on the nanosecond time
scale.
Now let’s fast-forward to a time when the room is fully illuminated. At
the nanosecond time scale, you see that the two small lights illuminating
the room have time periods when they interfere. These interference bands
show themselves as stripes of light and dark—light when they
constructively interfere, and dark in regions of destructive interference.
This lighting makes your friend’s white shirt look like that of a referee. And
the white horse appears like—yes, you guessed it—a zebra.
But wait again, weren’t you promised a dancing zebra? How can that
zebra-looking horse dance so fast that its motion can be seen on the
nanosecond time scale? It can’t. The horse looks frozen to you. But the
bands of light don’t. The bands of light and dark can move as the two light
bulbs go in and out of phase. How fast? You guessed it again (you’re getting
good at this!). Their apparent speed is unconstrained, so it can be faster
than light. There will be times when these bands of dark and light appear
to cross walls and couches and friends and horses faster than light. And so,
at times, these moving bands will make that white horse look like a dancing
zebra. Happy now?

CHAPTER 36
Are There Other Limits Like c?
The speed of light c is not just a limit on speed. It is a boundary between
the normal and the strange. Normal objects with mass can only approach
it. Shadows may appear to split when passing it. Is c unique, not only in
quantity, but in character? Are there any other limits in the universe that
act like c? That’s what this chapter is about.
Question 277: Is there a maximum distance?
A.    Yes, the edge of the observable universe.
B.    No, because any maximum distance is outflanked by farther distances.
C.    Yes, the edge of the entire universe.
D.    No, but apparently there is a maximally annoying question.
E.    No one knows.
F.    Max Distance was the famous crypto-xenographer who first characterized
the quantum effects of goats on missing sheep.
The best answer for modern concordance cosmology is B: there is no
maximum distance. However, most of these answers either fail interestingly
or can be justified in some way, so let’s go through them.
First, with regard to answer A, which focuses on the observable
universe, it is true that there is a maximum distance to which we can see
right now. (And another one right now.) This observer- specific limit was
pondered in the chapter Superluminal Cosmology but will be reviewed
again here. A different observer, or even the same observer at a different
time, has a different maximum distance limit.

With light, the farthest distance you can see is the cosmic microwave
background (CMB). Light can’t come to us from earlier times and farther
distances because the universe was opaque before that. This maximum
distance occurs in every direction, but it is slightly different in each
direction.
Beyond the CMB, there exists the cosmic neutrino background and the
cosmic gravitational wave background. Humanity does not yet have the
technology to detect these backgrounds. As with the CMB, the maximum
detection limit of these backgrounds moves out as the universe ages, at the
speed of light.
Now let’s go beyond the observable universe and consider the entire
concordance universe. There, expressions of distance can usually just be
outflanked by considering an even farther distance: answer B. As far as we
know, the universe just goes and goes without limit.
Let’s look now at answer C, but this time outside the context of
concordance cosmology. In some “closed universe” cosmologies, if you
keep going in a straight line, you will eventually come back to where you
started. This is like traveling all of the way around the surface of the Earth.
We don’t think our universe is like that, but such cosmologies were
seriously considered only seventy-five years ago. In cases like these, the
logic of answer A does not work. Things seemingly “beyond” some
maximum distance will only be considered closer, not farther.
Aside 31: How to Define Distances in Cosmology
It may surprise you to know that the concept of distance itself can be defined
in multiple ways in cosmological settings. As an object moves away from you,
it appears smaller. When the angular diameter of an object drops off directly
in proportion to its distance, that defines, cosmologically, angular diameter
distance. In some general relativistic cosmologies, including the presently
favored concordance, angular diameter distance has, oddly enough, a
maximum value. So there is a maximum distance in this case: a maximum
angular diameter distance! What this really means, though, is that as an
object moves farther away from you, after this “maximum distance,” its
diameter appears to increase.
However, when an object’s apparent luminosity—how it appears—drops
off directly in proportion to the square of its distance, that defines,

cosmologically, luminosity distance. In concordance cosmology, there is no
maximum value for luminosity distance: the farther the object, the dimmer it
appears.
In many general relativistic cosmologies, including concordance,
luminosity distance is different than angular diameter distance. This means
that for a single redshift (the quantity that is actually measured) the
corresponding numeric value of luminosity distance is different than the
numeric value of angular diameter distance. What to do? Nothing.
Cosmologists live with these differences and just try to be clear about what
type of distance they are using.
Beyond that, there is speculation that our universe is only one of many
similar universes in a greater multiverse. There, even if spatial dimensions
in our universe curve back on themselves, there may be disconnected
universes that exist outside of our own. An analogy with the Earth is that
even though the surface of the Earth curves back on itself, there are other
planets that exist outside of the Earth, like Mars.
OK, but could there be a maximum distance, call it d, that behaves
mathematically like c, the maximum speed? In this speculative paradigm, a
train could keep getting farther away from you, with everything seeming
normal on the train itself, but you see this train only slowly approaching
some maximum distance d.
As interesting as this may be to contemplate, a maximum distance d
like this has not been seriously considered. One key reason is that
concordance cosmology is not broken, and so there is really no need for
concepts like d to “fix it.”
Finally, let’s look at answer D: no one knows if there is a maximum
distance. This is also a good answer. Humanity mostly knows about things
on the size scale of, well, humans. Go much smaller and things become
strange: unfamiliar quantum rules more usually dominate. Go much larger
and things become strange again in a different way: unfamiliar gravity rules
more usually dominate. The more different the scale is from human
experience, the less we humans typically know about it. As technology
advances, though, we frequently push into length scales further from the
human scale than ever before. It is therefore possible that a future

technology will uncover clues to some type of maximum distance in a way
not yet imagined.
Question 278: Is there a minimum speed (slightly above zero)?
A.    Yes, Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle says so.
B.    No, because given any minimum speed, just go slower.
C.    Nobody knows.
D.    “Mini Speed,” as she is known to her colleagues, is a famous klepto-zoologist
who was once illegally barred from attending high-wire hippopotamus
performances in Antarctica.
The best answers are B and C, in my opinion. Let’s look first at answer
B: there is no minimum speed—or more exactly, no minimum relative
speed between any two objects. This seems obvious because any relative
speed can always be matched and so brought to zero. Classical mechanics
and special relativity say nothing about a nonzero minimum speed. Many
times right here in this book we have given examples where two or more
people were assumed to be “at rest” with respect to each other (in the same
inertial frame). There, their relative speed would be zero, which is a
theoretical minimum. Therefore, the concept of a pure inertial frame
depends on there being no minimum speed above zero.
Let’s look next at answer A. Although it is common to picture things as
moving and bouncing around on small scales where quantum uncertainty
may dominate, Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, by itself, demands no
minimum speed.
If you were to try to confine something that can carry momentum to a
small region, then, by the uncertainty principle, its average momentum
would go up, implying average motion. The momentum from such
confinements is not just theoretical. It creates pressure.
One can take the view that anything that interacts with the outside
universe is confined in some way, and so this confinement must lead to
some minimum average momentum and so some minimum average speed.
But then, quite possibly, the size of the universe comes into play. And the
entire universe is so big that we don’t know its size.

In terms of actual observations, it could be that there really is a
minimum speed but that we just don’t know what it is because it is too
small to measure with current technology. It is therefore usually assumed
to be zero for practical purposes.
What, though, is the world record for lowest measured speed? Oddly
enough, it might involve the fastest energy transporters known: light.
Photons from distant gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) arrive within about 0.001
second of each other after traveling over a billion light-years. This makes
their speed relative to each other about 3.6 x 10−11 kilometers per hour,
which is much slower than your average turtle. This, of course, is just a
limit. If a minimum speed exists it would have to be slower than this.
Question 279: Is there a minimum distance (slightly greater than zero)?
A.    Yes, the Planck length.
B.    No, because if so, just divide it in half.
C.    Nobody knows.
D.    There is no person named Mini Distance, in case you were wondering.
The best answer is C: no one knows. Evidence for answer B, that there
is no minimum distance, can be found in the idea that there are distances
so small they appear to us to be zero. For example, the size of an electron is
recorded as formally zero. However, the electron might have some
minimum size that is just, presently, too small to measure. The electron
has a known mass and charge, and any mass and charge confined to a
small enough volume would cause a charged black hole to be formed.
Do black holes imply a minimum size? The center of a static black
hole has, officially in general relativity theory, zero radius. Called a
singularity, this zero radius sounds like a minimum distance. But we can’t
see inside the event horizon of a black hole to check this. So, the smallest
distance we could probe would be the electron’s event horizon, which is
larger than zero. Furthermore, this black hole limit does not incorporate
quantum effects, which might take over before infalling matter reaches a
zero radius.

Involving quantum mechanics leads us to address answer A, the Planck
length. What’s that? Let’s say you want to probe a small distance, call it ∆x.
Now the quantum uncertainty principle says it takes an increasing amount
of momentum ∆p, and hence energy E to probe ∆x over increasingly
smaller distances. But energy is related to mass through Einstein’s famous
formula E = mc2. At some really small distance scale, the high energy
needed to probe it creates a black hole. This is the distance scale of the
Planck length.
To really know what happens at length scales at and below the Planck
length, both general relativity and quantum mechanics are likely
simultaneously important, and we don’t have a theory that combines them.
And even if we did, we can’t generate energies that high to check it.
Therefore, in my speculative opinion, C is the best answer: nobody knows.
Also relevant to answer A, some have hypothesized that the universe is
a big lattice where objects have positions separated by multiples of the
Planck length. Others have hypothesized that space and time become a
messy sea of quantum foam at the Planck length. Yet others have
hypothesized that objects are really made of strings that have sizes near the
Planck length. According to string theory, when these strings vibrate, they
create mass. However insightful such speculations are, and however
spectacularly cool the mathematics of such speculations may be,
unfortunately there have been no clear measurements that uniquely
require them. Therefore, there is no clear experimental evidence that the
Planck length is a minimum distance.
Question 280: Is there a minimum acceleration (just above zero)?
A.    Yes, and it is seen in the motions of stars in the outer parts of galaxies.
B.    No, why would there be?
C.    Is there a version of this book without the jokes?
The best answer is B, in my opinion: there is no known minimum
acceleration. Evidence does exist, however, that when accelerations get
small, things get strange. In particular, distant stars orbit always at the same

speed, no matter how far they may be from a galaxy’s center. One way to
explain this is with the Modified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND)
hypothesis, which includes an interpretation that says that below a really
small acceleration, objects respond to forces differently. This really small
acceleration is too small to be seen in today’s Earth laboratories.
Now most astrophysicists don’t believe in MOND and consider the
reason for the constant speed of stars orbiting in spiral galaxies to be dark
matter—a form of matter that creates much gravity but little light. Dark
matter is expected because it explains, among other things, the distribution
of hot and cold spots on the cosmic microwave background. Still, MOND
models have been defended for decades and remain impressively resilient,
without a clear galactic counterexample.
Question 281: Is there a minimum interval of time?
A.    Yes, the Planck time.
B.    No, because if so, just divide it in half.
C.    Yes, the ∆t in Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, where ∆E is the energy of
the observable universe.
D.    Yes, the time it takes for light to cross d˜, the shortest possible string in
string theory.
E.    We are zoologists, and although this book is not about zoology, we
purchased this answer after being alerted to the slur against zoologists given
in the answer to a previous question. We want you physics readers to know
that there is no such thing as “klepto-zoology” and we are not even sure
what that is supposed to mean. Oh—please wait for a second. We need to
put in some more quarters to keep this answer going. There. OK. Anyway,
zoologists are generally wonderful scientists who have attained their high
level of knowledge through hard work and not stealing anything. What?
More quarters? Wh—
The best answer is B: mainstream physics does not recognize a
minimum time interval. Mathematically, physics equations that work
during some time period will also work, in general, over half that period.
There are some physicists who consider answer A to be correct: that the
Planck time is the minimum. This is the time it takes for light to cross the

Planck length, about 5 x 10−44 seconds. Currently, humanity has not
measured any processes that takes a time period so short, so identifying the
Planck time as a minimum time interval is just speculation.
It is interesting to wonder, though, what known process takes the
shortest amount of time? Such ultrashort processes, if repetitive and easily
measurable, form the bases for clocks. In particular, atomic clocks are
synchronized to the difference in energy levels between atoms. This relates
to the frequency of microwaves, which, when modeled as a simple
electromagnetic wave, have electric fields that vibrate billions of times
each second.
Microwaves, though, are not the fastest photon oscillators—just a type
of light that can be easily stabilized for use in practical clocks. The fastest
photon oscillators are gamma rays. Gamma rays have been detected from
deep space with frequencies as high as 1029 cycles per second. One cycle
then takes only about 10−29 seconds. This might be considered the shortest
amount of time yet measured, although indirectly.
The shortest amount of time measured directly in a lab on Earth, so far,
is the time it took a photon to pass through a hydrogen atom: about 10−19
seconds.
Question 282: Is there a minimum energy?
A.    Yes, zero.
B.    No, since potential energy can go negative without limit.
C.    Yes, the minimum energy of vacuum.
D.    No one knows.
E.    Is there a version of this book without the physics? I like many of the jokes,
but I was happier believing that nothing I did really affected the future, let
alone the past.
The best answer is D: no one knows if there is a minimum energy.
Even when cleared of particles and photons, the vacuum of seemingly
empty space does not have zero energy because of quantum effects. Why,
then, isn’t answer C is the best answer? Because it may be possible to alter
this minimum quantum energy. For example, enclosing this vacuum

between two electrically conducting plates will alter some of it. How low
can it be altered? Currently, no one knows.
There is speculation that the current minimum vacuum energy in our
universe is a “false vacuum,” meaning that it may eventually decay to an
even lower energy level. Although this may seem fun to experience, such a
decay, if it occurred everywhere at once, might instantly vaporize all
matter, which might make it less fun. As with other speculated changes to
our universe, this prediction can be said to be outside of science since it is
not reproducible.
Answer B, that potential energy can be negative—even without limit—
is mathematically true when balancing energy equations. Potential energy,
though, can be considered strictly theoretical and not itself directly
measurable.
Question 283: Is there a maximum energy?
A.    Yes, the total energy of the entire universe.
B.    No, because it is possible to both generate energy from nothing and dissipate
it into nothing.
C.    Is this the last question in the book? Oh no! This was so much fun. What
should I do? I don’t want to run out of questions! Skip back? Yes, I can
become a butterfly reader and just keep jumping back to read previous
sections of this book. But wait. If there is a maximum energy, this book will
eventually run out of power (pages will decay, etc.) and then I really will have
to stop reading. But how will I know if there is a maximum energy? Wait, is it
OK that an answer to a question contains the question itself? Help!
Both A and B are good answers, even though they are opposites. First of
all, about answer A, energy is additive, so if you add up all of the material
and motional energy in the universe, you should get the maximum energy.
This works even if the total energy in the universe changes with time.
Next, about answer B, it is true that energy is not conserved in
Einstein’s general relativity, which means that energy can come or go. A
classic example of how energy in the universe can change can be found in
the CMB—photons that are seen to arrive from all directions. These
photons that pervade the universe have been dropping in energy ever since

they were created as gamma rays billions of years ago. Since all of these
photons are losing energy, where does this energy go? According to general
relativity, it doesn’t go anywhere. It is gone.
Things get stranger if one considers a type of negative potential energy
that can be included in the gravitational field itself, with one famous
example being the “zero-energy universe” hypothesis. There, the potential
energy in the gravitational field is assumed to be exactly the opposite of all
of the positive matter, radiation, and kinetic energy in the universe.
Therefore, when included, the total energy of the universe is, was, and
always will be zero.
When Einstein first heard this, he stopped in his tracks right in the
middle of a road to think about it. And so it is with this thought, too, that
we will stop this book. Thanks for pondering many of the strange concepts
that involve going faster than the speed of light. Like Einstein did, though,
please keep thinking about them.

CHAPTER 37
Epilogue
What will you do with your newfound knowledge about how to make
things go faster than light? (Well, at least things without mass, like your
shadow.) Will you use it to go back in time yourself, as the woman in the
limerick in the prologue did? No, unfortunately, even after pondering that
limerick and all of the puzzles in this book, that does not appear to be
possible. Will you use your new knowledge at least to send
communications back in time? No, that, too, is not thought possible. Will
you use it, at the very least, to send out messages faster than light? No
again. Modern physics—as communicated as best as I could with the
puzzles in this book—supposes that none of these things are possible.
But let’s look at the bright side. You now know how to make shadows,
laser spots, illumination fronts, and even magnetic field lines go faster than
light. You now know how to make things appear double without using a
lens, and even make one of these images appear to go backward in time.
You now know how to make flat photographs appear three-dimensional,
and how—assuming you have free will—you can affect the past, but
without sending back messages. And, perhaps most importantly, you may
now have a newfound respect for how cool and strange this seemingly
insignificant constant c really is.

CHAPTER 37.1
Glossary (minimal wording)
1- paths: The number of paths a photon takes to go from emission to
absorption in some interpretations of quantum mechanics.
2- path: The number of paths a photon takes to go from emission to
absorption in some interpretations of quantum mechanics.
3D: Three-dimensional.
∞-paths: The number of paths a photon takes to go from emission to
absorption in some interpretations of quantum mechanics.
acceleration: Speeding up or slowing down.
brightness: How bright something appears.
c: The speed of light.
caveat: A warning or exception.
classical: Not involving quantum mechanics or general relativity.
cm: Centimeter(s).
CMB: Cosmic microwave background.
Copenhagen interpretation: Quantum mechanics only describes what
may happen at a measurement. It does not describe what happens
between measurements.
cosmology: The study of the universe.
delayed choice: A human decision after a photon has passed the slit
screen.
Doppler shift: Fast things change color.

electromagnetism: The physics of electricity magnetism and, classically,
light.
entangled: Interaction memory.
entire universe: Everything.
free will: A sentient decision with quantum indeterminate component (as
used in this book).
FTL: Faster than light.
general relativity: Einstein’s 1915 theory of gravity.
GPS: Global Positioning System.
gravity: What holds you down.
hidden variables: Unknown things that would tell you the real single path.
km: Kilometer(s).
LED: Light-emitting diode.
light: What makes things bright.
many worlds interpretation: Every interaction splits off a new universe.
objective reality: How things really are.
observed universe: The universe humans can directly observe.
photon: A quantum of light.
platform: Where trains pass.
position: Where something is.
quantum indeterminate: Impossible to predict.
quasar: Quasi-stellar. A distant and bright galaxy center.
QED: Quantum electrodynamics.
QM: Quantum mechanics.
quantum: A discrete amount.
quantum mechanics: How fundamental particles interact.
quantum electrodynamics: Quantum theory of light and electrons.
quantum field theory: Everything everywhere is quantum fields.
relativistic image doubling: When something moves so fast it appears
twice.

RID: Relativistic image doubling.
slit screen: A screen with thin vertical openings.
spacetime: Space and time considered together.
special relativity: Einstein’s 1905 theory of relative motion.
speed: How fast something moves.
string theory: Particles and photons are not points but tiny strings.
subjective appearance: How things appear.
subluminal: Slower than light.
superluminal: Faster than light.
tachyon: A particle always moving faster than light.
tunneling: Going through something.
velocity: Speed and direction.
wave function: Where something might be measured.
wavelength: Distance between peaks.

CHAPTER 37.2
Image Credits
Jacket Cover
Illustration: A drawing of a fast particle jet emanating from a black hole at
the center of a galaxy.
Illustration Credit: Science Communication Lab for DESY (used with
permission)

Acknowledgements
I thank the following people, many of whom have advanced physics
degrees, for their help in the research, writing, and production of this book.
E. Casey Aldrich, Alice Allen, Logan Andersen, Jacek Borysow, Jane
Friedman, Sabine Hossenfelder, Ögetay Kayali, Eric Lupfer, Neerav
Kaushal, Stephen Maran, N. David Mermin, Tobias Mistele, Oindabi
Mukherjee, Eva Nemiroff, Jay P. Norris, Chad Orzel, Johanna Prüller,
Bryan Suits, Christina Thöne, Virginia Trimble, Robert S. Weidman,
Melissa A. Wuske, and Qi Zhong. Ögetay Kayali is additionally thanked for
contributing several illustrations.

Index
 aka Shruggy
observing fast train, 9
observing light bulbs, 29
observing expanding sphere, 43, 137-140
observing wall shadows, 54
observing shadow from Sun, 60
observing wall spot, 62
contemplating photon speed, 80
listening to supersonic plane, 103, 110
pulling lit candle, 108
pondering magnet, 115
racing light colors, 122
observing falling clock, 181
observing superluminal hourglass, 194
observing line of clones, 195
observing fast bus, 199
observing fast bicycle, 205
observing fast spaceship, 208
observing fast smartphone, 215
sending superluminal texts, 226
contemplating photon shape, 241
contemplating photon interference, 268
observing twin quasar images, 281
contemplating Moon existence, 310
contemplating quantum tunneling, 334
contemplating if light can be stopped, 339
contemplating light without vacuum, 340
confused by dancing zebra, 347
300 BC
Euclid claims light goes out from eye, 14

50 AD
Hero of Alexandria says light is infinitely fast, 14
1021 AD
Ibn al-Haytham reasons light comes into eye, 14
1676 AD
Ole Romer is first to measure light’s speed, 16, 128
1905 AD
Einstein postulates that c is a universal constant, 20
A
aberration
what is it? 176
how it makes things scrunch up, 177-178
acceleration
how to avoid splashing coffee during, 5-10
how it fits in with position, speed and jerk, 164
why can’t you accelerate past light speed? 192-193
how affects simultaneity, 203
is there a minimum? 356
aether
why it doesn’t exist, 20
air
as medium for sound, 102-112
why keeps you from seeing true self, 119
how affects speed of light, 123-126
reduces entanglement? 345-346
Alcubierre, Miguel
speculative FTL engine, 328
al-Haytham, Ibn
realized light goes from source to eye, 14
Alpha Centauri, See stars, Alpha Centauri
Andromeda galaxy
distance to, 132-133
how to go there in your lifetime, 133
how our galaxy moves relative to, 150
present time there if moving fast, 199
how to know if residents attacking, 205-206
Andromeda Paradox

disagreement over present time elsewhere, 205
angular momentum
small particles have only set amounts, 66
two properties of light, 121
conserved for particles AND globes, 292
ant
moving rubber tree plant, 207, 210
antimatter
entangled with matter, 290
what happens if you high-5 this twin, 314
Apollo missions
how placed reflectors tell us lunar distance, 53
Aristotle
thought light goes from eye to source, 14
Astronomy Picture of the Day (APOD),
same author, different project, 404
atoms
jiggling affects light’s speed, 86
how absorbs long wavelength light, 246
how interactions affect entanglement, 302
energy levels help define time, 357
B
Bell, John Stewart
experiments discern classical from quantum, 297
Betelgeuse, See stars, Betelgeuse
big bang
where it happened, 143-145
universe expanded FTL? 151
Big Bang National Park
why it doesn’t exist, 143-144
black holes
created when light bulb turned on? 179
superluminal (entire chapter), 181-190
can fetch dropped space-watch later? 186-188
are you a black hole? 190
imply minimum size scale? 354-355
blink sequence

why can appear FTL, 21-32
blueshift
Doppler versus cosmological, 156-157
how approaching objects appear, 344
bosons
what are they? 252-253
bulbs, See light bulbs
butterfly, See reader, butterfly
C
c2c readers, See readers, c2c
causality violation
if you went back in time, 196
if text went back in time, 226, 232-234
The Character of Physical Law
cool book by Feynmann, 186
charge
can help move electric field FTL? 116
why weak compared to gravity, 174
Cherenkov cone
where FTL particle in water emits, 92
Cherenkov light
what FTL particle in water emits, 88, 92-94
circular, logic, See logic, circular
classical mechanics
definition of shape in, 241, 246-247
1-path solution for light, 256
inability to explain 2-slit experiment, 272, 295
clock hypothesis
does acceleration cause redshift? 164, 203
clocks
do photons have internal? 153
why hard to synchronize two, 204-206, 210
why some appear fast or slow, 215-225
can arrange to detect entangled spin? 325-326
measuring time during tunneling, 334-335
most accurate, 357-358
clones

example exploring if FTL takes you back in time, 194-195
can entangled particles be cloned? 300
coherence length
how related to photon length, 241-242
coherence time
how related to quantum interference, 280
colors
of light (entire chapter), 119-126
relation to Doppler shift, 156, 343
relation to ∞-path paradigm, 261
compression wave
how sound travels, 102
created by sonic boom, 104
concordance cosmology
currently popular universe model, 147-148
constants of nature
speed of light (c), ix, 16, 18, 128, 342
fine structure constant, 37, 129
Planck’s constant, 66
Hubble constant, 148
gravitational constant, 174
constructive interference, See interference, constructive
contemplation points
method for master complex topics, 76
Copenhagen interpretation
relation to 0-paths paradigm, 256, 311
copper
effect of light’s speed on color, 126
cosmic microwave background (CMB)
age, 133
direction, 146, 149
distance, 350
losing energy? 360
will eventually disappear? 158-159
cosmologies
that explain expanding universe, 144-148, 151
can you circle the universe? 350-351
cross section

can photons collide? 252
D
dark energy
composes most of our universe, 148
is actually gravitationally repulsive, 151
causes distant galaxies to move away FTL? 154
dark matter
related to dark radiation? 119
composes what fraction of our universe? 148
more popular than MOND, 356
dark radiation
not responsible for shadows, 119
in Randall-Sundrum cosmology, 120
de Broglie wavelength
what is it? 249
delayed choice
adds strangeness to double-slit exp, 285, 321
related to free-will and predestination? 287-288
related to retrocausality? 315
allows control of old sports video? 316
destructive interference, See interference, destructive
Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems,
Galileo discovers irrelevance of speed to physics, 4
diffraction
makes light go around blocks, 258
relation to uncertainty principle, 266
Dirac, Paul
first mentioned key QM ideas, 256, 268
distance
maximum, 349-352
angular diameter, 351
luminosity, 351
minimum, 354-356
Doppler, Christian
fired from job for postulating effect, 107-108
how related to cosmological redshift? 157
Doppler shift

of distant expanding sphere, 43
how it works, 97
effect on supersonic jet, 107-108
occurs for receding galaxies, 156-157
depends on subjective observer, 163-164
causes time quickening? 224-225
double-slit experiment
in your basement (entire chapter), 267-279
across the universe (entire chapter), 280-289
works with single photons? 268
discerns between ignorance and uncertainty, 269
photon has different speed through each slit? 273
electrons illuminated with radio waves, 289
slits entangled? 303-304
relation to retrocausality, 307, 316
what if slits resolved after photon passed? 315
relation to predestination, 317
relation to quantum ∞-paths, 321
E
Earth
measuring light on, 15-16
measuring light from Jupiter on, 17-18, 128
spin effect on light speed? 20, 45
peering at the Moon from, 69-70
atmosphere, 90, 123, 162
why oceans appear blue, 125
distance to famous celestial objects, 130-132, 160
defines zero speed, 150
direction Earth is attracted to? 175
stability of orbit around Sun, 176-177
potential attack from Andromedecians? 205
quantum unentangled globes, 292-295
eclipse
how light speed first measured, 17-18
shows light is attracted to matter, 178
Einstein, Albert
and time travel paradoxes, ix, 233

realizing redshift independent of acceleration, 164, 203
realizing need to synchronize clocks, 199, 337
wondering if quantum mechanics incomplete, 251
said quantum mechanics refers only to ensembles, 254
criticism of 0-path quantum interpretation, 264
wondering if Moon always exists, 311
why stopped in middle of road, 360
electric
field strength, 81, 116
field, 81, 116-117, 178
field lines, 116-117
charges, 113-114, 116, 178
attraction, 174
electromagnetic
waves, 81-82, 125
fields, 82, 125, 250
electrons
create photons by jiggling, 85, 125, 248
create magnetic fields by moving, 113-114
are sometimes called beta rays, 121
can jump energy levels in atoms, 124
move fast to create gold’s color, 126
merged with protons to create CMB, 146
not divisible, 248, 354
in double-slit experiment, 269, 289
in entanglement experiments, 290-291
have zero size? 354-355
empty space
where photons have maximum speed, 122
not energy-free in quantum mech., 304-305, 358
does not flow in any direction, 339
energy
equivalence to mass, ix, 79, 190, 221, 355
maximum possible? 359
entanglement
in your basement (entire chapter), 290-300
adventures with Alice & Bob, 290-300
“spooky action at a distance”, 298

links you and romantic partner? 301-302
can change distant universe by blinking? 308-309
and retrocausality, 312-313
can use to communicate FTL? 325-326
destroyed by air? 345-346
equivalence principle
everything falls the same, 129
Euclid
believed light went from eye to source, 13-14
event horizon
retains image after object falls in? 159
speed of time near, 182-183
can tell when you pass through? 184-185
Ewald and Oseen
how air replaces photons, 125
expanding universe
when hypothesized and when verified, 144
FTL in the past? 151
FTL far away? 151
F
faster than light (FTL)
defined: same as superluminal, ix
why you can’t do it, 35
how your shadow can do it, 54-61
what happens if messages go, 228-235, 330-333
fermions
keep you from falling through floor, 253
Feynman, Richard
no theory of gravity beyond math, 186
“nobody understands quantum mechanics”, 254
one particle takes infinite paths? 256, 259, 263, 324
intuitive formulation of uncertainty principle, 266
Flash (superhero)
limit on speed after second cup of coffee, 172
limit on speed after third cup of coffee, 173
frame, See inertial reference frame
free will

effect on retrocausality, 286-289
contrary to predestination, 286-289
enables back-in-time signaling? 312-318
frequency
how fast light waves flap, 121
fog particles
can illuminate light’s one true path? 264-265, 271
Friedman-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) cosmology
describes how universe expands, 144, 154
front velocity, See speed of light
FTL, See faster than light (FTL)
G
Galaxies
Milky Way, See Milky Way galaxy
Andromeda, See Andromeda galaxy
light travel time to nearest galaxy, 132-133
in expanding universe, 144
how inter-galaxy distance is increasing, 148
nearest groups of, 150
superliminal (entire chapter), 153-159
can move away FTL? 154-156
will distant galaxies fade from view? 158-159
can reach distant galaxies ever? 170-171
where is Alcubierre vacationing? 328
galaxy lens
splitting images of distant quasars, 281-288
Galilean invariance
why different things fall the same, 4
Galileo, Galilei
invented Galilean invariance, 4
tried and failed to measure speed of light, 16
folklore involving leaning tower, 129
gamma-ray bursts
explosions from across the universe, 122
light and grav-waves seen simultaneously, 175
gamma-ray light
a form of light, 122

occurs in gamma-ray bursts, 122
travels at same speed as radio waves, 129
dominated the early universe, 148
fastest photon oscillators, 358
what CMB photons used to be, 360
Gamow, George
wrote original Mr. Tompkins stories, 344
general relativity (GR)
Einstein’s theory of gravity, 174
speed of gravity in, 175-178, 186-188
predicts light and matter attract, 179-180
speed of light in, 185
wormholes in, 188
does motional energy gravitate? 190
does not incorporate quantum mechanics, 288
number of spatial dimensions in, 327
size of black hole center in, 354-355
does not conserve energy, 359-360
gold
color determined by light’s speed, 126
grandfather paradox
classic time-travel conundrum, 233
gravitation
general relativity, See general relativity
waves, See gravitational radiation
radiation, See gravitational radiation
distorts time and space, 11
redshift, 157, 164, 187
how gets out of black hole? 186-188
gravitational lensing
first measured, 178
of distant quasar, 281
both images gravitate? 288
gravitational radiation
not tied to electric field, 172
speed of, 172-175
gravitational waves, See gravitational radiation
gravitomagnetism

incorporated in general relativity? 178
like magnetism but with gravity, 178-179
keeps Earth in orbit, 178-179
group velocity, See speed of light
guillotine
scissors where vertex can move FTL? 40-42
black hole parable involving, 181-182
H
Hartman effect
particles can tunnel FTL? 334
Heisenberg, Werner
questioned by Einstein about zero-path QM, 264
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, See uncertainty principle
Hero of Alexandria
said light was infinitely fast, 14
Hubble, Edwin
universe calibrator and basketball star, 149
Hubble’s Law
calibrates how fast universe expands, 149
human
historic knowledge of c, 13
when first measured c, 16-17
why can’t see superluminal shadows, 57, 64
can see only visible light, 124, 156
why now define light speed, 128-129
can’t accelerate themselves to near c, 129
how can reach Spica in normal lifespan, 166
why have trouble understanding QM, 247, 357
might not exist if c different, 343, 345
speed that vision updated from brain, 347
hydrogen atom
how can a little atom emit long radio waves? 246, 248
how size determines shortest measured time, 358
I
illumination front
the lead light bulb that you see flashing, 24-25

the division between dark and light, 55-57, 60
is massless and does not transfer energy, 97
why can travel FTL, 56-57
imaginary number, i
squared, -1
inertia
the ability of an object to remain in motion, 8
inertial reference frame
locations not moving, relatively, 8
one at rest relative to the universe? 149
observers all have same velocity, 163
FTL in one means FTL in all? 208
infinite (symbol: ∞)
does light move this fast? 13-14
flash sequence can appear, 30-32
why c is like omniscience, 35-36
can scissor vertex move this fast? 41
FTL spot on flat infinite wall, 63-69
size of entire universe? 146-147
redshift at event horizon, 185
object’s energy at light speed, 193-194
can be laser spot speed? 212-213
wavelength of stopped mass? 249-250
number of paths in QM paradigm, 255-263, 324
inflation, See inflationary epoch
inflationary epoch
universe expands exponentially fast, 120, 151, 154
information transfer
along swinging pole, 39
cannot exceed c, 85, 118, 172-173, 187
direction when text FTL, 232
maximum rate c even with FTL shadows? 237
can work back in time? 310-319
infrared light
you glow brightest here, 114
light too red for humans to see, 124
interference
how it can make a disk seem to disappear, 243-244

in quantum double-slit experiment, 267-279
a wave property of light, 267-289
between images of a distant quasar, 280-282
It’s About Time
Mermin book that briefly mentions RID, 333
J
jokes
funny, 1-361
not funny, 404
Jupiter
how eclipses led to first c measurement, 17-18
and magnetic field speed limit, 115-118
reason not to gossip about Sun, 175
do ∞-paths go out this far? 263-264, 323-324
K
kinetic energy
does it gravitate? 190, 360
L
laser
beam straight when rotating? 47-48
pulses can separate FTL? 49-50
can see beam reflected from Moon? 52
where rotating beam first hits wall, 63
where rotating beam first hits Moon, 70-71
will laser light ever reach distant galaxy? 155-156
length of photons emitted, 241-242
width of photons emitted, 245-246
can see beam path through fog? 264-265
uses light-amplifying substance, 340
laser spots
how to make go FTL (entire chapter), 47-53
how to make appear double, 62-72, 96-97
if FTL to one, then FTL for all? 95-96
if RID to one, then RID for all? 98-99
and superluminal void, 99-101

how to add FTL speeds, 210-211
why can’t use FTL spots to communicate? 237
have mass? 274
length contraction
verified special relativistic effect, 133, 160
how related to time dilation, 161-162
for photon? 162
relation to subjective appearance, 163-164
makes travel to distant stars possible? 166-168
light
the many speeds of (entire chapter), 77-86
the many colors of (entire chapter), 119-126
how to stop, restart, 268-269
can exist without vacuum? 341
lightning flash
creates FTL particles in air? 111-112
is light equivalent of sonic boom? 111-112
light-year
what is it? 129, 130
distance to Andromeda galaxy in, 132-133
distance to star Spica in, 160, 168
limerick, ix, 330, 361
logic, circular, See circular, logic
Lorentz
contraction, See length contraction
covariance, what is it? 4
transformations, what are they? 220-221
time-slowing, 224-225
Lunokhod missions
placed laser reflectors on Moon, 53
M
magnetic field
used to quantify speed of light? 18-19, 173
can grab lines? 94
how to make lines go FTL (entire chapter), 113-118
analogy with gravitomagnetism, 178
confines negative mass in bottle, 329

mass
equals energy, ix, 355
can’t accelerate past c, 7, 9-11, 34, 193
rest mass versus moving mass, 79, 190
do photons have any? 79
you and your friends have some, 95
galaxies have some, 153
gravitationally attracts light? 178
has quantum wave function? 249-250
shadows have none, 325
negative mass might fuel interstellar drive, 328
mathematics
high speeds add strangely, 9, 210-211
compared to “data” and “concepts”, 12
matter
sometimes means “mass”, 41
does dark matter emit dark radiation? 119-120
in the early universe, 144, 146
different types of, 148
only energy that generates gravity? 179-180
image frozen outside black hole, 186-188
can be entangled with antimatter? 290
explodes when meets antimatter, 314
dark matter versus MOND, 356
might vaporize if universe decays? 359
canceled out in “zero energy universe”, 360
Maxwell, James Clerk
unified electricity and magnetism, 19
measurements
c a local limit, 11
largest problem: systematic error, 15
attempt by Galieleo to measure c, 16
when humanity first measured c, 16
subjective versus objective, 25
using to construct objective reality, 99
and 3 strata of subjective appearance, 163-164
position vs frame dependence, 163-164
position vs frame simultaneity, 203

trying to determine photon shape, 242
collapsing dog’s quantum wave function, 250
quantum measurement problem, 251
of Schrodinger’s cat, 270
communicating FTL with quanta, 298-300
assumed here to destroy photons, 306
can trigger retrocausality? 307-308
can affect Moon’s past? 311-313
how new theories gain acceptance, 324
of c, one direction vs two directions, 336-337
Mermin, N. David
early mention of RID, 333
FTL directionality in different frames, 333
Michelson and Morley
light speed same in every direction, 20
microwave light
light much too red to see, 120
how it heats food, 124
oldest light known, 133, 146, 149, 158, 350
used in atomic clocks, 357-358
Middle Ages
tried measuring c by uncovering lanterns, 15
Milky Way galaxy
time it takes light to get here from there, 132
where to find similar galaxies, 146
how moves in the universe, 150
can visit entire galaxy in your life? 170
mirror
would work if you moved at c? 36-37
how to see yourself as a child, 46
measuring c with, 80, 336-337
Modified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND) hypothesis
predicts unexpected small accelerations, 356
alternative to dark matter, 356
momentum
angular, See angular momentum
does the vertex of scissors have any? 41-42
does a laser spot have any? 97

how uncertainty principle increases it, 245, 353-355
why laser spots cannot transferr it FTL, 250, 274
can become entangled? 301-302
how conserved when ∞ paths? 322
MOND, See Modified Newtonian Dynamics
Moon
can move laser spot across FTL? 52-53
can move arm’s shadow across FTL? 59-60
can see spot doubling on? 69-71
how long it takes light to reach, 130
still exists when not looking? 310-311
can change by staring? 311-313
multiverse
our universe is just one branch? 352
how to jump to a different branch, 404
muons
can travel really fast through water, 89
what are they? 90
how to see one muon twice, 90-94
demonstrators of time dilation, 162
are all identical to each other? 248
N
NASA
why left reflectors on Moon, 53
called to remind you to return laser, 70
status of FTL Emdrive? 329
negative mass
used in hypothetical Alcubierre drive, 328
might not exist, 328-329
neutrinos
many move near c, 173, 208
have no internal structure, 248
cosmic background further than CMB, 350
Newton, Isaac
describes how classical particles move, 256
defines 1-path paradigm, 256
gives up physics, 272

might say “Meh”, 294
might say “Still not impressed”, 295
might say “Of course”, 296
might say “What!?”, 296
Norse mythology
Thor throws FTL lightning bolts? 112
O
objective reality
in contrast to subjective appearance, 25, 28, 163-165
and long row of blinking lights, 24-33
does RID ever occur here? 69-71, 96
and FTL-moving video image, 73-74
is constructed from subjective observations, 99
and Schrodinger’s cat, 270
and Wigner’s friend, 270
observable universe
different than entire universe, 145-146
can move with zero speed relative to? 149-150
some parts now moving away FTL? 151-155
contains all paths in ∞-paths QM? 323-324
edge is maximum possible distance? 349-350
observer
sees only subjectively? 25, 163-165
why can only see back in time, 46, 155
can see two spots when only one exists? 96-97
sees nothing when in superluminal void, 99-101
near giant space ring, 135-142
can see entire universe? 145-146
can visit entire universe? 170-171
disagrees with others about simultaneity, 203
when affected by distant measurement? 252, 271
has free will? 286-287
P
Pat
person employed to composes D answers, 137
paths

of muon moving FTL through water, 94
hearing supersonic jet along, 104
superluminal quantum (entire chapter), 254-266
0-paths quantum interpretation, 255-257
1-path classical interpretation, 255-257
∞-paths quantum interpretation, 255-259
Penrose, Roger
disagreement over present time elsewhere, 205
phase velocity, See speed of light
photons
does time stop for a photon? 36, 162-163
can space between spread FTL? 51
intrinsic spin of, 66
can have tiny bit of rest mass? 79
how to measure speed, 80-84
races massive particle across swimming pool, 87-88
why red is faster than blue through water, 123-125
why you have likely never seen yourself, 125-126
why speed is now defined and not measured, 128-129
oldest that reach Earth? 133-134
compose what fraction of universe energy? 148
most distant photons you can see, 158
gravitationally attractive? 179-180
epoch when dominated universe, 180
speed up near a black hole? 185
best theory at predicting behavior, 240
length, width and shape? 241-248
travel along paths? 255-257
can one pass through two slits? 267-279, 320-322
can one pass both sides of galaxy? 280-289
remain entangled after collisions? 345-346
all colors move with c through vacuum? 354
oscillations can define minimum time, 358
physics
really cool, 1 – 361
Planck length
the real length of a photon? 241-243
the minimum possible distance? 279

where QM meets GR, 355
Planck time
minimum possible time? 356-358
Planck’s constant
used to quantify photon spin, 66
Polaris, See stars, Polaris
polarization
related to photon spin, 121
potential energy
only a theoretical construct? 359-360
balances all in “zero energy universe”, 360
Prandtl-Glauert Singularity
causes sonic booms? 104
predestination
what is it? 286-287
if true, do you have free-will? 286-287
with entangled particles, 307-309
in double slit experiments, 321
proton
moving really fast through water, 88-89
important component of water, 124
and universe transparency, 146
important component of regular matter, 148
Proxima Centauri, See stars, Proxima Centauri
Q
QM, See quantum mechanics
quanta
part IV of this book, 239-309
plural of quantum, 240
quantum
singular of quanta, 240
single unit of energy or matter, 240
quantum electrodynamics (QED)
current best understanding of light, 19
includes gravity? 175
computed assuming ∞-paths? 256
Feynman book of this name, 266, 324

quantum field theory
incorporates QED, 19
simplified becomes standard QM, 240
says vacuum never really empty, 341
quantum indeterminacy
why different from observer ignorance, 269-270
theoretically impossible to predict, 269-270
can be called “objective uncertainty”, 270
what photons are measured with, 278
how free will might incorporate, 286-287
quantum mechanics (QM)
can make light act strangley, 19
common term for QED in this book, 239-240
possible futures described by wave function, 250
thought incomplete by Einstein, 251
“must be insane to understand”, 254
math clear, interpretations debated, 255-257
can make light go around solid block? 258
does not allow for objective reality? 270
does not incorporate gravity, 288
allows matter to go through things, 334
allows matter to go through things FTL? 334-335
quantum particle
can sometimes act like another particle? 253
need QM to predict possible futures, 291-292
entangled pairs can share quantum property, 301
quasar
shows seemingly FTL motion, 33
images can appear on both sides of galaxy, 280-285
R
radiation
thermal: emitted by warm objects, 88
Cherenkov: emitted behind FTL particles, 88
electromagnetic: what light is, 114
dark: not how we see dark things, 119
CMB: microwaves from early universe, 133, 149, 158
gravitational: not normal light, 172-173

radio waves
a type of light? 129-130
used to probe simultaneity, 200-202
Randall-Sundrum cosmology
hypothetical universe with dark radiation, 120
readers
butterfly: skip around a book, x-xi
c2c: reads book cover to cover, x
redshift
Doppler: due to relative motion, 156-157, 163-164
cosmological: what is measured, 156-157
gravitational: due to relative gravity, 157, 164
reflection
how to see your younger self, 46
superluminal reflections (entire chapter), 135-142
how 2-way speed of light is measured, 336
how lidar uses c to measure distance, 347
refraction
index of: a measure of light’s speed, 81-86
color dependence in water, 123
relativistic image doubling (RID)
what is it (entire chapter)? 62-76
how to make a laser spot do it, 68
observer dependent? 69-70
visible on the Moon? 70-71
how author stumbled upon, 74-76
how fast particles in water do it, 92
how supersonic airplanes do it, 102-112
why not mentioned in Fast Speeds chapter? 213-214
how makes backward time travel complicated, 331-333
relativity
special, See special relativity
general, See general relativity
principle of: why don’t you feel smooth trains move? 4-6
retrocausality
why you can’t send messages back in time, 187-288
what is it? 286-287
and free will versus predestination, 286-287

involved in entangled correlations? 306-309
and cheering for sports game, 314-318
and delayed-choice quantum slits, 320-322
RID, See relativistic image doubling
Rietdijk–Putnam argument, See Andromeda Paradox
Rømer, Ole (also Romer, Ole)
how first measured c in 1676, 17-18
opened door to greater understanding, 298
ROY G BIV
visible colors of light, 121
S
Schrodinger’s cat experiment
analogy to ∞-path QM paradigm, 257
what if lives in box with “Wigner’s friend”? 270
shadows
how to make go FTL (entire chapter), 54-61
can grow FTL at sunset? 60
can grow FTL at sunrise? 61
not caused by dark radiation, 119-120
why can’t use to send FTL messages, 237-238
shock waves
travel at the sound speed, 102
hit when you hear sonic booms, 104, 106
silly
word salad to gain partial credit, 22
can make Sun appear FTL by turning head, 45
question without silly answer, 95
silliness used up over 3-question radius, 145
simultaneity
why observers might not agree, 27, 164
superluminal (entire chapter), 199-207
different types: position vs frame, 203
why frames might not agree, 209
sonic boom
doesn’t occur when jet exceeds sound speed, 103
not caused by Prandtl-Glauert singularity, 104
afterwards jet heard from two places at once, 107

can’t be heard by pilot, 109
thunder is an example? 111
sound
how it can act like light, 12
how breaking sound barrier like FTL, 12
space-time (also spacetime)
what it is, 198
special relativity (SR)
speeds add strangely, 9-10
Einstein published in 1905, 20
says cannot accelerate through c, 35
why distant FTL galaxies don’t violate, 151
creates differences in simultaneity, 203
how to add really fast speeds in (entire chapter), 207-214
and famous twin paradox, 236, 343
speculation
part V of this book, 320-361
can surf universe expansion to go FTL? 328
what happens if c changes (entire chapter)? 338-348
can light exist without vacuum? 341
did light always have same speed? 342
are there other limits like c (entire chapter)? 349-360
speed
local versus far away, 11, 34-35, 154
is c the fastest possible? 78-79, 172, 343
is there a minimum? 352-354
speed of light
electromagnetic nature, 19
in vacuum, 19, 77-79, 102, 128, 173, 341-343, 358
constancy postulated by Einstein, 20
in water, 35, 77, 81-94
many ways to define (entire chapter), 77-86
is maximum speed? 78-79, 172, 343
front velocity, 80-86
group velocity, 80-86, 123
phase velocity, 80-86, 123
can be derived? 173
speed of sound

slower than c, 102
speedometers
how can they work if motion constant? 4-5
spin
Earth’s spin causes directionally faster light? 20
intrinsic spin of photon, 66
can be entangled for quantum particles, 291-299
does quantum spin create time slowing? 326
Spotty
starship engineer who projects laser spots, 207
Star Trek
is warp speed really possible? 160
how to go warp 2 (entire chapter), 160-171
stars
Proxima Centauri: closest star, 131-132
Alpha Centauri: closest star system, 132
Betelgeuse: big red star in Orion, 165
Polaris: the north star, 165
Spica: used to show SR length contraction, 165-170
string theory
relation to other quantum theories, 240
the length of a photon in, 241-242
photon as vibrating string, 246
number of spatial dimensions in, 327
subjective appearance
versus objective reality, 25, 138
how fast a line of lights appear to blink, 28
how laser spot on Moon appears doubled, 70-71
three strata of, 163-165
Sun
observed versus real brightness, 25
trick to make Sun appear FTL, 44-45
why appears mostly white, 123
why Earth goes around, 174
to which direction is Earth attracted? 175-178
found attracting starlight, 178
seems brighter today than usual? 212
superluminal

defined: same as FTL, ix
relation to backward time travel, 194-195, 329-333
interference patterns, 274-275
motion of hypothetical tachyons, 335-336
supersonic
jet making sonic boom (entire chapter), 102-111
synchronization
possible only across one frame, 210, 221-223, 231
and hypothetical two-direction time travel, 235
needed for one-way light speed measurement, 336
systematic error
reason why some measurements deceiving, 15-16
T
tachyon
hypothetical mass moving FTL, 335-336
why rarely mentioned in this book? 336
thermal light
emitted by anything with non-zero temperature, 88
liberated by proton moving FTL through water, 88-89
different from Cherenkov light, 93-94
Thor
Norse god of thunder, 112
throws lightning bolts FTL? 112
3D (three-dimensional)
our universe? 146-147, 327
imaging: use for FTL spots & fronts, 346-347
time
why can’t send messages back, 226-236
shortest interval of, 357-358
time dilation
verified special relativistic effect, 133
how related to length contraction? 161-162
time-lapse photography
how to see FTL spots and fronts, 57
time machine
if existed, could enable you to go FTL? 196
if existed, could spend year eating ice-cream? 196

time travel (backward)
limerick about by Buller in 1923, ix
could happen if you keep accelerating? 193
could happen if you jump to FTL speed? 194
not tied to speed of donkey, 197
and grandfather paradox, See grandfather paradox
results from lack of clock synchronization? 235
why FTL doesn’t always enable, 329-330
time travel (forward)
why allowed and not controversial, 236
how tied to SR twin paradox, 236
train
can tell if moving? 3-4
can accelerate past c? 10-11
analogy involving group, phase velocities, 84-85
trumpeters demonstrate Doppler effect, 108
synched smartphones on, 215-225
what if FTL texts allowed on? 226-236, 329-333
transparent material
what if particle moves through at c? 35, 88
colors move through at different speeds, 122-125
slows light, 340
tunneling
can occur FTL? 334-335
turtle
could extend wall-intersection line FTL? 53
surprised to be moving near c? 208
twin paradox
why returning twin is younger, 236
and time-travel to future, 343
2D (two-dimensional)
balloon analogy to 3D expanding universe, 147
standard flat photography, 346
U
ultraviolet light
light too blue for humans to see, 120
what “black lights” really emit, 120

uncertainty principle
Heisenberg’s classic statement of, 245
Feynman’s ∞-paths visualization of, 265-266
defines a minimum speed? 352-355
defines a minimum time? 356-358
universe
too large to measure real size? 36
underlying quantum vacuum determines c? 79
appears contracted to zero length by photon? 134, 162
center not located at Big Bang National Park, 143-144
difference between observable and entire, 145-146
expands into what? 146-147
are parts expanding away FTL right now? 151-152
are distant galaxies disappearing from view? 158-159
some parts too far away to visit? 170-171
early universe dominated by photons, 180
goes back to normal if you stop reading this book? 234
lensing of distant quasars across, 280-288
is everything in universe entangled? 303
can change distant universe by blinking? 308-309
is like big game of predetermined billiards? 315-316
light has same speed in early universe? 342
maximum distance in, 349-350
part of a greater multiverse? 352
could total energy be zero? 360
V
vacuum
pervades the universe, 19
light’s speed usually defined here, 35, 77-78
cannot be compressed, 102
doesn’t transmit pressure waves like sound, 102
transmits all colors the same, 122, 129
speed of light in, precisely, 128
zero-point energy of, 173, 305, 358-359
can light exist without? 341
can be changed to speed up light? 341-342
velocity

phase velocity, See speed of light
group velocity, See speed of light
front velocity, See speed of light
always subjectively measured, 163-164
important for simultaneity, 203
determines SR effects, 219-221
Virgo Cluster of galaxies
direction we are falling, 150
virtual particles
theoretical constructs in QM, 175, 187
visible light
the light humans can see, 120, 124
extinction length only 1 mm in air, 125-126
W
Waffles the Wonder Llama (tm)
can move how fast? 78-80
epic race against photon and massive particle, 87
can really stop and start light? 339
Waiting for Godot
play by Samual Beckett, 73
why Godot never arrives, 73
wall
can laser spots move across FTL? 51-52
could line of turtles reaching extend FTL? 53
could bulb in room illuminate FTL? 55-57
can shadow cross FTL? 57-60
can laser spot cross FTL? 63-69
can projected FTL video play backwards? 72-74
as detection screen for double-slit experiments, 267-278
how many paths do shadows take across? 324-325
could quantum tunneling through be FTL? 334-335
warp speeds
possible like in Star-Trek? 160-171
how to go warp 2 (entire chapter), 160-171
water
how much it slows down light, 77
front velocity through is c, 82

why slows down light, 85-86
superluminal aquatics (entire chapter), 87-94
fast proton causes molecules to jiggle, 88
fast muon liberates Cherenkov radiation, 88
when superluminal void created in, 99-101
which color light travels fastest through? 122-125
replaces incident light with re-radiated light? 125-126
why can’t freeze into identical snowflakes, 247-248
can increase c by making water flow? 267-268
wave function
what is it? 250
example: your dog, 250
can collapse FTL? 251-252
how different from quantum ∞-paths? 255-257, 262
cannot itself be measured, 268
why shadows don’t have them, 325
wave packet
diagram showing group and phase velocities of, 80
encompasses a photon, 81-83
Wheeler, John Archibald
devised quantum delayed-choice experiments, 278, 321
Feynman’s PhD thesis advisor, 315
advises you to find the strangest thing, 320
white hole
hypothetically, how to use to travel FTL, 189
Wigner’s friend experiment
challenges objective reality, 270
what if lived in box with Schrodinger’s cat? 270
wormhole
hypothetically, how to use to travel FTL, 188-189
Z
zebra
dancing, 347-348
zero-energy universe hypothesis,
can all universe energies add to zero? 360
caused Einstein to stop in tracks, 360
zoology

plagued by klepto-zoologists? 353
sudden need for more quarters, 357



