Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
1
Nervous System 
Jennifer Carbrey, PhD 
 
The underlined headings correspond to the five Nervous system videos. 
 
1. Introduction and cell types 
 
Like the endocrine system, the nervous system responds to the environment and 
regulates the body. However in contrast to the endocrine system, the nervous system is 
much more rapid and targets cells more specifically. In addition, the nervous system is 
able to integrate more types of information from the environment and to respond with a 
broader range of reactions compared to the endocrine system. 
 
A sizable portion of the nervous system is involved in collecting information about 
our environment. The information is integrated and interpreted by the central nervous 
system (brain, spinal cord) and used to cause a response often by stimulating muscles 
or glands. 
 
Cell Types 
 
Despite the fact that the nervous system is extremely complicated, there are 
relatively few cell types present.  
 
Neurons 
 
Neurons are the cells of the nervous system that communicate and integrate 
information. They communicate with one another with their processes, or cell 
extensions, that emanate from the cell body (Fig. 1). Dendrites are processes which 
usually receive information from other neurons while axons are processes that usually 
pass information on to other neurons. Neurons use electrical signals to communicate 
along their length and often use chemical signals to communicate with one another. The 
morphology of neurons can differ widely depending on their role in the nervous system. 
Some neurons that receive signals from many other neurons can have thousands of 
dendrites. However, most neurons have only a single axon. Axons can branch to form 
many axon terminals that can be used to communicate with many neurons downstream. 
 
Figure 1. Parts of a neuron. 
image by OCAL (modified), 
http://www.clker.com/clipart-
9828.html, public domain 
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
2
Glial Cells 
 
Several types of glial cells support neurons in the nervous system. The axons of 
many neurons have a covering of specialized plasma membrane called myelin that 
makes the electrical signals that travel through axons faster and more efficient. In the 
central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord), oligodendrocytes use their 
processes to wrap many layers of myelin around each axon. Each oligodendrocyte 
insulates many axons. In the peripheral nervous system (outside of the brain and 
spinal cord), a single axon is coated by many Schwann cells that wrap themselves 
around a portion of a single axon to cover it with myelin. 
 
Astrocytes are another type of glial cell that function to support neurons in the 
central nervous system. Astrocytes provide metabolic support to neurons and maintain 
the extracellular environment so that neuronal signaling can occur. Some astrocytes 
have processes that coat the outside of blood vessels in the brain and help to form a 
tight blood-brain barrier that protects the brain from toxic substances in the blood. 
 
Microglial cells are scavenger cells of the nervous system that can take up 
cellular debris as well as serve other immune functions for the brain. 
 
2. Membrane potentials  
Signaling Along Neurons 
 
The speed and efficiency of the nervous system is contributable to the electrical 
and chemical signals that travel along and between neurons. Neurons use electric 
currents that can travel along their lengths in a very efficient manner. The current is 
generated by the flow of ions across the plasma membrane through ion channels. 
 
Electrochemical Gradient 
 
In order for a neuron to generate a current, or flow of electrical charge, the cell 
spends energy to establish a concentration and electrical gradient of ions across the 
plasma membrane. The gradient is primarily established by affecting the concentration 
of three ions in the cell, Na+, Cl- and K+ (Fig. 2).  
 
 
Ion 
ECF (Plasma) 
 
ICF (Cytosol) 
 
Na+ 
140.0 
     15.0 
 
K+ 
    4.4 
   140.0 
 
Cl- 
105.0 
       7.0 
 
 
Equilibrium potentials 
 
Due to the concentration gradient of ions across the plasma membrane of cells, 
the intracellular fluid has a small excess of negative charge compared to the 
extracellular fluid. The separation of charge has the potential to do work. As a result, the 
magnitude of the charge difference between the inside and outside of the cell is referred 
to as the membrane potential and measured in millivolts. If there is an excess of 
negative charges on the inside of the cell, the membrane potential is negative. If the 
excess charge on the inside of the cell is positive, the membrane potential is positive. 
The membrane potential of a cell under specific conditions is determined by the 
Figure 2. Chemical gradients of major ions across the cell membrane (mM) 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
3
concentration of ions inside and outside of the cell and by the permeability of the 
membrane for those ions. 
 
  
The simplest case is to 
consider a system that is 
permeable to only one ion (Fig. 
3). In part 1, there are two 
compartments separated by a 
membrane with two different 
solutions that differ in their Na+ 
and K+ concentrations. The ion 
channels in the membrane are 
not open. Since the number of 
positive and negative charges 
is equal on both sides of the 
membrane, the membrane 
potential is 0 mV. In part 2, if 
K+ selective ion channels are 
opened, K+ will travel down its 
chemical concentration 
gradient out of the 
compartment which will cause 
an excess of positive charges outside the compartment and an excess of negative 
charges in the compartment. In part 3, there is still a chemical concentration gradient for 
K+, but the increase in negative charges in the compartment is causing some K+ to be 
pulled back in. Finally in part 4, the number of K+ leaving the compartment because of 
the concentration gradient equals the number that are being pulled back into the 
compartment because of the excess of negative charge. The membrane potential of the 
compartment in part 4 is the equilibrium potential for K+ in this system. In a cell, the 
equilibrium potential for an ion is determined by the concentration of the ion inside the 
cell versus the concentration outside the cell. Using the concentrations from the 
table in Figure 2 the equilibrium potential for K+ in a typical neuron is -90 mV (EK) 
and for Na+ is +60 mV (ENa). The ENa is positive while EK is negative because Na+ and 
K+ accumulate on opposite sides of the plasma membrane. 
 
Membrane potential 
 
If a cell at a given time is permeable to only one ion, the membrane potential will 
become equal to the equilibrium potential for that ion. However, if ion channels open for 
more than one ion, then the membrane potential will be determined by the concentration 
of the ions inside and outside of the cell as well as the permeability of the cell to those 
ions. Under resting conditions, there are pumps and channels that collectively contribute 
to the resting membrane potential. The Na+/ K+-ATPase is a pump that uses the energy 
from ATP to transport three Na+ out of the cell and two K+ into the cell (Fig. 4). This 
maintains the concentration gradients across the plasma membrane (Fig. 2) and causes 
the inside of the cell to have an excess of negative charges. In addition, there are some 
K+ channels that allow K+ to leave the cell which makes the inside of the cell even more 
Figure 3. Equilibrium potential for K+ 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
4
negative. There are also some Na+ channels (fewer than the K+ channels) that let a little 
Na+ into the cell (Fig. 4). Once the system reaches steady-state the Na+/ K+-ATPase is 
pumping the same number of Na+ and K+ as the channels are letting through and they 
balance each other. When taking into account the action of the Na+/ K+-ATPase and the 
K+ and Na+ channels, the resting membrane potential (-70 mV) is between the 
equilibrium potential for K+ and Na+ but closer to the equilibrium potential for K+ because 
the membrane is more permeable to K+. 
 
The membrane potential can change 
quickly and dramatically when the cell is excited. 
When the membrane potential increases but still 
remains negative, the membrane is depolarizing. 
An overshoot is when the membrane potential 
becomes positive. When the membrane potential 
decreases towards the resting potential it is 
repolarizing. If the membrane potential goes 
below the resting potential then it is 
hyperpolarized (Fig. 5). 
 
Graded Potentials 
 
Changes in membrane potential produce 
the electrical signals that neurons use to 
communicate. A change in membrane potential at 
a location on the plasma membrane of a neuron 
results from opening of ion channels. The change 
in membrane potential can then travel along the 
length of the neuron due to neighboring ion 
channels that are gated by electrical stimuli. A 
graded potential is a 
transient change in the 
membrane potential that 
decreases in magnitude as it 
spreads out along the 
plasma membrane of the 
neuron and is proportional to 
the intensity of the stimulus. 
If ion channels in a specific 
part of the membrane are 
activated and that portion of 
the membrane is 
depolarized, the positive 
charges that have entered 
the cell will diffuse along the 
inside of the membrane (Fig. 
6). This area of 
depolarization will continue 
to spread but will decrease in intensity over distance. If the stimulus is more intense, 
Figure 4. Transport proteins important 
for establishing resting membrane 
potential. 
Figure 5. Terms for changes in membrane potential.  

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
5
more ion channels will open and the 
change in potential will be greater. This 
will result in the graded potential 
traveling a further distance (Fig. 6). 
Graded potentials signal over small 
distances since the intensity of the signal 
decreases over distance. However, they 
can also be additive if they occur in rapid 
succession. Graded potentials can 
stimulate or inhibit neurons and have no 
refractory period, or time period when the 
cell can not respond to a stimulus after 
the first change in potential.  
 
3. Action potentials  
 
Most neurons use action 
potentials as the most efficient and 
quickest way to convey electrical 
currents along the length of their axon. 
An action potential is an electrical 
signal like graded potentials but they 
differ in several ways. Action potentials 
are large changes in membrane 
potential that have a similar pattern of 
membrane potential change. In this 
way, an action potential is an all-or-
none phenomenon because either 
there is a large change in membrane 
potential if the stimulus was adequate 
or there is little change in membrane 
potential. In addition, action potentials 
have the same intensity as they travel 
along a membrane – they do not 
diminish over distance. Cells that are 
capable of producing action potentials 
are excitable due to the expression of 
the voltage-gated ion channels 
required to form an action potential. 
 
At the beginning of an action 
potential the cell which was at resting 
membrane potential has a graded 
potential that causes the membrane to 
be depolarized (Fig. 7). If the 
depolarization from the graded potential 
reaches a certain voltage, called the 
threshold, then enough voltage-gated 
Figure 6. Graded potential. Image by Rick 
Melges, Duke University 
Figure 7. Action potential. top image by image by 
Chris73 (modified), 
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Action_pot
ential_%28no_labels%29.svg, Creative Commons 
Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported license  
bottom image by Rick Melges, Duke University 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
6
Na+ channels will be opened to start an action potential (stage 2). Once enough Na+ 
channels are open, Na+ starts rushing into the cell due to the net negative charge inside 
the cell and the excess of Na+ outside the cell. This causes the membrane potential to 
increase (stage 2) and surpass 0 mV due to the concentration gradient of Na+. The cell 
is so permeable to Na+ that the membrane potential quickly comes close to the 
equilibrium potential for Na+. Right before the membrane potential reaches the 
equilibrium potential for Na+, the Na+ channels inactivate and the slower opening 
voltage-gated K+ channels open. When the K+ channels open, there is an excess of 
positive charge and K+ inside the cell (a positive membrane potential) so K+ leaves the 
cell and travels down its concentration and electrical gradients. This lowers the 
membrane potential (stage 3) and it approaches the equilibrium potential for K+, which 
is below resting potential (stage 4). The K+ channels start to close and the membrane 
returns to the resting potential (stage 5). 
 
Once the Na+ channels have inactivated, the membrane must repolarize before 
the channel returns to the closed state and can be opened again. This means that there 
is a refractory period that prevents another action potential from occurring before the 
first one has ended. Once an action potential occurs in one portion of the axon, the 
adjacent area will experience a depolarization from the spread of Na+ just like in a 
graded potential as long as the proper channels are expressed. This will be above 
threshold and will cause an action potential in the adjacent area which allows the action 
potential to travel along the axon. However, because of the refractory period, the action 
potential travels in one direction along the axon and not in two directions. In addition, 
each action potential that is produced down the axon will be identical and will not 
diminish over time or distance. 
 
Neurons relay signals along their length using graded potentials and action 
potentials. However, certain parts of neurons are specialized to facilitate certain kinds of 
potentials. Some sensory neurons receive their signals from their processes that are 
embedded in a tissue sensing changes in the environment. These changes cause 
graded potentials to travel down the process toward the cell body. In other neurons, the 
source of the graded potential comes from a neuron that is contacting a dendrite or the 
cell body. In either case, the graded potentials can start in the dendrites or cell body and 
if it is strong enough travel to the axon initial segment, where the neuron has the 
highest concentration of voltage-gated ion channels and the lowest threshold, to start an 
action potential. The initial segment is the beginning of the axon that connects to the 
neuronal cell body at the axon hillock. Once an action potential is started at the 
beginning of the axon, due to the refractory period, it will travel down the axon to the 
end of the neuron. Because a neuron can have many dendrites and have many other 
neurons contacting the dendrites or cell body, the axon hillock and initial segment can 
integrate those signals by requiring that signals reach a threshold before an action 
potential is formed. The strength, frequency and location of a stimulus received by a 
neuron will determine if threshold is reached because graded potentials are formed, not 
action potentials.  
 
 
Saltatory conduction 
 
In the human body, axons can be quite long (from the spinal cord to the tip of the 
toe). In order for an action potential to travel quickly along an axon that may be one 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
7
meter long, some axons are 
myelinated. Myelin is an insulator that 
is made up of many layers of 
specialized plasma membrane that is 
formed by Schwann cells in the 
peripheral nervous system and 
oligodendrocytes in the central nervous 
system. The Schwann cells and 
oligodendrocytes lay the myelin along 
the axons with regularly spaced gaps 
called nodes of Ranvier (Fig. 8). The 
myelin speeds conduction along an 
axon by insulating it and preventing 
leaking of ions in the area around an action potential. This allows the effects of the 
action potential, or the change in membrane potential, to be detected further down the 
axon in the neighboring node where there is a concentration of ion channels. In a 
myelinated axon, the action potential jumps from node to node allowing it to travel more 
quickly and more efficiently (Fig. 8). 
 
The diameter of an axon also determines how quickly action potentials travel 
down its length. Larger diameter axons have less resistance so action potentials travel 
more quickly along their length. This is exploited by the body. Neurons that sense touch 
have large diameter axons while pain and itch neurons have small diameter axons. 
 
4. Methods of communication 
 
Neurons signal to 
one another through a 
specialized junction called 
a synapse. The synapse is 
where the electrical signal 
from one neuron 
(presynaptic neuron) is 
transmitted to another 
neuron (postsynaptic 
neuron). Depending on the 
role of a particular neuron, 
it can receive signals from 
many presynaptic neurons 
(convergence) or it can 
send signals to many 
postsynaptic neurons (divergence). 
 
The presynaptic neuron causes a graded potential to occur in the postsynaptic 
neuron. The graded potential can depolarize the postsynaptic membrane, which makes 
the potential closer to threshold, and is called an excitatory postsynaptic potential 
(Fig. 9, synapses 1 and 2). Alternatively, the graded potential can hyperpolarize the 
postsynaptic membrane, which makes the membrane potential farther from threshold, 
and is called an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (Fig. 9, synapse 3). Since 
Figure 8. Saltatory conduction of an action potential.  
image by OCAL (modified), http://www.clker.com/clipart-
9828.html, public domain 
Figure 9. Integration of signals by a postsynaptic neuron. Image 
by Rick Melges, Duke University 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
8
Figure 10. Lateral inhibition of neurons 1 and 3 as a result of pathways that converge on those 
neurons. Image by Rick Melges, Duke University. 
presynaptic neurons cause graded potentials in postsynaptic neurons, spatial and 
temporal summation of signals from multiple synapses can occur so the postsynaptic 
neuron can integrate information (Fig. 9).  
One example of neurons integrating information is during lateral inhibition of 
sensory neurons. In order to discern the exact point of contact of a stimulus such as a 
pencil, neighboring neurons must be inhibited. For instance in Figure 10, the pencil is 
depressing the skin so that three sensory neurons are firing. However, the neuron in the 
middle, neuron 2, is firing more frequently because the pencil is in the middle of its 
receptive field. Branches from the axons of all three neurons converge on neighboring 
neurons. However, since neuron 2 is firing action potentials most frequently, its firing is 
affected the least by the inhibition. Lateral inhibition leads to reduction of the firing of 
neurons 1 and 3 and the sensation that the pencil is depressing only the field of neuron 
2 (Fig. 10). This allows for more precise determination of the stimulus site and type. 
Most synapses in the mammalian nervous system transmit between the 
presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons using chemicals called neurotransmitters. As 
the action potential from the presynaptic neuron travels to the end of the axon, calcium 
is released from voltage-gated calcium channels and causes vesicles full of 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
9
neurotransmitters to fuse with the plasma membrane and dump their contents into the 
space between the two neurons called 
the synaptic cleft. The 
neurotransmitters diffuse across the 
synaptic cleft and either directly or 
indirectly activate ion channels on the 
postsynaptic neuron to cause a 
graded potential. In an excitatory 
synapse, ion channels are opened that 
let positive ions into the cell causing a 
graded potential that depolarizes the 
membrane and may or may not be 
sufficient to reach threshold 
(excitatory postsynaptic potential). 
In an inhibitory synapse, chloride 
enters the cell or potassium leaves the 
cell causing a graded potential that 
hyperpolarizes the membrane and 
moves the membrane potential farther 
from threshold (inhibitory 
postsynaptic potential). 
 
The nervous system contains 
many types of neurotransmitters along with their respective receptors. There are two 
main types of synapses that are not only found in the central nervous system but also in 
the periphery. In cholinergic synapses the presynaptic neuron releases acetylcholine 
as the neurotransmitter and it is received by one of two main types of receptors in the 
postsynaptic neuron or cell. Skeletal muscle and brain express nicotinic receptors 
which are ion channels that are gated by acetylcholine. In heart, smooth muscle and 
glands, muscarinic receptors bind acetylcholine which starts a signal transduction 
pathway that regulates ion channels.  
Adrenergic synapses release either 
norepinephrine or epinephrine into the synaptic cleft. The norepinephrine or 
epinephrine bind to one of two classes of receptors, alpha-adrenergic or beta-
adrenergic receptors. Both types of receptors use signal transduction to affect the 
postsynaptic cell which can be in the heart, smooth muscle, or a gland (Fig. 11). 
 
5. Organization 
 
The nervous system collects information from the environment, processes the 
information obtained, and then reacts in an appropriate manner. This is accomplished 
as a concerted effort between both the central and peripheral nervous systems. 
Afferent neurons are sensory neurons that lead from their sensory receptors in the 
periphery to the central nervous system which processes the information. Efferent 
neurons lead from the central nervous system back out to the periphery to cause the 
response to the stimulus. There are two different classes of efferent neurons in the 
peripheral nervous system, somatic motor neurons and autonomic neurons (Fig. 
12). Somatic motor neurons excite only skeletal muscle and are responsible for most of 
our voluntary movements. The somatic nervous system and autonomic nervous system 
Figure 11. Organization of the efferent peripheral 
nervous system.  

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
10
also differ in their anatomy. In the somatic nervous system, neurons with cell bodies in 
the central nervous system send axons to the skeletal muscle they innervate. In the 
autonomic nervous system, a neuron with a cell body in the central nervous system 
synapses with a second 
neuron whose cell body is 
in a ganglion, or cluster of 
neuronal cell bodies in the 
periphery. The second 
neuron sends an axon to 
the target organ (Fig. 11). 
 
Within the 
autonomic nervous 
system there are three 
divisions. The enteric 
neurons connect to 
neurons in the wall of the 
intestinal tract that control 
many processes there. The sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions are important 
for controlling many processes for body homeostasis (Fig. 12).  
 
Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Systems 
 
The sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the autonomic nervous system 
differ in their anatomy. Both utilize two neurons in series to lead from the central 
nervous system to the target organ (Fig. 11). However, the ganglia for the sympathetic 
system are for the most part next to the spinal cord while the ganglia for the 
parasympathetic system are usually very close to or within the target organs. The 
sympathetic and parasympathetic systems both use acetylcholine and nicotinic 
receptors at the synapses in their ganglia. In the target organs in the parasympathetic 
system, acetylcholine and muscarinic receptors are usually present at the synapse. In 
the sympathetic system, norepinephrine is usually the neurotransmitter that binds to 
adrenergic receptors on the target organ. One exception is in the adrenal gland where 
the postganglionic neurons don’t release neurotransmitter into a synapse. Instead, they 
release a mixture of epinephrine and norepinephrine into the bloodstream that can bind 
adrenergic receptors all over the body (Fig. 11). 
 
Many organs are innervated by the parasympathetic and sympathetic nerves, or 
bundles of axons. In most cases this allows one system to activate the organ and the 
other system to inhibit it. In general, the parasympathetic system is activated during 
periods of rest or digestion while the sympathetic system is most active during the fight 
or flight situations. The sympathetic system prepares us for fighting by increasing the 
heart rate, releasing glucose from the liver, and dilating our pupils. In addition, the 
sympathetic system can divert blood from the skin and digestive system to the heart, 
brain and skeletal muscles. The sympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system 
can be thought of as the gas pedal on a car while the parasympathetic branch is like the 
brake. If you want to slow down you can press the brake or let up on the gas. This dual 
control of systems that cause opposing actions allows for fine control of an organ’s 
activity and overall body homeostasis. 
Figure 12. Organization of nervous system 
CNS 
Motor (EFFERENT) 
Somatic 
Motor (EFFERENT) 
    Autonomic 
Parasympathetic      Sympathetic 
Enteric 
Sensory (AFFERENT) 
INPUT SIGNAL 
(touch, temperature,  
& pain or visceral 
sensory signals) 

