 
 Networked 

 Networked 
 The New Social Operating System 
 Lee Rainie and Barry Wellman 
 The MIT Press 
 Cambridge, Massachusetts 
 London, England 

 © 2012   Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any 
electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information 
storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.   
 MIT Press books may be purchased at special quantity discounts for business or sales 
promotional use. For information, please email special_sales@mitpress.mit.edu or 
write to Special Sales Department, The MIT Press, 55 Hayward Street, Cambridge, 
MA 02142.   
 This book was set in Stone Sans and Stone Serif by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited. 
Printed and bound in the United States of America.   
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Rainie, Harrison. 
 Networked : the new social operating system / Lee Rainie and Barry Wellman. 
  p.  cm. 
 Includes bibliographical references and index. 
 ISBN 978-0-262-01719-0 (hardcover : alk. paper) 
 1. Social networks.   2. Online social networks.   3. Interpersonal relations.   
4. Internet – Social aspects.   I. Wellman, Barry.   II. Title. 
 HM741.R35   2012 
 006.7 ′ 54 — dc23 
 2011038146   
 10   9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 

 For Paulette and Bev 

 Contents 
 Preface  
ix
 Acknowledgments  
xi
 I  The Triple Revolution  
1
 1  The New Social Operating System of Networked Individualism  
3
 2  The Social Network Revolution  
21
 3  The Internet Revolution  
59
 4  The Mobile Revolution  
81
 Interlude: A Day in a Connected Life  
109
 II  How Networked Individualism Works  
115
 5  Networked Relationships  
117
 6  Networked Families  
147
 7  Networked Work  
171
 8  Networked Creators  
197
 9  Networked Information  
223
 Interlude: The Conversation Never Ends  
245
 III  How to Operate in a Networked World, Now and in the Future  253
 10  Thriving as a Networked Individual  
255
 11  The Future of Networked Individualism  
275
 Notes 
303
 Index  
351

 Preface 
 While writing our book, we had fun with the title. Should we call it  “ The 
Triple Revolution ” of the turn to social networks, the personalized internet, 
and always-available mobile connectivity? Too complicated, we decided, 
although that became the title of part I, with a chapter devoted to each of 
the three revolutions. 
 Should we call our book  “ Networked Individualism ” ? This seemingly 
contradictory term would confuse browsers — better to explain it inside —
 and would downplay our interest in the internet and mobile connectivity. 
And so part II spends a lot of time looking at how the Triple Revolution 
plays out in relationships, families, work, creativity, and information. 
 Should we call our book  “ The Social Network ” ? Definitely not, for that 
term resonates too much with Facebook these days — in fact it ’ s the title of 
the 2010 Oscar-winning movie about the start of Facebook — and we spend 
a lot of time in this book showing how social networks are much more 
than Facebook. 
 So we ’ ve called the book  Networked: The New Social Operating System , 
emphasizing how networks among people have profoundly transformed 
how we connect, in person and electronically. 
 Along the way, we made a decision: Although we take the internet and 
mobile revolutions very seriously, this is  not  a book about the wonders of 
the internet and smartphones. Despite all the attention paid to new 
gadgets, technology does not determine human behavior; humans deter-
mine how technologies are used. Moreover, we would be instantly out of 
date if we took gadgets as our focal point. We are writing this in September 
2011, but the book won ’ t be published until 2012, and we are sure that 
many things will have changed by then and soon thereafter. At the same 
time, we are confident that one thing holds true: The internet and mobile 
phones have facilitated the reshaping of people ’ s social networks, enabling 
them to be larger and more diverse. And they have reconfigured the way 

x 
Preface
people use their networks to learn, solve problems, make decisions, and 
provide support to each other. 
 Who knows? By the time you read this, Facebook or tablet computers 
might have overtaken laptops and desktops, elevating mobile  “ apps ” to 
digital supremacy over the web. But we have tried to get right the basic 
social processes associated with the Triple Revolution. Although we focus 
on the societies we know best, the United States and Canada — “ North 
America ” — the discussion should be more widely useful. 
 Finally, we note that all revolutions are lumpy. For example, despite all 
of our revolutionary talk, this book is still a traditional book — whether on 
paper or as ebook. We dearly hope that the next edition will have hyper-
links to all of the articles we cite and the movies we discuss. But there is 
still a place for a good read. We ’ ve tried to avoid jargon and write for intel-
ligent general readers but still keep the specialists happy. We think we ’ ve 
succeeded, and we hope you like it even more than we ’ ve loved writing it. 
Please send us comments on our blog, http://www.networkedindividuals
.com. Thanks. 

 Acknowledgments 
 It is fitting that this book about networks comes from networked teams 
and via digital interactions. Although coauthors Lee Rainie and Barry 
Wellman met in person a few times, their basic interactions regarding 
the book were by email — with copious link insertions and attachments 
exchanging drafts — and by mobile phone. 
 In addition, Rainie and Wellman were at the centers of research net-
works: Rainie directing the Pew Research Center ’ s Internet  & American 
Life Project and Wellman directing NetLab at the University of Toronto. 
 In the Pew Internet world and the larger Pew Research Center, it is 
impossible to say where Lee Rainie ’ s offerings begin and other staffers ’ 
contributions end. It is a fellowship of daily learning, creation, and kinship 
with Susannah Fox, Amanda Lenhart, Kristen Purcell, Aaron Smith, John 
Horrigan, Cornelia Carter, Kathryn Zickuhr, Deborah Fallows, Paul Taylor, 
Scott Keeter, and Andrew Kohut. For this book, no one ’ s insights and 
careful editing skills were as important as those of Mary Madden Nesper, 
who was generous with her time and graceful in her interventions. Along 
the way, a cadre of Pew Internet researchers made important contributions: 
Jessica Vitak, Sydney Jones, Amy Tracy Wells, Eliza Jacobs, Lauren Scissors, 
Xingpu Yuan, Terrell Frazer, Margaret Griffith, and Niki Woodard. 
 In the wider world of Pew, the financial and substantive support pro-
vided by the board of the Pew Charitable Trusts and board of the Pew 
Research Center were critical. The personal interest and commitment to 
technology-focused research of Rebecca Rimel, Donald Kimelman, Tim 
Durkin, and Elizabeth Gross were essential to the work of the Pew Internet 
project and the contributions its work has made to this book. 
 Rainie has also learned at the knee of advisers and teachers whose fin-
gerprints are all over this material: Janna Anderson, Keith Hampton, 
Michael Nelson, Lincoln Caplan, Adam Clayton Powell III, Esther Dyson, 

xii 
Acknowledgments
Linda Stone, Clay Shirky, James Fallows, Marjorie Blumenthal, Larry Irving, 
Bill Tancer, Michael Delli Carpini, danah boyd, Jeffrey Eisenach, David 
Silver, Eileen Rudden, Jonathan Zittrain, Howard Rheingold, Jill Nishi, 
Joseph Turow, Paul Parsons, Ed Fouhy, Tom Rosenstiel, Amy Mitchell, Luis 
Lugo, and Michael Dimock. 
 At the center of all that matters are Paulette Rainie — shrewd reader, 
patient sounding board, and sublime partner — and Amanda, Christina, 
Abigail, and Clay — the children who tolerated with good cheer the distrac-
tions that this work created for their father. 
 At the University of Toronto, NetLab has been at the center of Barry 
Wellman ’ s web of relationships for decades: spinning ideas, support, and 
community. Over the years, Professors Ronald Baecker, Dean Behrens, Bill 
Buxton, Dimitrina Dimitrova, Bonnie Erickson, Arent Greve, Anatoliy 
Gruzd, Alexandra Marin, Rhonda McEwen, Kakuko Miyata, Diana Mok, 
the late Judith Merril, Jason Nolan, Anabel Quan-Haase, the late Janet 
Salaff, Marilyn Mantei Tremaine, and Helen Hua Wang have stimulated 
our understanding. 
 They have been complemented by the NetLab diaspora of former doc-
toral students who have worked closely with each other — and Wellman —
 developing many of the ideas and research we discuss here: Susan Bastani, 
Kristen Berg, Jeffrey Boase, Juan-Antonio Carrasco, Wenhong Chen, 
Vincent Chua, Rochelle C ô t é , Keith Hampton, Caroline Haythornthwaite, 
Bernie Hogan, and Tracy Kennedy have been especially vital participants. 
 Preparing this book has been an intensive and extensive adventure 
involving many NetLabbers. Justine Abigail Yu coauthored chapters 8 and 
9 — “ Networked Creators ” and  “ Networked Information ” plus  “ The Con-
versation Never Ends ” interlude — while Xiaolin Zhuo focused on the cre-
ative use of the internet and mobile phones in the Egyptian revolt section 
of  “ Networked Creators. ” Maya Collum wrote the  “ A Day in a Connected 
Life ”  interlude; Tracy Kennedy coauthored chapter 6,  “ Networked Fami-
lies ” ; Wenhong Chen coauthored chapter 7,  “ Networked Work ” ; and Chris-
tian Beermann and Zack Hayat coauthored chapter 11,  “ The Future of 
Networked Individualism. ” 
 Other NetLabbers contributed vital research support and writing: 
Vincent Chua for chapter 2,  “ The Social Network Revolution ” ; Mirna 
Ghazarian for chapter 4,  “ The Mobile Revolution, ” chapter 5,  “ Networked 
Relationships, ”  and chapter 7,  “ Networked Work ” ; Julia Chae, Melissa 
Godbout, Sharanpreet Kelley, Rhonda McEwen, and Yu Janice Zhang for 
chapter 5,  “ Networked Relationships ” ; Julie Amoroso and Maria Majerski 
for chapter 6,  “ Networked Families ” ; and Anna Brady for chapter 7, 

Acknowledgments 
xiii
 “ Networked Work. ” Mohammad Haque researched and compiled the 
complex trend graphs, especially in the front end of chapter 2,  “ The Social 
Network Revolution. ” 
 Quietly supporting all of this were infrastructural heroes who made the 
research sing and the writing dance, most notably: Christian Beermann, 
Courtney Cardozo, Isabella Chiu, Sabrina Cutaia, Christine Ensslen, 
Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Jennifer Kayahara, Natalia Kononenko, Chang Lin, 
Julia Madej, Mo Guang Ying, Barbara Neves, Ayden Scheim, Annie Shi, 
Lilia Smale, Sinye Tang, Erin Weinkauf, and Natalie Zinko. 
 We have all learned a lot from each other, laughed a lot, and grown in 
understanding. 
 Most of all, extraordinarily deep thanks to Beverly Wellman who read, 
thought about, proposed, edited, and debated every word in every draft of 
every chapter — all with good humor, profound support, and uncommon 
intellectual sense. She has been Barry ’ s heart, soul, and brain in their dance 
through life. 
 A series of research teams have studied East Yorkers three times since 
1968. NetLab has returned for a fourth time. We have been thrilled to 
watch this area of Toronto change in buildings and people. We have been 
welcomed with generosity and insight. We have tried to repay a part of 
our debt here. 
 Our funders have created the conditions under which NetLabbers could 
think, communicate, and especially find and analyze evidence. Through-
out, continuous grants from the Social Science and Humanities Research 
Council of Canada have been the foundation of NetLab ’ s work. In addi-
tion, corporate grantors Bell Canada, Intel, Mitel, Nortel Networks, and 
Telus have provided generous arm ’ s-length support. Starting in 2010, 
the GRAND Network of Centres of Excellence have also provided NetLab 
with support for research on networked organizations and interpersonal 
relations. 
 NetLab has benefited from the intellectual communities found in the 
University of Toronto ’ s Centre for Urban and Community Studies and 
more recently in the Department of Sociology. Scholars don ’ t work alone: 
They network. 
 We both thank our supporters and helpers at MIT Press, especially our 
faithful ally Marguerite Avery and our trusted pathfinders Julia Collins, 
Mel Goldsipe, and Katie Persons. 
 We also bow our heads in humble gratitude to the people whose story 
inspired many of our insights and whose careful reading made our work 
smarter: Peter and Trudy Johnson-Lenz. 

 
 I  The Triple Revolution 

 
 1  The New Social Operating System of Networked 
Individualism 
 Early on December 3, 2007, Trudy Johnson-Lenz tripped on her front steps 
as she was walking to her door in a rain storm.  1 She slammed her head on 
a rock and was knocked unconscious. Her husband Peter struggled unsuc-
cessfully to rouse her and then called the Portland, Oregon, emergency 
ambulance service for help. By 8 a.m. she was on an operating table at 
Oregon Health  & Science University. Her skull was filling with blood. To 
give her brain room to swell and heal, neurosurgeons removed a third of 
her skull, put it in the freezer for later, and removed the blood. The odds 
of people in her condition surviving, Peter was told, were 50 – 50, and of 
the survivors, three-quarters have some disability. Yet, beating the odds, 
Trudy started recovering just twelve hours later. 
 Before leaving her bedside, Peter used his mobile phone to snap a few 
digital pictures of her elaborately bandaged head and breathing tubes. He 
emailed the pictures and a description of the accident at midnight to some 
friends and was warmed by the reaction. Within 36 hours, nearly 150 
people across North America had sent emails, as friends forwarded the 
news about Trudy to others. People sent poems, expressions of love and 
encouragement, and offers of help and prayers. Most were sent to Peter ’ s 
computer. Urgent and logistics-related text messages came to his mobile 
phone. 
 Over the next two days, local friends stepped in to help. John Stapp 
came to the hospital, treated Peter to a bag lunch, and offered to manage 
a local meal delivery campaign for the couple. Mike Seely, director of the 
Pacific Northwest Transplant Bank, introduced the couple to a hospital 
social worker who started prepping Peter with tips about how to navigate 
the looming insurance, billing, and financial-aid bureaucracy. Martin Tull 
and Chuck Ensign ran errands and helped prepare their house for Trudy ’ s 
safety once she was discharged. 

4 
Chapter 1
 More socially and physically distant acquaintances responded in other 
ways. Buddies who were volunteer DJs on the local jazz radio station, 
KMHD-FM, announced their concern about Trudy on air and dedicated 
shows to her. Among their many passions, Peter and Trudy co-moderate 
an internet forum on jazz vocalist Kurt Elling ’ s website.  2 Several of the 
radio station jazz aficionados and Elling forum participants took it upon 
themselves to burn CDs of their favorite music to send Trudy as she 
recuperated. 
 Another recipient of a forwarded email was Lisa Kimball, a friend whom 
they call a  “ netweaver extraordinaire. ” 3 Lisa crafted an email in the name 
of the Johnson-Lenzes that did something they could not bring themselves 
to do on their own: ask for financial help. Lisa explained to Peter that she 
understood how hard and embarrassing it is to ask for money,  “ but I 
believe with all my heart that this is what networks are for. ” The Johnson-
Lenzes are self-employed and do not have disability plans or group health 
insurance. Dated December 7, 2007, Kimball ’ s email read: 
 Dear friends of P+T, [the online nickname Peter and Trudy have used since 1977] 
 If you ’ re reading this it ’ s because I managed to convince Peter to send it which 
makes me very happy even though I ’ m sure it makes Peter feel uncomfortable. I ’ m 
sending a check out to Oregon today. We all know about  “ pay it forward ” — this is 
about  “ paying it backward. ” 
 P+T ’ s work has influenced and enhanced my thinking for years and years . . . so 
I feel that I owe them far more than I could ever afford to pay. If we all lived in a 
physical village the way we ’ re living in this global one we ’ d be bringing Peter 
healthy snacks to the hospital, shoveling their walk, filling the fridge, and doing 
whatever else we could to support them during a very difficult time. 
 Since most of us are far away, we can ’ t do much of that but we can provide some 
cash to reduce the stress of figuring out how to deal with the day-to-day while 
they ’ re dealing with something way more important. . . . If others have some cre-
ative ideas about more ways we can enact our network being — count me in! 
 lisa 
 Jessica Lipnack, another member of P+T ’ s network, put Kimball ’ s  “ pay it 
backward ”  email on her blog.  4 Soon, other checks arrived, including some 
from people who had heard of P+T through these online activities but were 
unknown to them. 
 In the following months, there were more medical ups and downs, 
including a harrowing period after Trudy ’ s skull was repaired when she 
developed a staph infection and underwent emergency surgery. About the 
same time, Peter suffered a mild stroke. Local friends were indispensable 
in helping them get the care they required and supporting their daily needs 

The New Social Operating System of Networked Individualism 
5
during these periods of incapacity. For instance, it was Donna Tull, the 
wife of a friend, and a person Peter had never personally met, who heard 
about Peter ’ s stroke symptoms and convinced him to seek help. Another 
 “ stranger, ”  who was the spouse of a friend, is a nutritionist and recom-
mended a probiotic that helped Trudy at a time she was on an antibiotic 
regimen. Many others played direct or indirect roles in the care, thanks to 
two websites created by Peter and Trudy and their friends. Lotsa Helping 
Hands is a one-stop web-based domain that allows people to set up helping 
communities to coordinate meal delivery, transportation, schedules of 
household chores and visits, and expressions of emotional support. Many 
of them opted for menus created by Sharon Thorne, a friend who worked 
at a local grocery store in the deli department and was aware of the couple ’ s 
special dietary needs. Kimball set up an account on the PayPal e-commerce 
website to accept donations. By autumn of 2008 about ninety friends, 
family, and associates had made contributions, including people Peter and 
Trudy had never met in person and one couple who were complete strang-
ers to them. Over thirty people, many of them at a distance, provided meal 
deliveries, using Lotsa Helping Hands to order from a local deli.  5 This far-
flung network used a complex assemblage of email, group software, web-
sites, regular ( “ landline ” ) phones, and mobile phones to coordinate.  “ We ’ re 
basically desktop people, ” Peter said,  “ but our cell phones came in handy 
when we were travelling or when I was at the hospital. ” 
 As Peter and Trudy thought about this outpouring of generosity and 
altruism, they reflected on the power of social networks and the amount 
of effort required to maintain effective support. In a series of emails to 
their friends, they meditated on the  “ art of networking ” and the occasion-
ally grueling work of making choices and tradeoffs in order to sustain a 
social network. Some of their emails began with their twenty-first-century 
update of a little-remembered quote from Shakespeare ’ s  Timon of Athens . 
Timon had said,  “ I am wealthy in my friends. ” Their rewrite and occasional 
email header was,  “ We are truly wealthy in our network. ” Tracy and Peter 
later described their experience for this book ’ s authors: 
 We have been able to  “ get by with a little help from our friends, ” but we had to ask 
for help first, and that was a big challenge for us. . . . We have learned so much 
about our own resilience and that of our networks. Each relationship is a source of 
unique nourishment that has contributed to our healing and recovery. We thought 
we knew a lot about the art of networking, but this was a whole new experience. 
 It ’ s been something of a challenge to manage some of the labor-intensive 
mechanics of networking in the current technological environment: choosing which 
networking tools to use and when; creating, adding to, updating, and maintaining 

6 
Chapter 1
email lists; offering opt-outs along the way; finding tools to help with scheduling 
food deliveries; and tracking and acknowledging contributions of money, food, and 
other gifts. 
 On the social side, we have wondered how often to send updates, with how 
much detail and with photos of what. What ’ s the right balance of optimism, humor, 
and candidness? We didn ’ t want to add even more to everyone ’ s overload. We were 
also surprised to hear how much people appreciated getting news of our progress 
and being included in our circle of support. . . . 
 Several of you have also told us that we have isolated ourselves too much. Certi-
fied INFJs (Myers-Briggs)  6 who prefer to put things in writing and like to immerse 
ourselves in our projects, we unwittingly opted out of the real-time flows of talk 
and lots of interaction where trust grows and real work is negotiated. We realize 
now that we need to schmooze, circulate, and network a lot more to survive! 
 This is a time in our lives for radical trust, taking a leap, moving along whatever 
paths we take, and seeing what happens. We surrender. Heads to the floor.  7 
 Networked Individualism 
 We read Peter and Trudy ’ s account and we wonder about the folks who 
keep moaning that the internet is killing society. They sound just like 
those who worried generations ago that TV or automobiles would kill 
sociability, or sixteenth-century fears that the printing press would lead 
to information overload. While  oy vey -ism — crying  “ the sky is falling, ” 
makes for good headlines — it isn ’ t true. The evidence in our work is 
that none of these technologies are isolated — or isolating — systems. They 
are being incorporated into people ’ s social lives much like their prede-
cessors were. People are not hooked on gadgets — they are hooked on 
each other. When they go on the internet, they are not isolating them-
selves. They are conversing with others — be they emailers, bloggers, 
Facebookers, Wikipedians, or even organizational web posters. When 
people walk down the street texting on their phones, they are obviously 
communicating. Yet things are different now. In incorporating gadgets 
into their lives, people have changed the ways they interact with each 
other. They have become increasingly networked as individuals, rather 
than embedded in groups. In the world of networked individuals, it is 
the person who is the focus: not the family, not the work unit, not 
the neighborhood, and not the social group. 
 So Peter and Trudy ’ s account of how they used their social networks is 
not only a heartwarming tale. It is also the story of the new social operat-
ing system we call  “ networked individualism ” in contrast to the longstand-
ing operating system formed around large hierarchical bureaucracies and 

The New Social Operating System of Networked Individualism 
7
small, densely knit groups such as households, communities, and work-
groups. We call networked individualism an  “ operating system ” because it 
describes the ways in which people connect, communicate, and exchange 
information. We also use the phrase because it underlines the fact that 
societies — like computer systems — have networked structures that provide 
opportunities and constraints, rules and procedures. The phrase echoes the 
reality of today ’ s technology: Most people play and work using computers 
and mobile devices that run on operating systems. Like most computer 
operating systems and all mobile systems, the social network operating 
system is  personal — the individual is at the autonomous center just as she 
is reaching out from her computer;  multiuser — people are interacting with 
numerous diverse others;  multitasking — people are doing several things; 
and  multithreaded — they are doing them more or less simultaneously. 
 Peter and Trudy rebuilt their world through their own resourcefulness 
and with the help of many allies. They used varied branches of their 
network operating system to find support, solve problems, and improve 
their knowledge and skills. The actions they took to recover were different 
from the actions that would have been used by their parents and grand-
parents. Those actions took place on a different human scale from the one 
that would have been available to their ancestors facing similar traumas. 
Those ancestors were embedded in groups and had little opportunity to 
navigate life by maneuvering through their networks. Yet, to networked 
individuals like Peter and Trudy, such art is second nature. They worked 
hard and thoughtfully to take advantage of the wide-ranging skills that 
existed in their extended social network — their closest friends,  plus  their 
more varied and extended system of associates,  plus  the new entrants into 
the network who were connected to them through personal, participatory 
media. 
 By Peter and Trudy ’ s reckoning their network has several thinly con-
nected segments. Because their friends traveled in different milieus, their 
friends needed contact and coordination in order to help. About twenty 
of those who helped were close friends and family. Beyond that inner circle 
was a ring of people who pitched in to help with specific issues even 
though they were not bosom buddies of the couple. Another ten or so were 
medical professionals, while another ten or so beyond that were parapro-
fessionals in the health-care world, the insurance world, the social-work 
world, or the patient-advocate world. And there were many part-time 
helpers, contributors, and well-wishers. Some in the network felt tied to 
the couple because of their common professional interests. Others were 
linked through their shared passion for jazz. Still others were linked because 

8 
Chapter 1
they live in Portland — proximity still counts for something, even in the 
networked age. Beyond them, hundreds of others found the wherewithal 
to offer help from afar by sending good wishes, advice, money, and job 
contacts. Collaboratively, this far-flung network made contributions to the 
couple ’ s emotional, financial, and logistical well-being. 
 The networked life epitomized by Peter and Trudy ’ s story is different 
from the all-embracing village that is usually held up as the model of com-
munity. In Peter and Trudy ’ s case, the people who were most useful in 
providing advice on medical decisions often did not know the people who 
provided emotional and social nourishment. Nor did all network members 
work closely in sync in providing assistance. Nevertheless, they found ways 
to work together in helping the couple wrestle with their daily — and 
future — lives. 
 So, what ’ s new about this social reality? Haven ’ t many communities 
pitched in before to help their members? Of course. Yet the way in which 
Peter and Trudy ’ s network did this is quite different from the way their 
forebears ’ communities would have. In generations past, people usually 
had small, tight social networks — in rural areas or urban villages — where a 
few important family members, close friends, neighbors, leaders and com-
munity groups (churches and the like) constituted the safety net and 
support system for individuals. 
 This new world of networked individualism is oriented around looser, 
more fragmented networks that provide succor. Such networks had already 
formed before the coming of the internet. Still, the revolutionary social 
change from small groups to broader personal networks has been power-
fully advanced by the widespread use of the internet and mobile phones. 
However, some analysts fear that people ’ s lesser involvement in local 
community organizations — such as church groups and bowling leagues  8 —
 means that we live in a socially diminished world where trust is lower, 
societal cohesion is reduced, loneliness is widespread, and people ’ s collec-
tive capacity to help one another is at risk. While such fears go back at 
least one hundred fifty years, the coming of the internet has increased 
them and added new issues: Are people huddling alone in front of their 
screens? If they are connecting with someone online, is it a vague simula-
crum of real community with people they could have seen, smelled, heard, 
and touched in the  “ good old days ” ? 
 The evidence suggests that those with such fears have been looking at 
the new world through a cloudy lens. Our research supports the notion 
that small, densely knit groups like families, villages, and small organiza-
tions have receded in recent generations. A different social order has 

The New Social Operating System of Networked Individualism 
9
emerged around social networks that are more diverse and less over lapping 
than those previous groups. The  networked operating system gives people 
new ways to solve problems and meet social needs. It offers more freedom 
to individuals than people experienced in the past because now they have 
more room to maneuver and more capacity to act on their own. 
 At the same time, the networked individualism operating system 
requires that people develop new strategies and skills for handling prob-
lems. Like Peter and Trudy, they must devote more time and energy to 
practicing the art of networking than their ancestors did. Except in emer-
gencies, they can no longer passively let the village take care of them and 
control them. They must actively network. They need to expend effort and 
sometimes money to maintain their ties near and far; choose whether to 
phone, visit, or electronically connect with others; remember which 
members of their network are useful for what sorts of things (including 
just hanging out); and forge useful alliances among network members who 
might not previously have known each other. In short, networked indi-
vidualism is both socially liberating and socially taxing. 
 Paradoxically, the technology that promises to connect people also 
threatens to overload them with extra work. The Johnson-Lenzes told us 
how it takes them just as much effort and even more time to conduct 
deeply satisfying electronic communications as it does to conduct person-
to-person encounters. They noted that while the internet put more poten-
tial relationships at their fingertips and made relationships easy to start, it 
also made relationships harder to sustain because it brought so many dis-
tractions and fleeting interactions into their lives. After making a good 
connection via email or texting, they wrote,  “ we want to hear the music 
of each other ’ s voices and we want to see and touch each other. ” 
 Our research supports this. An environment that spawns more social 
liberation also demands more social effort when people have desires or 
problems they want solved. This is where technology is especially useful. A 
major difference between the past and now is that the social ties people 
enjoy today are more abundant and more easily nourished by contact 
through new technologies. We will show throughout this book how the 
internet and other forms of information and communication technolo-
gies — what scholars call  “ ICTs  ” — actually aid community. 
 One way to look at the changed environment is to compare the John-
son-Lenzes ’  social network operating system to the social and media envi-
ronment of their parents. As Peter and Trudy recall, their parents had a 
few close friends who literally meant the world to them where they grew 
up — Portland for Trudy and Denver for Peter. Their mothers did not work 

10 
Chapter 1
until their children were teenagers. Their parents ’ milieus revolved around 
their children, work, volunteer activities like scouting and PTA, regular 
bridge games, and church. 
 Peter and Trudy learned to read with the  Fun with Dick and Jane  primer. 
As children, they got information and diversions from television shows 
like  The Mickey Mouse Club , local newspapers and newscasts, magazines 
such as  Life , and books checked out of the local library. However, Peter 
says their parents rarely treated these media sources as resources or tools 
they could use to tackle problems. Although family members used their 
home encyclopedia when they needed technical information or material 
to help with schoolwork, they did not see it as a  “ go to ” information trove 
that could answer all questions or help solve all problems. Peter ’ s parents 
would talk about the news with their friends, but they never wrote letters 
or made phone calls to talk back to the news organizations or newsmakers. 
Except for gossiping with friends and family, they never created their own 
version of  “ news ” to share with their acquaintances. The only personal 
news that they sent around was the occasional letter or card with family 
updates. 
 Nowadays, Peter and Trudy use a variety of tools to make sense of their 
environment and to plot their next steps: the internet, phones, books, 
magazines, newsletters, and interactions with friends. At the same time, 
the internet and their phones (landline and mobile) allow them to stay in 
touch white more people in their social networks, more often, and under 
more circumstances. They multitask with multiple devices. They find 
themselves sending emails to those helping them to coordinate household 
chores while on the same day they process contributions from strangers 
and do research and consulting work. 
 “ All this technology makes it easier for me to take care of lots of things 
quickly, ”  Trudy says.  “ It ’ s a juggling act with all the things I need to do, 
but I don ’ t know how I ’ d be able to work with so many people on so many 
different issues if I didn ’ t have this technology. ” Rather than being over-
whelming, the internet extends her reach — and the reach of people to her. 
While the internet itself is not overwhelming, Trudy notes that it intro-
duces more demands on her life about how to allocate her attention and 
manage her personal interactions. 
 Still, the technology and the social network are not the sole solutions 
to Peter and Trudy ’ s problems. Despite their wonderful network support, 
they have been hard-hit financially as a result of their health problems. 
They have gotten back on their feet with a lot of help from their friends 
and are slowly rebuilding their lives. 

The New Social Operating System of Networked Individualism 
11
 In thinking about Peter and Trudy, we have wondered if their story is 
unusual because they have been active networkers and community build-
ers since the 1970s — both in person and via ICTs. To be sure, Peter and 
Trudy have more experience and expertise networking than legions of 
other Americans. They have been developing social networking concepts, 
software, and virtual communities since the 1970s. Fittingly, they coined 
the term  “ groupware ” in 1978 to describe and construct the then-revolu-
tionary software that allowed two or more people to work together online
 — even before the internet itself had been widely embraced. Today, they 
realize that they work in social networks, not groups. 
 Yet, the more we have examined the research that is the heart of this 
book, the more we see that while Peter and Trudy have been pioneers, 
many people are actively networking in similar ways. We describe this new 
social operating system in the rest of this chapter, and we show throughout 
the book how social networks — combined with personal and mobile ICTs —
 are shaping how people relate to others, work, play, learn together, and 
seek out helpful information. 
 Although we focus on North America, our home and the source of 
most of our evidence, we believe that our conclusions generally hold 
true for the entire developed world. These insights also have implications 
for the developing world, where internet and mobile phone use is 
mushrooming. 
 The Triple Revolution ’ s Impact on How Networked Individuals Live Their 
Lives 
 Peter and Trudy Johnson-Lenz ’ s story highlights how the Social Network, 
Internet, and Mobile Revolutions are coming together to shift people ’ s 
social lives away from densely knit family, neighborhood, and group rela-
tionships toward more far-flung, less tight, more diverse personal net-
works. In their story, we see the changing realities of this new social 
operating system. 
 First, the Social Network Revolution has provided the opportunities —
 and stresses — for people to reach beyond the world of tight groups. It has 
afforded more diversity in relationships and social worlds — as well as 
bridges to reach these worlds and maneuverability to move among them. 
At the same, it has introduced the stress of not having a single home base 
and of reconciling the conflicting demands of multiple social worlds. 
 Second, the Internet Revolution has given people communications power 
and information-gathering capacities that dwarf those of the past . It has 

12 
Chapter 1
also allowed people to become their own publishers and broadcasters and 
created new methods for social networking. This has changed the point 
of contact from the household (and work group) to the individual. Each 
person also creates her own internet experiences, tailored to her needs. 
 Third, the Mobile Revolution has allowed ICTs to become body append-
ages allowing people to access friends and information at will, wherever 
they go. In return, ICTs are always accessible. There is the possibility of a 
continuous presence and pervasive awareness of others in the network. 
People ’ s physical separation by time and space are less important. 
 Together, these three revolutions have made possible the new social 
operating system we call  “ networked individualism. ” The hallmark of 
networked individualism is that people function more as connected 
individuals and less as embedded group members . For example, house-
hold members now act at times more like individuals in networks and 
less like members of a family. Their homes are no longer their castles 
but bases for networking with the outside world, with each family member 
keeping a separate personal computer, address book, calendar, and mobile 
phone. 
 Yet people are not rugged individualists — even when they think they 
are.  Many meet their social, emotional, and economic needs by tapping into 
sparsely knit networks of diverse associates rather than relying on tight connec-
tions to a relatively small number of core associates.  This means that net-
worked individuals can have a variety of social ties to count on, but are 
less likely to have one sure-fire  “ home ”  community. Looser and more 
diverse social networks require more choreography and exertion to 
manage. Often, individuals rely on many specialized relationships to meet 
their needs. For example, a typical social network might have some 
members who are good at meeting local, logistical needs (pet sitting, 
watering the plants), while others are especially useful when medical needs 
arise. Yet others (often sisters) provide emotional support. Still others are 
the ones whose political opinions carry more weight, while others give 
financial advice, restaurant recommendations, or suggest music and books 
to enjoy. 
 Networked individuals have partial membership in multiple networks and rely 
less on permanent memberships in settled groups.  They must calculate where 
they can turn for different kinds of help — and what kind of help to offer 
others as they occupy nodes in others ’ extended networks. They have an 
easier time reattaching to those from their past even after extended periods 
of noncontact. With a social environment in flux, people must deal with 
frequent turnover and change in their networks. 

The New Social Operating System of Networked Individualism 
13
 A key reason why these kinds of networks function effectively is that social 
networks are large and diversified thanks to the way people use technology.  To 
some critics, this seems to be a problem. They express concern that tech-
nology creates social isolation, as people rely on tech-based communica-
tion rather than richer face-to-face encounters.  9 We find a different story. 
Technologies such as the internet and mobile phones help people manage 
a larger, more diverse set of relationships. Consider the many people — and 
the many kinds of people — that Peter and Trudy could call on. The lesson 
is this: Rather than the internet or mobile phones luring people away from 
in-person contact, extensive internet use is associated with larger, more 
diverse, and growing networks. For example, one study of internet users 
shows that between 2002 and 2007, there was an increase of more than 
one-third in the number of friends seen in person weekly.  10 
 The changing social environment is adding to people ’ s capacity and 
willingness to exploit more  “ remote ” relationships — in both the physical 
and emotional senses of the word. The internet especially helps to main-
tain contact with  weaker ties : friends, relatives, neighbors, and workmates 
with whom people are not very close. While weaker, these ties often pro-
vide — as in Peter ’ s and Trudy ’ s case — crucial elements of information, 
sociability, and support as they seek jobs, cope with health issues, make 
purchase decisions, and deal with bureaucracies. Most importantly, they 
are the broader milieus that give people their places in life by providing 
them a means of connecting to the broader fabric of society. They can 
function better in a complex environment because the Triple Revolution 
provides them diversity in several ways, including more access to a greater 
variety of people and to more information from a greater variety of sources. 
 The new media is the new neighborhood.  The internet plays a special role 
for networked individuals because it is a participatory medium. To be sure, 
people still value some neighbors, because living nearby remains important 
for everyday socializing and for dealing with emergencies large and small. 
Yet, neighbors are only about 10 percent of people ’ s significant ties. As a 
result, people ’ s social routines are different from their parents or grand-
parents. While people see their coworkers and neighbors often, most of 
their important contacts are with people who live elsewhere in the city, 
region, nation — and abroad. The internet is especially valuable for those 
kinds of connections. 
 Networked individuals have new powers to create media and project their 
voices to more extended audiences that become part of their social worlds.  Their 
connections can ripen in important ways because the internet offers so 
many new options for interaction through social media such as emailing 

14 
Chapter 1
(still the most popular overall), blogging, posting Twitter messages, and 
Facebook activities. Social media allow people to tell their stories, draw an 
audience, and often gain social assistance when they are in need. Pew 
Internet surveys find that more than two-thirds of adults and three-
quarters of teenagers have created content online. The act of creating with 
new media is often a social — and networking — activity, where people work 
together or engage in short- and long-term dialogues. 
 The lines between information, communication, and action have blurred: 
Networked individuals use the internet, mobile phones, and social networks to 
get information at their fingertips and act on it, empowering their claims to 
expertise (whether valid or not).  They use social media and the web as a vast 
information store that can help them gather information, find and contact 
others who have faced similar experiences, compare options when they 
are making decisions, locate new experts to consult, and get second, third, 
and fourth opinions when they are assessing the advice they are given. 
Peter and Trudy had good doctors, but they used the internet and their 
networks to take charge of their own health care, searching on the web 
and asking knowledgeable friends elsewhere for advice and comfort. 
 Such empowerment is not limited to health crises. For example, after 
people have bought a product, they can turn themselves into broadcast-
ers as they comment on the experience they have just had, rate the 
product they have just bought, apply their own  “ tags ”  to label it in ways 
that are meaningful to them, and comment about the product on the 
blog or news site that may have originally led them to the product. Their 
participation then assists those who come later and can read their com-
ments. The interactive Web 2.0 environment provides innumerable oppor-
tunities for expanding one ’ s reach for new relationships, even among the 
most remote strangers. In this world, a new layer is added to a person ’ s 
social network — the audience layer sits beyond the weak ties layer. It is 
made up of strangers, but as Peter and Trudy discovered, even those 
strangers can play constructive roles when they are activated. The role 
of experts and information gatekeepers can be radically altered as empow-
ered amateurs and dissidents find new ways to raise their voices and 
challenge authority. 
 In this world of expanded opportunity, community building can take 
new forms. Hobbyists, civic actors, caregivers, spiritual pathfinders, and 
many others have the option of plugging into existing communities or 
building their own from scratch. Networked individuals can create new 
communities around themselves, their interests, even their illnesses —
 online, in person, and mixes of both. They can also use social media such 

The New Social Operating System of Networked Individualism 
15
as Twitter to discover and make connections to others with whom they 
share something in common. 
 Although they do not use Twitter, Peter and Trudy relied on their com-
munities built around futures research, sustainability, social media, virtual 
communities, and jazz musician Kurt Elling. Not only do they moderate a 
forum about Elling ’ s work and post news, articles, reviews, and personal 
information; they also write supportive and informative comments on 
others ’ online blogs. They work hard to keep the Elling network vibrant. 
Similarly, the internet became the environment where a distinct new com-
munity formed around dealing with Peter and Trudy ’ s medical and daily 
living needs, containing both new members and old friends. 
 Not only do networked individuals participate in social networks, they 
also take on specialized roles inside those groups. Many interpersonal ties 
are based on the particular attributes — not the full personality of the whole 
person. Peter and Trudy ’ s personal health network is typical. It includes 
family members, neighbors, work colleagues, members of online and 
offline support groups, expert hunters for medical information in profes-
sional literature or reports of clinical trials, and acquaintances coming into 
the picture because of the particular help they can provide. 
 Moving among relationships and milieus, networked individuals can fashion 
their own complex identities depending on their passions, beliefs, lifestyles, pro-
fessional associations, work interests, hobbies, or any number of other personal 
characteristics.  These relationships often depend on context, which pro-
vides networked individuals an opportunity to present different faces in 
different circumstances, especially online. For example, Peter and Trudy 
are jazz buffs, organizational consultants, futures researchers, sustainability 
advocates, software designers, and friends — in multiple environments that 
only overlap somewhat. Yet, despite their involvement in different milieus, 
they are still Peter and Trudy wherever they participate. They have a net-
worked self, a core being that emphasizes different identities as they 
connect with each milieu. 
 At work, less formal, fluctuating, and specialized peer-to-peer relationships are 
more easily sustained now compared with the past, and the benefits of boss/sub-
ordinate hierarchical relationships are less obvious. Pew Internet surveys show 
that about three-quarters of all American workers use all the basic tools of 
internet browsing, emailing, and messaging, and mobile phoning/texting. 
But that is just the starting point. Many of the most technologically 
connected workers have jobs built around creative effort rather than manu-
facturing or standardized paper pushing. This thrusts more autonomy and 
authority onto individual workers. Flexible arrangements with bosses, 

16 
Chapter 1
peers, and subordinates encourage independent thinking — and perhaps 
even creativity. 
 Networked workers frequently operate in multiple teams, rather than 
with the same colleagues every day, so their organizational life becomes 
more horizontal and less vertical. Peter and Trudy have always been a two-
person consulting partnership, but through the years they have developed 
a diverse set of trust relationships to get their projects done. Sometimes 
such networks develop within organizations with people shifting their 
work relationships throughout the week. They rely heavily on the internet, 
within-organization intranets, and mobile phones to obtain and share 
information and complete tasks. 
 The organization of work is more spatially distributed.  The classic picture 
of the Industrial-Bureaucratic era of the nineteenth and twentieth centu-
ries has been of people commuting to large factories and offices. Not only 
was it more convenient to produce goods in one place, but it also was 
easier to coordinate and control operations. Yet, the Internet and Mobile 
Revolutions enhance the ability to coordinate and control at a distance, 
so that goods and services can come from multiple locations. Documents 
and drawings are now internet attachments or are stored in internet 
 “ clouds ”  where they can be accessed from anywhere. Mobile phones and 
wireless computers allow dispersed workers — at home, on the road, and in 
coffee shops — to connect with each other. Air travel — of people and goods
 — has joined with traditional land and sea transport to facilitate distributed 
operations. 
 Home and work have become more intertwined than at any time since hordes 
of farmers went out into their fields.  The interpenetration of home and work 
goes in both directions. In one direction, workers bring work home from 
the office to finish off jobs or they may stay home full or part time. For 
example, Peter and Trudy have always lived and worked in the same place: 
Their home is their workplace. For others, the new media tethers them 
to their jobs — they cannot leave work behind when they head out the 
office door. On the one hand, many feel so burdened by time pressures 
and the constant threat of demands that they respond and complete tasks 
even when they are away from their place of work. On the other hand, 
many feel liberated by being able to avoid long, tedious, and tense com-
muting. They enjoy the prospect of being able to do  “ home ” activities 
such as personal browsing of the web, sharing Facebook updates, shop-
ping, and emailing family and friends while they are at work. In short, 
 “ home ” activities have invaded work while  “ work ” activities have invaded 
homes. 

The New Social Operating System of Networked Individualism 
17
 While ICTs have shattered the work-home dividing line, they have also 
breached the line between the private and public spheres of life.  Mobile phones 
have made conversations more private than they were in the era when the 
household phone sat in the middle of the house so that everyone at home 
could hear at least one end of a phone conversation. Texting has brought 
another dimension to person-to-person contact by helping it become more 
private, even in close quarters. Blogs often become quasi-public diaries, 
and social media such as Facebook, Twitter, and foursquare-enable people 
to inform others of their whereabouts and to announce their momentary 
thoughts and doings. For example, Peter and Trudy shared widely many 
details of their operations — including pictures of Trudy with a long row of 
surgical staples winding around her head. At the same time, heretofore 
private activity invades public spaces as people speak openly of intimate 
affairs on their mobiles in public spaces and work on their laptops in coffee 
shops (hoping that others won ’ t peek too much). 
 New expectations and realities about the transparency, availability, and 
privacy of people and institutions are emerging.  Reputation management — the 
selective exposure of personal information and activities — is an important 
element to how people function in networks as they establish credentials, 
build trust with others, and gather information to deal with problems or 
make decisions. In the really old days of wandering tribes and agricultural 
villages, people knew most things about each other — for better or worse. 
They felt both comforted by the availability of others and concerned about 
the surveillance of others. 
 The turn from groups to networks changed this as people expressed 
different parts of their behavior in different milieus. At first, the Internet 
and Mobile Revolutions aided this segmentation: Email, texting, and 
mobile calling are usually one-to-one media. But the rise of social media 
has brought people back into one network — happily or not. The most 
popular social media such as Facebook have offered limited ability — so 
far — to deal with the subtleties of how people really function in different 
segments of their networks. Rather, the sites tend to treat each person ’ s 
network as a monolithic entity that functions in a let-it-all-hang-out 
milieu. To be sure, it is intoxicating at times for people to share a lot. Many 
social network participants, especially young adults, say that the advan-
tages of disclosure — for instance by building friendships, enhancing status, 
and connecting to friends of friends — outweigh the problems they might 
encounter with too much sharing. 
 Yet with this reemergent transparency comes a loss of privacy and 
the perhaps unwanted commercialization of personal information. Not 

18 
Chapter 1
only do all Facebook friends learn a lot about the person who they 
have  “ friended, ”  but the social media companies can also aggregate and 
analyze this information and find out what twenty-year-old American 
students — and their forty-five-year old parents — are interested in. As 
former Google CEO Eric Schmidt boasted:  “ We know where you are. 
We know where you have been. We can more or less know what you ’ re 
thinking about. ” 11 
 In the less hierarchical and less bounded networked environment — where 
expertise is more in dispute than in the past and where relationships are more 
tenuous — there is more uncertainty about whom and what information sources 
to trust.  The explosion of information and information sources has had 
the paradoxical impact of pushing people on the path of greater reliance 
on their networks. It might seem that the abundance of information 
that organizations provide on the internet would prompt people to rely 
less on their friends and colleagues for facts and advice. Yet it turns out 
that the increasing amount of information pouring into people ’ s lives 
leads them to turn to their social networks to make sense of it. The 
result is that as people gather information to help them make choices, 
they cycle back and forth between internet searches and discussion with 
the members of their social networks, using in-person conversations, 
phone chats, and emails to exchange opinions and weigh options. In 
short, as the internet and mobile phones proliferate, people behave even 
more as networked individuals. 
 Is the Triple Revolution Having a Good or Bad Impact on Society?  
 The simple answer is: both and more. The research we shall present shows 
that networked individualism is the reality of many everyday lives. We 
believe that there is clear evidence that the shift to networked individual-
ism is widespread and is changing the rules of the game. Networked indi-
viduals live in an environment that tests their capacities to deal with each 
other and with information. In their world, the volume of information is 
growing; the velocity of news (personal and formal) is increasing; the 
places where people can encounter others and information are proliferat-
ing; the ability of users to search for and find information is greater than 
ever; the tools allowing people to customize, filter, and assess information 
are more powerful; the capacity to create and share information is in more 
hands; and the potential for people to reach out to each other is unprec-
edented. Rather than snuggling in — or being trapped in — their groups, 
people must actively maneuver in their networks. Some people are more 

The New Social Operating System of Networked Individualism 
19
likely to be network mavens than others, better able to navigate and 
operate the system. 
 Different networks operate in different ways. Many provide  havens: a 
sense of belonging and being helped. Many provide  bandages:  emotional 
aid and services that help people cope with the stresses and strains of their 
situations. Still others provide  safety nets  that lessen the effects of acute 
crises and chronic difficulties. They all provide  social capital:  interpersonal 
resources not only to survive and thrive, but also to change situations 
(houses, jobs, spouses) or to change the world or at least their neighbor-
hood (organizing major political activity, local school board politics). Not 
only must people choose which parts of their networks to access, the pro-
liferation of communication devices means they must also choose how to 
connect with others: meet in person, phone, email, text, tweet, or post on 
Facebook. 
 This is the era of free agents and the spirit of personal agency. But it is 
not the World According to Me — it is not a world of autonomous and 
increasingly isolated individualists. Rather, it is the World According to the 
 Connected  Me, where people armed with potent technology tools can 
extend their networks far beyond what was possible in the past and where 
they face new constraints and challenges that are outgrowths of networked 
life. Those primed to take advantage of this reality are the ones who are 
motivated to share their stories and ideas and then invite conversation and 
feedback. Much of the activity by networked individuals is aimed at gaining 
and building trust, the primary currency of social networks. There are new 
ways to offer trust and procure it online, and its basic value is growing 
because networks are so essential to people ’ s social success. In a world of 
networked individuals, those who engage in the mutual exchange of intan-
gible or mundane resources have the potential to thrive. These individuals 
will seek support and seek to provide support. Further, those individuals 
who are able to balance relationships with people in the various sectors of 
their social networks — kin, friends, neighbors, associates, and workmates —
 are better positioned to receive both broad and specialized support. 
 The changes wrought by the Triple Revolution — in social networks, the 
rise of the internet, and the advent of mobile connectivity — are not all for 
the good or all for the bad. Rather, some of the changes created by net-
worked individualism are beneficial to people and make society better 
while others are challenging to personal fulfillment and make society 
harsher. Some of the changes just make it different in neither a positive 
nor a negative way. Moreover, the effects of networked individualism often 
depend on personality traits and environmental contexts. 

20 
Chapter 1
 This book explores how this world came into being, the impact these 
changes have produced already, and where they are leading. In part I, we 
describe how the Triple Revolution — the Social Network, Internet, and 
Mobile Revolutions — affect networked individualism. Chapter 2 examines 
how the social network perspective differs from the two traditional 
approaches to understanding human behavior: in groups or as individuals. 
Chapter 3 looks at the rise of the internet in the United States, how pat-
terns of its adoption changed over time, and the current activities of 
people online. It notes the special contribution that high-speed, always-on 
broadband has made to how people connect with each other and infor-
mation. Chapter 4 shows how mobile phones have moved beyond ways 
in which people talk on the fly to become key means of always-available 
accessibility. 
 Part II shows how the Triple Revolution of social networks, the internet, 
and mobile access play out in communities, households, and work. Chapter 
5 considers the ways in which interpersonal relationships have moved 
beyond neighborhood communities. Chapter 6 looks inside and outside 
households to see how the everyday rhythms of traditional household-
centered families have moved out of homes as families become networked. 
Chapter 7 shows the partial transformation of work, with people working 
in multiple teams rather than hierarchies and work organizations becom-
ing geographically distributed. Chapter 8 describes how individuals can 
easily create, manipulate, share, and broadcast their ideas. Chapter 9 looks 
at the special features that digital technology and social networks have 
brought to how people obtain information. 
 The two concluding chapters in part III sum things up and look to the 
future. They try to answer the questions,  “ So what? ” and  “ Now what? ” 
Chapter 10 organizes what we have learned about how people and orga-
nizations can perform well in the world of networked individuals, while 
Chapter 11 explores the technological and social trends that might affect 
networked individualism in the coming decade. This world will create 
greater opportunities for people to build networks of kindred spirits and 
to amass information and social support to have their needs met. Yet, this 
world will also offer greater uncertainties, insecurities, and opportunities 
for surveillance. As the Triple Revolution unfolds, the move to networked 
individualism will continue. 

 
 2  The Social Network Revolution 
 When we tell people that we are thinking about social networks, they often 
say  “ Oh ,  Facebook . ” 1 Many believe that the Social Network Revolution 
started with Facebook ’ s emergence in 2004. To be sure, Facebook  is some-
what of a network. But social networks are bigger than Facebook, and they 
have been around since the beginning of time when Cain hung out with 
Abel. Even computer-based networks have been around for decades before 
Facebook. 
 In the story of the rise of networked individualism, it is important to 
realize that the Social Network Revolution came first — before the Internet 
Revolution or the Mobile Revolution. It is the least obtrusive because it is 
not a shift in technology, but a shift in how people relate to each other. 
The Social Network Revolution, which throughout this book we often 
shorten to the Network Revolution, has been less noticed and commented 
upon than the technology revolutions partly because the conceptual idea 
of a social network is simple, yet intangible.  
 A social network is a set of relations among network members — be they 
people, organizations, or nations. From a network perspective, several 
things matter: Society is not the sum of individuals or of two-person ties. 
Rather, everyone is embedded in structures of relationships that provide 
opportunities, constraints, coalitions, and work-arounds. Nor is society 
built out of solidary, tightly bounded groups — like a stacked series of build-
ing blocks. Rather, it is made out of a tangle of networked individuals who. 
operate in specialized, fragmented, sparsely interconnected, and permeable 
networks. Social network analysts focus more on the characteristics of 
these relationships than on the characteristics of the individual members. 
 If social networks have long been with us, why have we become more 
networked recently? The answer is that new technologies and major social 
changes have resonated with the footlooseness of North Americans and 
their desire for personal autonomy. North Americans move to new homes 

22 
Chapter 2
a lot: both locally and long-distance. North Americans also move around 
a lot on a daily basis: hopping in their cars for work, play, and socializing. 
And North Americans have especially extolled the value of personal auton-
omy — doing things on their own. Moreover, the turn to social networks 
has been a gradual movement that has recently accelerated, rather than a 
short-term cataclysmic event. 
 Yet this is not just a North American story, for similar changes have 
happened throughout the developed world and in many parts of other 
societies. People today are less bound to their national allegiance, village, 
and neighborhood moorings. Around the developed world flexible, maneu-
verable connectivity has increased, group boundaries have weakened, and 
information has become more directly available — all driving the shift to 
networked individualism. It is not that these changes have  caused  the 
Social Network Revolution. They have created technological, social, and 
economic circumstances that helped make the network operating system 
possible. The next three sections describe nine key changes that have 
facilitated the change to networked individualism. 
 Toward the Social Network Revolution 
 Widespread Connectivity 
 1.  Automobile and airplane trips have made travel wider-ranging and broadly 
affordable, helping spread social networks worldwide. 
 Longer drives became more feasible with the construction of the 37,000-
mile (75,000 km) U.S. Interstate expressway system between the 1950s and 
1980s. Middle-range trips became routine, automobile reliability improved, 
and rising affluence made cars more broadly affordable. High-speed cruis-
ing on I-40 replaced getting kicks on Route 66.  2 
 The percentage of households without any cars dropped from 21 percent 
in 1969 to 8 percent in 2001, and the percentage of one-car households 
dropped from 48 percent to 31 percent in the same time period (  figure 
2.1 ). Three-fifths (60 percent) of all households have two or more vehicles. 
The upshot is that the number of passenger-car miles driven annually by 
Americans rose 60 percent from 900 billion in 1970 to 1.5 trillion in 2001, 
and the amount of miles driven by an average car rose 20 percent during 
the same period, from 10,000 to 12,000. More people drove on highways 
in 2010 than a decade earlier, even while highway death rates went down. 
In short, Americans are driving more and driving farther in more cars. For 
better or worse, they are less bound up in their localities and their local 
habits. 3 

The Social Network Revolution 
23
 In the air, the proliferation of jet airliners made long-distance flight a 
regular practice, starting with the advent of the Boeing 707 in 1959. 
Deregulation of airlines in the late 1970s, first in the United States and 
then in Europe, made flying more affordable. No longer were distant rela-
tives and friends hugged good-bye and rarely seen again.   Figure 2.2  shows 
that the average American boarded a plane once every four years in 1954, 
but 2.5 times  each year in 2005. The proliferation of car and air travel has 
enabled social networks to become more far-flung.  4 
 2.  The rapid growth of affordable telecommunications and computing has made 
communicating and gaining information more powerful and more personal.   
 Two major changes were the automation of the telephone system locally, 
starting in the 1930s, and the spread of automated direct distance dialing, 
with regional area codes replacing operators within countries in the 1960s 
and between countries in the 1970s. The number of phones and the 
volume of calls went up rapidly domestically and internationally as per-
minute costs dwindled and ease of use increased (  figures 2.3 and 2.4 ). 
Distance still matters, but it has become much less of a deterrent to phone 
contact. At the same time, multiple phones proliferated inside homes: Even 
though they used the same phone number, the separate phone in each 
room provided more personal service and privacy.  5 
 After rapid growth between 1950 and 2000, telephone use changed 
dramatically. The number of traditional landlines peaked at 68 per 100 
Three
Two
One
None
2001
1995
1990
1983
1977
1969
10
0
20
30
40
50%
37%
31%
23%
8%
48%
26%
21%
5%
 Figure 2.1  
 Percentage of U.S. households by number of vehicles. 
 Source : NHTS Summary of Travel Trends (2004); Vehicle Availability and Utilization. 

24 
Chapter 2
1954
1970
1960
1980
1990
2000
2007
0.5
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2.55
.22
2007
Airbus A380 
introduced
1970
Boeing 747 
introduced
1958
Boeing 707 
introduced
 Figure 2.2 
 Per capita airline boardings in the United States. 
 Source : U.S. Bureau of Transportation Statistics. 
1985
1995
1990
2000
2005
3000
2
4
6
8
10
0
6000
9000
12000
15000
425
$8.20
$.53
13,673
Number of calls
Revenue per call
Number of calls (millions)
Revenue per call (US$)
 Figure 2.3 
 U.S. billed international calls. 
 Source : U.S. Federal Communications Commission. 

The Social Network Revolution 
25
Americans in 2000 and declined 15 percent by 2006 to 58 per 100. The 
obvious causes were the skyrocketing growth of more personal, flexible, 
and powerful mobile phones, plus the reduced need for second landlines 
to access the  “ dial-up ”  internet connections as broadband became wide-
spread. By 2006, there were more mobile lines than landlines in the United 
States and almost as many in Canada (  figure 2.4 ; Canada not shown). By 
the end of 2010, the number of people only using mobile phones had 
grown to nearly 30 percent of the population and nearly half of those 
under age 30.  6 
 Starting with the opening of the internet to the public in the late 1980s 
and early 1990s, the rapid growth of computer-supported information and 
communication technologies (ICTs) increased personal connectivity: first 
on the internet — itself expanding from email to ever-elaborating websites 
and social media — and then via mobile phones (  figure 2.5 ). Because all 
countries used the same communication protocols, the growth was world-
wide. The combination of proliferating ICTs with easier air and car travel 
shifted cities into functioning more as hubs of social networks and less as 
heaps of people and industries.  7 
 3.  The general outbreak of peace and the spread of trade have driven commercial 
and social interconnectedness.   
 There are fewer impediments to personal interactions across the globe. 
Interstate conflicts between nations are low, with the U.S.-led invasion of 
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000 ’01
’02
’04
’05
’03
’06
10
0
20
30
40
50
80
70
60
73.4
67.9
57.6
1.8
9.6
Wireless subscribers
Residential landlines
 Figure 2.4 
 Number of landlines and mobile phones in the United States (per 100 inhabitants). 
 Source : U.S. Federal Communications Commission. 

26 
Chapter 2
Iraq in 2003 the last to occur before 2011 (see   figure 2.6 ). Within Western 
and Central Europe, the growth of the European Union to twenty-seven 
countries and the subsequent twenty-five-nation Schengen Agreement in 
1985 almost erased borders among many European countries for trade, 
work, and travel. Although conflicts within nations persist in places such 
as Serbia, Sudan, Myanmar, Libya, and the Congo, conflicts have rarely 
taken place in the developed countries to which almost all residents of 
developed countries travel.  8 
 A high level of globalized production and consumption has accompa-
nied peace and more permeable borders. The growth of North American 
and European manufacturing bases in Asia and Latin America since the 
1970s, two-way exports of resources between the developed and the less-
developed worlds, the economic reforms of China in the 1980s and 1990s, 
and the shredding of the Iron Curtain in 1989 – 1990 allowed East and 
West, North and South to open up travel and trade. U.S. exports have 
become more important to the overall economy, more than doubling 
from 6 percent of the U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) in 1970 to 13 
percent in 2008. More strikingly, imports have become even more impor-
tant to the economy, more than tripling from 5 percent of the GDP in 
1970 to more than 17 percent in 2008. Imports have been appreciably 
greater than exports since 1982 and especially since 1998 (  figure 2.7 ).  9 
1981
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
20
0
40
60
80
100
.9
.8
79.9
94.6
U.S. data missing 
for 2002–2003
United States
Canada
 Figure 2.5 
 Number of personal computers in the United States and Canada (per 100 
inhabitants). 
 Source : International Telecommunication Union, Table 1090, Utilization of Selected 
Media. 

The Social Network Revolution 
27
 Products now come from everywhere; indeed, from many everywheres 
as pieces from different countries get assembled into the same product. 
Consumer options have expanded, so that people can choose among a 
wide array of goods and services from around the world, resonating with 
the transformation from groups to networks. For example, a Toronto super-
market carries fruit from more than ten countries in three continents (a 
sampling is shown in   figure 2.8 ).  10 
 Weaker Group Boundaries 
 4.  Family composition, roles, and responsibilities have transformed households 
from groups to networks.  
 Fewer marriages, smaller families, and more women doing paid work have 
transformed traditional homemaker households into networked families. 
Homes have become less of a castle and more of a base for sallying forth. 
1950
1970
1960
1980
1990
2000
10
0
20
30
40
50
27
8
5
2
0
5
Intrastate
Internationalized
intrastate
2003
Last interstate
conflict
Interstate
Extrastate
 Figure 2.6 
 Number of world conflicts. 
 Source :  Uppsala Conflict Data Program (UCDP)/Oslo Peace Research Institute (PRIO); 
UCDP/Human Security Report Project Database. 

28 
Chapter 2
For example, the percentage of American households comprising married 
couples with children declined by one-quarter between 1980 and 2005, 
from 31 percent to 23 percent (  figure 2.9 ). Moreover, people, especially 
women, are spending less time at home. For example, Canadian women 
were at home and awake 36 minutes fewer per day in 2005 (8.5 hours) 
than they were in 1992 (9.1 hours). Those women with children were the 
most likely to stay home, but also experienced the largest reduction in time 
at home. They were home 44 minutes fewer in 2005 (8.7 hours) than in 
1970
1985
1990
1980
1975
1995
2000
2005
4
0
8
12
16
20%
18%
5.8%
5.4%
13%
U.S. imports
U.S. exports
 Figure 2.7 
 U.S. imports and exports as percentage of GDP. 
 Source : The World Bank Group, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, and the U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis. 
 Figure 2.8 
 Globalized fruit prices in Toronto. 
 Source : Photos from Fiesta Farms Supermarket, Toronto.  © 2010 Gregory Jancelewicz 
and Barry Wellman. Used with permission. 

The Social Network Revolution 
29
1992 (9.5 hours). Moreover, 27 percent of Canadians were eating at least 
one meal alone in 2005 as compared to 17 percent in 1986.  11 
 5.  Structured and bounded voluntary organizations are becoming supplanted by 
more ad hoc, open, and informal networks of civic involvement and religious 
practice.  
 Political scientist Robert Putnam has shown in  Bowling Alone  that the 
average membership rate in thirty-two large American organizations 
dropped by half between 1960 and 1997. Similarly, the percentage of those 
Americans actively involved in such organizations also dropped by half, 
from 16 percent in 1973 to 8 percent in 1994.  12 
 This trend toward independent lives is also reflected in the shift away 
from institutionalized religions where people go frequently to church. 
According to Putnam ’ s  American Grace , the 1960s were the beginning of 
a mass wave of interest in religious experimentation. As focus changed 
to exploring  “ spirituality, ”  there was a corresponding drop-off in church 
attendance. Today, fewer Americans have a religious affiliation. Many 
Americans have moved to a more flexible and individualized way of 
engaging with religion. Traditional religions such as Baptist, Methodist, 
and especially Catholic have declined in childhood-to-adult retention 
rates, while identifications such as  “ non-denominational ”  and  “ unaffili-
ated ” have increased (see   table 2.1 ). Moreover, many Americans are not 
10
0
5
15
20
25
30
35%
28%
26%
23%
13%
9%
31%
30%
23%
8%
9%
1980
1990
1995
2000
2005
 Other 
 One person 
 Single parent 
Married with 
minor children 
Married without 
minor children 
 Figure 2.9 
 Distribution of households in the United States as percentage. 
 Source : U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 

30 
Chapter 2
keeping the religion of their birth, but switching (or jettisoning) religion 
later in their lives. The greatest losses are in highly institutionalized reli-
gions such as Catholicism (-8 percent net change), Baptist (-4 percent) and 
Methodist (-2 percent). By contrast, the greatest rates of retention and 
growth have been in non-denominational Christianity (+3 percent) and in 
the unaffiliated category (+9 percent). It is not that Americans are becom-
ing less religious: As much as 92 percent of Americans say they believe in 
 “ God, ” according to a June 2008 survey by the Pew Forum on Religion and 
Public Life.  13 
 6.  Common culture passed along through a small number of mass media firms has 
shifted to fragmented culture dispensed through more channels to more hardware. 
 Even before the internet gave people billions of web pages and videos to 
peruse, people saw their media options growing and that gave them more 
chances to sample specialized programming. The number of television 
 Table 2.1 
 Percentage Changes in Childhood versus Current Religious Affiliation of U.S. Adults 
(2008) 
 Childhood 
 Current 
 Net 
 Baptist  
  20.9  
  17.2  
  – 3.7 
 Methodist 
  8.3 
  6.2 
  – 2.1 
 Nondenominational 
  1.5 
  4.5 
  3.0 
 Lutheran 
  5.5 
  4.6 
  – .9  
 Presbyterian  
  3.4 
  2.7 
  – .7  
 Pentecostal  
  3.9 
  4.4 
  .5 
 Anglican/Episcopal  
  1.8 
  1.5 
  – .3  
 Catholic 
  31.4  
  23.9  
  – 7.5 
 Mormon  
  1.8 
  1.7 
  – .1  
 Jehovah ’ s Witness  
  .6 
  .7 
  .1 
 Jewish 
  1.9 
  1.7 
  – .2  
 Muslim  
  .3 
  .4 
  .1 
 Buddhist 
  .4 
  .7 
  .3 
 Hindu  
  .4 
  .4 
  0 
 Other faiths  
  .3 
  1.2 
  .9 
 Unaffiliated: atheist, 
agnostic,  “ nothing in 
particular ” 
 7.3 
  16.1  
  8.8 
 Source : Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life/U.S. Religious Landscape Survey 
(2009). 

The Social Network Revolution 
31
channels went from a handful of options that were accessed by getting up 
and turning a dial (so program announcers would say:  “ Do not turn your 
dial: There is more to come ” ) to hundreds that could be surfed via remote 
control. Now, there are many more outlets, but fewer shows are widely 
watched. Changes in hardware both reflected and encouraged the person-
alization of broadcast information. Television sets went from household 
consoles made for worshipful watching by the entire family to multiple 
sets for parents and children, doubling in number from 1.4 per household 
in 1970 to 2.8 in 2008 (  figure 2.10 ).  14 
 Increased Personal Autonomy 
 7.  Work has become flexible in the developed world, especially the shift from 
pushing atoms in manufacturing to pushing bits in white-collar  “ creative ” 
work.  
 As more workers started using personal computers rather than big machin-
ery, employers became more willing to allow flexible schedules and work 
sites. This fit with a trend away from the close supervision of employees 
on blue- and pink-collar assembly lines and toward giving workers loosely 
supervised, goal-oriented directions. The decline of working-class jobs and 
the rise of creative jobs have changed the face of many workplaces from 
industrial-age hierarchies to networks of collaboration (  figure 2.11  and 
chapter 7).  15 
1970
1985
1995
1990
2000
2005
0.5
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2.8
1.4
 Figure 2.10 
 Mean number of televisions per U.S. household. 
 Source : U.S. Census Bureau. 

32 
Chapter 2
 8.  American society has become less bounded by ethnicity, gender, religion, and 
sexual orientation.  
 In 1967, racial intermarriage was illegal in seventeen states and frowned 
on by most Americans. It was only in the same year (on June 12, 1967) 
that the Supreme Court legalized such marriages nationally in the aptly 
named  Loving v. Virginia  case. Nowadays, interracial couples are common 
and more widely accepted, and the United States has elected biracial Barack 
Obama as president. There is a consistent trend toward interracial accep-
tance, with younger generations being more tolerant than their elders. The 
percentage of Americans  opposed to  laws banning intermarriage has risen 
dramatically from 63 percent in 1972 to 90 percent in 2002 (  figure 2.12 ).  16 
Indeed, the percentage became so consistently high that the General Social 
Survey stopped asking this question after 2002. A record 15 percent of all 
new American marriages in 2008 were between spouses of a different race 
(including Hispanic ethnicity), double the 7 percent intermarriage rate of 
1980 and six times the rate in 1960.  17 
 This is not a na ï ve hymn to American integration because there still is 
far to go. For example, the percentage of Americans who do not want 
immigrants to be their neighbors nearly doubled from 10 percent in 1995 
to 19 percent in 2006. Similarly, the percentage of those who do not want 
Muslim neighbors jumped from 12 percent in 1995 to 22 percent in 
2006. Nevertheless, ethnic, racial, gender, and sexual orientation prejudice 
1900
1920
1940
1950
1930
1910
1960
1970
1980
1991
2006
10
0
20
30
40
50
60%
Farming
45.1%
30.5%
24.1%
12.4%
.3%
Service
Working
Creative
Super-creative 
core
57.2%
23.0%
12.7%
7.2%
3.3%
 Figure 2.11 
 Percentage of creative class  “ bit workers ” in the United States as percentage of total 
workforce. 
 Source : Martin Prosperity Institute, University of Toronto. 

The Social Network Revolution 
33
(attitudes) and discrimination (behavior) have decreased. Intermarriage 
has increased along with occupational and residential integration. Other 
dividing lines also have lessened: To take just one example, Will Herberg 
wrote in 1955 that white America was rigidly divided along Protestant-
Catholic-Jewish lines, and this book ’ s coauthor Barry Wellman was barred 
in 1960 from most undergraduate fraternities at Lafayette College because 
he was Jewish. Such distinctions have paled even more than race and how 
often become conversation points rather than reasons for discrimination. 
Weekly attendance at U.S. church services has declined, and those services 
themselves have become more participatory and informal. Even homosex-
uality — which dared  “ not speak its name ” until recently — has become 
more broadly accepted, with a majority of Americans willing to accept 
homosexual military members in 2010, and a trend to accepting same-sex 
marriages and civil unions.  18 
 9.  The decline of defined benefit pensions and the rise of independent retirement 
accounts.  
 American society is shifting away from an institutionalized employee 
welfare system to one where people must play a more active role managing 
their personal wealth, work lives, and retirement. Not long ago, many 
workers had  “ defined benefit ” pension plans that motivated them to stay 
with their company until retirement. But medium and large companies 
and governments are scaling back substantially on such pension plans: 
1972
’77
60
50
70
80
90
100%
90.5%
63.2%
72.9%
71.1%
Non-blacks only
’80 ’82 ’84
’90 ’91 ’93
’96
’00
’85 ’87 ’88
’94
’89
’98
’02
All residents
 Figure 2.12 
 Percentage of adults aged 18 and older not in favor of a law banning racial 
intermarriage. 
 Source : James Allan Davis and Tom W. Smith, General Social Surveys 1972 – 2002. 

34 
Chapter 2
Where 84 percent of workers had them in 1980, only 32 percent had them 
in 2009. This downward trend is less obvious in small establishments, but 
still important: Where 20 percent of employees in small firms had defined 
benefit pensions in 1990, only 9 percent had them in 2009. The decline 
of defined pensions is associated with more people taking individualized 
retirement plans, in the form of 401Ks and individual retirement accounts 
(IRAs). These plans allow workers to change companies without hurting 
their pensions, and they mean that people must take a more active role in 
managing their retirement investments. A similar push toward individual 
initiative and away from corporate oversight has been the rise of  “ cafeteria 
plans ” that require workers to become more engaged in managing their 
health insurance and medical costs.  19 
 Taken together, the nine key changes in affordances that we have identi-
fied indicate the greater social flexibility of North American and European 
societies. They suggest more personalization and the weakening of tradi-
tional boundaries of neighborhood, region, nation, race, and gender. 
People can range more widely in their travel, communication, and infor-
mation seeking. These are moves toward flexible, mobile, somewhat frag-
mented social systems, and they have helped to set the stage for the Triple 
Revolution of social networks, the internet, and mobile availability. In a 
leitmotif that will run through this book, such changes are both causes 
and results of the turn away from bounded, insulated, and homogeneous 
groups, and toward networked individualism.  20 
 People Think They Are in Groups but They Really Are in Networks 
 The move toward networked individualism was largely missed because 
there were understandable human tendencies for observers to see the world 
in an either/or way: Either people related in groups or they functioned as 
individuals. Those trying to examine groups often took as their basic 
framework the 1960s countercultural rejection of group-based conformity, 
summed up in Malvina Reynolds ’ s 1962 song  “ Little Boxes ” (sung most 
famously then by Pete Seeger and resurrected in 2005 as the theme song 
of the  Weeds  TV show). The song expressed the prevailing concern that 
stifling groups were preventing them from  “ doing their own thing. ” In this 
view, members of little-box societies deal principally with fellow members 
of the few groups they inhabit — at home, in the neighborhood, at work, 
or in voluntary organizations. They: 
 •  live in a household in which everybody gathers for family time on nights 
and weekends. 

The Social Network Revolution 
35
 •  live in a neighborhood like the TV show  Desperate Housewives ’  Wisteria 
Lane 
 •  hang out in pubs, bars, or coffee houses where  “ everybody knows your 
name ” (the theme refrain from the 1980s TV show  Cheers ) 
 •  belong to discrete, group-like organizations such as churches, bowling 
leagues, union locals and school associations 
 •  work in a discrete, bounded work unit in an office or factory organized 
as a traditional tree-like hierarchy 
 All of these are groups with precise boundaries for inclusion and hence, 
exclusion. Each has an internal organization that is often hierarchically 
structured: military officers and soldiers, supervisors and employees, 
parents and children, pastors and churchgoers, union executives and 
members. In such a little-box society, observers believe each interaction 
usually happens one group at a time. Yet, as devotees of the TV show  Mash 
know, in practice, Corporal Radar O ’ Reilly; the clerk, is the individual who 
really holds the unit together. 
 Still, people like to think that they operate in groups. It ’ s cognitively 
easier.  “ I belong to the Putnam Bowling League ” is easier to say — and 
remember — than  “ I belong to a shifting network of people that go bowling 
once in a while, although some of these people plus some others like to 
go to a dance club one Saturday night a month. ” In short, a group is often 
a stereotype — a shortcut for how we think about our relationships.  21 
 There are understandable reasons for taking this shortcut. First, groups 
are governed by a culture of generalized exchange where favors given to 
one person are not repaid directly by that person, but by other group 
members. In a closed group setting, mutual help becomes a norm, as many 
group members are both givers and takers. 
 Second, prominent people may emphasize  “ groupiness ”  to bolster their 
power and compliance to group norms in what sociologist  É mile Durkheim 
called  “ mechanical solidarity. ” 22 For instance, ethnic entrepreneurs who 
have sought to venture into mainstream markets in America have some-
times been accused of disloyalty by members of their own ethnic groups. 
Clearly, groups, while providing social support, may also lock people into 
limited opportunities. 
 Third, it is comforting for people who crave stability to think of them-
selves as belonging to a small set of groups rather than as maneuvering 
through murky, shifting sets of relationships at home, work, and in the 
community. In our research, when we ask people what groups they belong 
to we get stable answers most of the time. Yet, when we ask people who 
their close relationships are, we often get different answers each time, 

36 
Chapter 2
depending on the social circles and situations the people are involved in 
at that moment. 
 Most people in developed countries do not operate in tightly bounded, 
densely knit, group-centered worlds, and much of the less-developed world 
also is networked. People have separate agendas and schedules in their 
homes (chapter 6), communities (chapter 5), and at work (chapter 7). 
They socialize with shifting sets of friends rather than being regulars 
at bars or bowling leagues; many work in multiple teams at work — and 
increasingly away from the office. They not only receive information 
(chapter 9), they also create it (chapter 8). In short, people live in fluid and 
changing networks that go well beyond groups and Facebook.  23 
 The mistake of thinking that most people belong to a single group 
became resoundingly clear on February 10, 2010, when Google sprung 
Buzz on the unsuspecting world of its Gmail (email) users. Wanting an 
internet application that blended Facebook ’ s connectivity with Twitter ’ s 
microblogs, Buzz sought to make things easy by putting each user ’ s fre-
quently contacted people into a personalized Buzz network.  24 
 Google executives made two big mistakes: (1) They assumed everybody 
was a member of a single happy group; (2) even worse, they made that 
information public. 
 All hell broke loose. People in discreet multiple love relationships were 
outed; psychiatric care relationships became visible. One American, Harriet 
Jacobs, pointed out she was a marital rape survivor, and Buzz was linking 
her with her abusive ex-husband.  25 Unlike a village, where everyone knows 
(almost) everything about everyone else, modern people live segmented 
lives in which they cycle among different social networks. They handle 
things by a combination of compartmentalizing their relationships and 
overlapping their networks. 
 Outrage spread with the speed of the internet, and Buzz became a 
top-ten American  “ Trending Topic ” on the Twitter microblogging site. 
Google, having tested Buzz only on its own employees, had not realized 
the potential problems and were apparently surprised by the widespread 
upset. They changed Buzz two days later to allow people to choose with 
whom they wanted to connect. 
 Buzz product manager Todd Jackson said Google was  “ very, very sorry, 
and that users were rightfully upset. ” Yet, damage had already been done, 
and Google had to pay $8.5 million to settle a class action lawsuit for the 
invasion of privacy. Perhaps the threat of lawsuits is why Google CEO Eric 
Schmidt said on February 16, 2010, that  “ no really bad stuff ” happened 
when Buzz had made private relationships public. Ignoring the fact that 

The Social Network Revolution 
37
people do different things in different parts of their networks, Schmidt also 
asserted,  “ If you have something that you don ’ t want anyone to know, 
maybe you shouldn ’ t be doing it in the first place. ” By contrast, U.S. 
Federal Trade Commissioner Pamela Jones Harbour said Google had 
engaged in  “ irresponsible conduct. ” 26 Ultimately, Google settled with the 
FTC in an agreement that bars the company from future privacy misrep-
resentations, requires it to implement a comprehensive privacy program, 
and calls for regular, independent privacy audits for the next twenty years. 
This was the first time an FTC settlement order has required a company 
to implement such a sweeping privacy-protection regime to try to prevent 
future privacy breaches.  27 Google discontinued Buzz in December 2011 as 
it implemented the more flexible Google + . 
 Google leaders, like many others, viewed the world in terms of groups, 
even though they mostly function in networks. In networked societies, 
boundaries are more permeable, interactions are with diverse others, con-
nections shift between multiple networks, and hierarchies tend to be flatter 
and more recursive. The change from groups to networks can be seen at 
many levels. Trading and political blocs have lost their monolithic char-
acter in the world system. Organizations form complex alliances rather 
than uniting in cartels, and many workers — especially managers and pro-
fessionals — report to multiple peers and superiors. We summarize some key 
contrasts in   table 2.2 — somewhat exaggerated for effect.  
 The new focus on the role of networks is part of a broadly based move-
ment away from Aristotelian thinking that the world is structured in 
groups and Linnaean thinking that these groups can be neatly subdi-
vided.  28 One visible example of this shift has been in modern art since 
Picasso, where the same objects are simultaneously shown in multiple 
perspectives. The change to relational thinking has been fundamental in 
the sciences. When the two authors were growing up, atoms were pictured 
as mini solar systems: electrons circling a nucleus of protons and neutrons. 
In the influential shift by scientists toward thinking in networks — quan-
tum physics — the very properties of parts are defined by the interactions 
among them. We now picture atoms as complex interactions among a 
variety of particles, bonding together and connecting to others. Indeed, 
astronomers even describe the solar system less rigidly now: Instead of nine 
planets primly circling the Sun, they have demoted Pluto to a planetoid 
and discovered that other pieces swoop in and out of the system. They 
even define the universe itself relationally, linking perhaps to other mul-
tiverses.  29 Biologists, such as Richard Leowontin, now assume that  “ the 
properties of organisms are consequences of the particular interactions that 

38 
Chapter 2
occur between bits and pieces of matter. ” 30 Scientists are realizing that 
many complex systems — such as highways, power grids, and the internet 
itself — are best understood as networks. 
 People Think They Act Independently but They Really Are in Networks 
 On the other side of the group/individual divide is the tendency of people 
to think they make choices independently of others.  31 We may think we 
are free agents, but there are others whose presence in our networks and 
broader environments shapes the decisions we make.  32 Neuropsychologist 
Craig Kinsley has even argued that the brain inherently craves social inter-
action, although he does not distinguish between groups and networks.  33 
 While networks are often invisible, they nevertheless are important 
sources of our sociability, information, and social capital. For example, 
people are often put on corporate boards as individuals, but their connec-
tions to others are one of their key assets. And when we take a step back, 
 Table 2.2 
 Groups to Networks: Comparative Analysis  
 Group-Centered Society 
 Networked Individualism 
 Contact within and between groups 
 Contact between individuals 
 Group contact 
 One-to-one contact 
 Neighborhood community 
 Multiple communities 
 Local ties 
 Local and distant ties 
 Bowling leagues 
 Shifting networks of friends who bowl 
 Homogeneous ties 
 Diversified ties 
 Somewhat involuntary kin and 
neighbor ties 
 Voluntary friendship ties 
 Strong social control 
 Weak social control/shift to another 
network 
 Broad spectrum of social capital 
within group 
 Diversified search for specialized 
social capital 
 Tight boundaries with other groups 
 Permeable boundaries with other 
networks 
 Organized recreational groups 
 Shifting networks of recreational 
friends 
 Public spaces 
 Private spaces and online 
 Bulletin boards 
 Facebook, Twitter 
 Focused work unit 
 Networked organization 
 Autarky 
 Globalization, outsourcing 
 Source : Barry Wellman.  © 2011, used with permission.  

The Social Network Revolution 
39
we can see that these boards are interlocked so that different corporations 
in the same industry are indirectly connected through  “ old boy networks ” 
(with a few token old girls). One study highlighted a small set of 16 men 
who interconnect many major European corporations, forming a total of 
216 links between firms. They carry information back and forth, help 
coordinate, and provide access to financial capital.  34 
 But even the most rugged individualists cannot stand alone. That ’ s what 
golf superstar Tiger Woods found out the hard way when the public learned 
about his extramarital affairs. When he finally made a statement on Febru-
ary 19, 2010, he said:  “ I thought only of myself. . . . I thought I could get 
away with whatever I wanted to. I felt that I had worked hard my entire 
life and deserved to enjoy all the temptations around me. . . . I was wrong. 
. . . The same boundaries that apply to everyone apply to me. . . . I hurt 
my wife, my kids, my mother, my wife ’ s family, my friends, my foundation, 
and kids all around the world who admired me. ” 35 
 In other words: (1) Woods used to think that he was a self-contained 
individual, but (2) he realized that he is connected and constrained by his 
membership in multiple social networks. 
 Health care, too, has become networked. Not only is it important to 
have family doctors who know good specialists, but the more empowered 
networked individuals also seek to manage their own health care. Beverly 
Wellman studied why some people used complementary health care pro-
viders — like chiropractors — to deal with low back pain instead of relying 
only on medical doctors. Her research ruled out individual factors such as 
age, sex, education, and income. Instead, the key was networks: The larger 
and more diversified people ’ s networks are, the more likely they are to 
learn about alternative health care providers. But information is not 
enough: People only go to chiropractors when they trust friends and rela-
tives who have successfully used specific ones.  36 
 In sum, social reality is relational. We are not a set of individuals moving 
past each other as disconnected grains of sand or two lovers with eyes only 
for each other. Instead, these relationships are parts of fragmented partial 
networks rather than embedded in solidary groups. Therefore, analysts 
focus on how these relationships and networks interconnect to provide 
resources and meaning. 
 Thinking Networked 
 Social scientists have been using the metaphor of  “ the social network ” for 
more than a century to connote complex sets of relationships at all scales, 

40 
Chapter 2
from inter-personal to inter-national. Yet it was not until the 1950s that 
they started using the term systematically and self-consciously to describe 
patterns of ties that cut across the traditional concepts of  bounded groups 
(such as villages and families) and  social categories  that treat people as dis-
crete individuals (such as gender and ethnicity). Starting in the mid-1960s, 
a detailed lore and body of research has emerged to help us understand 
how people connect in networks.  37  Figure 2.13  tracks this, courtesy of 
Google ’ s nGram program. That shows the growing use of the terms  “ social 
network ” and  “ social networks ” in books from 1950 to 2005 and after. 
Although the percentages of references to the terms are tiny, the rate of 
growth is high.  38 
 “ Social networks ” took off as a concept because it was an apt description 
of social interactions. For example, people who hang out together — at 
work, in a caf é , or on the internet — can be thought of as a group, a bunch 
of individuals, or a social network. Those who study them as a group 
assume they know the membership and boundaries of the group. That is 
the mistake that politicians make when they talk about  “ the community ” : 
They wrongly assume that all the people in Ward 5 — or all the Italian-
Americans on the New Jersey Shore — know each other and belong to the 
same group. In all but desert islands and laboratory situations, people are 
constantly entering and leaving networks, and these networks are complex 
0.00018
0.00016
0.00014
0.00010
0.00012
0.00008
0.00006
0.00004
0.00002
0.00000
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
Social networks
Social network
2008
%
 Figure 2.13 
 Growth in use of the terms  “ social network ” and  “ social networks ” in books. 
 Source : Googlelabs Books Ngram. 

The Social Network Revolution 
41
structures with clusters, cleavages, and separate ties. In addition, many 
important ties extend beyond a network ’ s boundaries. 
 We discuss later how families and working arrangements are better under-
stood these days as networks. The ultimate examples are national societies. 
While people often discuss  “ American society ” or French, or Libyan, their 
interactional and cultural unity is more complex and dynamically changing. 
Consider how the southern United States split from the rest of America in 
the Civil War. Consider how Quebec and the  “ Rest of Canada ” (a term often 
used) are continually readjusting their relationship. Consider how French 
kings, presidents, and cardinals worked for centuries to knit together the 
disparate regions we now consider to be part of a unitary French society. 
Consider how most outsiders saw the Libyan society was monolithic before 
the revolt starting in March 2011 made palpable the split between Cyrenaica 
and Tripolitania. Yet  “ society ” is such a convenient shorthand that we all 
continue to use the term. The trick is not to take it — or other manifestations 
of groupiness — too seriously, but to use the network perspective to delve 
into the actual clusters, cleavages, and connections in societies. 
 The switch to the social network perspective raises questions about how 
people really operate, such as: 
 •  Who is in what network as people make their way through a bunch of 
loosely connected networks? 
 •  What kinds of relationships do people have? Are they narrowly defined 
relationships of love  or money, or are they more broadly supportive, pro-
viding love  and money and perhaps some babysitting? 
 •  How do these relationships enable people to survive and thrive? How are 
these relationships interconnected? What are the clusters and cleavages? 
Who is central or peripheral? Who is attached to whom? 
 •  How permeable are the boundaries of these networks? Are the networks 
closed shops or welcome wagons open to newcomers? 
 •  Does networked individualism foster  critical commitment  as people have 
a real, but limited, engagement with each of their social circles? 
 Understanding the answers to these questions helps solve some interesting 
mysteries. For instance, Wellman ’ s work with Ken Frank has shown that 
each tie between a parent and adult child tends to be supportive when the 
entire family has a culture of supportiveness. This is what social scientists 
call an  “ emergent property. ” You cannot just predict helpfulness from the 
characteristics of the tie between two persons, because the character of the 
network in which the ties are embedded also affects the likelihood that 
people will be helpful — or not.  39 

42 
Chapter 2
 The social network perspective also matters because the nature of the 
networks may also be associated with happiness and other emotional 
states. Social scientists Nicholas Christakis and James Fowler ’ s research 
reported that among participants in the Framingham (Massachusetts) 
Heart Study, people are about 15 percent more likely to be happy if they 
have close ties with happy people. While this may seem as if it is just happy 
people finding each other, the emergent property kicks in because if the 
friend of the happy friend is also happy, there is an additional 10 percent 
likelihood of that second person being happy. Even friends of friends of 
friends are happier.  40 By contrast, if a person is depressed, then their friends 
are likelier to be depressed.  41  
 Christakis and Fowler have also reported other network phenomena: 
Friends are similar in their smoking, obesity, and alcohol drinking.  42 While 
these similarities might lead you to think that misery (and happiness) loves 
company, their analysis of changes over time suggests that company loves 
misery (and also happiness). So happiness, misery, and obesity may spread 
by contagion, by homophily (similar people befriending each other), and 
also by shared exposure to similar environmental factors such as poverty 
or a general happy environment. As Christakis ’ s colleague Damon Centola 
found, this may be because multiple neighbors reinforce health behavior, 
which then spreads across  bridges between network clusters.  43 
 The group ’ s most startling research report is that people who are net-
worked tend to have similar genetic markers. Obviously, the genes came 
before the people connected in networks. This finding fits with Wellman ’ s 
earlier speculation about a gregariousness gene — as his NetLab ’ s research 
had shown that each member of a large network is more likely to be sup-
portive than each member of a small network. We caution that some 
analysts fear that Cristakis and Fowler ’ s results have been overstated 
because of the nature of their statistical models.  44 
 The Social Network Perspective Develops 
 The shift to networked individualism has been accompanied by a shift in 
thinking about how people behave socially. Rather than seeing people as 
driven by individual norms or by the collective activities of solidary 
groups, social network analysts focus on how people ’ s connections affect 
possibilities and constraints in their behavior. The network perspective 
has gone beyond being a suggestive metaphor to a systematic way of 
looking at how societies and people interrelate, with its own theoretical 
statements, methods, and research findings. The field of social network 

The Social Network Revolution 
43
analysis has developed from diverse sources, including anthropological 
accounts of rural – urban migrants, surveys of people ’ s long-distance com-
munities, political upheavals, international trade relations, and of course, 
Facebook. 
 Social network analysis studies the larger patterns of what people and 
organizations do and how these patterns fit into society. It is a new per-
spective for how to look at the world. As such, it has a good deal in 
common with revolutionary changes in fields as diverse as astrophysics, 
genetics, atomic physics, and English literature — when such disciplines 
emphasize how patterns of relationships affect the behavior of individuals: 
be they stars, words, genes, atoms, people, organizations, or nations. As 
sociologist Bernie Hogan puts it: 
 Key to the idea is the emphasis on the specific patterned relationships between 
individuals, rather than emphasis on inner forces, such as personality, or categorical 
differences such as race and gender. . . . Networks are . . . ways in which individuals 
negotiate both opportunities and constraints, thereby demonstrating they are not 
independent cases, but structured actors. It is very difficult, for example, to be at 
the forefront of culture if one does not have access to culture ’ s leading figures. Simi-
larly, it is difficult to rise through the political ranks without a specific set of useful 
relationships that will promote the individual.  45 
 The Founding Grandfather — Georg Simmel 
 The Social Network Revolution took many years to become an overnight 
success. The story begins more than a century ago: 
 Working in Germany, Georg Simmel (1858 – 1918) was the first to present 
a consistent network perspective and link it to the cataclysmic changes of 
the Industrial Revolution. Simmel argued that life — especially in cities —
 was a fluid form of networks. His main intellectual opponent, Ferdinand 
T ö nnies (1855 – 1936), nostalgically lamented the loss of group solidarity 
in German villages as industrialization, bureaucratization, and urbaniza-
tion took over in the late nineteenth century. T ö nnies argued that the 
German sense of community solidarity was gone, as impersonal relations 
in big organizations and cities had come to dominate German life.  46 
 But T ö nnies had made the terrible mistake of binary thinking: If vil-
lages — groups — were falling apart, then contractual relations — individualism 
 — had to be their replacement. Simmel thought otherwise, and wrote the 
first appreciation of  networked cities in his article,  “ The Metropolis and 
Mental Life. ”  47 Simmel ’ s network thinking comes in part from his position 
as a Jew in Germany at a time of anti-Semitism. Despite the widespread 

44 
Chapter 2
appreciation of his brilliance, Simmel never received a permanent univer-
sity position. He was never part of an ingroup, and his focus was on mar-
ginal people who link different groups rather than those who inhabit a 
single group. He wrestled with how people maintained their individuality 
in modern life while the division of labor in society caused them to rely 
on the complementary activity of others. 
 Simmel was the first to see contemporary humans as networked indi-
viduals. He elaborated on how their networks function by showing how 
interactions among three persons are fundamentally different from inter-
actions between two persons. It is only with three persons that you can 
have coalitions — two against one. 
 Furthermore, interactions between two persons are constrained — even 
shaped — when a third person is there. Think of how two guys compete for 
the attention of a woman. With only two persons present, if either one 
leaves, the interaction dies. But with a third person present, the interaction 
continues. None of the three has the leverage to destroy it. 
 The Cold War Begets Social Network Thinking 
 Despite Simmel ’ s brilliance, the social network perspective did not develop 
until the 1960s. Its flourishing had much to do with the 1960s ’  zeitgeist 
of more openness — and less groupthink — and with increased funding 
for the social sciences, especially after the Cold War set in. The loyal-
ties of those in less-developed countries were fluid in the 1950s and 
1960s, with colonialism on its way out and huge numbers of migrants 
moving from rural villages to explosively growing cities. U.S. and British 
officials were worried about the political leanings of populations in 
Africa, Asia, and Latin America. They believed that while villagers had 
been calm in their traditional hierarchical villages, they would be up 
for grabs in the cities — available for Communist activists to gain their 
allegiance. In short, Western authorities feared a political upheaval would 
occur during the transition from socially controlling groups to uncon-
strained individualism. So they encouraged social scientists to study 
the situation.  48 
 The researchers all came back with the same story: Things had  not fallen 
apart in the less-developed countries. Community was not dead as the 
result of massive migration to cities. There were few isolated, alienated 
individuals. But the new social reality did not resemble the traditional 
bounded hierarchy of prewar rural life, when the village chiefs supposedly 
told folks what to do and all the villagers knew each other. Rather, migrants 

The Social Network Revolution 
45
to the cities were forming what analysts soon came to call  “ social 
networks ” — where they connected both with former village mates and 
with the people they worked with, lived near, and did business with. A 
more fluid form of social structure emerged. 
 Pioneering network analysis was also done in Western countries. Anthro-
pologist Elizabeth Bott became the most famous social network analyst of 
the 1950s when she unlocked the key to why some English working-class 
husbands and wives spent their leisure time together while other husbands 
and wives went their separate ways. The answer had nothing to do with 
individual characteristics such as age or income. Rather, it was the strength 
of the women ’ s kinship networks. Where a woman ’ s Mum was close with 
her adult daughters and sisters, those women were pulled away from their 
husbands. Where Mum and daughters were not close, those wives spent 
more leisure time with their husbands.  49 
 A similar fear of things falling apart arose domestically in the United 
States during the urban discontent crescendo of the 1960s. Three things 
coalesced: the Civil Rights Movement, inner-city poverty among African-
Americans, and a student movement against  “ little boxes ” conformity. The 
working belief of government officials was that individual rioters were 
disconnected and alienated from American society — a similar belief to 
what was driving Cold War fears. Social scientists Joe Feagin and Harlan 
Hahn found evidence to challenge this belief. During jailhouse interviews, 
the researchers found that rioters were  not  the disconnected or alienated 
urban poor. This meant the individualistic explanation was wrong. Rather, 
rioters were more likely to be the settled poor who had more of a stake in 
their neighborhoods, larger friendship networks, and a greater concern for 
protesting social inequities. Indeed, it was a combination of friendship 
networks and local involvement that encouraged individuals to riot.  50 
 Meanwhile, American urban researchers, such as Herbert Gans, Elliot 
Liebow, and Carol Stack, were showing how supportive inner-city life could 
be: When people did not have much money, they relied on each other —
 although Liebow cautioned that with so much interpersonal reliance, 
relationships could easily explode under the strain. This is a theme that 
continues to the present. Sudhir Venkatesh ’ s  Gang Leader for a Day  graphi-
cally shows how the complex webs of support and social control pervade 
Chicago housing projects, with so-called  “ urban renewal ” tearing down 
their homes in order to erect wealthier high-rise buildings.  51 
 The Cold War and tumultuous 1960s yielded a third entry point into 
the social network perspective. Not only were people flooding into the 
cities of less-developed countries, they were also having many babies. 

46 
Chapter 2
There were more mouths to feed — and potentially, more discontented citi-
zens emerged from rural uprooting, poverty, and overcrowding. Conse-
quently, many Western policymakers wanted to influence people in the 
less-developed world to use birth control — condoms, IUDs, and the pill — to 
reduce the number of pregnancies. The standard marketing approach to 
this and other public health issues had been to use a two-step flow of com-
munication: The mass media — newspapers, magazines, radio, and TV —
 were used to try to induce people to chat about and reinforce mass media 
messages. Yet, traditional marketing methods did not work well in societies 
where most did not read, listen to the radio, or watch television. The mes-
saging had to be by word of mouth. So starting in the 1950s, scholars began 
to study the  “ diffusion of innovation. ” They discovered that they could 
model the spread of influence throughout a society and identify those who 
either spread the information the fastest among their own networks or 
who were bridges connecting different networks.  52 Although population 
control has been the best-known issue among policymakers, the same ideas 
have been applied to many things: medical innovations, the adoption of 
new seed types, the spread of AIDS, uncovering clandestine insurgent 
networks, and getting tastemakers to influence others to buy a particular 
brand of running shoes.  53 
 The tale of internet adoption matches long-observed patterns that go 
through several phases. The first phase is  innovators : The smallest per-
centage, they strive to create new products and services, and constantly 
prowl for new things to embrace and enhance. They are the people who 
first started using personal computers and connecting to early online 
communication services — some even before the internet. The second is 
 early adopters : They try out new ideas after they become available to the 
general public and are often motivated by being at the cutting edge of 
the culture. The third is the  early majority : These adopters learn about a 
new product or service and are happy to adopt it once they see it has 
some value. They came thundering in when the internet developed point-
and-click graphical interfaces, powerful browsers, and search engines. 
The fourth is the  late majority  adopters: They are skeptical about buying 
into something new until many of those around them have already 
become adopters and the innovation has been widely embraced. Now 
that the internet and mobile phones are routine and easy for beginners 
to use, they ’ re in. Fifth and finally is the  laggards : They are comfortable 
with the status quo and not much interested in change. For example, 
a minority of North Americans still do not use the internet or mobile 
phones. 

The Social Network Revolution 
47
 Communications scholar Everett Rogers did the pioneering work on the 
diffusion of innovations. As shown in figure   2.14 , the bell-shaped curve 
shows the proportion of each category of adopters. The S-shaped curve 
shows the rate at which innovations spread — slow at first, picking up 
pace as adoption increases and tapering off as laggards slowly stream in. 
However, information — and innovations — do not spread evenly.  54 Hetero-
geneous networks slow things down as different types of people steer clear 
of each other. For example, primary school boys rarely play with primary 
school girls: The gossips — and flu germs — of the boys and of the girls flow 
in different channels, although enough friendships slowly bridge the 
gender gap.  55 
 Where would the key influencers be located in the network? On 
the one hand, common sense and some evidence suggest that heavily 
connected people in the core of a network would be most apt to 
spread things — be they ideas or infectious diseases. On the other hand, 
those on the periphery have little impact within the network, but they 
are often important for sending and receiving things from other social 
milieus.  56 
Laggards
16%
Late
Majority
34%
Early
Majority
34%
Early
Adopters
13.5%
Innovators
2.5%
100
75
50
25
0
 Figure 2.14 
 Diffusion of innovation as a percentage of the population. 
 Source : Tungsten, Wikipedia article  “ Diffusion of Innovations ” under Creative 
Commons License. 

48 
Chapter 2
 The Structure of Social Networks 
 Social network analysts map networks of these relations, tease out the 
prominent patterns in such networks, trace the flow of resources — such 
as information, love, or money — through them, and discover what effects 
they have on individuals. The analysts explore network ties, which can 
consist of one or more relations, such as friendship, hate, financial 
exchange, trade, web links or airline routes. Ties vary in (1)  quality — for 
example, whether the relation provides emotional aid or companionship; 
(2)  quantity — how much emotional aid and how frequent the compan-
ionship; (3)  multiplexity — the bundling of relationships in a tie, such as 
friends who provide emotional aid  and frequent companionship; and 
(4)  symmetry — for example, which types of people who get emotional 
aid do not give it back. In addition, social networks vary in size and 
scale. They could be as large as the many-billion-page World Wide Web, 
as small as a classroom, as insignificant as a sandlot baseball game, or 
as world changing as the old-boy network of bankers, financiers, and 
government officials who brought about the Great Recession that began 
in 2007. Additionally, different nodes in networks have different roles. 
For example, the web has a central, thickly interconnected core, sur-
rounded by thinly connected clusters, and even some totally isolated 
websites. 
 Google searches this web network with automated bots (spiders) that 
crawl from website to website as they follow the ties among them. But how 
does Google — or anyone — go from one website to another, when there are 
billions and billions of them? For one thing, web ties cluster, making navi-
gation easier. It is easy, for example, to go from  pewinternet.org  to any 
other Pew site. 
 For another thing, there are superconnectors — like  Star Trek ’ s wormholes 
or neighbors on the block — who know everybody, or in the case of the 
web, connect to lots of others. Although these highly connected hubs 
shorten the distance ( “ path length ” in network language) that information 
must travel, recent research on Twitter by mathematical sociologist Duncan 
Watts has found that messages reach their destinations even without super-
connectors.  57 High network density — many interconnections — is especially 
useful for rallying support and crowdsourcing information. 
 There is cumulative advantage: The more connections you have, the 
more you get. The distribution often follows what mathematicians call a 
 “ power law. ” 58 This is a variation on what sociologist Robert K. Merton 
called the  “ Matthew effect ” : The rich get richer and the poor get poorer. 

The Social Network Revolution 
49
The name comes from the Biblical verse of Matthew 25:29:  “ For to all those 
who have, more will be given, and they will have an abundance; but from 
those who have nothing, even what they have will be taken away. ” 59 In 
short, networks are not random assortments of disconnected ties, but 
complex sets of relations that channel resources such as money, informa-
tion, and love toward some people and away from others.  60 
 Hubs link people and places as well as websites. Hubs that bridge two 
otherwise separated social networks can be useful for gaining new infor-
mation about jobs and housing.  61 Weak ties between acquaintances are 
sometimes more useful than strong ties between close friends: Weak ties 
are more likely than strong ties to connect to different social circles, pro-
viding access to more diverse information. For example, sociologist Mark 
Granovetter found that weak ties were more helpful than strong ties for 
Boston-area professionals and managers looking for new jobs.  62 
 As organizational sociologist Ronald Burt has pointed out,  “ network 
brokerage ”  is about building connections across different social circles that 
provide more exposure to variations in opinions and behavior. Burt argues 
that networks are most important for finding people who are interesting 
and who think differently, which exposes people to more diverse infor-
mation. With such diversity, corporate managers — and ordinary human 
beings — can perceive alternate ways of doing things.  63 Burt has extended 
his analysis to the many denizens of Second Life, an online virtual world. 
He finds that network brokers in Second Life are the high achievers who 
provide the social infrastructure that makes this virtual world valuable. 
Such brokers are more likely to found communities that survive and attract 
more people as members. There is a cost, though, because those living in 
closed Second Life networks are socially closer and more trusting than 
those in broker-ridden worlds.  64 We can make a similar argument about 
brokerage in finding homes, jobs, dates, or partners: The best strategy is to 
tell everyone with whom you are connected — weak or strong — that you 
are looking. 
 In short,  bridging ties  are great for getting information in and out of a 
cluster of relationships. But  bonding ties  that stay within a cluster are often 
necessary for internal trust, efficiency, and solidarity. Merton called these 
different structural roles  “ cosmopolitans ”  and  “ locals. ” Both are useful for 
societies.  65 As Uncle Jack used to tell his nephew, coauthor Wellman, about 
his small coat factory:  “ We have an  ‘ outside man ’ and an  ‘ inside man. ’ The 
outside man to schmooze with the customers, the suppliers, and the 
bankers; the inside man to make sure the factory makes good-quality 
clothes on time. ” 

50 
Chapter 2
 If Uncle Jack is not persuasive enough, there is now evidence from 
Britain showing that the spatial and social diversity of networks is related 
to their locality ’ s economic development. The more prosperous regions 
have more far-flung networks that connect to both high- and low-status 
people. 66 
 Analyzing Social Networks 
 Small networks are easily visualized in a graph as a bunch of network 
members connected by a bunch of lines. But once the number of network 
members gets above twenty or so, the graph ’ s clutter makes it hard to 
visualize. The standard trick among analysts is to transform the letters and 
lines into a matrix, where each row and column represent a network 
member and each cell shows if there is a connection between the two 
network members (  table 2.3 ). While we are not going to show matrices 
again in this book, we wanted to provide a glimpse of the matrices behind 
the apparent magic of social network analysis.  
 With matrices, analysts can easily find such things as: 
 •  Clusters of people, with many interconnections among them. These are 
the true groups. 
 •  How  densely knit  these clusters are. For example, relatives are usually more 
interconnected than friends. We would worry about families where people 
don ’ t talk with each other. 
 Table 2.3 
 Strong and Weak Ties: Matrix of Who Is Connected to Whom  
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 E 
 F 
 G 
 H 
 I 
 J 
 A 
 - 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 1 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 B 
 2 
 - 
 0 
 2 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 C 
 2 
 0 
 - 
 2 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 D 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 - 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 E 
 1 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 - 
 1 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 F 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 1 
 - 
 2 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 G 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 2 
 - 
 0 
 1 
 0 
 H 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 - 
 1 
 2 
 I 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 1 
 1 
 - 
 2 
 J 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 2 
 2 
 - 
 Notes : 0 = no tie; 1 = weak tie; 2 = strong tie.  
 Source : Table by Barry Wellman.  © 2011, used with permission.  

The Social Network Revolution 
51
 •  Where the  bridges are that connect different clusters, and where the 
structural holes are when there are no bridges. Such holes can create oppor-
tunities for people to become connectors and brokers between two net-
works. What kinds of people in what kinds of positions are bridgers? 
 •  Networks of networks . If two people in different clusters are connected, 
then the two clusters are potentially connected. Corporations connect in 
this way, putting members of other corporations on their boards of direc-
tors. This is also how much of the web is structured, with links to major 
sites (internet service providers, organizations, governments) that provide 
links to the smaller sites they service. 
 •  Indirect ties  in the network, such as from A to E to F in table 2.3. This is 
how information and infectious disease spread. 
 •  People who are  structurally equivalent  to one another. For example, all of 
the children in a class have a structurally equivalent relationship to their 
teacher. Less obviously, Burton Pasternak and Janet Salaff used network 
analysis to identify a class of high-status communist-party members in 
Inner Mongolia who were routinely receiving gifts from peasants and 
merchants. 67 
 Clusters of Networked Individuals 
 Networked individuals rarely are dancers in multiple, but separate, duets. 
Rather, many of their ties are in densely knit clusters. For example, A-B-C-D 
in  table 2.3 is a cluster, even though B and C are not connected. While 
this is visually clear, finding clusters in larger networks requires manipulat-
ing the matrix using standard network-analysis software programs such as 
UCINet, Pajek, and NodeXL. 
 Are such clusters communities? For better or worse, the clustering 
approach focuses purely on relationships and does not take into account 
sentimental feelings of belonging to a community. This can be useful 
because many people wrongly assert the existence of communities when 
they do not actually exist. Despite the precision of the clustering approach, 
it can underestimate people ’ s multiple attachments. This can lead to confu-
sion. When Beverly Wellman moved to Toronto more than forty years ago, 
she taught English-language subjects at a Jewish day school. One day the 
principal asked her: 
 “ When are you moving to be among your own kind? ” 
 “ Where do the intellectuals live? ” Beverly replied. 
 The principal asked the question of a Jew; Beverly answered as an intel-
lectual. Theirs was an exchange that wrongly assumed that networked 

52 
Chapter 2
individuals belong to one community rather than to multiple communities 
that command only some of their allegiance and attention. 
 Take, for example, the network of ties among those people who mutu-
ally exchange Twitter messages ( “ tweets ” ) with coauthor Wellman. Within 
the tangled spaghetti-like mass shown in   figure 2.15 , there are six clusters 
of people who are especially apt to tweet with each other. They are clus-
tered around some of Wellman ’ s scholarly interests, because his other 
friends, relatives, and neighbors do not tweet. So this Twitterverse only 
contains fragments of his social network life.  68 
 Where do these communities come from? Sociologist Scott Feld has 
come up with the useful concept of  “ foci ” to identify some bases of com-
munity, these can be shared places and institutions, both online and 
offline. One focus might be people with similar characteristics who come 
into contact, such as an ethnic minority at work or people who go to the 
same church. A focus is not community: It is the basis for community by 
Social network
analysis
Computer
science
Human-computer
interaction
Pew Internet
Research
Organizational
analysis
Internet and
society
 Figure 2.15  
 Clustering in Wellman ’ s network of mutual Tweeters. 
 Source : Anatoly Gruzd.  © 2010, used with permission. 

The Social Network Revolution 
53
providing a shared context that creates the possibility for interconnections 
among people.  69 
 Clusters are usually regions of particularly heavy interconnection, but 
they rarely are mutually isolated. Look at the interconnections among the 
six clusters in Wellman ’ s network (  figure 2.15) . In the lower right corner, 
information and mutual awareness is flowing among social network ana-
lysts, organization analysts, and internet and society analysts. As people 
retweet the messages they have received, information spreads and those 
receiving the forwarded messages can become aware of people in other 
clusters. 
 Fortunately for society, clusters rarely are like moated castles. The duality 
of persons and clusters creates both within-cluster bonding and between-
cluster bridging. When two people are in the same cluster, they are linked. 
But if they are also members of other clusters, the tie between these two 
persons also connects these other clusters. Their ties simultaneously bond 
them within one cluster and bridge between different clusters.  70 
 In addition to finding interconnected people, analyzing clusters can 
also identify communities of ideas — or mental models — when certain 
words are linked or disconnected. Organizational analyst Valdis Krebs 
discovered this when he analyzed the network of purchasers of American 
political books just before the 2008 presidential election. His results fore-
shadowed the problems that President Obama has had in working with 
Congress. Although the diagram shows a network of books — which really 
means a network of ideas — rather than of people, it is people who buy and 
read these books. 
 Figure 2.16  shows that ideas did not flow between the three clusters. 
The big Democratic cluster has a low density, reflecting the diversity of 
Democratic opinion: Only 14 percent of all the potential interconnections 
among its books actually exist. By contrast, the Republican books are twice 
as densely connected at 30 percent. While this is due in part to the smaller 
number of the Republican books — it is easier to interconnect a small 
number — the more densely knit Republican books portend the greater 
cohesiveness of Republican partisans since the presidential election. The 
third cluster of six books in the upper left indicates people who are more 
interested in Barack Obama personally than in the Republican or Demo-
cratic themes.  71 
 The arrows in the book graph show the directionality of purchases. For 
example, people who first bought  Patriotic Grace  (top center in the Demo-
cratic cluster) sometimes went on to buy  Snowball, and some of those 

54 
Chapter 2
purchasing  Snowball  also bought  When Markets Collide.  In this way, ideas 
can flow from  Patriotic Grace readers to  Snowball  readers to  When Markets 
Collide readers. 
 There are no bridges in these networks. The individual books are net-
worked, but their idea networks do not spread widely. The Republicans, 
Democrats, and Obama readers are only reading their own self-supporting 
stuff, with little evidence of ideological crossover. Not even one book 
attracted the attention of more than one crowd; there is not a Democratic-
Obama link. So the personal attraction of Obama to some is separate from 
their political leanings. The three-way pre-election split gives a good hint 
of the problems that Republicans, Democrats, and Obama had in working 
together after the election. They were talking different languages, with no 
bridges. 
 Figure 2.16 
 Links between book purchases before 2008 U.S. presidential election. 
 Source : Valdis E. Krebs,  http://orgnet.com/divided.html .  © 2008, used with 
permission. 

The Social Network Revolution 
55
 Personal Networks 
 So far in this chapter, we have been looking at  whole networks  from a God ’ s-
eye view: looking from above at the entire structure of these networks and 
what flows through them, be it information, money, disease, or love. But 
most people are more earthbound and self-centered, viewing social net-
works from their own personal perspective: the relationships that they 
have, directly and indirectly, via friends of friends. 
 People are becoming more aware that each individual is at the center 
of his or her own  personal network : a solar system of one to two thousand 
and more people orbiting around us. Each person has become a com-
munication and information switchboard connecting persons, networks, 
and institutions. At the same time, each person has become a portal to 
the rest of the world, providing bridges for their friends to other social 
circles. With the size and complexity of these networks, each networked 
individual has to balance out collective and interpersonal commitments 
in unique ways. Facebook is a good example: It consists of millions of 
interlinked personal networks, each  “ home page ” connecting to  “ friends ” 
and interests. 
 Indeed, barring the odd hermit, just about everyone is connected 
these days — at most by six links of interpersonal connection and often 
by less. This is the  “ six degrees of separation ” that social psychologist 
Stanley Milgram made famous in the late 1960s. Although the concept 
was made into a Broadway show and a subsequent movie, the  “ six 
degrees ” concept has been more celebrated than proven, because there 
has been limited evidence.  72 But retweeted messages in Twitter provide 
confirmation. The many bridges between Twitter clusters means that 
chains of information from one Twitter follower to a follower of that 
follower, and so on, encompass about 83 percent of all Twitter users 
within five steps of interconnection. 
 On average, about half of the people on Twitter are only four links away 
from each other. Of course, not all followers retweet each message — or even 
look at them — but the news spreads quickly. While messages usually get 
read and retweeted by those who speak the same language, they cross 
substantial distances, a mean of about 1,540 kilometers (955 miles). Indeed, 
a map of Twitter links looks much like a map of worldwide airline links: 
Tweets especially travel between big cities.  73 
 The study of personal networks highlights the new realities of the 
network operating system. People are not alone, but connected with many 
others in a variety of social circles that provide them with diversified 

56 
Chapter 2
portfolios of social capital. The shift from groups to networks affects peo-
ple ’ s behavior and calculations about their social strategies: They must 
understand and navigate the interpersonal solar systems of which they 
are a part. 
 Networked Societies 
 Remember Moliere ’ s  Bourgeois Gentleman  who was speaking in prose 
without knowing it?  74 Similarly, we all have been using networks through-
out our lives without knowing it. Sometimes we need a new perspective 
to see things differently, just as it took fractal discoverer Benoit Mandelbrot 
to point out  “ clouds are not spheres, mountains are not cones, coastlines 
are not circles and bark is not smooth. ” 75 
 Networks have always been with us, although they are more prevalent 
now and we are certainly paying more attention to them. So what does 
the discovery of social networks give us, besides a new label for an old 
habit? For one thing, network awareness provides new insights into the 
structure and functioning of our societies, and how we should operate in 
them. For another thing, we get away from the groupthink that leads 
people to cry  “ oy vey , things are falling apart ” when in fact, they are just 
changing the world into a more diversified, more complex, and more 
interesting place. 
 We also become more aware that the structure of networks matter. For 
example, many social networks are sparsely knit: The fact that A knows B 
and C does not mean that B knows C. This provides maneuverability, some 
privacy, and some insecurity. But the shape of the networks makes a big 
difference in how we communicate and get information. Sparsely knit 
networks often provide bridges to multiple social worlds. By contrast, 
densely knit networks — like small-town villages — often provide bonding, 
solidarity, and security but at the probable cost of insularity and social 
control.  76 
 We have talked principally in this chapter about some of the implica-
tions of the network operating system for social life. But there are things 
we have lost with the diminishing of groups: The weakened comfort of 
group identity comes with the gain in maneuverability; the ease of organiz-
ing group-based activities has given way to more strenuous microcoordina-
tion of networks. As sociologist Bernie Hogan puts it: With the turn to 
social networks,  “ we ’ re not bowling alone, but texting our friends, seeing 
who’s available, sending the electronic invitation, and waiting for people 

The Social Network Revolution 
57
to show up, scheduling another time because someone can ’ t make it and 
maybe, if we ’ re lucky, actually getting to bowl. ” 77 
 The turn toward a network operating system has been built on flexible 
connectivity between individuals and the ability to trust one another 
across distances and groups without requiring the cohesive force of the 
tribe to punish transgressions. We believe that this turn toward networks 
will continue — barring the loss of flexible connectivity and the loss of trust 
over large spatial and social distances. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 3  The Internet Revolution 
 The pioneers of the internet did not act as if they knew they were creating 
anything special.  1 Internet communication began with a computer crash 
and meaningless nonsense. The first attempted transfer of information 
packets over a wire strung between two computers took place in 1969. It 
was not accompanied by the same kind of thundering declaration as 
Samuel Morse tapped out in the first telegraph message in 1844:  “ What 
hath God wrought? ” Rather, Charley Kline, an engineering student at 
UCLA, froze his computer on October 29 when he began typing  “ L-O-G. ” 
(He was on his way to keying in  “ L-O-G-I-N ”  to start a file transfer program 
he had coded.) Programmers fixed the glitch quickly, and after a reboot, 
the login worked and file sharing between computers began.  2 
 Email came into being two years later in 1971, and, again, there was 
no throat-clearing puffery or even an effort to match the practical tone 
of Alexander Graham Bell ’ s initial phone call in 1876:  “ Mr. Watson, come 
here; I want you. ” Instead, an engineer for a U.S. Defense Department 
contractor named Ray Tomlinson sent a meaningless test message from 
one computer to another that was sitting less than five feet away. Recall-
ing the episode later, Tomlinson wrote on his website that  “ the test mes-
sages were entirely forgettable and I have, therefore, forgotten them. ” 3 He 
suspects his text was probably  “ QWERTYUIOP, ”  the top text line of a 
standard keyboard. Indeed, the most notable thing for which Tomlinson 
is remembered is that he picked  “ @ ” as the locator symbol in electronic 
addresses. 
 From those humble beginnings, a socially disruptive technology 
emerged. Though they did not proclaim it, the internet ’ s creators built 
something that would enhance the broader social, economic, and politi-
cal forces that were already pushing people in the direction of networked 
individualism in a network operating system. The internet did so by 
enabling people to act more effectively on their own and function 

60 
Chapter 3
more easily in large, dispersed networks. It empowered individuals and 
extended their reach by giving them tools to create media, search for 
information that mattered to them, project their voices, form groups 
that served their needs, and reach out to their strong and weak ties. 
The internet also helped people broadcast to and receive material from 
more sources. It helped users change the size and shape of their social 
networks. It even changed some peoples ’ communication patterns inside 
those networks. 
 In fact, the ascendance of the internet and innovations in the online 
environment in the last decade have strongly shaped public understanding 
of what it means to be part of a social network. Before the internet became 
a powerful cultural force, not many people thought of themselves as actors 
in social networks. Now they see it easily because their world is abuzz with 
references to social networking and because they are explicitly invited to 
participate in activities that are described as social networking and net-
working opportunities. Once it became widely domesticated, the internet 
made it easier for people to see that they themselves personally functioned 
in networks — both the technological and the social kind. In helping people 
understand what networks are and what networks do, the internet has 
become a useful metaphor of the new network operating system as well as 
one of its primary driving forces. 
 In the case of the internet, the diffusion of innovation model, shown 
in chapter 2, fits well. Innovators in government, technology firms, and 
universities, as well as individual super-geeks pretty much had the online 
world to themselves for two decades. No good data exist about the size 
of the internet population before the early 1980s, but it probably was 
several thousand. In September 1983, a telephone company ’ s survey 
titled  “ Road after 1984: The Impact of Technology on Society ” (after 
George Orwell ’ s  1984 novel) asked a representative sample of Americans 
how many had computers at home: Ten percent said they did. This 
group was asked a follow-up question,  “ Do you transmit or receive 
information on your computer over your telephone lines or not? ” Some 
14 percent of those home-computer users said they did, so the internet 
population in the fall of 1983 in America was 14 percent of 10 percent —
 1.4 percent.  4 
 The computer users were then asked a daringly futuristic question: 
 “ Would your being able to send and receive messages from other people 
. . . on your own home computer be very useful to you personally? ” Some 
23 percent of the computer owners said it would be very useful, 31 percent 
said it would be somewhat useful, and 45 percent of those early computer 

The Internet Revolution 
61
users said it would not be very useful. However, 74 percent of the early 
adopters agreed with an even more fanciful statement:  “ The trouble with 
purchasing and bill-paying by computer is that it will be too easy to buy 
too many things that aren ’ t in the family budget. ” So much for anticipat-
ing their future desires. 
 Things grew slowly in the early years as the internet — mostly email —
 was largely confined to universities. By the time Tim Berners-Lee wrote 
the code for the World Wide Web in 1989 and made it publicly avail-
able in 1991, there were probably fewer than five million  “ early adopt-
ers ” of the internet in the world. Only those with specialized knowledge 
could find what later came to be called  “ web sites, ” and only real spe-
cialists could build them. So when the first browsers enabled somewhat 
easier search and display of data in the early 1990s, the U.S. user popu-
lation was barely hovering around fifteen million — but was ready to 
blast off.  5 
 While all of these building blocks were critical to the development of 
the internet we know today, 1993 is the birth year when the  “ early major-
ity ” cohort of adopters began to use the internet. That is when the first 
easy-to-use web browser, Mosaic, became available and various email ser-
vices had largely come together. Where the 1980s were the decade of 
stand-alone computers, the 1990s became the decade of connected com-
puters. Over the course of 1993, various test versions of the Mosaic browser 
were released and by November, Marc Andreessen and Eric Bina of the 
National Center for Supercomputing Applications had unveiled the official 
1.0 version. Their browser was so popular it overwhelmed the competition 
and quickly established the World Wide Web as the dominant part of the 
internet ’ s traffic. Why? Because bits stored on computers finally became 
graphically pleasing, easy to navigate, and understandable by a broad audi-
ence. Mosaic and its offspring Netscape Navigator were to the web what 
paper is to ink. The browser creators used a simple format called hypertext 
markup language (HTML) to display the data stored on other computers 
in a graphical format that came to be known as  “ web pages. ”  6 The revolu-
tion was underway, and the  “ late majority ” of Americans became internet 
users in record-breaking time. 
 Over the next decade, the internet became one of the most rapidly 
adopted mass consumer technologies in history. It took radio thirty-eight 
years to attract a comparably sized audience of fifty million Americans; 
television took thirteen years. But it took the web just four years to amass 
that many, if you take as the starting date the day Mosaic was made 
available. 

62 
Chapter 3
 Why Was Internet Adoption So Rapid and Widespread? 
 The internet just didn ’ t happen by itself. A variety of factors encouraged 
people to embrace it. 
 First , the U.S. federal government and adventurous individuals were the 
forerunners. After the government supported the creation of the internet, 
it took a light-handed regulatory role once its use became popular. Policies 
adopted by the Clinton administration and the Republican-controlled 
Congress emphasized support for internet growth and minimum regula-
tion of what was happening online. The government transferred control 
of the internet infrastructure to the private sector in 1995, encouraged 
expansion of the internet backbone, kept new taxes off internet activity, 
and supported online commercial growth.  7 The Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC) buttressed these policies by embracing the dictate of 
the 1996 Telecommunications Act  “ to preserve the vibrant and competitive 
free market that presently exists for the internet and other interactive 
computer services, unfettered by Federal or State regulation. ” 8 The FCC 
determined that the internet was an  “ information ” service in little need 
of regulation rather than a  “ telecommunications ” service that would 
require more regulation. This hands-off policy enabled a spectacular 
amount of technological and commercial innovation and allowed user 
demand and feedback to play major roles in shaping the environment of 
the internet. 
 Second, the technology improved rapidly and dramatically, which 
increased its usability and attractiveness — and hence its potential profit-
ability to hardware and software makers. Connected computers became 
cheaper and better to use over time. Gordon Moore, the cofounder of 
Intel Corporation, famously asserted in April 1965 that the maximum 
processing power of a microchip, at a given price, doubles roughly 
every eighteen to twenty-four months.  9 That observation — called  “ Moore ’ s 
Law ” — has held since 1958. Moore said the ability to pack more tran-
sistors onto an integrated circuit allows computers to become faster at 
an astounding rate and the price of a given level of computing power 
to decrease at an equal pace. Intel press statements put this level of 
change in practical terms by noting that in 1978, a commercial airline 
flight from New York to Paris cost around $900 and took about seven 
hours. If progress akin to Moore ’ s Law had been applied to the airline 
industry the way they have to the semiconductor industry since 1978, 
that flight today would cost a fraction of a penny and take less than 
one second.  10 

The Internet Revolution 
63
 Third, at the same time computing power was growing and processor 
prices were dropping, a similar trend was taking hold in communications 
capacity — or bandwidth. Slow  “ dial-up ”  access that limited users to text 
and competed with phone calls soon was supplanted by  “ broadband ” 
technology that could push more bits more quickly through the copper 
wires — and, eventually, fiber optic cables — that tied computers together. As 
a result, bandwidth capacity doubled every one to two years as bandwidth 
rose from 300 bits per second in the mid-1970s to speeds of one billion 
(one gigabyte) bits per second, the speed that Google announced in the 
spring of 2011 it would build into a system it would construct in Kansas 
City, Kansas.  11 Furthermore, international standards were adopted a few 
years earlier for an ethernet system that was ten times faster than that 
gigabyte-per-second Kansas City system, thereby giving engineers the 
room to begin developing it.  12 The cost of moving bits has fallen about 50 
percent every year. Moreover, technologists were finding ways to compress 
computer files without losing much of the fidelity of the data.  13 This sig-
nificantly lowered transmission time and costs for larger stores of data, 
enabling everything from experiences in virtual worlds to streamed feature 
movies with the click of a finger. 
 Fourth,  similar, though less spectacular, improvements also took place 
in the radio spectrum, as engineers found more efficient ways to increase 
the flow of data in the spectrum and minimize interference in adjoining 
bands of the spectrum, thus allowing more data to be transferred wirelessly. 
This — plus lighter-weight computers and smartphones — broke the umbili-
cal cord tethering users to their desktop connections. We ’ ll discuss the 
Mobile Revolution in chapter 4. 
 Fifth,  the internet remained an interconnected network. Like the world-
wide telephone system, it did not balkanize into competing, mutually 
unconnectable bits and pieces, but remained a network of networks —
 interconnecting internet service providers (ISPs). It is harder to notice 
absences than presences, but consider what would have happened if dif-
ferent services had set up different networks with different domain names 
(one having .com and another having .biz) that couldn ’ t find each other. 
Communication, information, and commerce would have fragmented and 
never reached the scale they did. Instead, even though censorious regimes 
try to ban or control the internet, they have not set up competing sys-
tems — so far.  14 
 Sixth, most internet service providers in America (and increasingly 
elsewhere) provided all this bandwidth for a flat rate. It did not matter 
if a person was emailing  “ Hi Mom ” or downloading a giant movie file. 

64 
Chapter 3
This  “ all you can eat ” environment was successful in bringing new 
waves of users online. So successful, in fact, that it might not hold up 
under the advances in tech innovation and continuing additions to the 
online population. The cost of providing bandwidth became great as 
movies and long videos began to move along the internet. Some firms 
began offering tiered services, charging different rates for different levels 
of consumption. Additionally, providers began to hint they would con-
sider managing traffic flows and imposing  “ data-caps ”  in the mobile 
environment on the grounds that wireless spectrum is a limited resource 
that at some point could become saturated. This could change online 
culture, the commercial activity online, and the ecology of gadgets that 
are connected. 
 Seventh, storage vastly improved for personal computers, smartphones, 
and corporate installations. Like Moore ’ s Law, the  “ law ” articulated by 
Mark Kryder was that the density of information on digital storage devices 
has been doubling about every two to three years since 1956, the year 
the disk drive was introduced.  15 Since then, the density of information 
a drive can store has swelled from two thousand bytes to two trillion 
bytes (two terabytes), all packed onto a square-inch disk-drive storage 
space. That facilitates many things, including the economic viability of 
massive server farms that enable  “ cloud computing ” — where personal and 
organization information are stored online rather than on personal com-
puters: that is, things like Gmail accounts, Facebook profiles, and YouTube 
videos. 
 Eighth , all of these changes supported new and compelling applications 
( “ apps ” ) that led people to quickly embrace the internet. Email was the 
first — and still is — the most important app for internet users according to 
the number of people in America who use it every day. The earliest surveys 
of internet users showed that email was the most widely and eagerly 
embraced activity. A federal study in 1998 found that 78 percent of online 
Americans used email and over half (54 percent) of people with internet 
access outside the home used email. The numbers have been consistently 
high, regardless of income, race, gender, age, or any other characteristic.  16 
Pew Internet (referring to the Pew Internet  & American Life Project) surveys 
from their start in 2000 through 2011 have found that email is the single 
online activity that draws the most users on any given day. In mid-2011, 
78 percent of American adults told Pew Internet that they were internet 
users. Of these users, 94 percent said they were email users — a proportion 
that has hardly wavered from the first survey in March 2000 to the Project ’ s 
recent canvassings.  17 

The Internet Revolution 
65
 The Personal and Connected Computer Supports Networked 
Individualism 
 We often take for granted the ways in which technologies work. But they 
didn ’ t have to work that way. For example, some telephone pioneers 
thought the phone would be used to broadcast music, news, and sermons, 
while some radio pioneers thought it would be used for personal chats.  18 
That ’ s why sociologists have always cautioned against  “ technological 
determinism. ”  People take technologies and use them in many ways —
 including some never dreamed of by their inventors. 
 Nevertheless, how technologies operate has important implications for 
how they are used. Not that their design determines behavior, but their 
design does create the  affordances — “ the possible actions a person can 
perform on an object. ” That, in turn, affects how people use them. What ’ s 
happened with personal computers is a great example because design 
choices in its hardware, software, and connectivity have fostered net-
worked individualism.  19 
 The computer is personal.  We call our computers  “ personal computers ” 
or just  “ PCs. ”  The implications of that are huge. For one thing, we nor-
mally each sit separately in front of our own computers, although as we 
show in chapter 6, there are times when household members show and 
share material side by side. For another thing, when we go on the internet, 
we login as individuals, with our own usernames and passwords. Although 
most of us take this for granted, this is a big change from earlier informa-
tion and communication technologies (ICTs). Newspapers, magazines, 
books, and encyclopedias are often shared within a household; home 
phones can be answered by anyone in the household (although middle-
class Americans often had a separate  “ teenagers ’  phone ” to keep them out 
of adults ’ hair). The internet — followed by the mobile phone — became an 
information device for  individuals. 
 The computer is connected.  When personal computers first arrived, they 
were stand-alone devices: better calculators and typewriters. It was only 
later that the internet came along and personal computers became almost 
the only way to connect to it — so much so that personal computers and 
the internet have become just about synonymous. So individuals have 
become  networked  to each other and to all the companies, organizations, 
governments, and interest groups that have an online presence. 
 The computer and the internet have become humanized  .  Computers didn ’ t 
always have user-friendly screens and keyboards. We communicated with 
the earliest ones via blinking lights, switches, and keypunched IBM cards. 

66 
Chapter 3
Even when early personal computers came along, we needed to be pro-
gramming wizard to use them and to access the internet before browsers 
and search engines. Now, we just need to know how to click on icons, 
buttons, and menus and, perhaps, how to type queries into search engines. 
Many children learn how to use the computer before they learn how to 
spell. 
 The computer has helped people more than intimidated them . Once DOS 
gave way to the friendly, graphical user interfaces (GUIs) of Windows and 
Macintosh, people began to see the internet as an aid to get their jobs done 
and to stay connected with family and friends. That ’ s what much of part 
II of this book is about. To use reporter John Markoff ’ s phrase, people 
regard the internet as  “ Intelligence Augmentation ” rather than artificial 
intelligence. This augmentation can take thousands of forms, from helping 
people find their way with a GPS (global positioning system) to fixing their 
spelling as they write to helping them do their income tax returns.  20 To 
take an extreme case: nineteen-year-old Sheila Htoo arrived in Toronto in 
2004 as a Karen refugee from Burma. She had grown up in a village without 
a computer, telephone, or even electricity. Yet she quickly and eagerly 
grasped the computer: 
 I was so addicted to chatting because I felt very lonely and desperate academically. 
I made so many new friends online, wasting time in chatting with them every 
night. I got to know many Karen friends online, formed weak ties and friendships. 
I communicated with my family through emails because my brother and sister were 
studying in Thailand towns. But the rest of my family had to travel about two hours 
on foot to a Thai-Karen village to phone me. Now I use Skype, MSN and Google 
chat to talk with my brother and sister as well as friends from different countries. 
I did not grow up in an internet-based society, but now I have been exposed and 
addicted to internet use. I do not think that I can live without the internet for a 
day now.  21 
 Communication can be more customized and private . Before the internet, 
if we wanted to share some information with one person and not others, 
we would either tell that person face to face, call her, or send her a 
sealed letter. We had to monitor her communication to ensure that others 
would not know who we were talking with and what we were saying. 
By contrast, since the introduction of the internet, we can customize 
communication so that only the intended recipient/s get the informa-
tion. This started with email, but it became true for all manner of com-
munications — from password-protected YouTube videos to shared files 
in the cloud, and even to Facebook if people remember to fill out the 
privacy options. 

The Internet Revolution 
67
 The internet is decentralized and open to individual choice. Since the dawn 
of computing, there has been a fight between the centralizers — usually 
the information technology departments of large corporations — and the 
decentralizers — people who want to use their computers and the internet 
pretty much the way they want. The civil war will likely rage forever, 
but until now the decentralizers have more than held their own. Net-
worked individuals ’ notions of personalization and customization have 
fit with the decentralized ethos of contemporary computing. Except when 
working for organizational giants, people are free to choose their own 
software and hardware, and to upgrade and modify them when they 
please. 
 The internet is asynchronous . Unlike in-person or telephone chats, people 
can go online when they want to access the information and communica-
tion that is waiting for them. Yet, when they do go online, the speed of 
information retrieval is both rapid and private, and the speed of commu-
nication responses is much quicker than by postal mail or exchanging 
voicemail. Asynchronicity means that networked individuals can personal-
ize their choice of the times they want to connect without responding to 
others ’  schedules. 
 The Internet Expands: An Early Adopter ’ s Tale 
 The growth of the internet ’ s popularity is also the story of new features 
of the World Wide Web that have relentlessly renewed the online envi-
ronment and enriched users ’ internet experiences. Entrepreneurs, tech-
nology activists, civic actors, educators, government agencies, nonprofit 
organizations, news operations, and millions of individuals have invested 
billions of hours and hundreds of billions of dollars in research and 
development to build the online world. There are countless stories about 
how users first discovered the pleasures of email and browsing and then 
deepened their online engagement as each new wave of innovation and 
tech improvement made the online environment more useful and com-
pelling. For example, Leonard Witt began his networked life when, as the 
Sunday magazine editor at the  Minneapolis Star-Tribune , he was introduced 
to the organization ’ s internal messaging system in the mid-1980s:  “ It was 
almost magical that I didn ’ t have to walk down the corridor or climb a 
flight of stairs or even dial the phone to have a conversation with col-
leagues. Once I learned the mechanics of messaging and the office  ‘ norms ’ 
for when and how to use it, I could feel my collaborations and overall 
work improving. ” 

68 
Chapter 3
 When Witt became an email user in the Prodigy online service in the 
early 1990s and later in the open-web environment of the mid-1990s, he 
saw his outreach to a broader group of friends and work associates increase. 
 “ When I had an idea I wanted to share, and I have lots of those, Wham! 
I could send it off to others instantly, ” he remembers.  “ Ideas are ephemeral 
so it is hard to tell how many would be lost forever without email. Now 
they were kept alive, not only with me, but with my friends and colleagues 
reacting to them and improving them. ” 
 By 2002, Witt had become a professor of communication at Kennesaw 
State University in Georgia and his enthusiasm for the internet marched 
along with the frequent innovations that took place as the internet became 
a much more commercial space with mass appeal. He recalls his early 
encounters with portals such as Yahoo! in the mid-1990s and his fascina-
tion that new kinds of content taxonomies were being assembled. There 
were links to news stories, health sites, software downloading sites, enter-
tainment reviews of all kinds and fan sites, and religious material — all 
assembled by humans and entered in long link lists. Those portals were 
primitive, but their virtue to early internet users was that they provided a 
one-stop shop that imposed some order on the chaos of content that was 
flooding online. They also gave users the sense that there actually was a 
world wide web of information being created. Yet, Witt remembers that by 
1997 or so he felt one-stop shops were too unwieldy to help those search-
ing for particular information. Portals could not keep up with the explosive 
growth of web pages and other internet features. 
 Search engines such as AltaVista (1995) and later Google (1998) vastly 
improved users ’ abilities to navigate the rapidly expanding web. They 
allowed people to hunt down more specific material in the mass of web 
pages that were being built. Witt says:  “ Even back then, as clunky as the 
search engines were, it was easy to see that someday all the information 
we needed would be accessible on the computer, just as right now it is 
easy to see that all the world ’ s information will be accessible on our 
smartphones. ” 
 The late 1990s into the early 2000s was the era of the early majority 
adopters. Many newcomers were attracted by a specific interest and they 
had learned from others in their circles that the internet was particularly 
good at meeting that interest. As they gained experience in the online envi-
ronment, they found new ways to incorporate internet use into the rhythms 
of their lives. The excitement of that early discovery was enhanced by a 
sense that the internet provided many possibilities for enrichment, fun, 
and work-related benefits. In hundreds of interviews with internet users, 

The Internet Revolution 
69
we have found that these activities held a special place in attracting new-
comers to the internet or enticing existing users to deeper engagement: 
 •  Dot-com retailers such as Amazon (launched in 1994) and eBay (1995) 
quickly turned the online realm into a marketplace that offered new 
choices and convenience to consumers. 
 •  Alternative news sites like the Drudge Report, which first started as a 
Hollywood and Washington gossip email list around 1995, were especially 
attractive to the early-adopter news junkies. 
 •  Online games started during the 1980s as part of commercial timesharing 
services such as CompuServe and eventually went into more open online 
spaces in the early 1990s with such formats as massively multiplayer online 
role-playing games (MMORPGs). In the early days they were popular with 
geeks, especially boys and young men, but many more women became 
online gamers as the genres broadened to such things as online card games 
and board games in the mid- to late 1990s. 
 •  The pornography industry was one of the earliest entrants into the online 
world, and the widespread availability of free adult websites was one of 
the factors that made the online world an appealing place for young men. 
 •  Health sites like the National Institutes of Health ’ s Medline and WebMD 
(1995) were particularly compelling to women, who notably trailed men 
in the early adoption of the internet but by 2000 had reached parity.  22 
 •  Online radio stations started popping up as early as 1994 and eventually 
allowed millions of online listeners to sample new genres, control their 
playlists, return to their favorite childhood radio station, or listen to out-
of-town sporting events. 
 •  Specialty sites of all kinds found new audiences and allowed the like-
minded to commune. Financial news and tips sites drew legions who were 
anxious to hear about every turn of the market and insider gossip about 
companies. Hobbyist sites of staggering diversity, especially for genealogy, 
crafts, outdoor activities, clubs, do-it-yourselfers, and nostalgia themes 
grew communities of participants. Sports sites gave fans new outlets for 
trivia chatter, dissection of statistics, fantasy leagues, and trash talk. Celeb-
rity and gossip sites mushroomed in popularity. No niche was too small 
or too exotic to be left out of this long tail of material. 
 •  Instant messaging clients such as ICQ (created in 1996) and AOL ’ s AIM 
(1997) became addicting to teenagers and young adult users. 
 •  Napster ’ s peer-to-peer file-sharing program (launched in 1999) prompted 
a new wave of internet users who flocked online to download and share 
free music. Even when legal problems closed Napster, millions of users had 
become accustomed to getting music, movies, and videos from the web. 

70 
Chapter 3
 Witt remembers all of these new developments and says that each  “ was 
a  ‘ wow ’ for me, ” echoing the views of many veteran internet users who 
came to believe that the sheer growth of the material on the World Wide 
Web made it a more compelling place to visit and to interact with others. 
Google ’ s first run at measuring the size of the web in 1998 counted twenty-
six million pages. In two years, the number of pages on the internet grew 
to over a billion. It hit more than one trillion pages in the first half of 
2008 — although some carping critics pointed out at that time that  “ only ” 
forty billion pages were actually indexed by Google.  23 The unsearchable 
remainder has become known as the  “ dark internet, ” named after the 
unseeable  “ dark matter ” that pervades the universe. 
 A virtuous circle between supply-side creation and demand-side partici-
pation has emerged. As networks have grown, the value of being connected 
to the network not only has grown, but also has grown exponentially, 
constantly producing fuel for further expansion. The growth of the inter-
net, in particular, shows how a powerful set of self-reinforcing conditions 
cascade. As more people get email addresses, the value of email to personal 
communication grows. As more and more commercial, civic, educational, 
governmental, nonprofit, and individual websites are created, the value of 
going online to seek information and perform transactions mushrooms. 
As more tools develop to encourage user participation and customization, 
more people find reason to engage with others online, and to share and 
to mash up media. In the early days, people often had to be coaxed or 
compelled to go online because their employers or their schools encour-
aged or even required internet use. In the early 2000s about half of internet 
users said they first went online either for work or for school. Yet, the 
majority increased their online activity on their own as they became 
veteran users because they found the internet served a variety of personal 
and professional needs. 
 The growing usefulness of the internet became a boon to both parts of 
the phrase  “ networked individuals. ” The internet allowed users to be both 
more  networked  and be more assertive as  individuals . The vast majority used 
email to deepen and improve their bonds with their strong ties — partly 
because they felt email allowed them to communicate more often and 
more easily with close family and friends. In addition, many used email 
to stay connected to their weaker ties or to develop new relationships. At 
the same time, as the web developed, people reported that their internet 
use helped them become more individually empowered. Notably, in Pew 
Internet ’ s first survey in March 2000, 78 percent of online Americans said 
their internet use had improved their ability to learn new things, 76 

The Internet Revolution 
71
percent said it had improved their connection with their friends, and 55 
percent said it had improved their connections with members of their 
family. Roughly a third of the internet users noted improvements in their 
capacity to manage their health, their ability to shop and their ability to 
manage their finances.  24 Those figures rose in a follow-up survey a year 
later and rose yet again in subsequent work.  25 
 A Pilgrim ’ s Progress Continues as Broadband Brings in the Early and Late 
Majorities 
 In the decade-long span from the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s, the inter-
net ’ s role in most users ’ lives changed from being a dazzling novelty to 
being a commonplace, easy-to-use utility. It became embedded in people ’ s 
everyday lives — pervasive and domesticated. 
 For journalist Leonard Witt, there were several signposts of this change: 
The amount of time he spent online grew and the array of things he did 
online expanded dramatically. He transferred to his online repertoire activ-
ities that he had previously pursued by other means. By now he and his 
wife were doing everything from buying books on the internet to tracking 
down a cozy little vacation apartment in the Montmartre section of Paris 
by contacting the owner directly through a website and email. 
 The biggest change was about to come. From 1996 to 2002, while Witt 
was the executive director of the Minnesota Public Radio Civic Journalism 
Initiative, he was producing content that would be used on the internet. 
At first, he always needed a wizard-like webmaster to be his intermediary. 
Yet, Witt soon became an active content creator with no intermediary 
needed. He started blogging in 2003 about  “ public journalism, ”  26 a journal-
ism reform movement that had started in the early 1990s. In his blog, he 
explored the predicament of mainstream news organizations and began 
promoting an alternative vision of journalism that focused on the com-
munity role of news organizations and individual reporters. He exults: 
 “ Once I started blogging, the world changed for me. I had a new voice. I 
had a new — and much bigger — audience for my thoughts. I had readers 
and comments from people on every continent. My universe got a lot 
bigger. I used to connect with many dozens of people in my early email 
days. After I started blogging, that number grew to many thousands. ” He 
could literally see his influence spreading as conference invitations grew, 
as he was invited into more newsrooms to address the staff, as his work 
was linked to by prominent media analysts, and as his ideas started popping 
up in articles, blog posts, and presentations by others. 

72 
Chapter 3
 The arrival of higher-speed broadband connections at home and at work 
was a major catalyst to Witt ’ s intensified use of the internet.  “ Broadband 
enabled everything that mattered to me, ” he says.  “ It cut the friction of 
my online work and experiences. It also allowed me jump around a lot 
more. I don ’ t think in a linear fashion. So, the faster the connection, the 
more I can jump around and the quicker my work gets done. ” 
 Witt was talking about both his browsing and his communicating. His 
daily routines were shaped by his browsing through networked informa-
tion ( “ I enjoy traveling down link holes ” ) and his social and professional 
networking through a variety of communications strategies. Sometimes he 
called colleagues for consultations; sometimes he emailed listservs seeking 
advice or offering it to others; and sometimes he broadcasted his thoughts 
to the growing readership of his blog. 
 Although Witt is an especially active networked individual, his growing 
reliance on the internet is quite typical. A crucial factor in the change from 
internet-as-novelty to internet-as-utility was the rapid switchover from 
dial-up access to high-speed broadband connections. Less than 5 percent 
of the adult population had broadband connections at home when the 
Pew Internet  & American Life Project began its studies in March 2000. By 
the summer of 2011, 61 percent of all American adults had broadband 
connections at home (figure 3.1). In the process of converting to better 
connections, many Americans were like Witt: They became different kinds 
of internet users — more purposeful in their use of the internet, more 
2000
2002
2004
2005
2003
2001
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
10
0
20
40
30
50
70
60
80%
Dial-up
Broadband
3%
5%
66%
34%
 Figure 3.1 
 Percentage of U.S. adults with home broadband or dial-up access. 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project surveys 2000 – 2011. 

The Internet Revolution 
73
serious in their pursuits, and at the same time, more playful, more com-
mitted to using online tools to accomplish tasks big and small, and more 
likely to participate in the online commons.  27 
 Higher-speed networking has also allowed users to add abundant use of 
video to their cyber activities. As larger files were able to be transferred 
more efficiently, peer-to-peer exchanges flourished, allowing people to 
send each other videos and book-length texts instead of buying them in 
stores. By mid-2011, 71% of internet users regularly watched video online.  28 
More bandwidth and abundant, cheaper storage has allowed cloud applica-
tions to multiply: People now can use their computers to access software 
(such as Word ) and their own files on vast server  “ farms. ” This represents 
a shift from the personal computing environment where most personal 
files are stored on an individual ’ s computer (see chapter 4). 
 In every dimension probed by Pew Internet, broadband users have 
become heavier consumers and creators of online material. Their comput-
ers  are the internet now, in the sense that the computer no longer exists 
as a stand-alone piece of technology. This new reality showed up in survey 
findings that separately tracked computer users and internet users. That 
early-1980s phone company survey we discussed earlier in the chapter 
showed that about a tenth of computer users also exploited networking 
applications. By 1994, about a quarter of computer users went online. At 
the time Pew Internet began its surveys in 2000, 76 percent of computer 
users went online. And by 2011, more than 98 percent of computer users 
were internet users. Broadband connections have made the network the 
dominant realm of computing, of pursuing data and media, and of using 
tools for collaboration and creativity. 
 Once users converted from dial-up connections and got some experi-
ence in this more attractive networked environment, broadband users 
reported greater satisfaction with the way the internet was serving their 
needs. In 2002, 31 percent of internet users said it would be  “ very hard ” 
for them to give up the internet. By 2007 that number had grown to 
45 percent. In addition to saying that the internet was harder to give 
up once they adopted broadband, users acted as if the internet were 
more important in their daily lives: The frequency of internet use increased 
dramatically. The percentage of Americans who used the internet on a 
typical day doubled from 29 percent in 2000 to 60 percent in 2011.  29 
The percentage who said they logged on multiple times a day from 
home grew from 18 percent in 2004 to 38 percent in 2011. The percent-
age who said they logged on multiple times a day from work doubled 
from 17 percent in 2004 to 34 percent in 2011. For nearly a third of 

74 
Chapter 3
the population, the internet has become a place simply to hang out — a 
destination for diversion and entertainment.  
 When it comes to particular online activities, the story of increasing use 
of the internet is the same. As part of its regular survey work, Pew Internet 
asks respondents about their online activity  “ yesterday ” — or the day before 
they took the survey. Using those  “ yesterday ”  findings as an estimate of a 
 “ typical day ” online shows substantial growth in the people doing many 
internet activities on any given day: 
 •  The 21 percent of American adults exchanging emails on a typical day 
in 2000 more than doubled to 53 percent by 2011. 
 •  The 18 percent using a search engine on a typical day in 2002 more than 
doubled to 43 percent by 2011. 
 •  The 11 percent who got news online in 2000 more than tripled to 41 
percent in 2011. 
 •  The 8 percent who checked weather reports online in 2000 more than 
tripled to 32 percent by 2011. 
 •  The 2 percent who did online banking in 2000 grew more than ten times 
to 26 percent by 2011. 
 With the expanding activities and hype surrounding the internet, public 
expectations about its capacities soared. Asked in a Pew Internet survey in 
September 2007 what sources of information they used to solve any of 
several major challenges or problems in life, the internet was the first 
source on the list, followed by professionals, family and friends, newspa-
pers and magazines, government agencies, television and radio, and librar-
ies.  30 In another research project, Pew Internet and the Pew Research 
Center ’ s Project for Excellence in Journalism asked Americans in early 2011 
about their major sources of local information on a variety of topics and 
among internet users, the internet was cited as a leading source for material 
about schools and education, business news, jobs, housing, weather, local 
politics, arts activities, social services, and community events.  31 
 The power of all this newfound connectivity came to a climax for Leonard 
Witt in 2008, when he was blogging about a new idea he was then calling 
 “ Representative Journalism. ” Ruth Ann Harnisch, president of The Harnisch 
Foundation, found her way to Witt ’ s ideas through her own internet brows-
ing. Within a year, she had made a $1.5 million pledge to establish the 
Center for Sustainable Journalism to help advance Witt ’ s ideas.  “ Without 
the internet, this simply would never have happened and yet on the internet 
connections like this both big and small happen every day. Every day I say 
to myself this can ’ t really be happening, but, of course, it is, ” Witt says. 

The Internet Revolution 
75
 The State of Digital Divides 
 By mid-2011, the Internet and Mobile Revolutions had become main-
stream. Pew Internet surveys show that 78 percent of American adults and 
95 percent of teenagers use the internet; some 61 percent of Americans 
are home broadband users and 59 percent are connecting via wireless 
connections.  
 Still, there is another, less mainstream side to the stories: Pew Internet ’ s 
May 2011 survey found that 22 percent of adults  do not  use the internet; 
39 percent  do not  use high-speed connections at home; and 41 percent  do 
not use mobile connections. Indeed, 17 percent of adults and 25 percent 
of teens  do not  have mobile phones. Several factors stand out as the sig-
nificant predictors of  non-use  of the internet: age, socioeconomic factors 
such as educational attainment and household income, English profi-
ciency, and disability. Rural residents are also statistically significantly less 
likely than urban or suburban residents to have home broadband.  32 
 Over the years, Pew Internet surveys have probed why people did not 
use the internet or broadband, and the answers have been remarkably 
consistent even as the non-user population was changing. Roughly half of 
the non-users cite irrelevance for their nonadoption. They say they did not 
want or need the internet or see that it would add significant information 
resources or useful communications channels to their lives. About a fifth 
say the price of computers and internet connections is a problem for them, 
and a roughly equal number talk about the hassles they have had or expect 
to have using computers. And 5 percent to 10 percent say they do not 
think it is easy to connect where they lived. One surprise in the surveys is 
that 13 to 21 percent of the non-internet users consistently say that there 
is an internet connection  in their home  and that other household members 
go online at home. For one reason or another, these non-users have opted 
out of online life — sometimes because other family members are more 
competent and aggressive computer users; sometimes because of a more 
deliberate choice to avoid the online world.  33 
 Even many internet users engage only in a small list of activities: 24 
percent of internet users say they have never looked for news online; 42 
percent have never done online banking; 35 percent have never checked 
out social networking sites such as Facebook or MySpace; 34 percent have 
never made a travel reservation via the internet and a similar proportion 
have never bought a product online; 46 percent have not hunted for a job 
via the internet; 47 percent have never looked at a Wikipedia page; 13 
percent have never used a search engine; and even 6 percent do not use 

76 
Chapter 3
email — a figure that has not varied much since the earliest surveys of the 
Internet Project in mid-2000. 
 Digital differences are evident everywhere among demographic sub-
groups. The differences often echo media preferences that were measured 
in the pre-internet age. Women often are more likely than men to use some 
of the communications and highly social online activities such as email or 
social networking sites. Similarly, women are more likely to seek health 
information online and get spiritual material. Men are more likely than 
women to get news online, do research related to their jobs, get sports and 
hobby information, gather material about politics, and perform civic activ-
ities. Users under thirty, both male and female, are more likely than their 
elders to do these things online: use social networking sites, participate on 
dating sites, play games, seek jobs, create videos to share, and participate 
in virtual worlds. Older users are more likely than younger users to get 
news, health information, and government material; buy and sell goods; 
and do online banking. Some of the most striking differences among racial 
and ethnic groups relate to communications preferences. Whites are more 
likely than minorities to use email. African Americans and Latinos are more 
likely than whites to use all the nonvoice data activities on cell phones 
such as texting, shooting and sharing pictures and videos, listening to 
music, and playing games. 
 As more and more things become networked and so many everyday 
activities are tied together via the internet, people are finding it harder to 
be a non-internet user. Even if they never sit down at a computer, their 
phones, cars, and gadgets have become more connected. Moreover, it is 
likely that many of the existing access gaps will shrink more. The age gap 
is shriveling as yesterday ’ s sixty-year-old active internet user becomes 
tomorrow ’ s seventy-year-old active user. Rural access is increasingly avail-
able with advances in wireless and satellite connectivity. At the same time, 
the difficulties of poor people in gaining internet access could decrease as 
internet service becomes less expensive and as government and nonprofit 
groups provide assistance. 
 While (almost) everyone can use the internet, many cannot use it effec-
tively, lacking what sociologist Eszter Hargittai calls  “ digital skills ” and 
analyst Howard Rheingold calls  “ internet literacy ” and  “ net smarts. ” It ’ s 
the new digital divide, where differences in skilled use of the internet can 
worsen social inequalities. At present, income and education levels are 
associated with internet skills. Yet, those who are more skilled online are 
more apt to be hired for good jobs. They are also more likely to use the 
internet to look for political, financial, corporate, and government 

The Internet Revolution 
77
information. As a result, they are better able to know what sort of informa-
tion they can find online and where, how to evaluate that information, 
and how to employ it effectively.  34 
 The Culture of the Internet 
 While the nature of the online world is as varied as people are varied in 
their moral views, their economic circumstances, and their social struc-
tures, there are certain broad elements that have shaped the internet into 
something that is especially hospitable to networked individuals. Sociolo-
gist Manuel Castells has suggested that at least four distinct cultures have 
shaped the nature of the internet. Although the participants in these four 
cultures are only a small minority of internet users, they have largely 
shaped the ethos of the online world and how the internet has afforded 
networked individualism. 
 Techno-elites , the first culture, have baked the ethic of open scientific 
and technological development into the internet ’ s protocols and con-
stantly affirmed a value system that rewards improvements in the technol-
ogy. They are often innovators or early adopters. Their culture awards 
privilege to the best programmers who further the goal of building global, 
interactive communication centered on the open communication of soft-
ware. Credentials matter less and reputation matters more in this world of 
incessant peer review. Financial reward is not a marker of privilege; rather 
it is the authority awarded by the community of computer geeks.  “ The 
culture of the internet is rooted in the scholarly tradition of the shared 
pursuit of science, of reputation by academic excellence, of peer review, 
and of openness in all research findings, with due credit to the authors of 
each discovery, ” Castells writes.  35 He could also have argued that the open 
architecture the techno-elites have designed enables networked individuals 
to have an extensive exchange of ideas. 
 Hackers , the second group, are not the bad actors who try to steal, wreak 
havoc, or bring down the network. (In common parlance,  “ hacker ”  is often 
used to mean  “ bad guys, ” but those are more properly called  “ crackers. ” ) 
Hackers, Castells argues, are the programmers who contribute to upgrading 
the internet through work not tied to corporate or institutional assign-
ments. As innovators, the hacker community is devoted to expanding 
software that is able to run on all kinds of machines and internet servers. 
They aspire to reinvent ways for people to communicate using computers 
and believe that convergence between humans and machines is a good 
thing that is fostered by unfettered interaction. They believe in innovation 

78 
Chapter 3
without prior permission. The hacker culture ’ s central value has been 
articulated by Castells as free speech in the computer age, and later had 
its meaning expanded to become  “ freedom to create, freedom to appropri-
ate whatever knowledge is available, and freedom to redistribute this 
knowledge under any form and channel chosen by the hacker. ” This could 
serve as the credo of some utopian networked individuals.  36 
 Virtual communitarians:  If techno-elite and hacker cultures have pro-
vided the technical and political foundation of the internet, the virtual 
communitarians have shaped its social forms, processes, and uses. This 
cohort, the third of the four cultures, has its roots in the San Francisco Bay 
area ’ s counterculture. Although there was great variety to the types of com-
munities that began to form online around the world in the 1980s and 
early 1990s, the early communities shared a commitment to two values. 
First, they cherished  “ horizontal, free communication, ” often standing 
opposed to culture defined by corporate mass media and large government 
bureaucracies. Second, they upheld  “ self-directed networking. That is, the 
capacity for anyone to find his or her own destination on the Net, and, if 
not found, to create and post his or her own information, thus inducing 
a network. ” In short, their implicit goal was to foster networked individual-
ism.  37 Indeed,  “ inducing a network ” could easily be the T-shirt motto of 
networked individuals. This cultural endowment from early internet users 
helps explain why the new technologies found such a ready audience once 
they began to break into the mainstream. The affordances of the technolo-
gies helped them fit beautifully into the lives that users were already 
leading. As Castells wrote, self-directed networking is a tool for organiza-
tion, collective action, and the construction of meaning.  38 He could have 
added that it is also a tool for getting problems solved and emotional needs 
addressed. 
 Entrepreneurs , the fourth group, have been the ones who moved the 
diffusion of the internet into society at large, mostly from their Silicon 
Valley lairs south of San Francisco. Their chief cultural legacy to the online 
world has been their reverence for making money — preferably outlandish 
sums of it — out of ideas about the future.  “ The foundation of this entre-
preneurial culture is the ability to transform technological know-how and 
business vision into financial value, then to cash some of this value to 
make the vision a reality somehow, ” said Castells. The increasing public 
awareness of what the internet can do for them whets their appetite for 
more. Tech entrepreneurs have made the commercial build-out of the 
internet possible. Their approach infuses online culture with the spirit of 
individualism exercised through looser networks.  39 

The Internet Revolution 
79
 The participators  are another, distinct culture that is not part of Castells ’ s 
typology of four. They are the internet users who create and share material 
online. This widespread category of influential users is evident in Pew 
Internet ’ s research. While many individuals post substantial material 
online, roughly one-third of internet users are participators who actively 
post material that is meant to influence others or be helpful to them. 
These engaged users include users who compose blogs, upload pictures 
and videos online, create avatars, and contribute substantial content to 
social network sites such as Facebook. They belong to online support 
groups. They critique, rank, and rate everything from books to movies to 
news personalities. They advocate for political and social causes through 
their social network profiles and group affiliations. They explain their 
work or worldly insights in their blogs. They mash up existing media into 
video parodies, and they chronicle their travels through picture albums 
on photo-sharing sites. They provide tips and news nuggets about their 
hobbies or their passions. And they do much more. This distinct sensibil-
ity of networked creators and their publication practices are covered in 
Chapter 8. 
 The active participators are the multi-ideological offspring of Castells ’ s 
virtual communitarians. The most active in the participatory class repre-
sent the vanguard of networked individuals online. They are creating what 
William Dutton of the Oxford Internet Institute calls a Fifth Estate in civic 
life. Recall that the French thought that society was divided into three 
estates: the clergy, the nobility, and the commoners. A nineteenth-century 
conceit arose that newspapers and reporters had a distinct civic role and 
set of sensibilities, constituting a Fourth Estate. Dutton expands on those 
historic classifications by arguing that the internet is enabling people to 
network in new ways with other users and with a vast range of informa-
tion, services, and technical resources. This is creating a new class of civic 
actors — a Fifth Estate — with distinct sensibilities and interests in pursuing 
accountability in government, other institutions, and other people.  40 
Dutton notes that the internet reconfigures these networked individuals ’ 
access to information, people, and other resources, which allows them to 
 “ move across, undermine and go beyond the boundaries of existing 
institutions ”  to seek and enforce new levels of institutional and personal 
transparency. 
 Dutton ’ s British data closely parallel Pew Internet findings in suggesting 
that a modestly sized core of online activists dominate the participatory 
class in imprinting the character of the online marketplaces of commerce 
and ideas. Much of the content they create is inspired by the public 

80 
Chapter 3
disclosures of institutions and news stories about people and organiza-
tions. At the same time, much content creation and personal online com-
mentary emerges from ongoing  “ soft surveillance ” of others: watching 
who has posted what on blogs, Twitter, Quora, and other online forums. 
 Another new reality is that many internet users are leaving considerable 
digital footprints, advertently and inadvertently, for others to follow.  41 And 
follow they do. As we elaborate in chapter 9, they search for information 
about people they are going to meet, about institutions they are going to 
engage, and especially about themselves. Not only are other users  “ creep-
ing ” and  “ stalking ”  each other, but also governments and large organiza-
tions have the capacity to surveil individuals. 
 The Evolution of Networking 
 The internet ’ s evolution has been shaped by user innovations, many of 
which have been pushed along the needs of networked individualism: that 
is, for engaging their social networks and for gathering information that 
is personally important. In little more than a decade, the internet moved 
from being a plaything of computer scientists to becoming an important 
force in ordinary people ’ s lives. As a hub of communication for networked 
individuals, the internet has served the needs of people who want to 
expand their networks and more deeply embed themselves in their existing 
networks. As a pathway to information and participation, the internet has 
provided networked individuals with new power to pursue the things that 
interest them. 
 The societal trend toward the networked operating system was already 
underway before the internet became popular, but there is no doubt that 
that arrival of the internet pushed this trend to new heights and in new 
directions. The merger of the Internet Revolution with the Mobile Revolu-
tion has pushed it even further, and that is the tale we explore next. 
 

 
 4  The Mobile Revolution 
 Traditional research has not fully captured the changes that mobile phones 
and wireless computers have introduced to the network operating system.  1 
One way to grasp the magnitude of these changes is to remember scenes 
from the  “ old days ” and how people functioned in the pre-mobile age. 
 Almost any movie or TV show from before the Mobile Revolution will 
illustrate what we mean. The 1970 Neil Simon movie,  The Out of Towners , 
is a great example of how much the world has changed because its comedy 
depends on the lack of mobile connectivity. Unable to get to a landline 
phone, Jack Lemmon and Sandy Dennis  cannot: hold their hotel room 
reservation and the room is given to someone else; call ahead and resched-
ule Lemmon ’ s crucial job interview when they run into trouble; check 
on a con artist ’ s false story; summon help or seek follow-up assistance 
when they are mugged twice, kidnapped, and abandoned in Central Park; 
or let their children know where they are. One telling moment comes 
when a police sergeant asks,  “ Where can we be in touch with you? ” if 
the police recover Lemmon ’ s stolen wallet. Lemmon snorts and tells him 
they cannot be reached because the couple cannot locate a place where 
a phone is. 
 “ Where can we be in touch with you? ” The question seems quaint now. 
Yet, before the mid-1990s, almost all phones were place-bound. When the 
Mobile Revolution took hold, that relationship between place and phone 
became unhooked, and this has changed the way people connect with each 
other and with information. Think back to some other cinematic plots —
 and real-world activities — that rarely occur in our mobile world, such as 
the examples that follow. 
 Being attacked while alone :   most suspense movies hang on the inability 
of isolated victims to reach out for help. Think of Alfred Hitchcock films, 
such as  Rear Window  (1954), when wheelchair-bound Jimmy Stewart impo-
tently cannot warn Grace Kelly as he watches a murderer stalk her in the 

82 
Chapter 4
building across the way; or  The Rocky Horror Picture Show  (1975), when the 
innocents Brad and Janet go to a decrepit house to get help with their flat 
tire — but are then trapped by aliens. Such movies are no longer credible 
when mobile phones are like having an extra appendage. 
 Coping with and documenting disasters and traumas : For instance, hotel 
guests trapped by terrorists in Mumbai in November 2008 used their 
mobile phones to access hotel floor plans, find escape routes, and alert 
friends. 2 
 Running frantically to the scene of the action to convey important information:  
 Think of Dustin Hoffman in  The Graduate  (1967) sprinting down the street 
to stop Kathleen Ross at the altar before she marries the wrong guy. A text 
message would do the same job these days. 
 Depending on others being uninformed and out of touch :  Ferris Bueller ’ s Day 
Off (1986) is a teenage slacker ’ s dream come to life. In the movie, Matthew 
Broderick successfully skips school because his parents, priggish sister, and 
the dean of students cannot contact him — and each other. 
 Getting away with capers because the good guys cannot coordinate : Pew 
Internet correspondent Betsy notes:  “ I can ’ t read the alphabet mysteries 
anymore, such as  A is for Alibi  [by Sue Grafton, 1982]. I keep on saying, 
 ‘ Where is your cell phone? ’ ” 
 Failing to communicate in a timely fashion : Romeo and Juliet each com-
mitted suicide because of the lack of timely communication. Romeo killed 
himself because he thought that Juliet was dead. The letter alerting him 
to Juliet ’ s special sleeping potion never got to him. If only they had texted. 
The play would have to be rewritten for the mobile era — but would it be 
more comedy than tragedy if they died because their batteries ran out of 
power? 
 The First Mobile Phones Were Heavy Loads 
 The earliest public mobile communication in the United States was a 
comedy — at least to one of the participants. In the telling of Motorola 
engineer Martin Cooper, the first mobile call took place on April 3, 1973, 
using a two-pound instrument that had a maximum talk-time of thirty 
minutes and took a year for the battery to recharge. Cooper ’ s version of 
events is not fully corroborated by others, though it has not been fully 
refuted either. He says he was accompanied by reporters on a walk in 
Manhattan and placed the call in front of reporters as a publicity stunt to 
a longtime rival at Bell Labs, Joel Engel. 

The Mobile Revolution 
83
 Cooper began:  “ Guess who this is, you sorry sonofabitch? ” Cooper says 
he could hear Engel whisper to a colleague,  “ It ’ s him again ” and the Bell 
official then hung up. Cooper continued to roam around mid-town Man-
hattan with reporters in tow, dialing in to Engel ’ s office every once in a 
while and asking,  “ Can you hear me now? ” 
 The calls were especially sweet to Cooper for two reasons. The first is 
that Bell had developed mobile phone technology, but had little idea how 
to exploit it. Motorola did.  “ We desperately wanted to avoid having a Bell 
monopoly of this new technology, ” Cooper said in an interview. The 
second is that Engel had been a longtime tormentor of Cooper going back 
to their high school days. So Cooper made sure to initiate one of the calls 
from a men ’ s bathroom.  “ I wanted a way to get back at him; show him 
that I wasn ’ t just  ‘ Farty McCooper ’ as he used to call me. I thought I could 
teach Engel a lesson or two with a real cellular phone. ” By 1983, Motorola 
had created a one-pound phone that sold for $3,500.  3 
 It is fitting that these first mobile calls were annoying interruptions, 
given the ambivalent feelings many people have now about the intrusive-
ness of mobile phones. These early calls came after nearly a century of 
breakthroughs in radio communication that started with wireless links 
among ships. They advanced sharply when transistors became a part of 
mobile telephony in the 1950s and global standards for wireless digital 
transmissions were established in the 1980s. Citizens band (CB) radios 
proliferated in the 1970s, affording short-distance broadcast chats for 
lonely drivers and speed-trap avoiders.  4 Car phones came into being in 
1946. In 1955, the American TV show  Highway Patrol  made these phones 
famous when Broderick Crawford repeatedly barked out  “ 10-4: over and 
out ”  to end a mobile conversation. Yet, these phones used eighty pounds 
of equipment in the early years and needed operator assistance. 
 Things took off in less than a decade as better technology emerged: 
Transistor and battery improvements reduced the size of the phones. Sig-
naling capacity also improved and vastly sped up telephone networks ’ 
capacity to transmit calls. Cell towers sprouted up quickly in cities and 
then suburbs as demand grew. Technology switched in the 1960s and 
1970s from rotary dial phones to pushbutton touchtone phones. Eventu-
ally phones could become  “ smart ” — with pushbuttons used as inputs to 
computer applications and the internet. Low-cost text messaging, using 
the phones ’ pushbuttons (and eventually keyboards), complemented voice 
calls for many users by the early 2000s. Digital cameras, using charged-
coupled devices (CCDs), became standard phone features, allowing users 

84 
Chapter 4
to take pictures they could share with friends or put on the internet. 
Increasingly powerful computer chips allowed mobile phones to become 
smartphones: connecting to the web and hosting a variety of applications 
such as GPS routing systems.  5 
 The World Goes Mobile 
 Mobile phones have become key affordances for networked individuals as 
they have become easier to carry, cheaper to use, and able to function in 
more places. With the proliferation of smartphone applications ( “ apps ” ), 
they have become more than just a phone or a sidekick to computers. 
Indeed, apps have developed a life of their own and serve users in different 
ways than personal computers. At the same time, wireless computers have 
become lighter in weight and easier to use. 
 The explosive growth of mobile devices — phones and wireless laptops —
 reflects their routine use. The number of mobile users — and supporting 
infrastructure (towers, switches) — picked up in the 1990s and accelerated 
into the early 2000s as prices fell (  figures 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 ). The number 
of American subscribers grew from 340,000 in 1985 to more than 302 
 million  in 2011, comprising 83 percent of the adult population and 75 
percent of teenagers. At the same time, iPhone and BlackBerry became 
household words. These smartphones were used by 35 percent of adults 
by mid-2011.  6 
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
50
0
100
150
200
250
350
300
302.9
0.3
 Figure 4.1 
 U.S. mobile subscriber connections (estimated, in millions). 
 Source : CTIA. 

The Mobile Revolution 
85
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
500
0
1000
1500
2000
2500
1,495
81
2,241
2,052
Text messages
Minutes on mobile calls
 Figure 4.2 
 U.S. wireless usage: number of minutes and text messages (in billions). 
 Source : CTIA. 
2005
2007
2006
2008
2009
2010
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
76.2
17.3
19.3
30.1
15.9
13.6
3.3
1.1
8
Mobile cellular 
Fixed broadband
Mobile broadband
Internet 
33.9
Fixed telephone lines
 Figure 4.3 
 Global ICT ownership growth (per 100 world inhabitants). 
 Source :  International Telecommunication Union. 

86 
Chapter 4
 The evidence shows that the value of mobile phones has grown in 
several ways. By the end of 2010, the number of American households that 
had no landline phone and whose occupants were  “ cell only ” rose to 30 
percent. Another 16 percent of households with both mobile and landline 
phones receive almost all of their calls on their mobile phones.  7 Most other 
Americans use both landline and mobile. At the same time, devotion to 
mobile phone use has grown. In a 2009 survey, nearly half (45 percent) of 
Canadians said they  “ can ’ t leave home ” without their mobile phone, with 
10 percent of Canadians saying they  “ can ’ t live ” without it.  8 
 Most demographic groups show heavy adoption of mobile phones, 
according to Pew Internet data. Yet, there are still statistically significant 
gaps when it comes to the poor (those living in households earning less 
than $30,000), those who are age sixty-five and older, and those living in 
rural areas (  table 4.1 ). By spring of 2011, the great majority of American 
adults owned mobile phones, but the same demographic groups that had 
lagged in 2004 still lagged in 2011, although with higher percentages 
 Table 4.1 
 Percentage of U.S. Adults Who Own a Mobile Phone  
 March 2004 
 May 2011 
 All 
 74% 
 83% 
 Men 
 74 
 85 
 Women 
 73 
 81 
 Whites 
 74 
 80 
 Blacks 
 73 
 89 
 Latino* 
 76 
 86 
 Ages 18 – 29 
 79 
 94 
 Ages 30 – 49 
 82 
 90 
 Ages 50 – 64 
 75 
 82 
 Ages 65+ 
 46 
 55 
 < $30,000 
 56 
 77 
 $30K – $50K 
 76 
 87 
 $50K – $75K 
 84 
 88 
 $75,000+ 
 94 
 96 
 Urban 
 75 
 84 
 Suburban 
 77 
 83 
 Rural 
 63 
 75 
 *2004 figure is for English-speaking Latinos; 2011 figure is for English and Spanish 
speaking. 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project surveys.  

The Mobile Revolution 
87
of users. But the mobile digital divide is decreasing even more quickly than 
the earlier digital divide in internet use, and users have become adept at 
typing on tiny keyboards. Teens are showing the way. Since 2005, mobile 
phone ownership has become mainstream among even young teens. 
Three-quarters (75 percent) of teens and 94 percent of young adults aged 
eighteen to twenty-nine own a mobile phone by mid-2011.  9 
 The turn to mobile phones is muting the racial and ethnic digital divides 
that have worried American policymakers since the mid-1990s. While 
African Americans have consistently been less likely than whites to be 
wired internet users, they are more likely to use a mobile phone to access 
the internet. A May 2011 Pew Internet survey found that while 41 percent 
of white cell owners go online via their phone, some 53 percent of cell-
owning blacks do. Mobile internet connectivity reduces the overall inter-
net-use gap between blacks and whites. Latinos are also heavy users of 
mobile phones to access the internet, similarly reducing their digital divide 
with white Americans. Moreover, as teens and young adults grow up and 
displace non-using seniors, mobile phone use is becoming almost universal 
in North America, ending at least one digital divide. 
 The numbers of mobile phone users are way up, but numbers them-
selves don ’ t make a revolution. As communication scholars James Katz and 
Marc Aakhus point out, the popularity of this technology changes  “ appa-
ratgeist ” — the relationship of people to digital technologies and how that 
changes the way people relate to each other and to larger social institu-
tions.  10 Pew Internet surveys in 2006 and 2007 confirmed this when they 
found two broad types of mobile technology users. 
 The first category, those  “ Motivated by Mobility, ” have positive and 
improving attitudes about how mobile access makes them more available 
to others. Two-fifths (39 percent) of the survey respondents are heavy 
participants in the Mobile Revolution. They — and their number has grown 
rapidly since 2007 — are the leading edge of the Mobile Revolution. The 
data show they are a mixture of young adults, road warriors, and telework-
ers — people who tend to desire instant information and those in the 
survey, disproportionately women, who cherish quick communication. 
Further, they are more likely to be minorities than whites. 
 The second category, with 61 percent of the adult population, are the 
 “ Stationary Media Majority, ” who do not feel the pull of mobility — or 
anything else — drawing them further into the digital world. Landline 
connections are the norm for them, on their phones and computers. 
Within this category, one-quarter of the survey population (27 percent) 
are actively involved with the internet, their mobile use mostly limited 

88 
Chapter 4
to basic talking and texting, while one-third (34 percent) hardly ever 
use mobile devices. They tend to be older, poorer, have less than a uni-
versity education, and are more likely to live in a rural area. Many 
are  “ ambivalent networkers, ” wrote study author John Horrigan. They 
 “ bristle at all their gadget-facilitated connectivity, but don ’ t give it 
up. ” 11 
 Canadians have also widely adopted mobile phones. The Telus Canadi-
ans and Technology survey found in July 2009 that about one-quarter of 
Canadians, aged thirteen-plus report that their mobile phones are the 
primary way to keep in touch with friends and family (28 percent) and to 
organize their social life (22 percent). But the percentages double with the 
young adult generation, aged eighteen to twenty-four. Nearly half look to 
mobile phones for contact with friends and family (49 percent) and orga-
nizing their social life (44 percent). 
 Although we focus in this book on North America, the Mobile Revo-
lution is a global phenomenon; mobile connectivity around the world 
has grown even more explosively than in North America. By 2009, 
there were more than three billion mobile phones in use and cell towers 
were probably within reach of 80 percent of the world ’ s population (see 
 figure 4.3 ).  12 
 Three economic factors have made global use expand more rapidly than 
in North America. First, the cost of fixed landlines has always been higher 
outside of North America — even in the developed countries of Western 
Europe, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand. 
 Second, few countries had the extensive — and expensive — copper wire/
fiber optic infrastructures that landlines need. Because cell towers are 
cheaper to build, especially when the density of mobile users is low, many 
places in the developing world have leapfrogged their shortage of landlines 
and plunged right into the Mobile Revolution. People prepay for their calls 
and share their phones. Some use schemes to put cash into their phones 
for money transfers and purchases.  13 
 Third, mobile phones are crucial in less-developed countries because 
they are often the first means of telecommunications that people have 
ever had. While mobile phones increase connectivity to people in the 
developed world, they provide even greater improvements in connec-
tivity and social capital in the less-developed world. They intensify 
contact with dispersed family members, expand networks, and enhance 
sociability and support. They substitute for often-difficult travel, provide 
price information to marketers, and extend business and family 
relations.  14 

The Mobile Revolution 
89
 By 2011, more than three-quarters of the world ’ s mobile phones were 
in less-developed countries, with China alone having some 879 million 
subscribers (and even more users of shared phones).  15  “ For you, it was 
incremental — here it is revolutionary, ” asserts Isaac Nsereko of Africa ’ s 
largest mobile operator, MTN.  16 
 Texting Joins Talking 
 There was comparatively little public and media fanfare in North America 
about the increasing adoption of mobile phones until users started doing 
un-phonelike things on their handheld devices in the late 2000s. The most 
prominent of those has been texting, also called SMS for  “ short message 
service. ”  The first texting schemes were created in the late 1980s as data 
additions to the emerging mobile phone market.  17 Texting took off when 
pricing plans in Europe and a decade later in the United States started 
applying relatively cheap rates to 160-character text messages. 
 Pew Internet surveys show how texting became a mainstream activity 
for all types of Americans between the spring of 2006 and the spring of 
2011, nearly doubling from 31 percent of the population age eighteen and 
over to 59 percent. As is the case for mobile phone ownership itself, older, 
poorer, and rural people text the least. Yet, most demographic groups 
doubled or tripled their texting in this short period. 
 Teens are especially networked via texting. A 2011 Pew Internet survey 
of those ages twelve to seventeen shows that the average teen texter sends 
and receives fifty texts a day (1,500 per month) and one third handle 
double that volume — over three thousand per month. About two-thirds of 
all teens use text messaging,  “ mostly due to its simplicity as well as the 
privacy of being able to communicate without being heard, ” says Amanda 
Lenhart, the principal author of the Pew Internet report.  “ If teens are a 
leader for America, then we are moving to a text-based communication 
system. For them, there is less interest in talking. ”  18 
 With increased texting, the sheer volume of communication greatly 
increases, and individuals become more networked. Each new communica-
tions medium adds onto people ’ s connectivity. It doesn ’ t fully replace the 
old media — so that the total amount of communication goes up using a 
greater variety. Pew Internet surveys show that all forms of mobile com-
munication have overtaken the frequency of other kinds of ICTs (informa-
tion and communication technologies) and even in-person contact — and 
on mobile phones texting has overtaken talking as the most frequently 
used teen communication. 

90 
Chapter 4
 The data about teens are the most compelling, as table 4.2 shows. When 
asked about the ways in which they communicate with friends outside 
school on a daily basis: 54 percent of all those ages twelve to seventeen 
say they used texting on a daily basis; 38 percent use mobile voice contact 
daily; 33 percent say face-to-face meetings outside school daily; 30 percent 
report talking on a landline telephone daily; 25 percent use daily contact 
through social network sites like Facebook; 24 percent use instant messag-
ing. By contrast to longstanding patterns, email is the least used commu-
nication activity, with only 11 percent reporting that they use it on a daily 
basis. 
 Teens prefer mobile texting and talking because they can do it privately 
from their personal phones, and because texting is unobtrusive — it can be 
done silently while in a class, out with friends, or even at home with 
parents. Unlike phone chats, texting can be asynchronous: Busy teens can 
leave messages for each other. More than any other age group, teens need 
to be both individualists and networked. They want to forge their own 
 Table 4.2 
 Percentage of U.S. Adults Who Send or Receive Text Messages  
 March 2006 
 May 2011 
 All 
 31% 
 61% 
 Men 
 31 
 61 
 Women 
 29 
 60 
 Whites 
 26 
 56 
 Blacks 
 39 
 68 
 Latino* 
 47 
 71 
 Ages 18 – 29 
 56 
 89 
 Ages 30 – 49 
 37 
 77 
 Ages 50 – 64 
 18 
 48 
 Ages 65+ 
 3 
 13 
 < $30,000 
 23 
 52 
 $30K – $50K 
 34 
 64 
 $50K – $75K 
 35 
 67 
 $75,000+ 
 42 
 80 
 Urban 
 33 
 61 
 Suburban 
 31 
 58 
 Rural 
 22 
 47 
 *2006 figure is for English-speaking Latinos; 2011 figure is for English and Spanish 
speaking. 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project surveys.  

The Mobile Revolution 
91
identities independently from their parents. Yet, they have real social, 
instrumental, and nurturance needs for connections to their peers — and 
also to their parents. 
 Teens and young adults also use their mobile phones to micro-coordi-
nate their lives. Information scientist Rhonda McEwen found that Toronto 
undergraduates do not use landlines to call close friends even if it is avail-
able. Although three-quarters of those surveyed had access to a landline, 
four-fifths of them would still call a mobile number even if they knew the 
recipient was within range of a landline. Yet Toronto teens perform an 
ambivalent approach-avoidance duet when they meet others. They imme-
diately exchange mobile phone numbers, but they implicitly understand 
that neither will call the other until the relationship becomes more serious. 
In general, teens see the mobile phone as an instrument of intimacy. 
They use Facebook and instant messaging for more distant or newer 
relationships.  19 
 Beyond Talking and Texting: The Smartphone 
 The evolution of the mobile phone hasn ’ t stopped with texting. In the 
mid- to late 2000s, there was a convergence of improvements in com-
puting, storage, and radio-spectrum management that made mobile con-
nectivity easier and cheaper. Phones themselves became more versatile 
as cameras were added and apps were developed. These turned the 
former two-pound  “ mobile ” calling device into a light, compact multi-
functional Swiss Army – style tool, able to communicate, browse, create, 
and amuse — and to be in touch with social networks in an instant 
( table 4.3 ). The social-sharing functions were becoming particularly 
 Table 4.3 
 Percentage of Mobile Users Who Use Their Phones for These Activities 
 2007 
 2009 
 2010 
 2011 
 Take picture 
 76 
 85 
 Texting 
 58 
 68 
 72 
 85 
 Access internet 
 19 
 32 
 38 
 51 
 Record video 
 18 
 19 
 34 
 40 
 Play music 
 17 
 29 
 34 
 39 
 Email 
 19 
 29 
 34 
 44 
 Play game 
 27 
 27 
 34 
 41 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project surveys.  

92 
Chapter 4
important to mobile phone users by mid-2011 as they sent photos and 
videos to others (74 percent) or posted them online (31 percent), accessed 
social networking sites (48 percent) and Twitter or other status-updating 
sites (20 percent), and even made charitable contributions via text (10 
percent). 
 This expanding functionality makes mobile phones useful in new ways. 
In Toronto, disgruntled transit riders have made a habit of photographing 
sleeping station agents and bus drivers taking coffee breaks. They actively 
share their photos with newspapers to force more customer-oriented 
service. In response, the transit operators set up a counter-Facebook site, 
 “ Toronto Transit Operators against Public Harassment, ” where they post 
pictures of obnoxious riders.  20 
 There is another story to tell in the emergence of mobile apps, first 
widely introduced by the iPhone but now being built by the many thou-
sands to serve a growing number of smartphones with customized infor-
mation, games, and other activities.  “ If the cell phone kept us connected 
to each other, then the smartphone kept us connected to the world, ” 
muses  eWeek  editor Debra Donston. Easy-to-use apps are leading to vastly 
increased and diversified mobile phone use.  21 The first Pew Internet survey 
on the subject in the spring of 2010 showed that 35 percent of all U.S. 
adults — or 43 percent of mobile phone owners — have apps on their 
phones. Supporting data from the Nielsen Mobile Insights group looked 
at the subpopulation of those who had downloaded an app in a month. 
The most popular apps are games (especially puzzle/strategy games, card 
games, and arcade games), social media websites, maps and directions, 
and weather reports.  22 
 Yet, for all the developers ’ media excitement about the apps, many 
mobile users are not fully plugged into this world: The Pew Internet survey 
found that 11 percent of mobile owners do not know if they have apps on 
their phone; only 24 percent of Americans actually use the apps on their 
phones (even though 35 percent say they have apps on their phones); and 
18 percent of those who have apps do not know how many apps they have 
on their phones. 
 That situation will, of course, change as people become familiar with 
all the capabilities that are being built into smartphones. Indeed, it was 
not farfetched for  PC World  writer Jeff Bergolucci to write that multifunc-
tional smartphones will likely eventually kill off several major stand-alone 
consumer technologies: MP3 music players like iPods, portable game con-
soles; point-and-shoot cameras; personal video players; voice recorders; 
portable GPS navigation devices; personal digital assistants; wristwatches; 

The Mobile Revolution 
93
paper maps; and 411 directory assistance services.  23 The rise of smart-
phones and the surrounding apps ecology has prompted spirited debate 
about whether non-web exchanges that run on the internet but not on 
the web — such as mobile apps, peer-to-peer services, video exchanges, and 
downloads — would supplant web applications as the dominant form of 
media and communication exchanges.  Wired magazine kicked off the 
debate with a provocative cover story,  “ The Web is Dead. Long Live the 
Internet, ”  laying out a credible scenario where people turn away from 
the sprawling, browser-based, search-oriented web in their search and 
content-creation activities toward the more customized world of non-web, 
mobile apps. The argument about the validity of its thesis rages on through 
this writing.  24 
 Computers Have Become Mobile and Wireless 
 Do a stimulus-response test: Ask people what their personal computers are 
for, and they will usually say  “ the internet. ” That ’ s not always been so. It ’ s 
only in the past fifteen years that computer use has become synonymous 
with internet use. When the Pew Research Center for The People  & The 
Press did its first internet-related survey in 1996, only 19 percent of com-
puter users were also internet users. Most used their computers for stand-
alone programs: word processing and spreadsheets. Yet, by the spring of 
2011, 98 percent of computer users were internet users. In effect, the inter-
net had become the computer.  25 
 Even now, many personal computers are tethered to the internet via 
cables: reliable and secure. Yet wireless connectivity is now something a 
majority of Americans enjoy. When the Pew Internet project adds up the 
number of laptop owners who connect through a wireless card — 88 percent 
of laptop owners — and the number of smartphone owners who connect 
with their mobile handhelds, the project finds that 63 percent of all 
Americans are wireless connectors, as of mid-2011. Wireless access has 
allowed the internet to travel with users, so much so that many Ameri-
cans use multiple devices to connect to the internet. For instance, 32 
percent of Americans said in a mid-2011 Pew Internet survey that they 
have gone online wirelessly using both their mobile phones and their 
laptops. Some of coauthor Wellman ’ s students sit with both a laptop and 
a smartphone at their seats: one to take notes and the other to chat with 
their friends. 
 This greater use of mobile connectivity has also encouraged greater 
internet use. Wireless users are substantially more likely than those who 

94 
Chapter 4
only have broadband landlines to do more internet activities. Among other 
things, Pew Internet surveys have shown that mobile connectors are 41 
percent more likely to be online news consumers than those who only 
have fixed, wired broadband connections; 64 percent more likely to have 
done online banking; and 92 percent more likely to have made a charitable 
donation online.  26 
 Living in the Cloud 
 People can do some things by themselves with a portable computer. Just 
as in the old days, they can write a document or analyze spreadsheets. 
And with minimal internet access, they can send emails and instant mes-
sages or browse the web. But to do anything more heavy duty, they need 
access to software and materials that are stored online, in the  “ cloud. ” 
Cloud computing applications became popular in the early 2000s. Still, 
it wasn ’ t until MySpace and Facebook took off that people started living 
in the cloud — often without realizing it. The general technology to  “ push ” 
to people the digital material they might like had existed for many years, 
but the  “ killer app ” for that function did not arise until social networking 
sites made this push compelling by allowing it to help users answer the 
question:  “ What are my friends doing now? ” At the same time, cloud 
functions have become more compelling with the rise of mobile con-
nectivity because they enable people to have access to their files and 
business applications wherever they can grab a connected device — or pull 
out one from their bag. And they can work together, using a shared 
password to coedit a document or edit an online calendar showing when 
they are available. 
 Using the cloud has its risks: Cloud-service companies may disappear; 
the internet connection can go down; surveillance is easier; cracking (the 
odious form of hacking) and identity- and data-theft can be more devastat-
ing. For example, Gmail has gone down at critical moments for some users. 
In October 2009, the wireless phone company T-Mobile wrote to its cus-
tomers that  “ personal information stored on your [mobile] device — such 
as contacts, calendar entries, to-do lists or photos — that is no longer on 
your Sidekick almost certainly has been lost as a result of a server failure 
at Microsoft/Danger. ” Microsoft Danger ’ s servers had crashed days before 
without backup copies of users ’ items. Another privacy invasion occurred 
when hackers took over Twitter on December 17, 2009, replacing its 
content with:  “ THIS SITE HAS BEEN HACKED BY IRANIAN CYBER ARMY 
iRANiAN.CYBER.ARMY@GMAIL.COM. ”  27 

The Mobile Revolution 
95
 Continuous Access and Hyperconnectivity 
 The Mobile Revolution has extended the cultural changes that were already 
underway as the Social Network and Internet Revolutions took hold. A 
large number of people have emerged who are almost always online or 
on their mobile phones: available to others, capable of searching for 
information, and usually able to create online material if they wish. They 
have built continuous access into their lifestyles and expectations. Addi-
tionally, their access nudges them into an internet-first frame of mind, 
encouraging them to use their smartphones, laptops, or desktops to access 
the internet when they have a question to research or something to 
publish — a status update, a picture, a video. This level of connectedness 
also leads them to prefer to text and chat on mobile phones as they share 
their stories. 
 The small size of mobile phones also gives users a sense that their 
social networks are easily accessible wherever they are: The diminutive 
device potently symbolizes a network in their pocket. Some 84 percent 
of cell-owning teens say in a Pew Internet survey that they take their 
phones to bed with them to make sure they are aware of messages and 
status updates throughout the night. Others confess that their phone is 
part of their body. As sociologist Manuel Castells argues:  “ We now have 
a wireless skin overlaid on the practices of our lives, so that we are in 
ourselves and in our networks at the same time. We never quit the net-
works, and the networks never quit us; this is the real coming of age of 
the networked society. . . . People can now build their own information 
systems. ”  28 
 This easy and constant accessibility changes how people relate. For 
networked individuals, this switch to perpetual access that is untethered 
from places gives them more control of their outreach to others and their 
availability to others. This also affects people ’ s sense of time, place, pres-
ence, and social connectedness. This, in turn, leads to new notions about 
when it is possible — and permissible — to be in touch with others. People ’ s 
expectations about the availability and findability of others have sharply 
expanded since the Mobile Revolution began. In one poignant example, 
researchers Scott Campbell and Michael Kelley have shown how alcoholics 
and their mentors are always on call to each other for moral support and 
expertise.  29 
 For better or worse, mobile hyperconnectivity means that people do 
not have to walk — or sit — alone. They are  networked  individuals. At 
times, people use their mobile phones to communicate to onlookers 

96 
Chapter 4
that they have friends and that they are not lonely losers. They may 
physically be alone, but they are not socially lonely. At times, they 
even fake it. Some 13 percent of U.S. adult cell owners say they have 
pretended to be using their phone in order to avoid interacting with 
other people around them.  30 Others have pretended to be on their 
phone when they feel endangered and want to ward off trouble. More-
over, as people use their mobile phones to reduce loneliness or kill 
boredom (as 42 percent of U.S. adults have), they reinforce their exist-
ing relationships. This intensification creates a cocoon-like zone of inti-
macy in which people can continuously maintain their relationships 
with others who they have already encountered. Thus, mobile phones 
both liberate and reassure. 
 Controlling the Volume and Social Interactions 
 The reality of perpetual connectivity is well suited to networked indi-
viduals because it greatly increases their opportunities to network. But 
what about what sociologists call  “ work-life balance ” ? Language scholar 
Naomi Barron notes that mobile communication — combined with caller 
ID, voicemail, away messages, and other technologies — allows people to 
 “ control the volume ” in their social lives. They can turn their phone 
on and off, screen their calls, or manage others ’ expectations about their 
availability. Yet, the same power that they have to regulate the access 
others have to them means that they need to work harder to gain access 
to others. 
 The expectation and reality of perpetual access also creates stresses. 
Jeremiah, a tech-sector worker interviewed by Pew Internet (who only 
wanted us to use his first name) described his evolution as a manager of 
his social relationships. When he first bought a mobile phone in 1997, he 
was  “ on on on all the time, and it didn ’ t matter who I bothered or who 
called me at any hour. ” He says it was intoxicating to be plugged into his 
social and work environments  “ 365/52/7/24/1440 ” — every minute of every 
day of the year. Then, as more of his colleagues got mobile phones, the 
number of calls began to rise, and the number of overlapping or back-to-
back-to-back interruptions started growing. He recalls:  “ I finally lost it 
sometime in 2000 when I got a middle-of-the-night call [in San Francisco] 
from someone in Asia and I started screaming,  ‘ Don ’ t you know what time 
it is here? ’ and the guy replied,  ‘ I thought you were close to my time zone 
in Singapore. ’ I realized he didn ’ t know where I was and didn ’ t particularly 
care. ” 

The Mobile Revolution 
97
 From that point onward, Jeremiah began to regulate his accessibility. 
First, he started using email  “ away ”  messages to inform others when he 
was focusing on particular tasks and to reduce the pressure he felt to 
respond quickly to all emails — both work and personal. After that, he 
likewise used away messages on his mobile phone to let callers know what 
he was doing and when he would be able to receive and respond to voice-
mail messages. He also created several email accounts to share with close 
friends and colleagues to allow them different pathways to him that he 
monitored more frequently.  “ In the beginning, some of my friends were 
insulted that I was actually daring to limit their access to me, ” he explains. 
 “ Over time, though, I think they began to face the same time-management 
hassles and adopted my self-defense techniques. They definitely stopped 
bitching to me about my strategies to get a little more control over my 
time. ” 
 When Facebook opened up to the general public in 2006, Jeremiah 
created a profile that was designed to be a  “ public address system ” about 
his whereabouts and availability. He says that by posting status updates 
regularly on Facebook, he could announce his  “ office hours and office-
closed ” notices to a wide range of friends. Most honored his wishes, espe-
cially since he made it clear to his closest pals and most important clients 
that he was available at all hours in urgent situations. 
 Jeremiah has seen those around him take even more dramatic steps 
to try to manage outside contacts. More than a dozen friends have declared 
 “ email bankruptcy ” by saying they have given up any hope of respond-
ing to the hundreds of unanswered emails in their inboxes. Some have 
started over. One has said he will read select emails in the future, but 
hardly ever respond. Several have quietly let select acquaintances know 
that the way to start a conversation is via texting or IM-ing (instant 
messaging). Jeremiah writes:  “ Challenges over personal access are universal 
in my business. We ’ ve really gone from the anytime, anywhere ethic to 
one where you have go through protocols and permissions to get to deal 
with someone. The access gates have slammed shut. ” A  New Yorker  cartoon 
nicely sums up the situation, with one man saying to another,  “ I used 
to call people, then I got into emailing, then texting, and now I just 
ignore everyone. ”  31 
 At the same time, others are organizing their communications based on 
the context of their contact. People use multiple media to communicate 
and can choose the one that is most suitable for the moment. If they don ’ t 
know where the other person is, their first questions usually are:  “ Where 
are you? Are you OK to talk? Is there anyone with you? ” Discreet text 

98 
Chapter 4
messages are handy: Torontonian Julia Madej exchanges romantic texts 
with her husband Luke  “ about 50 times a day. ” 
 Ad Hoc Communities Using Mobile Communication 
 Ad hoc communities are created in an instant, thanks to mobile commu-
nications. Technology analyst Howard Rheingold gave birth to the idea 
that  “ smart mobs ” are a hallmark of this new age.  32 Groups no longer 
require centralized decision making and top-down information flows to 
gather information that allows group members to act in a coordinated 
fashion. This information is now distributed and conveyed by group 
members contacting each other when they have the urge. The nature of 
such ad hoc community is well illustrated by an episode communications 
scholar Rich Ling recounted, about when he came to the aid of a woman 
who had just fallen and hurt herself: 
 A woman fell on a stairway and hurt her leg when she was rushing to get her gro-
ceries into her apartment while her two-year-old son was asleep in the back seat of 
the car. Aside from a banged-up leg and the resulting shock, the woman was not 
otherwise hurt. To confirm this, however, she needed to go to the emergency room. 
In addition, her son needed to be cared for. Thus, there were a whole series of com-
munications to be made. 
 When lying on the stairs, before other[s] had even recognized that there was 
a minor emergency afoot, the woman had incidentally received a call from a 
friend who had rung for a chat. After being alerted to the situation, this friend 
was on her way to the apartment but was still a half hour away. After this call 
I chanced by and was drawn into the situation. I helped her to a more comfort-
able position, she was able to call another family member to come and help with 
taking care of her son. This family member was en route to another location at 
the time, but it was arranged that he could come and get the child. Although it 
would take approximately an hour. A short-term babysitter was found — my daugh-
ter. In addition, another friend was alerted and he was able to meet the woman 
at the emergency room after he had retrieved his own child from day-care. Finally, 
a call was made to my wife in order to postpone my picking her up from a 
shopping trip.  33 
 Ling was struck by the efficiency of all the interaction. People were alerted 
and activities were rearranged on the fly in real time.  “ Underlying all of 
this was the assumption that each relevant person had a mobile phone 
and was accessible via that form of mediation, ” he wrote.  “ This assump-
tion has become a part of the logic of a real-time form of coordination. ” 
Chapter 8,  “ Networked Creators, ” goes into more detail about the power 

The Mobile Revolution 
99
and impact of such networked interaction in more global and civic 
activities.  34 
 The New Choreography of Physical Gatherings 
 Before the mobile-ization of the world, time and space were critical factors 
for in-person contact. People needed to specify when and where they 
would meet. Coordinating a rendezvous, a party or a business meeting was 
a formal negotiation yielding firm coordinates. Early in the twentieth 
century, sociologist Georg Simmel pointea partyd out that a similar, large-
scale change occurred with the nineteenth century ’ s Industrial Revolution. 
With the coming of big machines, cities, bureaucracies, stores, and railroad 
lines running on strict timetables, people had to be at precise places at 
precise times — or else the machines wouldn ’ t be operated, papers wouldn ’ t 
be pushed, customers wouldn ’ t be served, and trains wouldn ’ t be boarded. 
Public clocks — and private wristwatches — regulated the industrialized 
world. This was a profound change from preindustrial village life, where 
people went to their farms, shops, or pubs according to their needs — not 
their clocks.  35 
 To some extent, mobile phones allow us a slight return to this more 
casual negotiation of time. In the age of mobile connectivity, time is more 
fluid and people ’ s expectations have changed. In the felicitous phrase Ling 
uses,  “ hyper-coordination ”  is now possible and preferred, especially by 
younger mobile users. 
 Within a decade, we have come to take mobile connectivity for granted. 
When you read  “ Interlude: A Day in a Connected Life, ” following this 
chapter, notice how much back-and-forth goes into Maya ’ s getting together 
with her friend Geri. Rather than people stating precisely where they will 
be and when, people use their mobile phones as they draw near a gather-
ing, repeatedly reporting their whereabouts and approximate arrival time, 
and often pointing out landmarks so that those meeting them will be able 
to place them and even see them as they approach. They understand from 
the beginning that the initial time and place for the meeting are approxi-
mate and changeable. They are more careless about arriving at the proper 
time and they fuss less about knowing the proper place ahead of time. 
Sociologist Bernie Hogan calls this  “ soft time ” and  “ soft location. ” It is part 
of networked individuals ’ shift from place-based connections to person-
based connections, with  “ a flexible lifestyle of instant exchange and con-
stant updates. ”  36 

100 
Chapter 4
 Longer Encounters 
 In the era of perpetual connectivity enabled by mobile communication, 
social encounters can be prolonged and elaborated. Pew Internet respon-
dent Maxine Clarke gave a good example of this: 
 Every time I leave someone, I remember things I wanted to say or I have reactions 
to our discussion that I want to make sure I register. Before I had a cell phone, I 
would have just let them pass or I would have brought them up the next time I saw 
the person or had a [landline] call with her. After I got a cell phone three years ago, 
I realized I could just ring the person right back and we could pick up just where 
we left off. Sometimes I ’ ll just call someone I ’ ve just seen just to say,  “ That was fun, 
let ’ s do it again. ” This is a more spontaneous and human way to be in touch with 
others. I don ’ t have to make an effort to reach out. I can do it on the spur of the 
moment. 
 Information scientist Rhonda McEwen noticed a ritual when Toronto 
students get together. A mobile call or text message preceded the in-person 
meeting by a few minutes, and a second call followed after the friends 
departed.  “ McEwen reports that first it ’ s:  ‘ I ’ m just calling to make sure we ’ re 
on for today ’ or  ‘ remind me to tell you about whatever. ’ ” The students 
then recount:  “ We meet, then afterwards,  ‘ Hey thanks very much for 
today; that was great. ’ It ’ s more of a cell phone thing. I ’ d say I ’ m more 
prone to call before, meet and text after, that ’ s sort of my habit. ” 
 This ritual sandwiching of mobile chat with the meeting stretches the 
interaction beyond the physical meeting. The pre-meeting call lowers 
interaction barriers before the in-person meeting because the participants 
have something very recent to reference. The call afterward politely ensures 
that the interaction lingers on via the mobile phone. One student described 
the pre-meeting call  “ an appetizer before the main course ” and the post-
meeting call  “ the dessert. ” 
 The Weakening — But Not the Death — of Distance 
 Ages ago in internet time — 1997 — Economist writer Frances Cairncross 
published a book provocatively titled:  The Death of Distance: How the Com-
munications Revolution Is Changing Our Lives . Her thesis:  “ New communi-
cations technologies are rapidly obliterating distance as a relevant factor 
in how people conduct their business and personal lives. ”  37 
 More than a decade later, we can see that Cairncross was both right and 
wrong. Our book presents many examples of people connecting over great 
distances: at work, in friendship, and even in families. Distance no longer 

The Mobile Revolution 
101
means that communication has (almost) died. For some things, such as 
online games, distance does not even matter — except when collaborating 
players get out of sync because they are sleeping in different time zones. 
For some things, time-zone differences are even beneficial, as when medical 
secretaries in India enter American doctors ’ notes during the American 
nighttime and the Indian daytime. 
 With communication being personal and mobile, location often is not 
apparent. Mobile connections can become  “ places. ”  In some circumstances, 
people can become more defined by their mobile phone numbers and 
internet aliases than by where they physically live and work. When gradu-
ate student Kris Thomas went to Addis Ababa in 2008 to deliver food to 
an orphanage, many people gave their mobile phone number as their 
 “ address ” : 
 We asked our driver for his address, so we could hire him again. He said,  “ sure, sure, ” 
and he took our pen and paper, wrote something and handed it back. It was a cell 
number, complete with the international calling code prefix. His address was a 
phone number. That is why so many residents had cell phones. Their place is not 
tied to a home, an address, a permanent place on earth, but to their phone number. 
 “ I am here, ” but  “ here ”  is where you can reach me, via my phone. Our driver 
couldn ’ t give us any addresses where he could receive mail — neither his home 
address nor the orphanage ’ s. He seemed surprised that we would want such a 
thing — why would we need it, when we had his phone number? I got the sense in 
Addis that maybe the socio-economic divide is not  “ have a home versus homeless/
shanty living ” but instead perhaps  “ have a phone number and therefore a place, 
versus do not have a cell phone, truly without a place. ” 38 
 Nor is this only a phenomenon of the developing world. Oxford sociologist 
Bernie Hogan tweeted on February 4, 2010:  “ A friend asks for my address 
 & phone. I give him email  & cell. It never dawned on me that he meant 
 ‘ home ’ address. ” 
 Yet, distance still matters in many situations. We show several times in 
this book that the closer that people live and work to one another, the 
more contact they have.  39 Moreover, the emergence of location-aware 
software means that place remains important as long as we think of place 
in the way that networked individuals do: as the locations where they are 
at that moment, and where they are heading. 
 Connected Presence, Absent Presence, and Present Absence 
 People can initiate multiple social contacts and information searches so 
rapidly that time is basically  “ timeless ” — what communications scholar 

102 
Chapter 4
Manuel Castells calls  “ the space of flows. ” 40 This is a realm where multiple 
near-simultaneous communications are possible and can be consummated 
at any moment — including times when people are standing in line, walking 
down the street, or driving in their cars. Time sequences need no longer 
be as distinct as they were when parts of the day had different character-
istics: Waking up was followed by breakfast, traveling to a job, work time, 
lunch break, traveling home, dinner, and evening leisure time. Unplanned 
traffic jams and waits in doctors ’ offices are especially empty. Mobile 
devices can now fill these heretofore useless waiting times with all manner 
of activity enabled by mobile devices — and the sanctity and separateness 
of different times of day can easily be interrupted. Mobile networked 
individuals have more room to maneuver and more opportunities for 
interaction. Even when not physically together, they have what commu-
nication scientists Scott Campbell and Yong Jin Park call a  “ connected 
presence. ”  41 For instance, people can update their friends on aspects of 
their lives without having to wait for the next time they see each other in 
person. There is less backlog of information. 
 One caution is that intensive ICT use means that people can be 
physically in one place while their social attention and communication 
focus is elsewhere — a state that social psychologist Kenneth Gergen calls 
 “ absent presence. ” 42 This can created awkward, annoying social discon-
tinuities as people  “ leave ”  the group they are physically a part of to 
take a call or respond to a text message from someone afar.  “ Distracted 
driving ” has become a policy concern, with states and provinces outlaw-
ing holding a mobile phone while driving. Pew Internet surveys have 
found that 47 percent of U.S. adult texters and 34 percent of texters 
aged sixteen to seventeen (of driving age) have sent or received texts 
while driving. Some 49 percent of all adults and 48 percent of all teen-
agers have been passengers when the driver was sending or reading texts. 
Finally, 44 percent of adults and 40 percent of teens said they were 
passengers in cars when the driver put them in danger because of the 
driver ’ s use of a mobile phone. The plaintive cry of those ignored or 
abandoned by their  “ absent present ” companions was sounded by Pew 
respondent Michael Jamison: 
 I ’ ve had a number of arguments with my family about how much I feel disrespected 
when they check their text messages or crackberries [BlackBerrys] when they are 
with me. They understand how I feel now and have (mostly) stopped doing it. I 
worry about my son in college because he and his friends don ’ t seem to ever be 
totally present in their live interactions with each other. They are all constantly 
texting others instead of fully engaging in conversation with the people they are 

The Mobile Revolution 
103
with. A key aspect of true friendship is that friends will really listen to each other. 
I don ’ t know how you can do that if you are texting others at the same time.  43 
 Scattered studies suggest problems. For example, distracted drivers do not 
need to be holding mobile phones to have higher accident rates — it is the 
act of talking on the phone that is the issue. While walking, mobile phone 
users are more likely to ignore key things happening around them. Pew 
Internet found that 17 percent of mobile owners had bumped into another 
person or object when they were distracted by talking or texting on their 
phones. 44 In one experiment, more than half of participants did not notice 
a clown unicycling nearby.  45 Two-thirds of employees want to ban smart-
phone use at meetings as distracting and impolite. And one women wrote 
to advice columnist  “ Dear Abby ” complaining about others chatting on 
mobiles while using public toilets.  46 
 The array of both positive and negative feelings that people have about 
the role of mobile phones was nicely captured in the words of an anony-
mous Pew Internet respondent in April 2009: 
 My husband has a heart condition. Last fall he had an episode and ended up in an 
ER about 45 miles away. I had my phone turned to privacy because I was in a 
meeting, but after I heard it vibrate for the third time in about ten minutes I knew 
I should answer it, so I was able to get to my husband on a timely basis instead of 
finding out after I got home. Yet, my husband ’ s cell phone bugs the hell out of me! 
He always raises his voice, never wants to let it go to voice mail, and always has it 
in his pocket. He stops everything to answer his phone, while I do not. 
 Norms, expectations, and habituation are part of the issue, for people have 
multitasked while driving for generations. Moreover, Europeans often sit 
among friends at caf é s while simultaneously using their mobile phones to 
incorporate absent friends into their group conversations. To complement 
Gergen ’ s notion of  “ absent presence, ” we call this  “ present absence. ” 
 The Blurring Boundaries of Public and Private Spaces 
 The boundaries that used to exist between public realms and private havens 
are no longer as rigid. People now engage in intimate mobile phone con-
versations as they stand on sidewalks. Work supervisors now have more 
ability to interrupt family gatherings. The private is more likely to become 
public. Several Pew Internet respondents discussed situations where they 
had confronted individuals who were inflicting their private lives on others 
in public places. Nikki Waters described how she and several other pas-
sengers listened to a woman curse out her boyfriend for several minutes 

104 
Chapter 4
on a BART train and then confronted her with the blunt request:  “ Lower 
your voice and move on. ” Even more revealing about how private matters 
have colonized public spaces in the age of mobile phones is this story a 
lawyer recounted about an overheard conversation on a train from Wash-
ington, DC to New York City: 
 I, along with all of the other passengers, were sitting quietly when the man directly 
behind me decided to make a phone call using his Bluetooth [wireless ear piece link 
to his mobile phone]. He was talking so loudly that I think most people in the car 
were able to hear him. His conversation, though he stressed how necessary it was 
to be kept secret (ah, the irony), detailed the current plans of Pillsbury [Pillsbury 
Winthrop Shaw Pittman law firm] to lay off somewhere in the range of 15 – 20 attor-
neys from four offices by the end of March, including a few senior associates with 
low billable hours and two or three first-year associates. I wouldn ’ t have believed it 
except for the fact that he identified himself to the caller as Bob Robbins, who I 
learned is the leader of the firm ’ s Corporate  & Securities practice section, and that 
he was talking to Rick Donaldson, who I learned was COO (chief operating office). 
What ’ s more, he was NAMING NAMES over the phone!  47 
 While some people do not notice — or care — that they are in public, 
others are taking steps to preserve some privacy in public spaces. Sociolo-
gist Keith Hampton and associates watched people using wireless laptops 
and mobile phones in public places, such as parks, and semipublic places, 
such as coffee shops. Some users maintained open glances while they 
looked at their laptops and mobile phones, inviting conversations; others 
surrounded themselves with laptops, books, and outerwear as visible bar-
riers to interaction. In   figure 4.4,  Nelu Handa smiles happily at Ezra ’ s 
Pound caf é in Toronto while surrounded by her wireless laptop, two mobile 
phones ( “ one is for friends, and the BlackBerry is for business ” ), an iPod 
music player (attached to her earbuds), a cup of coffee, a camera, eyeglasses 
as an aid to visual communication, and anachronistically, a large notebook 
for writing ideas. Although surrounded by tech gear, she was quite happy 
to chat with other diners.  
 Mobile hyperconnectivity in fuzzily bounded public-private space 
changes individuals ’ expectations about the availability of other people 
and the accessibility of information. As personal autonomy grows with 
new tools, there is a counterpressure for people to stay connected. This is 
partly driven by  social striving : Who wants to be out of the loop? A new 
formulation of that concern in tech circles is  “ FOMO ” — Fear of Missing 
Out. In addition, the imperative to connect is partly driven by  social needs : 
Who wants to miss a call from someone who might offer something useful? 
It is also partly driven by  social obligation : Who wants to get a reputation 
as being a wallflower? 

The Mobile Revolution 
105
 The old rules of etiquette and courtesy are reconfiguring in this new 
environment that enables users to conduct their private business in public 
places. Evolving mobile etiquette — “ metiquette ” — injects new realities into 
social events. When, if ever, is it permissible to interrupt a conversation to 
accept a mobile call or a text message? When, if ever, is it okay to check 
email on a mobile device while a meeting is taking place? When, if ever, 
is it permissible to browse a social network site when a teacher is giving a 
lecture? When, if ever, can you scream your dismay into the phone while 
you are waiting in line for the bus? The norms of networked individualism 
have not caught up to the practice of networked individualism. 
 The rebalancing of public and private means renegotiating the norms 
of absent presence. Many people expect to get undivided attention when 
talking in person. Yet, some of coauthor Wellman ’ s students think it is 
okay to text while meeting friends in person. They think it rude to have 
extended phone chats, but a murmured quick call to arrange something 
is okay. Sociologist Erving Goffman has pointed out that people must 
practice  “ civil inattention ” in order to get through life in public spaces.  48 
As Crocodile Dundee did not realize when he moved from the Australian 
Eyeglasses
Earbuds
MacBook
Computer
Reserve
Energy
Stimulant
Watch (Analog)
Camera
& Case
Connector
Mobile Phone
(personal)
BlackBerry
(work)
Paper Notebook
iPod (music)
 Figure 4.4 
 Nelu Handa at work at Ezra ’ s Pound Caf é , Toronto, May 2009. 
 Source : Barry Wellman.  © 2009, used with permission. 

106 
Chapter 4
Outback to New York City, big-city people would get overloaded if they 
paid attention to everything. But what if people are thrusting heretofore 
private matters into our faces and ears: talking loudly on phones in public 
or texting incessantly? Look in the second picture (  figure 4.5 ) at how a 
number of networked individuals mark off private space in the midst of 
a crowded New York park. Each is alone, but each is connected to an 
outside world.  
 As with earlier technologies, societies are still adjusting to what is 
acceptable behavior while using mobile devices. When someone reaches 
for her mobile phone during a lunchtime meal to check in with her spouse 
or colleague, people may not make the snide comment that they would 
have a few years ago nor may they feel as offended by the action as they 
would have not long ago. When a mobile phone rings during the toasts 
at a wedding, some people chuckle and shake their heads, while others 
glare. Yet, a YouTube video records the gasps at the church when  “ Louches-
ter ” pulled out his BlackBerry at the altar to change his Facebook status to 
 “ married. ”  49 
 Figure 4.5 
 Laptop users in Bryant Park, Midtown Manhattan, June 21, 2010. 
 Source : Oren Livio;  © Keith N. Hampton 2010, used with permission. 

The Mobile Revolution 
107
 The Triple Revolution Pushes on: Mobile + Internet + Social Networks 
 Most North Americans use mobile phones. But the extent to which they 
are in perpetual contact varies. Many are motivated by mobility to deepen 
their relationship with digital resources; many are in a holding pattern. 
Some in the holding pattern are becoming more involved, some will 
remain steady users, and some are not likely to become more active. 
 One implication is that there is an  inflection point  that comes when 
North Americans go beyond using their mobile phones only for talking, 
chatting, and snapping — and start using their mobile devices to access the 
internet. This is when the value and impact of mobile connectivity will 
become most pronounced. Indeed, people now report a growing reliance 
on mobile devices. For example, Pew Internet found that the mobile phone 
went from the device that was the fourth  “ hardest to do without ” in 2002 
to the number one slot by 2007.  50 
 Through developments such as these, mobile connectivity has increased 
the ability of people to act as networked individuals by giving them more 
control over how they can reach out to others for information and support, 
share ideas, create personal networks around similar interests even if the 
network members live far apart, and switch between portions of their 
networks. In the process, mobile connectivity has lessened individuals ’ 
perceptions of themselves as embedded members of fixed groups.  
 Mobile connectivity is a social lubricant. The global uptake of the 
mobile phone is probably the most rapid embrace of a consumer technol-
ogy in history. Important in itself, it has come together with four other 
developments to enable widespread mobile connectivity that have pro-
foundly affected behavior: (1) the emergence of lightweight portable com-
puters: laptops, even smaller netbooks and tablets, and smartphones; (2) 
the rise of wireless connections so that people can connect to the internet 
wherever they can get a broadband phone or computer signal; (3) the 
emergence of cloud computing that enables people to store email, docu-
ments, and media, and to use social media on remote servers that are 
accessible from any connected device; and   (4) the boom in apps that have 
turned smartphones into diversified personal and portable computing 
devices that can access the internet. 
 We close part I of our book with the hope that we have made clear that 
the three revolutions intertwine and affect each other in the network 
operating system. The Mobile and Internet Revolutions are not either/or: 
They reinforce each another. The always-connected layer of mobile access 
has enhanced the ascent of broadband and the always-on internet. The 

108 
Chapter 4
way those motivated by mobility use both their wired and wireless access 
suggests a new era for many users, where the norm is continual access to 
information and communication. Indeed, as the internet and mobile 
access converge, we are finding some networked individuals whose smart-
phones and highly portable computers satisfy all of their needs. 
 The implications of a significant portion of the population being 
involved in continual access are only partially understood. Space and time 
are becoming softer, with people finding their way to each other in due 
course — to socialize, work, or organize. Location is becoming important —
 but now mobile apps find people wherever they are. As always, distance is 
not dead, it is just being renegotiated. Physical presence and absent 
presence are becoming integrated as the character of public and private 
spaces changes. We are seeing people spending more time away from their 
home and office desktops and more time with their mobile appliances. 
The internet is becoming the mobile internet. Your place is where your 
connectivity is. 
 Networked individuals are using both the internet and mobile access to 
orient their  “ continuous partial attention ” to a variety of social networks 
and information sources.  51 This mobile-ization strengthens the three pillars 
of online engagement: connecting with others, satisfying information 
queries, and sharing content with others. In part II, we describe in more 
detail how important realms of human activity are being shaped by the 
Triple Revolution and how networked individualism is playing out in 
relationships, families, workplaces, and creative and knowledge spaces. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Interlude: A Day in a Connected Life 
 What are the everyday realities of hyperconnectedness? How do information and 
communication technologies affect home life and work life? Coauthor Wellman 
asked his Toronto students to complete time diaries and reflect on these questions. 
Maya Collum ’ s submission was exceptionally detailed and thoughtful. It also 
brought together trends that were common in all the papers. 
 Wednesday, September 19, 2007 
 Today was an absolutely ordinary day, and, in being an absolutely ordinary 
day, it was inundated by technology, although I didn ’ t realize to what 
extent until I reviewed my notes. 
 8:00 am   The day began as any other weekday, with a brief check on what 
is happening in the world. The process is automated at this point: Check 
Gmail, check Facebook, check news on the CBC [Canadian Broadcast Cor-
poration] website. Gmail proved promising: no forward or junk, just two 
emails from political and environmental lists I subscribe to which I 
promptly delete and never bother to read, and one email from my good 
friend, Gratia. Gratia lives nearby and we see each other a fair amount. As 
such, no catch-up is required and this email is right to the point. She wants 
to know what the plan is for tonight ’ s weekly get together. I respond with 
an equally to-the-point email. Other discussions can wait until we see each 
other tonight. . . . I don ’ t have the time or need to post on anyone ’ s Face-
book wall. 
 8:30 am   My boyfriend (now husband) Matt comes downstairs and we have 
our brief morning chitchat before heading to work. The conversation is 
quick — what are you doing tonight, what is the dinner plan, etc. We leave 
more in-depth conversations for tonight and we both know we ’ ll discuss any 
details or questions that arise during the day, on IM (instant messaging). 

110 
Interlude: A Day in a Connected Life
 9:00 am   Log onto IM. 
 10:30 am  I receive a mass group email from Chris, an acquaintance, 
regarding his upcoming show. I do not respond as it ’ s almost etiquette not 
to respond to emails like this. 
 11:30 am   Cyril, a colleague and friend, pops into my cubicle for a visit. 
These pop-ins are sometimes too frequent but with Cyril, I never mind. 
He is my mentor and after our work matter has been settled, we chat about 
the future of my career at our organization. Cyril is professional and not 
one to waste too much time; he leaves about fifteen minutes later . . . in 
perfect time for Kate, a good friend and colleague, to pop in. We have our 
morning catch-up session featuring a lot of gossip but that ’ s how our 
interactions seem to flow. She leaves about ten minutes later and our IM 
conversation begins from her desk. 
 Noon   Since I don ’ t usually take an hour for my lunch break, I feel justi-
fied in taking a short break to putter around the internet. Again, I check 
Gmail, Facebook, and CBC. Gratia has responded to my morning email on 
Gmail. I respond. Facebook is a tad more eventful: Kate has posted a group 
chat about our plans tonight and people are responding. There are a few 
comments to read; I respond directly to Kate ’ s. The IM conversation with 
Kate continues and one with Matt begins. IM conversations with these two 
interweave sporadically throughout the entire day. . . . The conversations 
are short, to the point, sometimes just goofy remarks or emoticons, but 
never anything too in depth or that requires too much attention. I also 
receive an email from my mom but she ’ s asking too many questions to 
warrant a response right now. 
 12:30 pm   An IM ping from Alex comes in. Alex is also wondering about 
plans tonight and has a few questions. I answer them but wonder why he 
doesn ’ t just read the Facebook thread; perhaps it ’ s blocked by his firewall 
at work. . . . The conversation with Alex continues for another fifteen 
minutes, though it ’ s not continuous. A response takes at least three 
minutes. 
 1:00 pm   Connor IMs me. He ’ s obviously bored at work because the ques-
tions are a bit too demanding. I quickly tell him I ’ m busy but will ping 
him later. I must admit, at this point I ’ m irritated by all of the interaction. 
I set my IM status to BUSY. 
 2:30 pm   Another influx of interaction begins but I am aware that I inad-
vertently ask for it; if I didn ’ t insist on checking my email and Facebook 
obsessively, and if I didn ’ t leave IM running, this wouldn ’ t happen. 

Interlude: A Day in a Connected Life 
111
I receive an email from Jen wondering if I ’ m attending the group event 
tonight; I respond that I am. Alex pings me again about plans tonight. 
Kate has responded to my Facebook thread post. 
 3:00 pm   Kate pings me on IM and we agree to meet for our daily 
coffee break. It lasts only about fifteen minutes. A few more emails 
filter in from Jen and Kate about plans tonight and other miscellaneous 
matters. 
 3:30 pm   I send Kate an email with a Craigslist posting for our friend 
Amanda who is apartment hunting. I found this ad yesterday and set a 
reminder on my eCalendar to email it today. 
 4:00 pm  A few more emails are exchanged regarding plans tonight. This 
is getting a bit ridiculous! 
 5:00 pm   The work day is done and I ’ m off to school. 
 5:30 pm  Waiting for class to start, I check my cell phone voicemail. There 
is one message from Jamie asking to borrow my bike tonight. I respond 
via text. Why bother spending several minutes returning the call when the 
entire conversation can be summed up in one text?! 
 6:30 pm   I exchange four text messages back and forth with Gratia. She ’ s 
in class as well, and I suspect equally as bored as I am. 
 8:00 pm   I call Gratia as soon as class lets out because I have changed my 
mind about how I want to spend the evening. Ironically, after so much 
time spent planning my evening, all I want to do is go to the local pub 
for a pint. She agrees. 
 8:15 pm   After biking home, I find my roommate ’ s entire band, Fjord 
Rowboat, sitting on our porch. I socialize for a bit and head to meet Gratia 
at the pub around the corner. A quick text is sent to Kate informing her 
that neither Gratia nor I will be attending tonight ’ s festivities. I ’ ll admit, I 
text instead of calling because I won ’ t have to deal with her response if 
she ’ s not pleased. 
 10:00 pm   Gratia and I finally chat in person. One beer becomes two 
and our bartender/friend, Andre, joins us for a quick conversation. I text 
Matt when Gratia is in the washroom, to ask if he wants to join us. No 
response. 
 11:45 pm   Home. I find the Fjord boys still on the porch as though their 
rehearsal never started. We all have a final beer and I commit to calling it 
a night around 12:30. 

112 
Interlude: A Day in a Connected Life
 1:00 am   Matt and I have our final chat about the day, although it dies 
quickly as we ’ re both tired. Some ten minutes later I collapse in a heap of 
exhaustion — good night! 
 Looking at her day, Maya says that three things strike her. First, she is 
surprised by  “ just how much personal communication interweaves into 
my day. ” Moreover, many of those communications are covert:  “ I tech-
nically shouldn ’ t be having so much personal communication during 
the work day, and I shouldn ’ t be having any during class. ” Still, technol-
ogy has made all this easy to conceal, and in so doing, her personal 
communications are not very disruptive to anyone other than Maya. 
She is carrying her personal network with her and maintaining ties 
efficiently. 
 Second, Maya does not feel much guilt about this.  “ Despite what seems 
like a massive amount of personal interaction throughout the day, I manage 
to be extremely productive and get everything accomplished. None of this 
technology distracts me from the day completely, ” she wrote.  “ These 
personal interactions never receive my full, undivided attention. Face-to-
face conversations do, but they are scarce and it is likely for this reason 
that I prefer non face-to-face mediums like IM, email, Facebook, etc., 
because I can control the timing and level of attention they receive. Thus, 
it is not an issue of distraction but rather, the art of multitasking and 
control. ” 
 Third, Maya uses multiple communication media. For example, she 
interacted with Kate all day: face to face, on IM, through email and Face-
book, and when a work matter came up, they used a landline phone. Maya 
concluded: 
 It is somewhat striking that I exhaust every possible medium when communicating 
with individuals. There are certain people whom I contact by using just one means 
of communication such as Facebook. But, for all of my regular and close contacts 
however, we communicate via whatever medium is easiest or more appropriate. To 
a large extent, I can decide who I talk to, when we interact, and how. I can decide 
to what extent these interactions affect or interrupt my day. There ’ s an immense 
amount of freedom in this. 
 Maya — like many young adults — is  hyperconnected , using many media 
for (almost) continuous communication presence. They — and their friends
 — choose the medium that is most suitable for their relationship with the 
other person, their social context (work, at home, the street), and the 
nature of the message — it ’ s less confrontational but tacky to break up by 

Interlude: A Day in a Connected Life 
113
email or texting, for example. Often, a conversation started with one 
medium will switch to another, as when Maya ’ s conversation with Kate 
moves among email, Facebook posts, and texting on IM. For better or 
worse, mobile hyperconnectivity means that people never walk — or sit
 — alone.  

 
 II  How Networked Individualism Works 

 
 5  Networked Relationships 
 Alarm spread in June 2006 when Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith-Lovin, 
and Mathew Brashears published  “ Social Isolation in America ” in the 
 American Sociological Review.  1 In this leading journal, the three scholars 
reported findings from the General Social Survey — the gold standard of 
American surveys — to the question :  “ Looking back over the last six 
months — who are the people with whom you discussed matters important 
to you? ” Comparing Americans ’ answers in 2005 to answers in 1984, they 
found that the number of people with whom Americans reported discuss-
ing important matters had declined by 28 percent, from 2.9 to 2.1. More-
over, nearly one-quarter (23 percent) of Americans said they did not have 
any confidants with whom they could discuss important matters — not 
even their spouses. The nature of their confidants had also changed. There 
were fewer friends and neighbors in 2005 than in 1984 and more immedi-
ate kin and spouses. For example, the percentage of Americans with a 
friend as a confidant declined from three-quarters (73 percent) in 1984 to 
one-half (51 percent) in 2005.  2 
 These depressing results raised an alarm that Americans had become 
more isolated. Although the researchers did not show that the internet was 
the cause of social isolation, the media speculated about this.  Toronto Globe 
and Mail  columnist Douglas Cornish sounded a common refrain when he 
wondered:  “ Will this glow [from the internet] produce a closed generation 
of socially challenged individuals, humans who are more comfortable with 
machines than anything else? ” 3 
 Anxieties about the withering of relationships are not new, but began 
many centuries before the coming of the internet. Every epoch experiences 
them. In past decades, they were tied to industrialization, bureaucratiza-
tion, urbanization, socialism, and capitalism. Often, these alarms have 
been tied to the rise of technologies that connect people in new ways: 
from grumbling about nineteenth-century railroads spooking horses to 

118 
Chapter 5
more recent complaints about cars and telephones isolating people from 
in-person contact.  4 
 The alarm is repetitive: Something is happening  “ now ” to rend apart 
the supposedly supportive, fulfilling bonds of olden days — although in 
every generation the alarmists keep looking back approvingly to the previ-
ous generation. For example, in the now supposedly communal 1950s and 
1960s, commentators were moaning that things were falling apart com-
pared with the old days. They came up with a number of memes for it, 
such as  “ the lonely crowd, ”  “ mass society, ” and  “ the quest for commu-
nity. ” 5 For example, here is Maurice Stein in  The Eclipse of Community :  “ The 
old feeling of solidarity based on a sense that everyone in town belongs 
to common community gives way to sub-communities with hostile atti-
tudes toward each other. ” He continues:  “ Community ties become increas-
ingly dispensable, finally extending even into the nuclear family, and we 
are forced to watch children dispensing with their parents at an even earlier 
age in suburbia. ” 6 
 Although such critics wrote before the proliferation of the internet, it 
has now became the scapegoat. The basic argument is that community is 
falling apart because internet use has led people to lose contact with 
authentic in-person relationships as they become ensnared online in weak 
simulacra of reality. As early as 1995, Texas radio commentator Jim High-
tower warned,  “ While all this razzle-dazzle connects us electronically, it 
disconnects us from each other, having us  ‘ interfacing ’  more with comput-
ers and TV screens than looking in the face of our fellow human beings. ” 7 
 Social psychologist Robert Kraut and associates added to the unease in 
1998 when major newspapers publicized his finding that newcomers to 
computing had decreased social involvement and psychological well-
being. To their credit, Kraut and associates retracted their initial findings 
in 2002, when they found that as the newcomers became computing vet-
erans, their negative symptoms disappeared. However, this got less media 
attention.  8 
 The internet was also the force underlying social decay in William Gib-
son ’ s science fiction novel  Neuromancer , which portrayed people losing 
their real-world personas by  “ jacking in ” to  “ cyberspace ”  (the latter being 
a word that Gibson coined for the novel).  9 More recently, social scientist 
Sherry Turkle has argued that people create separate selves as they immerse 
themselves in cyberspace and forget the real world.  “ People can get lost in 
virtual worlds, ” she warned in her 1996  Wired magazine article. Her 2011 
book  Alone Together  continues the thread, bringing in a new techno-fear 
as added cause for alarm: connections with robots supplanting human 

Networked Relationships 
119
interaction.  10 She also raised concerns about people being more preoccu-
pied with the connections they make through mobile phones than with 
the real people who are standing mere inches away. 
 After the McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Brashears article and ensuing 
commentary about technology ’ s suspected baleful impact, network scholar 
Keith Hampton joined with Pew Internet to investigate how technology 
might be tied to social isolation and declining discussion networks. The 
resulting work showed the opposite: People who use ICTs (information and 
communication technologies) have larger and more diverse networks than 
others. 11 On average, a Pew Internet study showed, the size of people ’ s 
discussion networks — those with whom they discuss important matters — is 
12 percent larger among mobile phone users, 9 percent larger for individu-
als who share photos online, and 9 percent bigger for those who use instant 
messaging. The diversity of people ’ s core networks — their closest and most 
significant confidants — tends to be 25 percent larger for mobile phone 
users, 15 percent larger for occasional internet users, and even larger for 
frequent internet users. 
 Contrary to some pundits ’ fears that the internet was drawing people 
away from local communities, Pew Internet research found that most 
internet activities have little relationship or a positive one to local activity. 
For instance, internet users are as likely as anyone else to visit with their 
neighbors in person. Mobile phone users, those who use the internet fre-
quently at work, and bloggers are more likely to belong to a local volunteer 
association, such as a youth group or a charitable organization. Internet 
use does not pull people away from public places, but rather is associated 
with frequent visits to places such as parks, caf é s, and restaurants — the 
kinds of locales where people are likely to encounter a wider array of people 
and diverse points of view. 
 Why do many commentators suspect that ICTs cause social woes? There 
are multiple traps in the notion that the internet is a separate, immersive 
medium: 
 •  It assumes that people lead different  “ virtual ”  lives, distinct from their 
everyday real-world lives. As we showed in part I, this rarely is the case. 
With the partial exception of the intense gamers that Turkle has studied, 
online and in-person interactions — and lives — are intertwined. 
 •  It assumes that in-person encounters are the only meaningful form of 
social connection, and it does not recognize that emails, text messages, 
Facebook posts, tweets, and the like are everyday tools that people rou-
tinely use to stay connected. 

120 
Chapter 5
 •  It asserts the internet ’ s limited capability for transmitting social cues such 
as facial expressions, smells, and body gestures. Internet encounters contain 
 “ less ”  social information and communication, and that might cause rela-
tionships to atrophy. Yet, people rarely interact with strangers over the 
internet. They have a strong sense of the others with whom they are online 
and internet encounters complement and increase the volume of com-
munication among people, rather than substituting for richer in-person 
contact. 
 •  It takes Marshall McLuhan ’ s aphorism too seriously and  confuses the 
medium with the message.  In reality, people are not confusing the Facebook 
screen with the person at the other end of it, just as they have not confused 
the telephone receiver with the person with whom they were talking. 
Another McLuhan phrase seems more accurate: The media are  “ extensions 
of man ” (in other words, people). When we send email to our spouse or 
look at a friend ’ s Facebook updates, we do so with a strong understanding 
of the person with whom we are communicating.  12 
 A large part of contemporary unease with technology stems from selec-
tive perception of the past and the superficial observation of other indi-
viduals. Many people think they are witnessing loneliness when they 
observe people walking or driving by themselves — not realizing they may 
be going to meet friends. They echo the Beatles:  “ All of the lonely people. 
Where do they all come from? ” 13 
 Yet, while people do not often open the door to strangers, they do drive, 
fly, and make internet phone calls over long distances to help their friends 
and relatives. People glance at Nelu Handa (chapter 4, figure 4.4) sitting 
by herself at her laptop and immersed in her iPhone chats and music, 
without realizing that she can also be interacting intensely with friends on 
the internet and the phone, as well as be available for in-person contact. 
 By contrast, tech enthusiasts have been excited about the positive pos-
sibilities of the internet for sociability. Their view has been that the internet 
would foster an enormous increase in cooperation by allowing far-flung 
people to interact. Rather than alienation and isolation, there would be 
more relationships, more long-distance relationships, and more connec-
tions among the members of a person ’ s network. In the mid-1990s, John 
Perry Barlow was a leading enthusiast. The co-founder of the Electronic 
Frontier Foundation vividly prophesied that the Internet Revolution would 
bring about radical and positive social transformation:  “ With the develop-
ment of the internet, and with the increasing pervasiveness of communica-
tion between networked computers, we are in the middle of the most 
transforming technological event since the capture of fire. ”  14 

Networked Relationships 
121
 Both sides of the debate — doomsters and enthusiasts — have been so 
excited by the internet that they can be too  presentist and  parochial : 
presentist, because they have rarely looked back to see if people had 
ever worried about relationships before the internet arose; parochial, 
because they have assumed that the internet ’ s very existence would 
radically affect relationships. Social scientists call this sort of thinking 
 “ technological determinism , ”  because it does not take into account how 
the use of ICTs is socially embedded and socially determined. This igno-
rance of context is why both the yeasayers and the naysayers have gone 
astray. 
 Their fixation on the internet has ignored nearly a century of research 
showing that technological changes before the internet — planes, trains, 
telephones, telegraphs, and cars — neither destroyed relationships and 
communities nor left them alone as remnants locked up in rural and 
urban villages. Fifty years of research have shown that people are in 
sizeable and supportive networks, both local and long-distance.  15 When 
asked, few people say that they, themselves, are living lives of lonely 
desperation, and they are aware that most of their friends, neighbors, 
relatives, and coworkers are also in supportive networks. Yet, even with 
these realizations, some people — and commentators — believe that they 
are the exceptions and that the masses around them are lonely, isolated, 
and fearful. 
 There is no reason to panic. The alarm that McPherson and associates 
sounded came from survey responses to only one narrow question. Looked 
at more broadly, a large body of evidence has shown that relationships and 
community and civic engagement thrive in social networks and that they 
are aided by the internet and mobile community. Take Robert Putnam ’ s 
well-known book  Bowling Alone , based on evidence from the middle to the 
end of the twentieth century. It argues that key reasons why involvement 
declined in community organizations such as bowling leagues is that 
people stayed home to watch television and many more women were 
doing paid work outside of their homes. But Putnam ’ s own account shows 
that people are not bowling  alone — despite the book ’ s title — but in fact 
are bowling in networks of shifting sets of others who happen to be free 
that week.  16 
 Research by Pew Internet, Toronto ’ s NetLab, and others provides much 
evidence that that people have large and helpful networks. While the 
Internet and Mobile Revolutions have affected the nature of communities, 
they have transformed but not destroyed them for networked individuals 
in the networked operating system. 

122 
Chapter 5
 From Door-to-Door to Place-to-Place Networks 
 It helps to think about communities as fluid personal networks, rather than 
as static neighborhood or family groups. For too long, the model of com-
munity has been the preindustrial village where people walked door to door , 
and all knew, supported, and surveilled one another. These bygone village 
groups have largely transmuted into multiple, fragmented  personal networks 
connected by the individuals and households at their centers.   Figure 5.1 
shows a typical network of close ties. For example, Wellman ’ s early research 
found in 1968 that neighbors made up only 13 percent of Torontonians ’ 
core networks. Research elsewhere in North America confirmed this in 
Detroit, Los Angeles, and northern California. People find support and 
Neighbors
Friends
Workmates
Kin
Immediate
Extended
Ego
Very close ties 
Somewhat close ties 
 Figure 5.1 
 Typical personal network of close ties. 
 Note : Ego ’ s ties to every network member omitted to reduce clutter. 
 Source : Barry Wellman.  © 2004, used with permission. 

Networked Relationships 
123
sociability, but mostly with people who live outside of their neighborhoods 
and as often with friends as well as with kin. Rather than having a few go-to 
persons who provide a wide range of support.  17 
 Although the move away from village groups did not happen instantly, 
it did happen after World II, but before the Internet and Mobile Revolu-
tions. The widespread abundance of cars, phones, and plane travel made 
 “ glocalization ”  possible (global + local connections). Social networks 
remained anchored in households, yet people often traveled substantial 
distances to get together with friends and relatives. Although neighboring 
remained, personal communities extended far beyond them. Wellman ’ s 
awakening insight on this came when he was part of a  “ Save our Neigh-
bourhood ” meeting, intent on stopping the Spadina Expressway from 
knifing though downtown Toronto. The group was just like groups in 
other cities, fighting to preserve neighborhoods against cars. But as he 
looked around the room, he realized that many of that neighborhood ’ s 
saviors did not even live there. They were not a little group of neighbors 
at all — they were a network of community activists who had come from 
all over Toronto. 
 Wellman ’ s long-running research in Toronto has shown that although 
people continue to befriend neighbors, they have less connection with 
their neighborhoods than in preindustrial door-to-door times. Until the 
Mobile Revolution, phone calls came in by landlines to households —
 rather than wirelessly by mobile phones to specific people. Consequently, 
many interactions moved inside private homes — where much entertain-
ing, phone calling, and internetting take place. At the same time, longer-
distance connections proliferated. Both Wellman ’ s first (1968) and second 
(1979) studies in the East York area of Toronto found that few strong ties 
were with neighbors. The more voluntary phone calls were stronger predic-
tors of social closeness and support than in-person contact with neighbors 
and coworkers who might not have voluntarily chosen their relation-
ships.  18 As such, people became connected  place to place . They are aware 
of local contexts that they physically inhabit — especially home, work, bars, 
coffee shops, and airports — but they rarely know about the places in 
between them. 
 From Place-to-Place to Person-to-Person Networks 
 The personalized and mobile connectivity enhanced by the Triple Revolu-
tion and the weakening of group boundaries have helped relationships 
move from place-to-place networks to individualized person-to-person 

124 
Chapter 5
networks. Most have private internet connections and personal mobile 
phones, and their own cars. Lower numbers of children mean parents need 
to spend less time at home raising them. There are fewer children to keep 
parents housebound. The loosening of religious, occupational, and ethnic 
boundaries also encourages interpersonal free agentry.  
 Rather than ties between households or work groups, people connect 
as individuals to other individuals, in person-to-person networks. They 
maneuver through multiple sets of ties that shift in importance and contact 
by the day. Each person engages in multiple roles at home, with friends 
and relatives, and at work or school. Their networks are sparsely knit, with 
friends and relatives often loosely linked with each other. These loose link-
ages do not imply a complete untethering of social relations: There are 
only a few isolates  “ bowling alone. ” Most people are connecting in shifting 
networks rather than in solidary groups.  19 Such networks provide diversity, 
choice, and maneuverability at the probable cost of overall cohesion and 
long-term trust. 
 While place-to-place networks show how community has transcended 
local boundaries, person-to-person networks show how community has 
transcended group boundaries. It is the individual — and not the house-
hold, kinship group, or work group — that is the primary unit of connectiv-
ity. The shift puts people at the center of personal networks that can supply 
them with support, sociability, information, and a sense of belonging. 
People connect in person and via ICTs. Their networking activities shift as 
their needs shift. While network members relate to each other as persons, 
they often emphasize certain roles. They are bosses to their employees, 
husbands to their wives, friends to their friends, and so on — with some-
what different norms for each network. 
 Networked individualism means that people ’ s involvement in multi-
ple networks often limits their involvement in and commitment to any 
one network. It is not as if they are going to the village square every 
day to see the same crowd. Because people can maneuver among milieus, 
their multiple involvements decrease the control that each milieu has 
over their behavior. Yet limited involvements work both ways. If a 
person is only partially involved in a milieu, then the participants in 
that milieu often are not as committed to maintaining that person ’ s 
well-being. Like corporations that segregate their activities into somewhat 
autonomous units, people are now in communities of  “ limited liability, ” 
to use the British legal term.  20 
 The shift to person-to-person networks has profoundly affected how 
people relate. This is not a shift toward social isolation, but toward flexible 

Networked Relationships 
125
autonomy. People have more freedom to tailor their interactions. They 
have increased opportunities about where — and with whom — to connect. 
As people maneuver through their days, lives, and networks, the nature of 
their ties varies from situation to situation. That means people are more 
selective about the people with whom they relate, because they no longer 
can be open to  “ the community. ” In the old days, people reportedly kept 
their outside doors unlocked and picked up their phones as soon as they 
rang. By contrast, a recent study showed that many Chicago homes, for 
example, are  “ islands of privacy. ” People practice selective concealment 
and disclosure. They don ’ t open their doors readily — to avoid salespeople 
and religious proselytizers — and they use caller ID and voicemail to avoid 
phone contact with telemarketers, politicians, and others. Email is easily 
screened by software to remove most spam before viewing, and invitation-
only Facebook offers preselected contacts.  21 
 Norms are developing around these new social spaces. For instance, 
some teachers are now being encouraged not to become Facebook  “ friends ” 
with their students. Moreover, Facebook and Twitter users control what 
information they disclose online. For example, neither Rainie nor Wellman 
discuss much of their personal lives on Twitter. Others provide code words 
to mask sensitive content, just as  “ partying ” can mean sexual relations 
among teens. So far, texting and other mobile phone calls have been less 
of a problem because there are no public directories of their numbers. 
 Most people do not limit themselves to participation with just one or 
two groups. They gain advantages by having a diversified set of networks 
and knowing who has what to offer. That creates powerful social capital. 
For example, NetLab ’ s Connected Lives research in the Toronto area of East 
York has found that people are apt to get hugs from their sisters, money 
from their parents, and sociability from their friends.  22 
 Living in person-to-person networks has profound implications both for 
individuals and for the social milieus and overall societies that they are in. 
Networked individualism downloads the responsibility — and the burden —
 of maintaining personal networks on the individual. Networked individu-
als often have time binds, since they are constantly negotiating plans with 
disconnected sets of individuals within their expanding network. Active 
networking is more important than going along with the group. Acquiring 
resources depends substantially on personal skill, individual motivation, 
and maintaining the right connections. 
 What about our  “ self ” : that elusive concept of subjective identity that 
helps us to integrate our involvement in multiple social networks?  23 Are 
we the same person in different milieus, both online and offline? Sherry 

126 
Chapter 5
Turkle has argued that our  “ second selves ” online are different from our 
selves offline. Yet the research we present throughout this book shows that 
people ’ s online and offline interactions are almost always integrated. 
However, Turkle rightly calls attention to the need for more research into 
how different aspects of the self get emphasized in different situations.  24 
 We suggest it is useful to think of a  networked self:  a single self that gets 
reconfigured in different situations as people reach out, connect, and 
emphasize different aspects of themselves. Our working visual image of 
this is an amoeba, with both a core nucleus and constantly changing 
pseudopods. 25 While a small number of scholars have used a concept 
similar to the networked self, there has been little systematic research — or 
even theorizing. The most relevant discussion is conducted by Jay David 
Bolter and Richard Grusin, who talk about a networked self switching 
among a variety of media to make their social networks perform well. They 
point out that people are  “ constantly making and breaking connections, 
declaring allegiances and interests and then renouncing them — participat-
ing in a video conference while sorting through email or word processing 
at the same time. ” 26 However, they anchor the concept in communication 
media rather than in multiple roles in social networks, as we do. 
 Networked Relationships On- and Offline 
 With the shift to person-to-person networks, the gap between physical 
space and cyberspace — or for that matter, between writing and talking — is 
diminishing. For instance, a Pew Internet study found that American teens 
usually think of their texting as  “ conversations ” rather than as  “ writing. ” 27 
Teens are even more text-involved, checking for multiple Facebook updates 
and text messages from their  “ friends, ”  who in fact range from close friends 
to distant acquaintances. Expressions such as  “ see you later ” or references 
to conversations such as  “ she told me that ” could as easily refer to in-
person encounters, emails, tweets, texts, or Facebook postings. Technology-
enabled interaction fits seamlessly into people ’ s everyday lives and 
complements other practices. 
 When people think of the impact of the Internet and Mobile Revolu-
tions on relationships and community, two contrasting images often come 
to mind. One is that of a world without borders and an endless amount 
of friendships and knowledge at people ’ s fingertips — Marshall McLuhan ’ s 
mythological global village come to life.  28 The contrasting image is of a 
lonely individual, hunched over a computer or smartphone screen, avoid-
ing all human interaction. These two extreme examples are at odds, and 

Networked Relationships 
127
the ambivalence has also been reflected in papal pronouncements. In June 
2011, Pope Benedict XVI lauded the power and value of ICTs for spreading 
information, but warned that people need to get away from their comput-
ers and meet people in person: 
 The new technologies allow people to meet each other beyond the confines of space 
and of their own culture, creating in this way an entirely new world of potential 
friendships. This is a great opportunity, but it also requires greater attention to and 
awareness of possible risks. Who is my  “ neighbor ”  in this new world? Does the 
danger exist that we may be less present to those whom we encounter in our every-
day life? Is there is a risk of being more distracted because our attention is frag-
mented and absorbed in a world  “ other ”  than the one in which we live? Do we 
have time to reflect critically on our choices and to foster human relationships 
which are truly deep and lasting? It is important always to remember that virtual 
contact cannot and must not take the place of direct human contact with people 
at every level of our lives.  29 
 The Pope also tweets occasionally as  PopeBenedictXVI . 
 It is appropriate that the pope recognized the importance of the Internet 
and Mobile Revolutions because in reality, people are positively embracing 
them. In July 2009, the Telus Canadians and Technology national survey 
found that more than half (55 percent) of Canadians aged thirteen and 
older agree that  “ the internet has improved my connections with friends 
and family. ” Only 15 percent disagree: a ratio of almost four to one. More-
over, 46 percent of the Canadians said,  “ the internet has improved the 
quality of my life ” : a ratio of nearly three to one. Almost as many (42 
percent) go so far as to say,  “ I cannot live without access to the internet. ” 
Yet, the internet has not taken over completely, for only a minority say 
they spend more time interacting with friends and family online than in 
person. 
 Contrary to concerns that the internet would reduce other forms of 
contact, the evidence shows the opposite: the more internet contact, the 
more in-person and phone contact. These are not either/or relationships: 
People use the internet and mobile phones to keep in touch, to arrange 
get-togethers, and to follow up after they meet. Despite fears that the 
internet would curb relationships by luring people to the screen and away 
from in-person contact, the number of important relationships may even 
have grown. One survey found that Twitter users are more involved in 
social activities.  30 More broadly, the average number of friends whom 
American adults see in person at least weekly grew 20 percent in five 
years: from 9.4 in 2002 to 11.3 in 2007. Moreover, this does not include 
relatives unless the respondents consider them to be  “ friends. ”  The same 

128 
Chapter 5
study shows that internet users have somewhat larger networks than non-
users. Moreover, heavy internet users have had the biggest increase in 
their number of friends: a 38 percent average increase from 9.0 in 2002 
to 12.4 in 2007 (  figure 5.2 ). Similarly, a Pew Internet study found in 2004 
that internet users have had 23 percent more active network members 
than non-users.  
 In short, being on the internet is associated with having both more 
friends and a greater increase in the number of friends over time. The 
number of friends has increased even for non-users, although not nearly 
as much. That non-users has increased their friendship contacts suggests 
two possibilities: The use of the word  “ friend ”  may have broadened between 
2002 and 2007 as MySpace and then Facebook became popular, or the halo 
effect of the internet has created more opportunities for friendship because 
most of the friends of non-users undoubtedly are internet users.  31 
 ICTs are about society as well as relationships. They support participa-
tion in traditional settings such as neighborhoods, voluntary groups, 
churches, and public spaces. They also support involvement in interest 
groups, whose membership might have been too small or spatially dis-
persed in pre-ICT days, to find one another and to get together in person. 
For example, communication scientist Nancy Baym has shown how the 
internet allows lovers of obscure indie bands to find each other online 
and becoming acquainted offline. Like rock parties, significant political 
Nonusers
Moderate users
Light users
Heavy users
3
0
6
9
15
12
2007
2002
9.5
9.9
8.5
9
10.2
12.3
10.5
12.4
 Figure 5.2 
 Change in average number of offline friends seen in person at least once per week. 
 Source :  Wang and Wellman, 2010  (see note 31). 

Networked Relationships 
129
organization begins on the internet, organizes via mobile phones, and then 
meets in person.  32 
 As a result, North Americans are in more contact with the members of 
their social networks than ever before. For example, the Pew Internet ’ s 
 “ The Strength of Internet Ties ” study found that people who email the 
great majority of their core ties at least weekly are also in phone contact 
with more core ties than are non-emailers. Many people use the internet 
to keep up with their weaker ties. Computer science graduate student Sarita 
Yardi explains: 
 I use the [I]nternet for two reasons: First, to keep up with my family. I have 18 
cousins, and most are married. Most have kids too and will often post pics. I ’ ve 
become closer — also in real world interactions — than I would otherwise be with all 
of them. 
 Second, I keep up with researchers in my community. For example, at the confer-
ence I ’ m at, I see when people arrive, where they are going tonight, who wants to 
grab dinner, etc. Facebook is a little more manageable on a large scale than Twitter. 
One of the best benefits has been to see their work-life balance (most of them have 
a reasonable balance), and I see a mix of statuses and pics about kids, awards, travel, 
rants, updates about research, and it makes me confident that it is possible to do 
all that too.  33 
 The more personal kinds of ICTs often intensify close relationships. 
Connected Lives participant Vamos values the personal autonomy he gets 
from using email.  “ If a friend sends me an email, I can respond — not 
immediately, ” he explains.  “ If I have something to do, I can say okay, I 
can send him an email after tomorrow when I have more time. Maybe [if 
he phoned] he can ’ t understand that you can ’ t speak with him for one 
hour, two hours. That ’ s simpler on email. ” 
 Until recently, younger adults have been the most involved in the 
Internet and Mobile Revolutions. As Toronto student Nazia Shahrin 
recounts,  “ I find my mother and father value face-to-face communication 
a lot more than I do. To me, a phone call is good enough, while they really 
need to see my face. It creates a lot of arguments where I am screaming, 
 ‘ I talk to you every day ’ and they are yelling,  ‘ But I haven ’ t seen you in 
two weeks. ’ ” 
 Despite the ubiquity of the internet, the Center for the Digital Future ’ s 
2007 survey of Americans found that that only 23 percent of internet users 
have one or more  “ virtual friends ” whom they have only met online. To 
be sure, the more people use the internet, the more virtual friends they are 
likely to have. Among those who have virtual friendships, heavy users 
(who use the internet at least three hours per day) report having an average 

130 
Chapter 5
of 8.7 online friends compared with only 1.3 for light internet users 
(online an hour or less per day). Moreover, just as in-person relations lead 
to more online contact, 20 percent of Americans have at least one relation-
ship that started online migrate to in-person contact. Here, too, heavy 
internet users have more migrating friends (an average of 2.2) than do light 
users (0.5).  34 
 While only a small percentage of people are heavily involved in virtual 
friendships, to some they are important — even consuming. Many of 
them are immersed in massively multiplayer online role-playing games 
(MMORPGs) that embrace thousands of players simultaneously, loosely 
organized as networked clans. But even in these, virtual friendships tend 
to  “ decay or grow inert without interaction, ” reports anthropologist Bonnie 
Nardi in her study of the World of Warcraft MMORPG. For example, there 
is no real group pressure to show up for clan activity, and people can switch 
clans easily. The games lack the rich ways that in-person relationships have 
to maintain connections.  35 
 Still, neighbors and local concerns matter in both online and offline 
encounters. Communications scholar Keith Hampton spent considerable 
time looking at how people connect with neighbors online and offline. In 
the late 1990s, he and coauthor Wellman studied the pioneering  “ wired 
suburb ”  of  “ Netville ”  near Toronto, comparing residents who used the 
internet with those who did not. They found that as compared with non-
internet users, internet-using neighbors had larger and wider-ranging local 
networks that socialized more with each other.  36 Further reflection suggests 
that the more active internet use resulted from the suburb setting up a 
local listserv that encouraged such interactions. Moreover, as settlers in a 
newly built suburb, the residents became part of the larger network of 
information — for example, where the dry cleaners were, who would baby 
sit, and efforts to press the area ’ s developer to fix sinking driveways and 
leaky plumbing. The email list served to facilitate the flow of information 
regardless of physical proximity and according to the users ’ convenience. 
When such incentives for local internet connectivity are not present, 
neighbors interact less intensively. To help build local community, 
Hampton created a set of internet-based eNeighbors.org and iNeighbors
.org sites across America to aid local connectivity.  37 
 Despite the distance spanning of the internet, people are still much 
more apt to have friends, coworkers, and schoolmates who live a 
short walk or drive away, they use the internet and mobile phones 
between in-person encounters to share information, coordinate contact, 
provide support, and just socialize. In-person contact predominates in all 

Networked Relationships 
131
neighborly interaction, but the amount of such contact may be declining. 
The Pew Internet  “ Neighbors Online ” study found that while 46 percent 
of Americans talk face to face with their neighbors about community 
issues, only 21 percent discuss such issues over the phone. Even less — 11 
percent — read a blog about neighborhood issues, a mere 5 percent belong 
to a neighborhood listserv (such as Netville had), and only 9 percent have 
exchanged emails about neighborhood issues.  38 So, proximity matters to 
networked individuals, but for most, the neighborhood is not where their 
community lives are focused. 
 How Large Are Personal Networks? 
 The high level of friendship activity online and offline suggests that worries 
have been overstated that Americans have only an average of 2.1 close ties. 
Yet, the research on declining networks is based on a single question about 
people  “ discussing important matters ” with others. But, that is only one 
kind of relationship in Americans ’ much larger core networks. 
 How large are people ’ s personal networks? One widely known estimate 
by Oxford anthropologist Robin Dunbar argues that limits on people ’ s 
cognitive information-processing capacity — what he calls their  “ social 
brain ” — limits the maximum size of cohesive groups to 150. He bases his 
estimates principally on his studies of primates and villagers in less-devel-
oped societies and structured military organizations. Yet, as Dunbar himself 
points out,  “ The 150, as we understand it, is simply one of a series of layers 
of embedded relationships, and this seems to apply as much in the con-
temporary world as the ethnographic world. ”  39 The outer most layer, 
Dunbar explains,  “ demarcates those whom you know as individuals from 
those whom you recognize but only have casual relationships with. ” A 
social network  “ consists of four layers, the Circles of Acquaintanceship, 
which scale relative to each other by a factor of three (an inner core of five 
intimates, and then successive layers at 15, 50 and 150). ” 40  
 Does it matter if a personal network contains 150 or 1,000 people when 
most of these are undoubtedly weak ties — nodding acquaintances or people 
rarely in contact? The answer is  “ Yes ”  for many reasons. For example, the 
developers of social media want to know how much space to allocate for 
information about friends. They have eagerly seized upon what they call 
 “ Dunbar ’ s number ” because of their need to estimate the size of networks 
when they design social media such as Facebook — despite the fact that 
they are designing for less-bounded networked societies and not for village-
like groups.  41  Likewise, policymakers want to know if people are lonely or 

132 
Chapter 5
connected, so that they can understand if they need extraordinary mea-
sures to build community. Even weak ties can provide a sense of commu-
nity. 42 Social psychologists want to know about the origins of lonely 
people: Where do they all come from?  43 And epidemiologists want to know 
network size because many diseases, such as HIV/AIDS, come from human-
to-human contact.  44 
 Network size also matters because people can often reactivate latent ties 
when they travel to a place where they know people, or they rekindle a 
common interest. At the same time, when people move, they are able to 
retain some of their relationships in the places where they used to live.  45 
 The larger the network, the more ties that can pass along information.  46 
Moreover, people with more ties tend to connect to more networks. Larger, 
more diverse networks connect people to a greater variety of social milieus, 
providing a greater variety of information and social contacts.  47  There is a 
nice spin-off societal effect that sociologist  É mile Durkheim first identified 
in the late nineteenth century as the  “ division of labor in society ” : When 
ties connect different social networks, their interconnections help to inte-
grate these different milieus in an overall society, providing a social glue 
that can help hold a society together.  48 
 The larger the network, the more health benefits. Larger networks 
provide more social support. As Peter and Trudy Johnson-Lenz found 
(see chapter 1), such support reduces psychological distress by providing 
more information, more goods and services, and a greater sense of con-
nectedness. Moreover, larger in-person networks provide more immunity 
to serious infectious diseases by exposing people to a wider range of minor 
infections such as common cold viruses.  49  
 Of course, the more people use the internet, the easier it is to connect 
online with large numbers of people.  50 
 Thus, size matters. Although some might think that smaller networks 
will have higher-quality relationships — quality compensating for the lack 
of quantity — in fact, quantity goes along with quality. Not only do larger 
networks provide more support, but each person in a larger network is 
likely to be supportive.  51 We do not know why, but we suspect that social 
capital breeds more social capital in a positive feedback cycle. A large, 
active, specialized and resource-filled set of ties is an important resource 
in its own right. 
 Dunbar ’ s number is set too low for most people in developed countries 
because their networks have many more than 150 members. Such higher 
numbers were found even before the advent of the internet because people 
have been moving among multiple sets of ties for generations. Moreover, 

Networked Relationships 
133
social media such as Facebook have increased the carrying capacity of 
relationships: It takes little work to keep large numbers of hardly known 
(or long-lost) ties on your  “ friend ”  list. While many are weak ties at the 
moment, they can be called upon when needed. Networks are so large, 
segmented, and far-flung that many people are not in frequent contact 
with many members of their networks. This means that people may not 
remember many of those whom they know — unless they see them, see 
their names or pictures, or get another hint. 
 To deal with these complexities, researchers have used a variety of 
techniques to estimate network size. For example, one research team 
found that Americans can name an average of 290 persons as members 
of their personal networks when they asked them to spot names in a 
telephone book and identify first names they know.  52 Name identification 
is tricky, for people are more likely to remember a boy named Sue than 
a girl named Sue. When researchers more recently took into account the 
difficulties people have in recalling common first names, they found 
much larger networks: an average (or mean number) of about 611 members 
in of their networks with a median of about 470 people. The range in 
Americans ’  network size is vast, with 90 percent of the adult population 
knowing anywhere between 250 and 1,700 others, and half knowing 
between 400 and 800. Women know about 9 percent fewer people than 
men do.  53  
 Scholars Keith Hampton and Lauren Sessions Goulet worked with Pew 
Internet researchers and a refined version of these name-recall methods to 
find that the average American has 634 social ties. Internet users, with an 
average of 669 ties, have more connections than nonusers, with an average 
of 506 ties. Moreover, heavy internet users have more ties than lighter 
users. At the same time, the average mobile phone user has 664 ties and 
the average user of a social networking site has 636 ties.  54 
 But, even these larger numbers underestimate the number of people 
that each American adult knows — because they are all based on recalling 
names, and people will forget lots of others until they meet them or are 
otherwise reminded. As psychologists Melinda Blau and Karen Fingerman 
show in the well-named  Consequential Strangers,  people know many others 
whom they usually do not list in network surveys, such as the woman who 
runs the local variety store who smiles every weekday as she sells  The New 
York Times .  55 All of these acquaintances embed people in society, provide 
useful services, sometimes open up new opportunities, and often give 
people a sense of belonging as they go through the day. The most accurate 
(and time-consuming) way to count these people is to follow someone 

134 
Chapter 5
around. Anthropologist Jeremy Boissevain did this in the 1970s when he 
followed two people in Malta for a year and had them keep records when 
he was not with them. Boissevain found the  “ true ”  average size of the 
networks in his small, intensive study to be more than 600, consistent with 
the estimates done by two recent research groups and much larger than 
Dunbar ’ s number.  56 
 Who Is in Personal Networks? 
 Personal networks tend to have roughly similar mixtures of people: 
friends, relatives, neighbors, and workmates (or schoolmates). Immediate 
family (parents, adult children, and siblings) and friends usually domi-
nate the core of North American networks. For example, the Connected 
Lives study shows that half (50 percent) of very close ties were kin. The 
rest are with friends (41 percent), a handful of neighbors (4 percent) 
and work/school mates (5 percent) (see table 5.1). But in societies with 
monogamous marriages, people can have only a limited number of kin 
even if they get married more than once. In the 1950s, anthropologists 
estimated that the British had about fifty kin on average: Smaller families 
 Table 5.1 
 Percentage of Closeness  
 Role 
 Very 
Close 
 Ambiguously 
Very Close 
 Somewhat 
Close 
 All Close 
Ties 
 Immediate kin 
 44 
 20 
 6 
 22 
 Extended kin 
 6 
 10 
 14 
 11 
 All kin  
  50  
 30  
  20  
  33 
 Friends 
 37 
 50 
 53 
 47 
 Neighbors 
 4 
 7 
 9 
 7 
 Work/school 
mates 
 5 
 6 
 10 
 7 
 Organizational 
ties 
 0 
 0 
 4 
 2 
 Online-only 
friends 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 Other 
 4 
 7 
 4 
 4 
 All non-kin  
  50  
 70  
  80  
  67 
 TOTAL 
 100 
 100 
 100 
 100 
 Number of ties 
 348 
 229 
 462 
 1,039 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project,  “ The Strength of Internet Ties, ” 2006.  

Networked Relationships 
135
may have made the average even lower now.  57 But there are no such 
limits on other types of relations; they are limited only by a person ’ s 
carrying capacity for friendships, neighbors, workmates, and more distant 
relatives. 
 Any network of relations around an individual can be a personal 
network: be it one of emotional support, gift giving, or email exchanges. 
Thus, studying personal networks provides information about people ’ s 
social worlds. Friends tend to outnumber relatives in personal networks. 
The larger the network, the higher the percentage (and number) of friends 
who are in it. Although the Connected Lives study shows that kin comprise 
50 percent of very close ties, friends and other non-kin (neighbors, work-
mates, etc.) comprise fully 80 percent of somewhat close ties. Using a 
somewhat more relaxed measure of closeness, Pew Internet research shows 
that Americans have twenty-three core ties in 2004 as well as twenty-seven 
other, but still significant ties: Most are friends and not kin.  58 Moreover, 
the average person ’ s ten to fifty close ties are only in the core of their 
networks: Their other five hundred-plus ties are almost entirely with 
friends, acquaintances, and consequential strangers. The Connected Lives 
study does not show any close ties maintained solely via the internet; all 
meet in person at least once in a while.  59 
 Sparsely Knit, Segmented, and Specialized Personal Communities 
 Networked individuals have  “ sparsely knit ” personal communities, mean-
ing that most network members are not directly connected with one 
another. As far back as 1968, the first Connected Lives study found that 
only one-third (33 percent) of an East Yorker ’ s five socially close ties were 
linked with each other. Further research in 1979 showed that weaker ties 
are even more sparsely interconnected, with a density of 13 percent.  60 
The larger the network, the less likely that two network members will be 
connected. We are not aware of more recent studies of the density of 
personal networks, although it is a good bet that the internet — especially 
Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, and email — enhances the density of inter-
connections among a person ’ s relatively close ties by allowing friends 
of friends to become aware of each other. 
 Personal communities are usually specialized, with different network 
members helping in various ways.  61 The exception is spouses who supply 
each other with many types of support.  62 Friends are valued as confidants 
and social companions. Neighbors and coworkers are conveniently suited 
for handling unexpected emergencies because their nearness enables them 

136 
Chapter 5
to react quickly with goods and services. Parents, adult children, and 
in-laws often provide emotional and long-term support: financial aid, 
emotional aid, large and small services such as childcare, health care, 
and home repairs. Similar to East Yorkers, Northern Californians name 
fifteen to nineteen network members who have helped them in up to 
ten different ways.  63 
 Supportive people tend to have longer-lasting relationships.  64 Yet, net-
works do change over time. Friendships are not always forever; neither are 
some kinship ties. Breakups became more widely known as  “ unfriending ” 
when the Facebook term  “ unfriend ”  became the Oxford University Press 
 “ word of the year ” for 2009. However, there is not much research evidence 
about how friends break up, fade away, or become weaker ties. A prelimi-
nary study found that those who initiate friending requests on Facebook 
are more likely to be subsequently unfriended (disconnected) in the rela-
tionship than are those who receive the friendship requests — presumably 
because some friending requests were unwanted.  65 One small NetLab study, 
done before the advent of Facebook, suggests that changes in network 
membership are not gradual but sudden, triggered by changes in personal 
situations such as marriage, childbirth, and residential moves — a personal 
network version of what paleontologist Steven Jay Gould has called  “ punc-
tuated equilibrium ” on the global evolutionary scale.  66 
 Core Networks Do More than Discuss Important Metters 
 We began this chapter with the alarm that Americans have only 2.1 people 
with whom they can discuss important matters, while a sizeable minority 
does not have any such discussion partners. Presumably these people are 
at the core of someone ’ s personal network. But when we delved into the 
matter, we found that there was more to the core than discussion part-
ners. 67 For one thing, the original survey did not ask about what  “ impor-
tant matters ” people discussed. When sociologists Peter Bearman and Paolo 
Parigi did, they discovered the variety of people ’ s concerns. While some 
talked about war and peace or getting a job, others talked about eating less 
meat and cloning headless frogs.  68 
 Not only is there variety in what people discuss, but their closeness 
comes from more ways than discussing important matters. Different 
people are close for different reasons, as sociologist Claude Fischer first 
documented in 1982.  69 For example, they could be  doing things for each 
other (rather than  discussing);  be  mutually enmeshed  in a broader kinship, 
friendship, or workplace network;  see  each other often at work or in the 

Networked Relationships 
137
neighborhood; or  chat  frequently in person or on the internet. As new 
Connected Lives research is showing, the multiple ways in which people 
are socially close means that the core networks of close ties are much 
larger than the 2.1 persons whom the U.S. General Social Survey (GSS) 
reported discuss important matters. 
 To understand this better, the Connected Lives study interviewed 84 
East Yorkers to learn about whom they felt close to in their personal 
communities — and why. The researchers asked about closeness in two dif-
ferent ways: by asking participants a direct question, and by asking them 
to place their network members on a series of concentric rings like a target, 
with the innermost ring indicating those who are  “ very close ” (see figure 
5.1). By only choosing those who are  “ very close ” on both criteria, the 
researchers are more confident that they are studying ties that are very 
close. The Connected Lives study finds that the average Torontonian inter-
viewed feels very close to 4.1 network members (answering  “ very close ” 
on both measures) and pretty close to another 8.2. In short, they feel close 
to 12.3 people — not 2.1.  70 
 But what does such closeness mean? Surprisingly, only 31 percent of 
the very close ties  “ discuss important matters ” with each other: an average 
of 1.1 ties. The respondents also discuss important matters with 1.3 of their 
other somewhat less close ties. The total of 2.4 close ties who reportedly 
 “ discuss important matters ” with the Connected Lives participants is more 
than the average of 2.1 found by the 2005 GSS but less than the 1984 GSS 
average of 2.9.  71 
 If people do not discuss important matters with all of their very close 
ties, then what relationships connect them with their other very close ties? 
 “ Salami analysis ” — cutting off and analyzing one chunk at a time — reveals 
that 20 percent of those who do not discuss important matters  “ chat about 
the day ” with each other. Think of friends and relatives schmoozing. 
Another 12 percent of the very close ties neither discuss nor chat, but do 
provide various kinds of social support such as information about health, 
help with home renovations, and advice about computers. 
 What about the 37 percent of the very close ties who neither discuss 
important matters, nor chat about the day, nor exchange social support? 
Frequent contact seems to account for most of the rest: 13 percent see 
each other in person at least weekly, while 12 percent of the ties do not 
see each other in person but connect by email at least weekly. A few 
(4 percent) just keep in contact by talking on the phone at least weekly. 
The small number of remaining very close ties are almost equally divided 
among friends, neighbors, and workmates (4 percent) and parents and 

138 
Chapter 5
adult children (3 percent): These are ties with whom people feel very close, 
but contact infrequently. 
 These findings make it clear that  “ closeness ” is not a one-dimensional 
phenomenon. 72 The variety of reasons for closeness shows that most ties 
in personal networks are specialized: People get different types of social 
support from different folks. Only when social closeness is measured exclu-
sively by the  “ discuss important matters ” criterion is there any evidence 
that North Americans have tiny and shrinking networks. As soon as mul-
tiple criteria for closeness are taken into account, there are larger support-
ive networks of strong, close ties. Toronto student Mirna Ghazarian put 
this nicely.  “ I would argue that close ties are not necessarily close friends, ” 
she writes.  “ For instance, I have a close tie with a lady I work with, with 
whom I discuss important political, environmental, and work-related 
matters, but I would not consider her a close friend. Why? Because I do 
not discuss my personal matters with her. I do not confide my personal 
problems as I would with my best friend. ”  73 
 Despite the major changes in connectivity that ICTs have brought, the 
percentage of very close kin and friends in these networks is almost identi-
cal to what it was in 1979, when NetLab studied East York and found 48 
percent were kin and 39 percent were friends, compared with 50 percent 
kin and 37 percent friends in 2005. However, friendships doubled between 
1979 and 2005, from 24 percent to 53 percent, while the percentage of 
neighbors has dropped by half for both the very close and somewhat close 
ties. These changes suggest that ICTs help to expand friendships — espe-
cially with somewhat weaker ties — and diminish the importance of neigh-
borly proximity. 
 Of course, styles vary with the stage of life. Marriage and early parent-
hood often entail high levels of commitment to kin, exerting strenuous 
demands on both time and energy for both spouses. Where singles use 
weekends for socializing with friends, married couples use weekends and 
weekday evenings for childcare and visits to their parents and in-laws. 
When working mothers are pressed for time, it is friendship that gives way 
and kinship that remains.  74 
 Moreover, how men and women network is converging. In pre-internet 
days, women were most often responsible for keeping networks going, 
especially with kin, although husbands and wives often saw the same 
friends. 75 In the early days of the internet, men were more active than 
women. Now, on the one hand, there is less difference in what women 
and men do online. On the other hand, a study of American undergradu-
ates still finds a traditional difference between men and women in their 

Networked Relationships 
139
internet use. Women use the internet more to reinforce their existing 
core ties, while men are more apt to use the internet to develop new 
relationships.  76 
 Networks in the Age of Facebook 
 Nothing has brought social networks more vividly to public awareness 
than the rise of social networking sites — first Friendster, then MySpace, 
and, most dramatically, Facebook. These sites have made social networks 
more salient and allowed networked individuals to share and capture more 
information about their friendships than has ever been possible. Moreover, 
this mutual exchange opens up countless avenues for dialogue and discus-
sion among one ’ s personal network, bringing to reality what mathemati-
cian Jon Kleinberg describes as  “ the visible conversations, the spikes and 
bursts of text, the controlled graffiti of tagging and commenting. ” 77 Social 
networking sites have become the dashboards of the internet for net-
worked individuals. Half of all American adults (50 percent) now use such 
sites, according to Pew Internet work.  78 From early 2010 onward, the fastest 
growing user cohort for these sites has included individuals over age fifty 
(see   figure 5.3) . 
 Facebook, especially, has become a powerful stimulant to internet and 
mobile use. Some of the contours of the Facebook world and the visible 
conversations that take place there were captured in a Pew Internet survey 
Sept. 
2005
May 
2008
Nov.
2008
April
2009
Dec.
2009
May
2010
May
2011
20
0
40
60
80
100%
83%
16%
12%
7%
5%
70%
51%
33%
Ages 18–29
Ages 30–49
Ages 50–64
Ages 65+
 Figure 5.3 
 Growth in the percentage of adult internet users who use social networking sites. 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project surveys. 

140 
Chapter 5
in September 2010: Some 42 percent of all American adults (53 percent of 
internet users) are Facebook users.  79 Many have large and active networks 
on Facebook. The mean number of users ’ Facebook  “ friends ”  is 229, or 35 
percent of the estimated size of Facebook users ’ overall social networks. 
Almost a third of the Facebook users (31 percent) say they check the site 
multiple times a day, and another 21 percent say they check in at least 
daily. And 15 percent say they change their profile at least once a day. The 
growing linkage between mobile connectivity and social networking is 
apparent in the study. Some 35 percent of those Facebook users access their 
profile pages from time to time with their mobile phones. 
 This same survey showed that 85 percent of the Facebook users comment 
on other people ’ s status, wall, or links — and 21 percent do so every day. 
Similarly, 85 percent comment on other people ’ s photos — and 19 percent 
do so every day. The survey shows that 78 percent use the  “ like ”  button 
to comment on others ’ status, wall, or links — and 25 percent say they do 
so every day. Also, 72 percent send private Facebook messages — and 10 
percent do so every day. 
 Facebook has become so essential and appealing to networked individu-
als that it is consuming ever-increasing amounts of time. Nielsen Company 
figures show this (see   table 5.2 ). The company reports that throughout the 
month of March 2011 the average internet user spent 6.5 hours on Face-
book, compared with 21 minutes on Google, the most heavily trafficked 
site on the web that month.  80 
 By engaging in these activities, networked individuals influence the 
content and flow of interpersonal information in ways that were unseen 
prior to the emergence of social networking sites.   Figure 5.4  provides just 
a snapshot of the kind of personal information that networked individuals 
publicize on their online profiles. Nicole Soriano (a pseudonym) has filled 
out her Facebook profile with tidbits of personal information. For instance, 
just on this one page, Nicole has shared her location (Toronto), educational 
background (Political Science and Sociology at the University of Toronto), 
partnership status (in a relationship), languages (English, French, and 
Spanish), birthday (September 6), and religion (Catholicism). She provides 
links to her friends (also pseudonyms here), and has set up her social net-
working profile to indicate her favorite music, books, and movies. Nicole 
also shares a total of 921 photographs from her daily life and travel. Net-
worked individuals on Facebook can share other details such as their 
current and previous work experience, favorite quotations, activities, inter-
ests, and contact information.  

Networked Relationships 
141
 Although the award-winning 2010 movie about Facebook is called  The 
Social Network,  Facebook is mostly about groups rather than networks. 
Rather than making it easy to limit certain kinds of information to differ-
ent types of people, Facebook ’ s profiles are set up to default to the assump-
tion that all people want to make all of their information available to all 
of their Facebook friends. This is a key part of Facebook founder Mark 
Zuckerberg ’ s philosophy:  “ You have one identity. . . . The days of you 
having a different image for your work friends or co-workers and for the 
other people you know are probably coming to an end pretty quickly. 
. . . Having two identities for yourself is an example of a lack of integrity. 
. . . The level of transparency the world has now won ’ t support having 
two identities for a person. ” 81 
 So, Nicole ’ s parents hear about her late-night partying, and her friends 
learn obscure details about her second cousins. Other social networking 
sites such as Google+ are trying to capitalize on this one-size-fits-all struc-
ture by allowing users to segment their networks and send different infor-
mation and updates to those different segments. 
 Table 5.2 
 Percent Using Top Ten Internet Sectors by Share of Time U.S. Internet Users Spend 
Online 
 Rank 
 Subcategory 
 % Share 
of Time 
 June 2010 
 % Share 
of Time  
 June 2009 
 % Change 
in Share of 
Time 
 1 
 Social networks 
 22.7 
 15.8 
 43 
 2 
 Online games 
 10.2 
 9.3 
 10 
 3 
 E-mail 
 8.3 
 11.5 
 – 28 
 4 
 Portals 
 4.4 
 5.5 
 – 19 
 5 
 Instant 
messaging 
 4.0 
 4.7 
 – 15 
 6 
 Videos/movies 
 3.9 
 3.5 
 12 
 7 
 Search 
 3.5 
 3.4 
 1 
 8 
 Software 
manufacturers 
 3.3 
 3.3 
 – 0 
 9 
 Multicategory 
entertainment 
 2.8 
 3.0 
 – 7 
 10 
 Classifieds/
auctions 
 2.7 
 2.7 
 – 2 
 Other 
 34.3 
 37.3 
  – 8 
 Source : The Nielsen Company. See note 80.  

142 
Chapter 5
 Much of the information on Nicole ’ s profile links to other pages within 
the social networking site itself and to external websites. For instance, the 
University of Toronto is a link to another page on Facebook that provides 
a description of the school as found on Wikipedia, related posts by Nicole ’ s 
friends, and all the people who have also added this university to their 
profile. Similarly, the icon for her favorite book,  The Reader,  links to another 
Facebook page that gives a description of the book and shows how many 
other Facebook users like the novel. Thus, these links allow for a denser 
and broader network of information, not just about Nicole, but also about 
the things she likes and the other networks she is a part of. 
 Facebook news feeds update Nicole ’ s friends with what is happening in 
her life. The feeds are neither random nor comprehensive: Facebook uses 
 Figure 5.4 
 Screen shot of a networked individual ’ s Facebook profile. 
 Source :  © 2011, used with the Facebook user ’ s permission. 

Networked Relationships 
143
algorithms that try to tailor the information that each friend gets according 
to their interests. Thus, each friend gets a somewhat different picture of 
Nicole ’ s life on their customized news feed. Some information is widely 
shared: When Nicole ’ s status changed from  “ single ” to  “ in a relationship, ” 
all her friends wanted to know  “ who? ” and  “ why? ” 
 What impact has the now-dominant Facebook had on networked rela-
tionships? It has clearly allowed more sustained contact with weaker ties. 
Even as people move, change jobs, and switch their attention zones, Face-
book efficiently allows them to stay in touch with others, broadcast basic 
update messages, and receive similar updates from their friends. Facebook 
has also enabled reconnections. Long-lost friends can locate each other 
and reconnect with old school chums, onetime lovers, former coworkers, 
and former neighbors.  82 
 Facebook promotes bridging as well as bonding: By following a chain 
of Facebook friends, people connect to other personal networks, providing 
potential access to other social milieus.  83 Mutual ties — both people are 
friends with the same third party — are especially important for forming 
new connections, as one friend validates the other.  84 As Toronto student 
Sharanpreet Kelley notes: 
 As I parted ways from my friends in high school offline, we maintained our relation-
ship online. When I started university, my network swelled with new people. Face-
book functioned unofficially alongside the university system, providing me with 
information on social events as well as on how my peers were doing. This open 
discussion played a key role in meeting people outside of my immediate network. 
I have depended on Facebook since high school, and it is difficult not to notice how 
dependent I am for social rituals, updates, and entertainment. Most of my friends 
and I do not see each other on a daily basis, so Facebook serves as a medium to 
continue light conversations and maintain our social ties. 
 Her story also shows how useful it is to be perpetually and pervasively 
aware of who is doing what with whom. Of course, this extreme transpar-
ency means that Facebook friends may learn unwanted things about one 
other — such as political leanings or sexual adventures — that may lead to 
unwanted attempts to control each other ’ s behavior or may even rupture 
relationships. 
 Yet, the importance of Facebook goes beyond its role in connecting 
current and former friends. It has become a personal portal embodying the 
networked individual. Not only are there links to people, but to tastes —
 such as Nicole ’ s books — and  “ likes ”  to even more books, music, and orga-
nizations. Corporations are now using Facebook pages extensively, so that 
if Nicole likes San Miguel Beer, she can link to the company ’ s page and 

144 
Chapter 5
they will know about it. Facebook has become each person ’ s  “ go to ” page: 
their home base. It is why they stay on Facebook for so long. Just like the 
car has become the personal basis for transportation, the smartphone for 
personal communication, and Google for information, Facebook is becom-
ing a key web in the social operating system — connecting each person to 
who and what they are interested in. At the same time, Facebook is amass-
ing tons of information about the individual, the aggregated profiles of 
individuals (for example, young Canadian women with Chinese family 
names), and their social networks. Thus, Facebook is both the epitome of 
networked individualism — each person is an individual participant — and 
of the networked operating system as a whole. 
 The More, the Merrier 
 Critics used to worry that the internet would be an inadequate replacement 
for human contact because hugging a computer screen is less satisfying 
than hugging a friend. In fact, the evidence shows that ICTs supplement —
 rather than replace — human contact. People will make do with electronic 
contact if they cannot be together in person. A more anthropomorphic 
device is the mobile phone, which some people see as their third skin. But 
despite whispered endearments into the phones, the boundaries are clear 
even here.  85 
 Do ICTs substitute for in-person communication, extend it, or transform 
it? The evidence for the  substitution  argument is almost nonexistent except 
for early studies of apprehensive newcomers to the internet. If anything 
was being substituted for, it was television.  86 Consider what happened 
when Toronto student Sharanpreet Kelley experimented with going off of 
Facebook and Twitter for two weeks in 2011.  “ As soon as I went offline, I 
wanted to check back immediately to see what I could have possibly 
missed, ” she says.  “ I had to distract myself with other activities, but my 
attention kept on going back to what was going on online. I felt like I was 
being isolated from my community. This was highly frustrating, because 
it was as if I had been exiled from my community. ” 
 Sharanpreet ended her cold-turkey experiment early: She could only 
handle her partial withdrawal from the network operating system for eight 
days instead of two weeks. There were events to plan and things to do. 
 “ FOMO ” — fear of missing out — played a key role in her return: Her network 
was too individualized and spatially dispersed to keep in touch solely 
through in-person and telephone contact. Sharanpreet ’ s experience par-
tially supports the  extension  argument. Facebook, email, internet phoning 

Networked Relationships 
145
(video and audio), mobile phoning, and texting are continuations of inter-
personal conversations. 
 But, Sharanpreet says that things have gone beyond supplementary 
extension. ICTs have  transformed  communication, relationships, and com-
munity. They support rapid-fire exchanges among individuals — in pairs or 
groups — that would only be partially feasible in village pubs. Social media 
such as Facebook, Twitter, and lists support  “ social neighborhoods ” that 
may be as important as the physical neighborhood or workplace in provid-
ing frequent contact and information about others.  87 Moreover, intercon-
nected personal networks now aggregate so that the sum is more than the 
whole. 
 To what purpose? So far, systematic research has found ICT use to be 
more beneficial than harmful. This is true in city, suburb, and country-
side. 87 The question is no longer the simple one of whether or not the 
number of relationships in personal networks is rising or falling in a hyper-
connected world. Although earlier studies were ambiguous, it is now clear 
that they are rising in number and in the volume of contact.  88 Networks 
are larger, more diverse,  89 and supportive.  90 The question is not if but  how 
ICTs intensify bonding and promote bridging. These happen both through 
casual interaction via email and Facebook, and through ad hoc support 
organized to help those in need. Susannah Fox reports this dimension of 
Pew Internet ’ s research into how people support others with illnesses even 
when they have never met:  “ The most striking finding of the national 
survey is the extent of peer-to-peer help among people living with chronic 
conditions, ” she notes.  “ One in four internet users living with high blood 
pressure, diabetes, heart conditions, lung conditions, cancer, or some other 
chronic ailment (23 percent) say they have gone online to find others with 
similar health concerns. By contrast, 15 percent of internet users who 
report no chronic conditions have sought such help online.  91 
 Fox summarizes that  “ people living with chronic disease who go online 
are finding resources that are more useful than the rest of the popula-
tion. ” 92 Similarly, a Dutch study found that online communication stimu-
lates teens ’ well-being,  93 while an American study showed that Facebook 
users provide social support. As one person in the Facebook study mused, 
 “ When you Google it, they just give you a list of medicines. You don ’ t 
know if the medicine works or not. You talk to somebody else [on Face-
book] who has a child and know that they gave it to their child. ” 94 
 Networked relationships on and offline reinforce networked individual-
ism. Both the internet and the mobile phone allow people to use their 
social switchboards to move between their social circles and to inter-

146 
Chapter 5
connect them. The internet and mobiles help people to bond within their 
circles by supplementing their in-person contacts. Further, their ease of use 
helps people to bridge networks as they never could before. They allow 
people to shop at specialized relational boutiques for support, similar to 
how Peter and Trudy Johnson-Lenz obtained diversified, often specialized, 
help from friends near and far in the story we recounted at the beginning 
of this book. 
 We have interviewed scores of networked individuals who use a panoply 
of gadgets and applications to orchestrate their lives. Theirs is a compli-
cated dance through the networked operating system. They use email for 
certain kinds of networked communication; text messaging, Facebook 
posts, private Facebook messages, and Twitter posts for others; and phone 
calls for communication that requires more extensive conversation. Today 
individuals have more communications options than ever, and that means 
they have to work harder to figure out which gadget or mobile apps to use 
for which kinds of activities. Yet, segmenting their tools and messaging 
strategies allows them to handle different tasks across their segmented 
networks. It is common for multiple devices and applications to be running 
simultaneously in the network operating system. In many cases, ICTs are 
used to organize in-person contact. 
 The more people use the internet, the more friends they have, the more 
they see their friends, and the more socially diverse are their networks. The 
internet and mobile phones are both an outcome and a cause of larger 
networks. They help people get social support. They provide conduits for 
information, guides to services, and ways to seek and ask for help. The 
internet, especially, amplifies people ’ s social capital — the resources they get 
from the ties that they draw upon for their needs and interests. As we have 
shown elsewhere in this chapter, the internet is especially good for con-
necting people with their weaker ties and with a broader diversity of 
people. 
 This chapter has described how personal networks have expanded, 
become more complex, and speeded up. Communities continue to exist, 
except as spacially dispersed and differentiated personal networks rather 
than as neighborhoods or densely knit groups. When we see individuals 
sitting alone, we should not assume they are isolated or lonely: With 
internet access and mobile phones they have community immediately at 
their fingertips. And when they need a real hug or material aid, transit, 
cars, and planes are often available.  95 People ’ s lives offline and online are 
now integrated — it no longer makes sense to make a distinction.   

 
 6  Networked Families 
 The Triple Revolution — Social Network, Internet, and Mobile — has under-
mined the classic notion that people ’ s homes are their castles: inviolate, 
defended households filled with family activity.  1 Rather, they are bases for 
reaching out and networking — with family members, friends and relatives, 
community groups, and work. 
 Hillary Clinton understood this in her book  It Takes a Village.  Despite 
the title, Clinton recognized in the text that families are not bound up in 
villages but are networked:  “ The networks of relationships we form and 
depend on are our modern-day villages, but they reach well beyond city 
limits. ”  2 
 The evidence suggests Clinton can take her thesis further. No family is 
an island, and no house is a castle. They are multiply networked. The ways 
in which modern families are networked provide them with a great deal 
of individual discretion, abundant opportunities for communication, and 
flexibility in their togetherness. They spend less time physically together 
at home in the same room and even in the same house.  3 People network 
as individuals rather than within solidary family groups. Each household 
member operates as a semiautonomous individual, with her/his own 
agenda, using a multitude of transportation services and communication 
media to contact and coordinate with each other. But while structural 
changes in North America have centrifugally weakened the physical 
togetherness of families — for better or worse — multiple communication 
media links them. Families continue to be thickly connected at any time 
and anywhere, with in-person contact supplemented by mobile phones 
and the internet. 
 Although the trend to networked families began before the internet and 
mobile phone, the intrinsically  personal nature of these technologies has 
encouraged the transmutation of households into networks. Where calls 
to wired (landline) home phones and visits to homes often were contacts 

148 
Chapter 6
with the entire household, new ICTs (information and communication 
technologies) foster individual person-to-person contact. Yet, this only tells 
part of the story, for in the network operating system, there are social and 
cultural changes in addition to technological changes. They include trends 
toward personal car ownership (rather than the one-for-all family car), 
women working outside of their homes, shifting family composition 
(smaller, with multiple marriages and parentage), and the substitution of 
paid services for the work formerly done by homemakers — such as lower-
cost fast food and  “ family ”  restaurants. 
 The Way It Is in the Networked Age 
 To understand the networked nature of family life these days, consider 
how Tracy Kennedy operates. She ’ s a single mom in southern Ontario with 
a teenage son, and their lives are oriented around ICTs: 
 I often start my weekday morning at the computer where I respond to emails and 
catch up on social networking sites. Much of my day takes places at my home office, 
and communicating via ICTs to friends, relatives and work peers is steady through-
out the day. But not all of my online interactions are with people outside my home; 
I also connect with my teenager via ICTs when he is not at home and when he is 
at home. For example, just before lunch I receive a text message from my son while 
he is at school:  “ so bored in this class. ” Entertained, I text a pithy response to which 
he does not reply. In the afternoon he sends another text message saying he will be 
a few minutes late coming home because he has some work to do in the computer 
lab. I text him back letting him know that I am running errands and won ’ t be home 
when he gets there. He sends me a text to let me know he has made it home — and 
to remind me to buy Coke. 
 Later in the day, dinner is almost ready and he ’ s not responding when I shout 
up to him because he ’ s listening to music on his headset. I send him an IM through 
Skype to let him know, and he immediately replies that he will be there right away. 
After dinner, we each grab our own Xbox to play the multiplayer  Modern Warfare 
video game with each other. We also set up a game lobby with his school friends 
and my friends (all local) so that we can all chat on our headset during our game 
play. Later that evening, he sends me an email with a link to a laptop that he is 
really interested in buying for school use. We talk about it face-to-face before he 
goes to bed. 
 In my home, staying connected with my teenager throughout the day is vital as 
a single parent, and using ICTs gives me some peace of mind about his whereabouts 
and safety. More importantly I find that using these ICTs with my teenager is . . . 
engaging and entertaining when we are home together but not in the same room, 
and they also act as a generational bridge between parent and child. Our use of ICTs 
is individual, but we are connected and networked together as a family.  4 

Networked Families 
149
 This story points to how the increasingly ubiquitous nature of ICTs is 
embedded in the domestic lives of networked families. This is a dramati-
cally different life from the one her parents experienced (  table 6.1 ). 
 Changing Households: Size and Composition 
 North American families have changed substantially during the past several 
generations.  5 The percentage of married-couple households with children 
has steadily declined — that traditional model of the  “ nuclear family ” of 
always-married mom and dad with kids, the  Fun with Dick and Jane  norm 
of American life. Between 1980 and 2005, the overall percentage of such 
households fell by one-quarter in the United States — from 31 percent to 
23 percent. At the same time, the percentages of single-parent households 
and remarried-parent households have each increased. 
 Households have also become  smaller.  Part of this is attributed to women 
having fewer children. In the 1970s, only 10 percent of women in their 
childbearing years did not have a child compared with 20 percent in 2008. 
The percentage of family households containing children under the age of 
eighteen has declined from 52 percent in 1950 to 46 percent in 2008.  6 The 
result of this decrease means that there are now more childless (28 percent) 
and single-person (26 percent) households in the United States than mar-
ried-couple-with-children households (  figure 6.1 ).  7 Many households have 
 only one adult  because late marriage — with a median age of twenty-eight 
for men and twenty-six for women — provides more opportunities to 
develop separate networks as adults before marriage. Yet, while the percent-
age of one- or two-person households increased by nearly one-third during 
the same time period — from 46 percent to 60 percent — the percentage of 
households with five or more people dropped in half from 21 percent in 
1970 to 10 percent in 2003.  8 
 Households have become  less stable  in their composition. Fewer Ameri-
cans between age thirty and forty-four are married than before: 84 percent 
of Americans 30 – 44 years were married in 1970 compared with 60 percent 
in 2007. American divorce rates in the United States are higher than they 
were a generation ago: increasing from 2.2 (per 1,000 people) in 1960 to 
3.6 in 2005, while Canadian rates increased from 0.4 in 1960 to 2.2 in 
2005. 9 Partnership — cohabitation without marriage — is becoming more 
normative. Whereas only 16 percent of American adults lived together 
before marriage in 1980, 41 percent did in 2000, and the 2010 numbers 
are expected to show more than 50 percent.  10 

150 
Chapter 6
 Table 6.1 
 How Households Have Changed  
 1950s to 1960s 
 2000s to 2010s 
 Mom 
 Homemaker 
 Paid worker outside 
home 
 Dad 
 Sole breadwinner 
 Largest earner 
 Marital status 
 Lifelong 
 Second marriage 
 Housework 
 Mom does almost all 
 Mom does more than 
dad 
 Children ’ s play 
 Front/back yard, street, 
park 
 Baseball, ballet, scouts, 
piano 
 Mom contacts kids 
 Yell out window, call 
neighbor 
 Call kid ’ s mobile phone 
 Joint family time 
 Watching TV 
 Showing  & sharing at 
the computer 
 Number of cars 
 One per household 
 One per adult 
 Music 
  American Bandstand  
 iTunes 
 Mass communication 
 Radio, one TV controlled 
by dial, broadcasting 
 Multiple TVs controlled 
by remote, 
narrowcasting 
 Textual news 
 Daily (print) newspaper 
 Yahoo/Google News, 
RSS 
 Visual news 
 Life  magazine, TV 
network news 
 YouTube, video links, 
blogs, tablets 
 Ads 
 Magazine, classifieds, 
Yellow Pages 
 Amazon, Craigslist, 
eBay, banners, AdWords 
 Spoken communications 
 One household phone 
 Personal mobile phones 
with Caller ID screening 
 Written communication 
 Letters, personalized 
stationery 
 Texting, email, Facebook 
 If not home 
 Call back 
 Leave voicemail 
 Spousal contact at work 
 Only in emergencies 
 Discreet email  & text 
through the day 
 Household recreation 
 Charades, Monopoly, 
radio, TV 
 YouTube, downloads, 
video/online games 
 Movies 
 Movie theaters 
 Downloads, Netflix 
 Source : Table by Barry Wellman.  © 2011, used with permission.  

Networked Families 
151
 Shifting Family Roles 
 Family roles have changed, driven by the rise in the percentage of women 
who work outside their homes and the smaller number of children in 
households.  11 In most married couples, both wives and husbands go out 
to do paid work. While in 1960, 38 percent of American women were 
employed outside the home, that figure leapt to 59 percent in 2006. Simi-
larly, in Canada, nearly three-quarters (73 percent) of the men and nearly 
two-thirds (62 percent) of the women were in the labor force in 2004. 
Dual-job households grew from 39 percent in 1970 to 53 percent in 2007. 
As a result, wives and husbands must negotiate multiple work and school 
schedules in addition to domestic work (such as cooking, cleaning, and 
maintenance), child care, family time, and social and leisure activities. 
Some of the biggest challenges emerge as the financial balance of power 
shifts in families. More spousal households in North America contain 
dual-earners (  figure 6.2 ), and the gaps between the relative contribution 
of husbands and wives to the household income and the number of paid 
hours worked outside the home have narrowed over the past twenty years. 
For example, 42 percent of Canadian wives contributed at least 45 percent 
of the household income in 2007, as compared to 37 percent in 1997, 
with two-thirds (65 percent) of the wives working the same number of 
paid hours per week as their husbands.  12 
1960
1970
1980
1990
1985
2000
1995
2005
0.5
0
1.0
1.5
2.5
2.0
2.3
1.9
U.S. (children under 18 among 
married couples per household)
Canada (children under 
25 per census family)
1.1
1.7
 Figure 6.1 
 Average number of children per household in the United States and Canada. 
 Source : U.S. Census Bureau; Statistics Canada. 

152 
Chapter 6
 As women spend more time working outside the home, there have 
been big changes in how both men and women spend their time on 
child care, housework, and other activities. The amount of time mothers 
spend weekly on housework shrunk nearly in half between 1965 and 
2005, from an average of 32 hours to an average of 19.6 hours, while 
the amount of time spent by men doubled from an average of 4.4 hours 
to 9.8 hours (figure 6.3). Fast food restaurants grew in number by 25 
percent in the United States between 1998 and 2007 and by 36 percent 
in Canada between 1990 and 2007, reducing domestic time pressures on 
homemakers. 13 
 Although mothers continue to spend more time than fathers caring for 
children, fathers have more than doubled the time they spend caring for 
their children — in addition to the increased time they spend doing domes-
tic work. Men and women are spending more time in leisure activities, 
both outside of their homes (such as visiting friends and relatives and 
participating in voluntary associations, sports, and entertainment) and 
inside their homes (such as watching television, chatting online, playing 
online games, and downloading music and videos). Canadian women 
spend less time at home: 8.5 hours per day in 2005 as compared with 9.1 
hours in 1992.  
 With wives doing more paid work and men doing more child care, 
husbands and wives have less specialized roles. In effect, this means that 
1960–61
1970–71
1980
1990
1985
2000
1995
2005
40
30
20
50
60
80%
70
79%
70%
68%
58%
56%
78%
36%
29%
Men (U.S., ages 16+)
Women (U.S., ages 16+)
Men (Canada, ages 15+)
Women (Canada, ages 15+)
 Figure 6.2 
 Percentage of employed workers by gender. 
 Source : Statistics Canada and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (see note 12). 

Networked Families 
153
spouses need to perform as networked individuals to negotiate how they 
allocate household roles. Nevertheless, women are still primarily respon-
sible for household work as well as for keeping up ties with neighbors, 
friends, and relatives. 
 The way couples apportion their time between work and home has also 
become more fluid as the boundary between home life and work life breaks 
down and the length of the work day increases. Some do all or part of their 
jobs at home, using the internet to communicate, access organizational 
databases, and find information. Some do part of their jobs on the fly, 
using their mobile devices to place calls, browse the internet, or access 
specialized apps that tie to their interests. Those who can control their 
schedules do best at avoiding stress and dealing with the often-competing 
demands of home and work. 
 Yet, the growth of computer-based work allows both men and women 
to spend more hours doing paid work than in the previous generation. In 
1980, less than one-quarter (22 percent) of college-educated men worked 
a fifty-or-more-hour work week compared with almost one-third (31 
percent) in 2005.  14 
 Pressed for time, couples multitask throughout the day. They may have 
less time for each other or for their children. Some watch less TV, cut 
back on involvements with traditional volunteer organizations (such as 
the Scouts), or get together less often with neighbors and friends.  15 All 
1965
1975
1998
2000
5
0
15
10
20
25
35
30
32
19.6
9.8
4.4
Mothers
Fathers
 Figure 6.3 
 Mean number of hours of housework per week by parents in the United States. 
 Source :  Sayer 2005, 2007  (see note 14); U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 

154 
Chapter 6
of these trends have implications for how satisfied people are with the 
amount of time they have to spend with family and friends, and on 
leisure activities. The increase in both single-parent and dual-income 
families has resulted in both men and women devoting more hours to 
both paid and domestic work — and spending less time in person with 
their families.  16 
 Household life has sped up and become more individualized. The time 
that adult Canadians spend alone increased 38 percent from 257 minutes 
per day in 1986 to 354 minutes per day in 1998. In 1986, men spent 215 
minutes per day with their spouses and women spent 198 minutes. This 
had dropped by 1998 to 201 minutes for men ( − 16 percent) and 175 
minutes for women ( − 11 percent) for women.  17 Moreover, smaller house-
holds mean fewer people at home to chat with.  18 
 As people ’ s routines have changed, so have the technologies they use 
to communicate with family, friends, and work peers. Over the last genera-
tion, home computers have become domesticated.  19 Pew Internet surveys 
in mid-2011 found that 55 percent of American adults own desktops and 
57 percent own laptops and netbooks.  20 As personal computing tools have 
gotten smaller, desktop computer screens have gotten larger, growing from 
fourteen inches in the 1980s to at least twenty inches now. With more 
than twice the viewing area, these larger screens enable multiple programs 
to be viewed simultaneously and enable family members to use the inter-
net jointly. Not all households are the same, and not all households use 
the internet and mobile phones in the same amounts or the same ways. 
Households with higher levels of education, higher income, and children 
still at home are more likely to use the internet at home. Many of today ’ s 
households contain multiple ICTs. There are more technological toys in 
living rooms than a generation ago, such as digital cable boxes, gaming 
consoles, personal video recorders, and DVD or Blu-ray players. Much 
larger TV screens enhance the immersiveness — and potential inclusive-
ness — of the experience. Where a twenty-inch screen was normal in the 
1970s, forty-two inches or more is the contemporary standard, providing 
more than 4.5 times the viewing area.   21 
 Family Time, Network Time 
 When the University of Southern California ’ s Center for the Digital Future 
issued a 2009 media release titled  “ Family Time Decreasing with Internet 
Use, ”  hundreds of articles picked up on its premise. Such articles often 
portrayed internet use as a replacement rather than a complement for 

Networked Families 
155
in-person family contact, and they rarely saw the internet as a positive tool 
to help families cope with single parenthood, time-use challenges, or struc-
tured activities for their children.  22 
 To be sure, social and economic changes have helped to reconfigure 
family life from solidary togetherness to networked semi-independence for 
family members. Nearly half of all American parents feel that they spend 
too little time with their children. A main reason is that greater involve-
ment in paid work weakens parents ’ ability to respond flexibly to children ’ s 
needs. Still, the majority of family members spend considerable time 
together, watching television, having family meals, and visiting with 
friends and family (  figure 6.4 ). Although the time people spend with 
household members varies depending on the day ’ s events and their sched-
ules, they still find some time to be with their families. More than three-
quarters of married parents (77 percent) report spending all or most of their 
non-work time with other household members.  23 
 Family dinners have usually been a way for people to spend quality time 
with each other, chatting about how they spent the day, discussing things 
in more depth, and bonding with each other. So alarms rang in 2000 when 
Robert Putnam in  Bowling Alone  reported that the frequency of people 
saying they usually have family dinners together had declined by a third 
during the past twenty years, from about one-half to one-third. We won-
dered if the networking of family life means that spouses and children 
have less time to eat dinner together. The current situation is more positive 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60%
All my time not with them
Most of my time not with them
Some of my time with them
Most of my time with them
All of my time with them
Married couples
Married parents
Single parents
21%
46%
52%
45%
24%
20%
30%
9%
2%
6%
0%
1%
1%
25%
18%
 Figure 6.4 
 Percentage of time that adults spend with other household members. 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project, Networked Family Survey 2008. 

156 
Chapter 6
than people might suspect. A Pew Internet survey on networked families 
shows that North Americans have dinner together more. Despite the 
demands of work, child care, school, and other activities, almost all (93 
percent) of those American adults who live with a partner or a child have 
dinner with members of their household at least a few times per week. 
More than half (56 percent) have dinner daily with their families, while 
one-quarter (24 percent) have dinner together almost every day (  figure 
6.5 ). Only 6 percent have a family dinner just a few times a month.  24 
 A generation ago, most people watched television every night. Hit 
shows were widespread bases for conversation around the TV set, at family 
dinners, in the neighborhood, and at work. Television continues to be 
frequently watched: Canadians, aged thirteen-plus, watch TV about four-
teen hours per week (two hours a day), slightly less than the fifteen 
hours per week that they are on the internet. Yet, only three-quarters of 
Americans watch TV almost every day now, while a lower proportion —
 three-fifths, of young adults aged eighteen to twenty-nine — watch almost 
every day. 
 Television watching is a much different experience than it was a genera-
tion ago in the content of shows, the fragmented audiences, the technol-
ogy people use to watch, and the time of day they watch. Fewer shows aim 
at the four traditional demographic segments of broadcasting: men and 
women, old and young. Instead, hundreds of stations now supply focused 
10
0
20
40
30
60%
50
Every day
Almost every day
Few times a week
Few times a 
month or less
56%
24%
14%
6%
 Figure 6.5 
 Frequency of dinners that adults share with other household members. 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project, Networked Family Survey 2008. 

Networked Families 
157
 narrowcasting  aimed at narrowly defined audience segments:  “ niche TV ” 
with channels focused on such subjects as golf, cooking, pets, sex, old 
movies, and shopping. Choice has exploded, putting control of what 
people watch — and where — in the hands of individuals. There are more —
 and more flexible — ways to watch these shows. Many shows are streamed 
on the internet and excerpted on YouTube or Hulu. Netflix and most cable 
TV providers deliver movies and TV shows on demand; podcasts and per-
sonal video recorders (such as TiVo) allow people to watch shows according 
to their own schedules. 
 These changes allow for more flexible TV viewing tailored to personal 
interests, scheduling, and time constraints. In contrast to the previous 
generation ’ s  “ must see ” appointment TV, this has become an era of  “ my 
playlist ”  TV. The new era responds to smaller, more flexible households 
with networked family members going their separate, but connected, 
ways.  25 
 Nevertheless, television watching is down. Where have all the watchers 
gone? The answer is the internet: Time-use analysis shows a good fit 
between less television watching and more internet use. For example, the 
Telus Canadians and Technology study shows that nearly half (44 percent) 
of all Canadian adults watched less TV in 2009 than they did in 2006. 
Moreover, nearly half (46 percent) of those who watched less TV say a main 
reason is that they are spending more time on the internet.  26 
 Digital Technologies and Networked Households 
 Inside homes, computers have assumed a special place in communal 
spaces. As  New York Times  reporter Katie Hafner put it in 2003:  “ If the 
kitchen ’ s warm, it may be the PC. ” 27 Evidence in the Pew Internet surveys 
and in ethnographic research shows that people reorganize their spaces 
at home to accommodate computer use. Most home computers are in 
shared space that is accessible to other household members most of the 
time. In Toronto ’ s East York, 46 percent of those Connected Lives partici-
pants who use home computers have at least one in a public space such 
as a living room. 
 With computers and the internet so widely available, children can 
become proficient quickly. Maria Lianos-Carbone blogged about her five-
year-old son Anthony: 
 I ’ m stunned that he learned how to turn my computer on, get into Internet Explorer 
and find his way to Nick Jr. so he can play video games. Watching his little fingers 
click on that mouse is simply astounding. Once he ’ s bored of video games, he ’ ll 

158 
Chapter 6
move to YouTube to watch the Wiggles online. When he ’ s tired of singing along 
with Greg first in English and then in Spanish, he ’ ll cross over to Starfall, a free 
educational website also used in his kindergarten class. . . . Did I mention that my 
husband is computer illiterate? My 5-year-old had to show him how to close a 
program.  “ See dad? All you have to do is to click on the X. ” 28 
 Nor is Anthony a unique case. Even younger children grow up now becom-
ing as unconsciously computer literate, just as many children start learning 
how to drive by watching their parents.  Wired magazine editor Chris 
Anderson tweeted on September 11, 2009:  “ Our baby has a pull-along 
phone. There is nothing about it she recognizes as a phone dial: dial, 
handset, cord. But she chats on the TV remote ” because it looks like a 
phone.   29 
 These children are not necessarily prodigies. The Telus Canadians and 
Technology survey found that three-fifths (58 percent) of Canadian chil-
dren have started using the internet by age seven, and one-quarter (23 
percent) before they have entered kindergarten at age five. By age ten, the 
great majority (84 percent) are on the internet, using it at least four hours 
per week.  30 By that time, they have already learned a good deal about what 
to do, through watching their parents and older siblings, and playing 
around with their equipment. 
 Social scientists Gina Neff and Philip Howard sent us a picture of their 
eighteen-month-old twin boys Hammer and Gordon with  “ their favorite 
toys, mom ’ s laptop and cell phone ” (  figure 6.6 ). 
 Figure 6.6 
 Eighteen-month-old boys playing with their favorite toys: their parents ’ laptop and 
iPhone. 
 Source : Gina Neff and Philip Howard.  © 2010, used with permission. 

Networked Families 
159
 As their homes fill up with ICTs, people make it a daily routine to 
use them to stay connected as they move about. Networked families 
use ICTs to keep their family together. Their ICTs enable them to com-
municate and coordinate despite their mobile, individual lifestyles. ICTs 
allow them to reach out to new information and new contacts, and 
then bring that back to the family. At home, their family spends quality 
time together showing and sharing web pages, online media, and email 
messages. They rely on blogs and other websites for advice from other 
parents and organizations, often getting a sense of connectivity with 
other, sometimes beleaguered, parents. All of this communication and 
content creation has helped family members as they operate as net-
worked individuals using personal technology to navigate family life. 
Two-fifths (39 percent) of all American households have at least two 
computers; three-fifths (58 percent) of married-with-children families 
have at least two. 
 Not surprisingly, married couples with children stand out for owning 
more technology, including mobile phones and computers. Part of the 
reason is that these are the largest households. The more people in 
households, the more coordination and communication they need. For 
example, where a two-person household (married couple or single mom 
with child) has only two relationships to coordinate (one in each direc-
tion), a four-person household (mother, father, and two children) has 
twelve relationships to coordinate. Almost all (93 percent) American mar-
ried-with-children families own a personal computer, and nearly six-tenths 
(58 percent) own two or more. In addition, more than one-third (37 
percent) of such families (and 63 percent of those with multiple computers) 
have a wired or wireless home computer network, so that all can connect 
to the internet. Indeed, both spouses go online in three-quarters (76 
percent) of these families as do an even higher five-sixths (84 percent) of 
their children aged seven to seventeen. 
 For example, Tanya (in the Connected Lives study) is a married woman 
in her late forties, a mother of two and a marathon runner. An engineer, 
she works full-time mostly at the office, although some of her evenings 
and weekends are also filled with work. Tanya has a tight schedule and 
coordinates all of the comings and goings of her family using the calendar 
program on her laptop. She uses her computer to plan all of her work, 
family, and social activities, and she sees it as a valuable asset that affects 
everything in her life. All of her family members have their own iPods, 
BlackBerrys, and computers, which are all linked and connected. They are 
in email contact with each other throughout the day. Tanya uses the 

160 
Chapter 6
internet all day and evening. She sees the internet as the ultimate resource. 
It is the newspaper, the phone book, and the encyclopedia combined. 
Whenever she needs information for her family — on healthy living, for 
example — she turns to the internet. For Tanya, as for almost all the people 
we interviewed, debates about whether ICTs help or hurt do not matter; 
she cares only about how these technologies let her get on with her life. 
 Families of married couples with children are also likely to own mobile 
phones according to Pew Internet data: 89 percent of such families own 
more than one mobile phone, while 47 percent own three or more. For 
parents, the patterns of mobile phone use are similar to those for internet 
use — both parents own a mobile phone in over three-quarters (78 percent) 
of such families. Children however, are less likely to own a mobile phone 
than they are to go online. For example, where the Telus survey found in 
2009 that 84 percent of Canadian children aged seven to seventeen in 
married families go on the internet, only 57 percent have a mobile phone 
of their own. However, as costs have dropped for gadgets and monthly 
fees, mobile phone ownership for teens has increased: Pew Internet research 
showed that by mid-2011, exactly three-quarters of those between ages 
twelve and seventeen have a mobile phone, up from 45 percent in 2004.  31 
Most teens get their mobile phones by the time they turn fifteen. It is a 
win-win situation for teens and parents: Teens value their ability to connect 
with their friends and to call home when in need, while parents have 
some comfort knowing they can connect with their kids at any time when 
they are apart. 
 Most children get their first mobile phone as a gift from their parents. 
Like most gifts, the phone comes with strings attached, in this case an 
obligation for teenagers to reciprocate by regularly checking in with their 
parents to maintain family ties while being physically apart. Parents use 
their mobile phones to make sure where their children are and to coordi-
nate meeting spots. The paradox is that the Mobile Revolution makes 
children freer to be physically apart from their parents, because their 
mobile phones can keep them constantly accessible to their parents. 
 There is also pressure to add ICTs to the family so that each member 
can function independently. As Michelle told the Connected Lives study: 
 “ The whole reason why our three children got their own computers for 
Christmas the one year was because people were fighting over them. 
They ’ d all want to use them at the same time, of course. There ’ s only so 
much time between after school and bedtime. ” 
 Helen, another Connected Lives participant, has two computers at 
home. Her personal computer is in her home office where she does her 

Networked Families 
161
public relations business. Helen uses email to communicate with work 
people and friends. She too looks online for information to help her family. 
As was the situation for Peter and Trudy (described in chapter 1), ICTs are 
used in new and different ways when life disruptions occur. Helen recol-
lects:  “ My father was diagnosed with cancer, so I went on the internet to 
find out everything I could about cancer, the cancer site and different 
things, ” she wrote.  “ And then, my mother once had a reaction to a medi-
cation and I went on the website to find out about that. I [also] use websites 
to find hockey camps for my son. ” 32 
 Helen effectively ICTs to inform herself and those close to her. A single 
mom, she put the second computer for her children in the family room 
because she wants her kids to be close to her when they are using it. She 
keeps the door to her office open, unless her kids have friends over and it 
gets too loud. Her kids are computer whizzes; they have been using it since 
kindergarten. She draws on their skills if something needs attention. Her 
kids have no problems sharing one computer, as her fourteen-year-old son 
will use it after her nine-year-old daughter has gone to bed. Helen ’ s son 
often uses the internet for homework, and also for learning guitar chords, 
downloading music, and following hockey. He also talks to his friends via 
email and IM. Her daughter plays games both on the computer and her 
mother ’ s mobile phone. 
 More choreography is needed when families share a computer. Daniel 
and his wife, for example, have separate email accounts to keep their mes-
sages apart. These Connected Lives participants share a home computer is 
in the basement, while Daniel also carries a laptop back and forth to work 
for his university research. He researches holidays, looks for genealogy 
information, and emails friends and family who live out of town. He likes 
to check his email in the morning, and might check it again after dinner. 
Sometimes when Daniel is at work he will forward email from his family 
out west to his wife at home — and she does the same. Although Daniel 
does not think of himself as an avid internet user, he goes online for travel 
and product information, buys tickets to local events, and more. He also 
looked up health information online once when his wife was misdiagnosed 
with a medical condition. 
 In such ways, networked households are working harder to keep in 
touch than households of the previous generation did. Where mom, dad, 
and the kids used to be in fixed locations all day and rarely communicated 
until they came home, on-the-go networked individuals are grabbing mul-
tiple means of communication to tell each other where they are and 
coordinate what they are doing. While sometimes they go online jointly, 

162 
Chapter 6
most often they are using personal communication media. They mostly 
dance solo but take part in a few duets and household ensembles. 
 The New Connectivity: Keeping in Touch with Spouses 
 Spouses use many different media to stay in touch with each other through-
out the day. Those with children stay in touch more often than those 
without children, because the presence of children in a household increases 
responsibilities and workloads. There are more schedules to organize and 
more responsibility, and a definite need to stay connected instrumentally 
and emotionally. 
 Married couples — whether they have children or not — contact each 
other to schedule events and tasks, organize daily routines, and plan future 
events with friends and family. Spouses often communicate with each 
other when they are apart, just to say hello and chat. Despite the routines 
people keep, they still make time to talk. Much of their day is spent away 
from home: commuting and working, running errands, making social 
visits, picking up children at school, generally being busy and on the go. 
For example, Connected Lives participant Theresa lives in Toronto with 
her husband and three young children. She feels it is important to stay 
in touch with her husband at work throughout the day by email to make 
sure that important family organizational details don ’ t slip through the 
cracks. For Theresa, these emails work as a helpful task list and reminder 
system — “ we need to do this, this, this, and this ” — to be discussed later 
when her husband comes home from work in between the  “ thousand 
things going on. ” Peter, with a wife and two young twins, tells a similar 
story. He emails his wife about sports schedules, scheduling pickups and 
check-ins:  “ Well, now I ’ m taking them to dentist: Put this in your schedule 
at work. ” 
 Spouses principally use mobile phones and landlines to stay in contact. 
Those with children connect with their partner by mobile phone at least 
once a day (a mean of 7.3 times per week), and several times a week by 
landline (a mean of 4.7 per week) — slightly more often than couples 
without children (  figure 6.7 ). 
 Connecting with Children 
 Parents and children need to stay connected when they are not together, 
whether for socioemotional reasons, instrumental reasons, or for the chil-
dren ’ s security. While parents stay in touch with their spouses most 

Networked Families 
163
frequently, single parents connect with their children more often than 
married couples with children do. Some single parents may have more 
of a workload and increased responsibility because they are the sole 
domestic caregiver.  33 
 Americans use the same media to connect with their children that they 
use to connect with their spouses: mobile phones and landlines. Single 
parents use mobile phones (a mean of 4.8 times per week), landlines (a 
mean of 4.1 times per week), and text messaging (a mean of 2.8 times per 
week) more often than couples with children. Not only are parents in 
frequent contact with their children, they also use a variety of ways to do 
so — what Caroline Haythornthwaite and coauthor Wellman have called 
 “ media multiplexity. ” This reflects the complexity of their lives, and how 
ICTs facilitate their needs.  34 While the danger of hovering  “ helicopter 
parents ”  has been overstated, many parents are fascinated with using ICTs 
to keep track of their children.  35 
 James, a Connected Lives single father, regularly emails and IMs his son. 
His son especially enjoys IM-ing with his dad because he loves sending 
Yahoo ’ s  “ emoticons ”  to him — like this winky ;-). James and his son often 
IM each other when they are at home together, but in separate rooms —
 they think it is fun. In Canada, mothers are the main communicators with 
children. Women use landlines, mobile phones, email, and IMs more than 
men do. Women contact children more than men do, especially using 
landlines and mobile phones. 
2
1
0
4
3
6
5
8
7
SNS
IM
Text message
Email
Mobile
Landline
Single parents’ contact with kids
Married parents’ contact with kids
Married couples’ contact with spouse
Married parents’ contact with spouse
4.7
7.3
6.5
4.8
4.2
2.7
1.1
2.1
.9
3.2 3.3
2.8
2.5
1.9 2.3
1 .9
1.4
.7 .8
1.8
4.1 4
3
 Figure 6.7 
 Mean number of daily ICT contacts with spouse and children. 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project, Networked Family Survey 2008. 

164 
Chapter 6
 James ’ s experience with his son reflects broader social changes in how 
people communicate with their children, the time they spend with them, 
and ultimately how they parent them. Despite the concerns of parents 
about how they might navigate unchartered internet terrain, ICT use con-
tinues to become further embedded into daily home lives. Hence parents 
often become  “ digital parents, ” in order to work with their networked 
children who have grown up with ICTs, and who have different under-
standings of play, social interaction, leisure activities, and school work.  36 
For better or worse, much of the teens ’ and children ’ s time now is spent 
on the internet or with mobile phones. As researchers Caroline Haythorn-
thwaite and Richard Andrew have found, when ICT use is tied into school, 
their use can enhance teaching and learning.  37 Moreover, playing video 
games habituates children into the routine ICT use that becomes an impor-
tant part of their life and part of a skill set for jobs that have not even been 
created. And as communication scientists Hua Wang and Arvind Singhal 
have shown, games themselves can be designed to be educational — as well 
as enjoyable.  38 
 Teens Texting 
 No other digital development highlights the new networked nature of 
family life better than short-message texting on mobile phones. As we 
noted, the rise of the mobile phone itself has changed household com-
munication from a place-to-place basis to a person-to-person basis. Texting 
solidifies the transfer of activity from the group to the person. People use 
mobile phones to be a part of their social networks even when they are in 
the midst of their families — using their phones at the dinner table, riding 
in the family minivan, or sitting in front of the TV. 
 Teens are usually the most active networkers in households, especially 
girls. Mobile phones provide special power to teens because they allow 
them to conduct discreet private conversations without parental supervi-
sion. Pew Internet survey data collected in 2011 showed that three-
quarters (75 percent) of those aged twelve to seventeen own mobile 
phones and 97 percent of that group use text messaging. Some 49 
percent of those texters send fifty or more messages a day — 1,500 per 
month — while a third send more than a hundred messages per day. 
Girls send or receive an average of eighty texts per day, compared with 
thirty for boys. 
 Teens in the Pew Internet focus groups also report that they like to text 
because it is asynchronous — two people don ’ t have to be communicating 

Networked Families 
165
at the same time. Teens can send messages and then simply await the 
answers. The persons receiving them can deal with the message as their 
situations allow. This gives them the possibility to interlace the communi-
cation into other parts of their lives without instant interruption. A young 
teen boy described this in the Pew Internet study:  “ I usually text my 
parents. Like, I guess although I ’ m not really supposed to in school, I ’ ll 
just start texting them. I ’ ll just be like,  ‘ Hey mom come pick me up, this 
is happening, ’ Or just,  ‘ Hey mom I forgot this can you drop it off? ’ I don ’ t 
call that much. ” 
 Teens also text to cover their tracks. Unlike computer screens that 
often are open to parental view, teens texts privately from their mobile 
phones. As there is no sound when texting, teens prefer it to voice. For 
example, they can text their parents when the background noise of 
their location would give away too much information on their where-
abouts. A high school boy described how his mother saw through this 
ruse:  “ Sometimes, I would text my mom, like, she, like, knows. She says 
to me,  ‘ Sometimes I know you ’ re doing something wrong if you ’ re 
texting me. ’ She says she knows that, usually she ’ s right if I tell her 
I ’ m supposed to be somewhere else. If she calls, she can hear the back-
ground. If she calls she says,  ‘ Who are you with? Who are you talking 
to? Where are you? ’ If I ’ m texting, it doesn ’ t give the location as much 
[because] she can ’ t hear the background. ” Yet, mobile connections work 
both ways: Parents on the go can call their children to check in with 
them. 
 Texting can also be a buffer, keeping parents at an emotional as well as 
a physical distance. Since there is no synchronous interaction and since it 
is often more difficult for parents to construct a text message, teens use 
text messaging when they have to break bad news or make an uncomfort-
able request of their parents. It is not just parent-child communication 
patterns that have changed in networked families; child-parent communi-
cations have followed suit.  39 As one high school girl put it:  “ I usually text 
my mom whenever I want to ask her something or tell her something bad. 
That way I don ’ t have to hear her yelling at me, like, give me a reason why 
I shouldn ’ t go, or why she doesn ’ t want me to go.  ‘ Cause she doesn ’ t text, 
she just writes short answers. I usually text her everything else I want her 
to know so I don ’ t have to hear [her voice]. ” 
 Yet, teens described to Pew Internet how texting is an easy way to keep 
up with the flow of everyday life. Several teens noted that to call means 
that it is something that is important. However, if the teens are simply 
checking in with one another, texting is an easy way to touch base. A 

166 
Chapter 6
middle school boy said,  “ If I ’ m texting, it ’ s just people I hang out with 
every day. ” And a high school girl said,  “ I text more than I talk . . . I call 
my family, but friends and stuff text me. ” 
 In short, texting is an emblematic activity for networked individuals —
 especially teens. It is personal. It can be customized to individual tastes 
and purposes. It allows people to be socially engaged with others outside 
the room. It provides ready access to multiple networks. It allows people 
to stay in touch with the flow of chatter that is coursing through their 
networks. It keeps parents at a distance, adding new ways for teens to 
respond to the previous generation ’ s dialogue: 
 Parent:   “ Where did you go? ”  
 Teen:  “ Out. ”  
 Parent:   “ What did you do? ”  
 Teen:  “ Nothing. ”  40 
 Netting Together 
 In the evocatively named  Alone Together,  social scientist Sherry Turkle 
argues that ICTs as a leisure pursuit may weaken the quality of time families 
spend together when individual family members spend it focusing on a 
screen instead of socializing with each another.  41 Some media depictions 
show fragmented families as heavy ICT users that text from the dinner 
table. Such commentators perceive ICT use as a solitary activity that is 
different from the TV experience of the 1960s, when families sat together 
in front of a single screen. For example, newspaper columnist Steve Collins 
writes: 
 There ’ s no we in iPod. The TVs, computers and hand-held screens have . . . multi-
plied, enabling us to ignore each other any time and any place. Will we someday 
envy old-fashioned families who at least used to zone out in front of the same TV 
screen together, even as the Cassandras of the day prophesied looming social apoca-
lypse? . . . Paradoxically, even as [the teenagers] seem unaware of each others ’ pres-
ence in the same room, they are interacting with each other online.  42 
 Our evidence shows that people use ICTs to support, supplement, and 
enhance face-to-face interaction with family members. Networked families 
spend time netting together online: Most spouses have gone online 
together. Married childless couples spend more time online with their 
spouses than married parents. Just under half of them say they are  “ often ” 
online with their spouses as compared with only one-third of married 
parents (  figure 6.8 ). 

Networked Families 
167
 When couples go online together, their shared online activities are 
shaped by common interests, household needs, and talking to family 
members. For example, Connected Lives participant Theresa goes online 
with her husband to research things they need to make a decision about, 
such as buying cars. They also have been fans of  “ The Amazing Race ” TV 
show. After they watch it, they go to the internet to check online clips for 
the next  “ fun things. ” Other participants go online jointly to plan family 
vacations. Olivia, a married mother in her 40s, told the Connected Lives 
researchers that she often goes online spontaneously with her husband 
when they want to follow up on information that comes up during con-
versations or while watching TV.  “ My husband looks at real estate online —
 all over the place, ” she said.  “ Just the other night we were both sitting and 
looking at condos in Mexico.  ‘ Let ’ s do it! ’ ” Olivia laughs.  “ We were looking 
at property in Greece but it was ridiculous. On analyze.ca, you can look 
all over Canada on there, so we will often do that. So, we will sit together, 
mainly for that purpose — look at houses or something and dream. ” 
 Nearly 90 percent of American parents say they have gone online with 
their children. More than half of married mothers and one-third of married 
fathers go online  “ often ” (figure 6.9). Single parents spend more time 
online with children than do married parents. Three-fifths of single 
mothers and nearly half of single fathers go online  “ often. ” 
 For example, Jennifer, a fortyish single Connected Lives participant 
looks forward to going online with seven-year-old Katie. For Jennifer, the 
10
0
20
40
30
50%
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Often
Married couples
Married parents
46%
41%
11%
2%
33%
41%
17%
9%
 Figure 6.8 
 Frequency of spending time online with spouse. 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project, Networked Family Survey 2008. 

168 
Chapter 6
notion of netting together combines parent-child learning sessions, 
game playing, and boundary setting. Jennifer plays online games with her 
daughter Katie — choosing the games and showing her how to play — but 
feels her dan daughter is too young for an email address at this time, and 
she monitors what Katie is doing online. Although she knows that Katie 
knows how to search, her parental rule is that Katie has to ask and Jennifer 
has to be there.  
 Like Jennifer, many parents in the Connected Lives and Pew Internet 
studies worry about what their kids are doing online when they are not 
supervising them: what they are looking at, and who they are talking to. 
As a consequence, rules have emerged inside families for safety, netiquette, 
and metiquette. Beth Herina, in New Jersey, has a rule:  “ no texting at 
dinner ”  or on family outings:  “ not when it is family time. ”  43 In Toronto, 
some Connected Lives parents set themselves up as administrators of their 
children ’ s computers to keep an eye on what software they are bringing 
in. They put their computers in public spaces, such as the den or kitchen, 
they ask their children about what they are seeing, and they randomly 
look over their shoulders at their screens. 
 Indeed, parental oversight of their children ’ s ICT use is commonplace. 
Fully 85 percent of parents of American teens who use the internet have 
rules about the websites their children can visit; 85 percent have rules 
about the kind of information their children can share online with others, 
69 percent have limits on how much time their kids can spend online, 53 
percent have filters on family computers that keep users from visiting 
10
0
30
20
40
60%
50
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Often
Mothers, single
Mothers, married
Fathers, married 
Fathers, single
46%
60%
52%
20%
45%
25%
11%
6% 6%
9% 8% 7% 11%
27%
31%
36%
 Figure 6.9 
 Frequency of spending time online with children. 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project, Networked Family Survey 2008. 

Networked Families 
169
certain websites, and 45 percent have monitoring software to check up on 
what their children do online.  44 Similarly, a majority of parents impose 
rules about their children ’ s use of mobile phones and use the phone as a 
monitoring and punishment tool: 64 percent of parents of teens who have 
mobile phones have looked at the contents of their child ’ s phone such as 
the address book and log of calls or texts, 62 percent have taken away their 
child ’ s phone as a punishment, 52 percent have imposed limits on the time 
of day when their child can use the phone, 48 percent use the phone to 
monitor their child ’ s location, 46 percent limit the number of minutes 
their child can talk on the phone, and 28 percent limit the number of texts 
their child can send. 
 Many parents also embrace the internet with their children, going 
online with them to share interesting things, to find information, or 
simply to play. Connected Lives participant Tanya works with her husband 
and two children to use the internet throughout the day: doing everything 
from researching new toilets for home renovations to playing a computer 
game together to helping her kids do their schoolwork. Connected Lives 
participant Felicia also helps her son with schoolwork:  “ Oh, yes. Last year 
he was doing some work for a history project and we did some research 
on costumes and dress of the time. ” At other times, being online together 
is for fun. Henry, a married father of two, goes with his children to the 
Thomas the Tank Engine website because there are different little games, 
projects, and puzzles — his son loves to do internet puzzles. Sheena ’ s six-
teen-month-old daughter loves the games and music on the Treehouse TV 
children ’ s website. More spontaneously, Greg, a married father of two, 
describes going online with his family when one of them finds something 
interesting online and calls,  “ Come and look at this! ” Then all four family 
members crowd around the screen. 
 These shared online experiences show that home internet use does not 
have to be solitary. Showing and sharing on the internet can sometimes 
bring household members together, just as TV watching sometimes does. 
Although people may not have comfortable sofas at their desktops to 
accommodate an audience, they often have a laptop that can travel any-
where in the home, or their home computers are in places, such as living 
rooms, that allow several viewers. 
 Joint activity may redefine family boundaries as Facebook broadens 
from its original young adult base to encompass older adults. Parents who 
would never think of following their children in person often ask to 
 “ friend ”  them on Facebook. Pew Internet surveys in mid-2011 show that 
a substantial majority of parents use social networking sites and that 81 
percent of the parents who use such sites are  “ friends ”  with their children.  45 

170 
Chapter 6
 On the one hand, parent and child are sharing experiences. On the other 
hand, the Facebook link gives parents a good deal of information about 
what their children — and their children ’ s friends — are doing. Some parents 
go even further, installing spyware on their children ’ s computers to record 
the pages they view and the keystrokes they enter. Parents justify this to 
prevent misadventures and cyberbullying — reportedly experienced to some 
extent by about 30 percent of teens. However, parental surveillance of 
Facebook can become voyeuristic.  46 
 Networked Families: In Connected Motion 
 Networked families have adapted to the Triple Revolution. They use ICTs 
to bridge barriers of time and space, weakening the boundaries between 
public and private life spaces. The mounting and interrelated changes in 
the composition of households — such as the life-cycle complexities of mar-
riage and divorce and decisions to have children — mean that today ’ s 
households are varied, complex, and evolving. Networked families use ICTs 
to mediate these complexities and adapt ICTs to their varied needs. 
 The findings from the Pew Internet and Connected Lives studies con-
tribute to understanding of how networked individuals  —  who are per-
ceived as technological nomads  —  operate within their daily activities and 
within households and families. Not only have families changed in size 
and composition, they have also changed in their lifestyles. ICTs have 
become thoroughly embedded in families  ’  everyday lives, helping them 
stay connected   and in motion. The internet and mobile phones connect 
family members as they move around, help them find each other, and 
bring them together for joint work and play. The result is that ICTs  —  often 
in conjunction with personal automobiles  —  have paradoxically provided 
household members with the ability to go their separate ways while at the 
same time keeping them more connected. Families have less face time, but 
more connected time ,  using mobile phones and the internet.   
 

 
 7  Networked Work 
 To see what white-collar work was like in the 1960s, watch the retro TV 
show,  Mad Men.  1 It portrays life at a Madison Avenue (New York) advertis-
ing agency, where all the employees work nine to five. Men sit in separate 
offices or gather in small group meetings — each man with a young female 
secretary in the public space in front of their offices. Along with gender 
stratification, there is ethnic and religious homogeneity: All of the men 
are white Christians. 
 Except for the occasional phone call to other organizations, all the men 
work at desks, using pen and paper — only the secretaries type. To the men, 
multitasking is holding a cigarette, a glass of Scotch, and a notepad. They 
communicate only face to face. Work spills over into family life only when 
the lonely housewives object to their husbands working late at the office 
or accompany them to company parties. Work, itself, never comes home, 
while wives and children phone only in emergencies — and shock the 
system if they ever come to the office. 
 Although  Mad Men  is fiction, it fits well with William H. Whyte ’ s 1956 
bestseller,  The Organization Man , which describes American organizational 
life after World War II. The book shows how loyal and conformist  “ orga-
nization men ” (no women) fit into hierarchical structures with a single 
boss coupled to a stable work group whose members conformed to clear 
corporate-status pecking orders in conference rooms.  2 
 Since the Industrial Revolution of the 1800s, the dominant images of 
work have been of employees in large factories or offices, in small groups 
such as retail shops, or as lone workers such as truck drivers. While there 
are still plenty of such factories, offices, shops, and lone workers, a host of 
forces has been transforming work from individual or group activities to 
networked activities. Many people work in a global economy where cor-
porations deal agilely with turbulent market environments by fostering 
 networked work  as they participate in multiple teams often for multiple 

172 
Chapter 7
purposes. And they do so in  networked organizations  whose workers may 
well be physically and organizationally dispersed. 
 In this chapter, we examine the ways in which an organization ’ s work 
has become distributed to different locations, the ways in which workers 
work in multiple teams on multiple projects, and the involvement of 
the Internet and Mobile Revolutions with these changes. We caution 
that our discussion is more tentative than in the preceding Networked 
Relationships and Networked Family chapters. That is because manage-
ment gurus ’ assertions and advocacy about how networked organizations 
can — and should — operate currently outweigh evidence and analysis about 
how they actually do operate. We further caution that the turn to a 
networked operating system in workplaces is uneven. Neither all workers 
nor all organizations in North America have become connected. More-
over, the percentages of internet-using workers outside of North America 
are lower: A 2008 International Data Corporation (IDC) survey in sev-
enteen mostly developed countries found that only 16 percent of the 
global workforce use multiple digital devices and new communications 
applications. 3 The figures have surely risen since then, but the larger 
point is true. This is decidedly a fractional minority of the global 
workforce. 
 Fostering the Turn to Networked Work in Networked Organizations 
 Five related trends have been encouraging the trend to networked work in 
networked organizations. First, the globalization of work, consumerism, 
and travel has expanded and diversified the reach and purview of corpora-
tions. As a rule, workers and companies are in contact with more colleagues 
and customers these days than they were in the past. 
 Second, there has been a shift in developed countries from growing, 
mining, making, and transporting things — atom work  in the material econ-
omy — to selling, describing, and analyzing things via words and pictures —
 bit work  in the information economy. The rising numbers of what urban 
scholar Richard Florida calls the  “ creative class ” have fostered this trend 
toward bit work. The percentage of  “ creatives ” in the American workforce 
has doubled in a generation: from 22 percent in 1960 to 43 percent in 2006 
(see figure 2.11 in chapter 2). They are  “ people in science and engineering, 
architecture and design, education, arts, music and entertainment, whose 
economic function is to create new ideas, new technology, and/or new 
creative content. ”  4 In short, they are people who usually manipulate bits 
more than atoms.  5 

Networked Work 
173
 Third , although the shift to networked work and organizations began 
before the Internet and Mobile Revolutions, these two revolutions have 
accelerated the shift. The two revolutions allow  “ bit workers, ” who use 
computers to work with ideas and data, to have more ability to network —
 in multiple senses of that word — than  “ atom workers, ” who work with 
physical objects and often on assembly lines. For one thing, it is easier to 
use information and communication technologies (ICTs) to connect and 
collaborate when workers are pushing bits by calculating, searching, 
drawing, and writing. Some of the most ICT-connected workers have jobs 
built around creative effort rather than manufacturing or standardized 
paper pushing. 
 Fourth, the internet allows people to communicate and access shared 
information and databases at a distance — from publicly available libraries 
to secret corporate records  6 . Some workplaces can exist anywhere. As orga-
nizational scholars Paul Adler and Charles Heckscher put it: 
 The large corporation combining bureaucracy and loyalty-based community meets 
its limits in organizing the production of knowledge. Bureaucracy, as has been fre-
quently documented, is very effective at organizing routinized production, but it 
does very poorly at these complex interactive tasks involving responsiveness and 
innovation. Under bureaucracy, knowledge is treated as a resource, and is therefore 
concentrated, along with the corresponding decision rights, in specialized func-
tional units and at higher levels of the organization. However, in organizations that 
are competing primarily on their ability to respond and innovate, knowledge from 
all parts of the organization is crucial for success, and often subordinates know more 
than their superiors. Innovativeness and responsiveness cannot be rigorously 
preprogrammed, and the creative collaboration they require cannot be simply 
commanded. 7 
 In other words, creative bit work may function better in networks than in 
the hierarchies of bureaucracies or the rugged individualism of markets. 
Of course, this is a bit of caricature as no hierarchies follow a strict tree 
structure — there are always side alliances and work-arounds. And no 
markets are truly atomized — market players are always making alliances 
and deals. But while networks permeate hierarchies and markets, they are 
more palpable now.  8 
 The fifth and less pervasive shift has been enabled by the Mobile Revolu-
tion, which allows some bit workers to be productive with their laptops 
and smartphones while away from their desks. While the purchase of 
desktop computers have leveled off and of wired-in landline phones have 
declined, the purchase of smartphones, tablets, and laptops has soared. It is 
often as easy to push bits at home or in the coffee shop as it is in the office. 

174 
Chapter 7
 “ Road warriors ” do their work at home, offsite workplaces, hotel,  5 planes, 
trains, and automobiles. To be sure, not all work is networked. Many 
people still work on assembly lines, sit in separate cubicles — white-collar 
assembly lines — or work alone in shops or trucks and taxis. Even so, the 
internet, tablets and smartphones have become pervasive at workplaces. 
 The Diffusion and Use of ICTs 
 There have always been long-distance communications within and between 
organizations. That is how Egyptian granaries fed Rome and the British 
East India Company ruled nineteenth-century India. That is how the smart 
use of alerting systems gave some nineteenth-century American companies 
a competitive advantage by being the first to know what ships were coming 
in and what they were carrying. Yet, communication this way was always 
difficult, slow, expensive, and intermittent, even when telegraphs, rail-
roads, phones, cars, and planes came along. In essence, most commu-
nication at work was in person.  9 The Internet and Mobile Revolutions 
afford different opportunities for many networked workers to work from 
multiple locations, including their homes, and do so in less-hierarchical 
organizations. 
 At first, computers were giant mainframes, used principally for account-
ing and corporate services. It was only in the late 1980s that a few innova-
tors and early adopters began to use truly  personal computers, with even 
fewer having the ability to communicate online with coworkers. For 
example, the Cavecat and Telepresence projects at the University of Toronto 
spent several million dollars between 1989 and 1995 to build systems 
where a set of people could use their computers to text, talk, and video 
conference with one another. They had to design and build the hardware 
and software from scratch, and there was no user-friendly internet 
software.  10 
 That all changed as computers became personal devices and then 
became networked. Management scholar Andrew McAfee identified what 
he dubbed  “ corporate America ’ s ongoing love affair with geek gear. ” ICT 
spending in corporate America has grown greatly since the 1970s, outpac-
ing other types of equipment expenditures, even after taking into account 
a growing workforce and the declining price of computer hardware and 
software. For instance, the nominal annual U.S. corporate IT investment 
from 1970 to 2008 increased from about $5 billion to almost $350 billion. 
Overall IT investment rose exponentially in the United States, from about 
$100 per employee in 1970 to $3,000 in 2008. While ICT expenditures 

Networked Work 
175
made up less than 10 percent of the total corporate investment in equip-
ment during the 1970s, they accounted for around one-third of total 
annual spending on fixed assets in the first decade of the twenty-first 
century. American industries became 5.5 times more ICT intensive between 
1995 and 2008.  11 
 At present, low-cost, portable, and increasingly usable software has 
so diffused that most homes and workplaces have at least one personal 
computer with almost every computer connected to a network, either the 
publicly available internet or a private organizational network (see chapter 
3,  “ The Internet Revolution ” ). The trend is striking. In its first survey in 
March 2000, Pew Internet found that 37 percent of full-time workers and 
18 percent of part-time workers have internet access at work. By mid-2011, 
the figures grew to 76 percent of full-time workers and 52 percent of part-
time workers who use the internet on the job. In Pew Internet ’ s 2008 
Networked Workers survey, 60 percent of workers use the internet every 
day at work, while only 28 percent say they never used computers. The 
same survey shows that ICT use at work varies significantly by the nature 
and prestige of the profession. About three-quarters of professionals, man-
agers, and executives and half of clerical, office, and sales workers use the 
internet at work. By contrast, workers in service industries and skilled 
trades are less likely to use the ICTs at work.  
 Many American workers use a variety of ICTs, especially smartphones 
and personal computers. The Pew Internet Networked Workers survey 
showed that 77 percent of American workers use a desktop computer, 50 
percent use a laptop, and of course, many workers use both. Other workers 
use ICTs that are not part of the internet: truckers, taxi drivers, and plumb-
ers connected to their dispatchers and customers; cashiers and bank tellers 
at their terminals; consumers at self-service checkout and automatic teller 
machines. Workers also connect — overtly or covertly — via mobile phones. 
They are pervasive at American workplaces: Almost nine out of ten Ameri-
can workers had a mobile phone in 2008. 
 The same Pew Internet survey also found that almost all workers (87 
percent) who have email at work check their work email at least daily (  table 
7.1 ). Half of all workers checked their phones several times an hour, with 
37 percent checking constantly. One third (33 percent) of those who own 
a mobile phone regularly text with colleagues and two-fifths (39 percent) 
regularly text with friends and family. (The percentages are undoubtedly 
higher now.) In addition, more than three-quarters have personal email 
accounts and two-fifths (39 percent) of them check their account at least 
daily. The survey also found the first indications that social networking 

176 
Chapter 7
 Table 7.1 
 Frequency of Workers ’ Use of ICTs for Work and Personal Purposes  
 Constantly 
 Several 
Times 
an Hour 
 Several 
Times 
a Day 
 About 
Once 
a Day 
 Every 
Few 
Days 
 Less 
Often 
 Never 
 Employed respondents who have personal email (n=751) 
 Check your 
personal 
email 
 7% 
 4% 
 12% 
 16% 
 6% 
 9% 
 46% 
 Employed respondents who have work email (n=609) 
 Check your 
work email 
 37 
 13 
 22 
 15 
 5 
 2 
 6 
 Employed respondents who use instant messaging (IM) (n=325) 
 Send IMs to 
colleagues at 
work 
 8 
 5 
 13 
 5 
 5 
 8 
 55 
 Send IMs to 
friends or 
family 
 3 
 • 
 8 
 9 
 5 
 11 
 62 
 Employed respondents who text (n=455) 
 Send texts to 
colleagues at 
work 
 3 
 2 
 6 
 6 
 6 
 11 
 67 
 Send texts to 
friends or 
family 
 3 
 2 
 11 
 12 
 11 
 16 
 44 
 Employed respondents using social networking sites (n=245) 
 Communicate 
with 
colleagues 
using social 
networking 
sites 
 2 
 • 
 1 
 2 
 8 
 5 
 83 
 Communicate 
with friends 
or family 
using social 
networking 
sites 
 2 
 0 
 3 
 4 
 7 
 11 
 72 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project, Networked Workers Survey 2008.  

Networked Work 
177
sites were being used at the workplace for work- and personally related 
communication. 12 
 Not only are people more connected, but they are spending more time 
online. The mean amount of active internet use at work doubled from 4.6 
hours per week in 2001 to 9.2 hours in 2010.  13   This means that those who 
have internet access at work are spending the equivalent of an entire 
workday per week using the internet. Of course, the actual numbers vary 
enormously for different individuals, and with broadband enabling com-
puters to be on all workday, it is difficult to know what active use means. 
At the same time, ICTs make it easier for workers to relax at work. The Pew 
Internet Networked Worker survey found that while at work 22 percent 
shop online, 15 percent watch videos, 10 percent use online social or pro-
fessional networking sites, while 3 percent play online games.  14 
 What does all this ICT connectivity mean? The survey shows that 
despite diversions workers who use ICTs tend to be more productive, flex-
ible, collaborative, and better connected. However, they also work longer 
hours, and are more distracted and stressed. For organizations, a McKinsey 
study reported that  “ technologically-enabled collaboration with external 
stakeholders [bridging ties] helps organizations gain market share from the 
competition. ”  15 
 How Networked Workers Operate 
 Traditional work groups have featured densely interconnected relationships 
in physically compact spaces. People in such  “ fishbowl ”  offices work within 
clearly defined, ordered groups. Almost all communications are within 
the group and visible to all. In contrast to the walled silos of traditional 
workplaces, boundaries in networked organizations are permeable, foster-
ing workers ’ interactions across departments. Compared with traditional 
 “ fishbowl ” organizations, the  “ switchboard ” is the descriptive metaphor 
for networked organizations, where each person plugs into a direct con-
nection to his/her own colleagues. In a switchboard situation, the structure 
of networked organizations is more flexible, laterally coordinated, team 
based, and boundary spanning.  16 Many networked workers communicate 
frequently, easily, rapidly, and cheaply over great distances, using a battery 
of media — internet, phone, texts, emails, social network sites, blogs, instant 
messages, video encounters — whatever seems appropriate and is available. 
Increasingly, their tools and data are no longer stored on their own com-
puters but are accessed from almost anywhere from the  “ cloud ” on the 
internet. They link both within the organization and, if outward facing, 

178 
Chapter 7
to clients and suppliers.  17 Creativity and information gathering, especially, 
are encouraged by flexible arrangements with bosses, peers, and subordi-
nates — pushing autonomy and authority onto networked individuals. 
 Yet, there are costs to all this networking, some inherent in the concept, 
some afforded by the ICT technologies, and some provided by the dynam-
ics of labor-management relationships. For example, as networked workers 
move between teams — and places — they risk having less of a sense of 
 “ ownership ”  of a particular piece of work, and their attention and loyalty 
can be divided. When physically dispersed, workers may have difficulties 
in information sharing, coordination, and control, which means they may 
spend appreciably more time getting work done. These difficulties are 
increased when new teams are formed who do not know each other and 
do not share a common culture. 18 
 The comparisons in   table 7.2 , although somewhat oversimplified, show 
how much traditional and networked office work can differ. Taken together, 
the comparisons suggest how a culture gap may develop between net-
worked workers in networked organizations and workers doing repetitive 
work in bureaucratic organizations.  
 Networks at work may be larger than traditional work groups, as employ-
ees shift among teams locally and virtually. For example, the Pew Internet 
Networked Worker survey shows that four-fifths (80 percent) of American 
workers who use ICTs at work say these technologies have increased the 
size of their communication networks, with almost half of the workers 
(46 percent) reporting that these technologies have greatly increased their 
network size. The survey also shows that three-quarters (73 percent) of 
American workers who use ICTs at work say that ICTs have improved their 
ability to share ideas with colleagues. 
 As communication often crosses work group and organizational bound-
aries, information becomes a key asset and its flow becomes critical for 
success. In addition to standard leadership positions, strategic network 
positions contribute to superior individual performance, from those who 
can usefully connect various parts of the organization. Workers who have 
a higher level of  “ betweenness centrality ” — they are in the shortest paths 
linking employees in the firm — tend to have better performance. One 
study has found different media-use patterns for the central  “ thought 
leaders ”  of an interorganizational scholarly network. Such leaders prefer 
giving advice in person while peripheral members tend to rely on email 
for giving and getting advice.  19 Knowing who knows who knows what and 
who knows whom becomes crucial for problem solving, leading to the 
growth of social media within organizations. One study of knowledge 

Networked Work 
179
 Table 7.2 
 Traditional versus Networked Offices  
 Traditional  “ Fishbowl ” Workgroups 
  “ Switchboard ” Networked Individuals 
 All work together in the same room 
 Each works separately 
 All visible to each other 
 Office doors closable for privacy 
 All have physical access to each 
other 
 Glass in doors indicate interruptibility 
 All can see when a person is 
interruptible 
 If door ’ s locked, must knock; if door ’ s 
open, request admission 
 All can see when one person is with 
another; neighbors have high visual 
and aural awareness 
 Difficult to learn if person is dealing 
with others, unless door is open 
 Limited number of group 
participants 
 Switch among large number of 
potential interactors 
 Densely knit: most are directly 
connected 
 Sparsely knit: most don ’ t know each 
other or unaware of mutual contact; 
no detailed knowledge of indirect ties 
 Tightly bounded: most interactions 
are within a small group 
 Loosely bounded; many different 
people contacted in multiple 
workplaces; each person operates 
individually 
 Loyalty, motivation to the small 
work group 
 Self-motivation; loyalty to the career, 
profession, larger organization 
 Frequent contact; recurrent 
interactions 
 Variable, changing frequency of 
contact 
 Easy, swift to coordinate and control 
 Difficult, slower to coordinate and 
control 
 Long-duration ties 
 Switching between multiple ties 
 Work only at the office 
 Work at home: part-time, full-time 
 Sense of group solidarity: name, 
collective identity 
 Collective activities; transient, shifting 
sets 
 Mentoring by co-located workmates 
 Little mentoring: harder to learn tacit 
knowledge 
 Repetitive tasks, faster deskilling, 
lower wages 
 Multiple tasks foster multitasking; 
higher wages 
 Sense of ownership, loyalty to a 
work process 
 Commitment divided among multiple 
work processes 
 Little sense of the whole 
 More sense of how pieces fit together 
 Intranet/virtual private network: 
internal links only 
 Internet: links with outside 
organizations 
 Direct visual and aural social control 
by supervisor and group; plotting 
done off premises 
 Internalized normative control; 
electronic surveillance; plotting done 
by ICTs  
 Top of the hierarchy 
 Betweenness centrality 
 Source : Barry Wellman  © 2011, used with permission.  

180 
Chapter 7
workers in a large global information organization found that workers who 
are especially good in linking others in the organization generate more 
revenue for the firm.  20 
 ICTs also facilitate friendships at work. For example, one study of com-
puter scientists found that there is as much friendship contact at work as 
professional contact, and other research has shown that multiplex relation-
ships (such as work plus friendship) help productive communication 
within and between organizations.  21 Observational data support this. 
When MIT organizational analyst Sandy Pentland put wearable  “ reality 
mining ” sensors on workers, he discovered:  “ At more than a dozen com-
panies . . . , social interaction has been found to be an important element 
in productivity. Staff who socialize trade information about how to do their 
jobs better. People who are cut off aren ’ t wise in the ways of the company 
and don ’ t have social support. ” 22 
 When they chat about work or each other, workers often switch among 
different media, calculating which may be tactically important for the 
relationship and the situation. For example, Anabel Quan-Haase and coau-
thor Wellman found much media juggling at  “ KME, ”  a high-tech Chicago 
company. The communication norm was to respond quickly to IMs from 
coworkers sitting at nearby cubicles. But coworkers switched to email when 
they had something long and complicated to communicate. When the 
subject got sensitive, they went out for face-to-face get-togethers at lunch 
or coffee. 
 People sometimes chose a platform because they do not want to com-
municate too much. As Andy at KME said:  “ I use IM a fair amount because 
there are times where I want to know something, but I don’t want the 
other person to know how I am reacting or responding. And then, I can 
have a moment to think and compose myself, while figuring out how to 
respond. ” 
 KME ’ s employees thought that getting up and walking to someone 
else ’ s cubicle was too visible and too disruptive. For example, when an 
issue came up, Linda emailed Desmond asking him to meet, even though 
they sat across from each other. They emailed back and forth a couple 
of times to arrange a good time to have a coffee outside the building 
and talk. 
 Yet, despite the computerized connectivity at KME, organizational 
boundaries still mattered. Most communication stayed within a depart-
ment, and the remainder usually went to KME employees elsewhere in the 
firm. Supervisors sent and received high volumes of messages and emails. 
Similarly, when a large Canadian telecommunications company set up a 

Networked Work 
181
program for a few computer-based employees to  “ telework ”  at home, the 
structure of authority remained in place. The only major change was in 
work schedules, with more working hours replacing commuting. In short, 
organizational imperatives tended to outweigh the ease of cross-boundary 
communication. However, several people did become informal bridges 
carrying information and ideas between departments.  23 
 Workplace design in many networked organizations favors open, fluid 
spatial arrangement that encourages interactions. Former CEO Eric Schmidt 
described Google as the  “ best example of a network-based organization. ” 
While self-congratulatory, Schmidt ’ s remark points to Google ’ s penchant 
for having small, focused, short-term work teams that are repeatedly 
reformed and refocused. Blogs disseminate information about who is 
working on — or thinking about — what. YouTube videos are created to share 
knowledge across teams. Frequent peer reviews foster quality control for 
networked workers ’ independent projects. Google employees work in the 
Googleplex — a campus-like environment designed to encourage interac-
tion and discussions. These include caf é terias providing free lunches, game 
rooms, salsa dance clubs, and small shared offices instead of cubicles. 
Public spaces in the Googleplex aim to foster serendipitous contact among 
networked individuals beyond the traditional unanticipated meetings at 
the water cooler or photocopier.  24 
 The Rise of Networked Organizations 
 Management analysts have suggested that flexible, networked organiza-
tions have several advantages in allocating people and resources to projects 
and at the same time can foster autonomy, flexibility, and decentralized 
control. 
 People often work in multiple projects with different teams. This allows 
firms to assemble ad hoc teams with diversified talents and perspectives. 
As workers shift among teams, they can develop cumulatively larger net-
works of expertise that are  “ glocal, ”  with both local interactions and global 
connectivity. Instead of submitting to the traditional hierarchical mode of 
authority, workers have more discretion about the work they jointly 
accomplish. Networked organizations have advantages for boundary span-
ning, as employees work and network between work groups and organiza-
tions — and at times, between continents.  
 Networked workers in networked organizations are more likely to know 
and collaborate with colleagues outside of their immediate units. They 
can be knowledge brokers who receive and transmit diverse and novel 

182 
Chapter 7
knowledge and expertise within and between organizations, making them 
more likely to solve difficult problems and complete projects. At times, 
they become members of ongoing  “ communities of practice ” within and 
between organizations, where they can access tacit knowledge and lore, 
earn professional reputations, and develop useful concepts. For example, 
organizational analyst Arent Greve has shown how boundary spanners in 
the Norwegian oil industry use their bridging ties to obtain information 
from other firms about important new technologies:  “ All successful firms 
had these links; the less successful did not. ” Yet, not all is boundary-
spanning, as employees also call on their strong internal  “ bonding ” ties 
for help in completing their projects.  25 
 The organizational structure of networked organizations can be rela-
tively flatter than traditional organizations, have less hierarchical reporting 
relationships, and be a more informal work culture. Moreover, networked 
organizations tend to enforce fewer bureaucratic rules. This encourages 
their employees to have multiple reporting relationships as well as open, 
fluid spatial arrangements. To make teams work, both hardware — such as 
knowledge and skills — and software — such as trust and commitment — are 
important. With less top-down supervision, team members need to obtain 
a shared understanding of the team ’ s goals and actions. Moreover, the 
quality and the pace of knowledge transfer depend on the structure of the 
informal networks among employees. Therefore, networked organizations 
often encourage informal interaction and sociability in order to develop 
supportive networks of information exchange. Because networked organi-
zations are often geographically distributed and internet based, they can 
offer advantages in the flexible organization of work, reduced real estate 
costs (fewer desks needed), more work time through less commuting, and 
rapid access to knowledge. Nevertheless, the thinness of the reporting 
structure necessitates active coordination to avoid duplication and differ-
ent teams charging off in opposing directions. 
 Communication scientists Peter Monge and Noshir Contractor ’ s review 
of the literature on this suggests that centralized organizations are more 
efficient for routine tasks and for facilitating the downward communica-
tion of knowledge and commands. They are less effective when tasks are 
not routine, as lower levels may lack the knowledge to create new knowl-
edge, and they may lack the ability and incentives to transmit new ideas 
upward.  26 
 By contrast, decentralized networks are more efficient for creativity and 
collaborative problem solving where people have more autonomy to find 
and use knowledge. Sociologist Ronald Burt argues that having connec-

Networked Work 
183
tions to different work teams provides more diverse information because 
such inter-team networks help to find people who are interesting and think 
differently. 27 Similarly, organizational analysts Lynn Wu and associates 
demonstrate that the more  “ structurally diverse ” the networks are in a large 
global information firm, the better the performance of both individuals 
and their work teams.  28 
 Management experts argue that the process of shifting to a networked 
organization requires changes in the way work is scheduled and organized, 
as well as in how workers are managed. If early studies emphasized how 
technologies affect organization behavior and performance and ran the 
risk of technological determinism, more recent studies more carefully pin-
point the impact of ICTs on the bottom line. Networked organizations 
often require a workplace culture that encourages collaborative sharing of 
knowledge and expertise. Bill McDermott, president of SAP America, argues 
that using mobile tools  “ unleashes freedom. Because people who were 
formerly tethered to somebody else ’ s rules, somebody else ’ s processes, can 
now be free to manage their work life on their own terms. ” 29 Yet, such 
thoughts are essentially exhortation: Few studies besides that of Wu and 
associates have provided evidence about the conditions in which multiple 
teams actually work better than in fixed bureaucracies. As organizational 
analysts Steven Poltrock and Gloria Mark note,  “ A business case is easy to 
develop when a technology directly increases product sales or decreases 
development or manufacturing costs. ” However, they warn,  “ Working with 
people in our major divisions, we were able to develop a compelling story 
about likely benefits but could not identify specific, accessible budgets that 
would profit from the technology.  ”30 
 In short, proponents claim and some evidence supports the argument 
that the networked/team approach has affected organizational operations 
by helping make problem solving more flexible and nimble. However, we 
do not want to sound like hype-mongering consultants claiming that most 
organizations have joined the networked bandwagon. Many organizations 
continue to be traditional bureaucratic hierarchies in whole or in part. 
 Working in Multiple Teams 
 When people work in multiple, fluid teams, they have more reporting 
relationships and fewer single-hierarchy relationships. The National Estab-
lishment Survey in 1992 showed that 55 percent of U.S. firms with fifty or 
more employees have adopted self-directed work teams to some extent.  31 
More than a decade ago, sociologist David Knoke found that in more than 

184 
Chapter 7
40 percent of the workplaces at least half of workers who are most directly 
involved in producing goods and services work in self-managed teams. 
Working in teams appears to have become even more widespread since 
then, especially in high-tech industries.  32 
 One study of knowledge workers in a large American organization found 
that two-thirds (65 percent) of recent MBA graduates worked in more than 
one team at the same time, although most devoted almost half of their 
working time to a core team.  33 More broadly, the Pew Internet Networked 
Worker Survey found that two-thirds (64 percent) of American workers 
work in at least one team and two-fifths (41 percent) belong to multiple 
teams (  figure 7.1 ). At one extreme, one-quarter (23 percent) of American 
workers are members of only one work group. At the other extreme, 15 
percent of American workers are members of at least five teams. And what 
tends to be forgotten is that nearly one-third (30 percent) of Americans 
work alone as shopkeepers, truck drivers, and the like.  
 Intel is a good example of an organization filled with multiple teams of 
bit workers designing the chips, administering the company, marketing 
their products, and thinking about the future. (However, many Intel 
workers are on traditional — but high-tech — assembly lines making com-
puter chips.) At the time of an evaluation in 2004, three-fifths (61 percent) 
of the workers studied used email, internet conferencing, and other means 
to work together in three or more teams, with each team consisting of two 
Other 6%
1 group 
23%
2 to 4 groups
26%
Work 
alone 
30%
5+ groups
15%
 Figure 7.1 
 Percentage of workers who work alone, in a group, or in multiple groups. Sample 
size = 1,000 employed workers. 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project Networked Workers Survey 2008. 

Networked Work 
185
to ten people. About half worked from home during normal business days 
at least once per month, and about half also regularly used mobile phones 
or laptops to keep in contact with colleagues. 
 Intel ’ s teams span the globe. For example, approximately 70 percent of 
the Intel knowledge workers surveyed collaborate at least once a month 
via ICTs with colleagues whose first language is not English — although they 
all use English when they communicate. While Intel workers are generally 
comfortable with working in teams, the ICT-connected teams especially 
benefit. Seventy percent of team workers have never met in person. The 
researchers show that the spatial spread and different cultures of team 
members does not lead to lower performance, but using incompatible types 
of ICTs within a team does lower performance.  34 
 At times, distributed work can mean physically disconnected work. As 
one administrator in another networked organization told us:  “ We have 
one guy who worked for the company for eight years before anyone ever 
met him face to face — he lives on a remote island. I was struck by the fact 
that people referred to him by his username rather than his real name. ” 
 Yet the employee got the work done.  35 
 The blurring of boundaries can also cause problems. People may not 
know who to call to get a decision or to troubleshoot difficulties. This 
became apparent in the BP Gulf of Mexico oil spill disaster in the summer 
of 2010. As local official Billy Nungesser lamented:  “ If you asked me today, 
 ‘ who was in charge: the Coast Guard, BP, or their subcontractors? ’ I couldn ’ t 
look you in the eye and tell you who was making the decisions. ” When 
U.S. President Obama heard that, he told Nungesser to call him directly. 
Not everyone can call the president directly nor, we daresay, can Nungesser 
most of the time.  36 
 Blurring the Home-Work Boundary 
 Along with the ability to enable work almost anywhere, ICTs at home 
afford individuals the opportunity — and the burden — to work at any time. 
Many workers stay connected beyond regular working hours, even during 
weekends and vacation time. Thanks to the Internet and Mobile Revolu-
tions, some workers have become  “ teleworkers, ” performing their work 
in multiple locations: at home, clients ’ sites, caf é s, airline lounges, hotel 
lobbies, on the go, or on the beach. 
 The Pew Internet Networked Worker survey showed that 60 percent 
of employed Americans do some work from home and 18 percent work 
from home almost every day. Other surveys also show high percentages: 

186 
Chapter 7
The University of Southern California ’ s Center for the Digital Future 
reports that more than three-quarters of Americans had gone online at 
home for work in 2008. Half (49 percent) of the Intel workers surveyed 
work at least part-time at home, 17 percent are mobile workers while 
traveling (airports, hotels, etc.), and 16 percent work at different Intel 
locations. While the share of teleworkers has been on the rise, few work 
entirely at home. Part-time and over-time work is more prevalent. In 2008, 
nearly half (45 percent) of American workers did some work at home 
( figure 7.2 ). 
 The Pew Internet Networked Worker study shows that about half of 
employed email users check their work emails on weekends, sick days, or 
before and after going to work for the day (  table 7.3 ). More than one-third 
of employed email users check work email while on vacation. Phone calls 
also follow workers outside the normal working hours. Nearly two-thirds 
(63 percent) of American workers make or receive telephone calls related 
to work on weekends or when they are sick at home.  37 
 And then there are the rebels who defy the new convention. When 
computer scientist Eleni Stroulia went off email during an eight-day 
holiday in February 2011, she found 470 emails piled up awaiting her 
return. Although she missed some opportunities, she says,  “ In the end I 
am terribly happy I stayed out of email. I had an amazingly relaxing vaca-
tion. I read a couple of books, I had some memorably inane conversations 
Almost everyday 
5%
A few times a week 
10%
A few times a month 
9%
Less often  
8%
Never 
55%
Everyday
13%
 Figure 7.2 
 Frequency of internet use while working at home. Sample size = 1,000 employed 
workers. 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project, Networked Workers Survey 2008. 

Networked Work 
187
 Table 7.3 
 Frequency of Work-Related Emailing and Phoning beyond Regular Work Hours   
 Often 
 Sometimes 
 Rarely 
 Never 
 No Email 
at Work 
 Respondents who check email related to work (n=807) 
 On weekends 
 22% 
 18% 
 10% 
 41% 
 9% 
 On vacations 
 11 
 14 
 9 
 59 
 7 
 Before you 
go to work 
for the day 
 17 
 9 
 7 
 59 
 7 
 After you 
leave work 
for the day 
 19 
 16 
 9 
 48 
 8 
 When you 
are sick and 
cannot go to 
work 
 25 
 15 
 6 
 45 
 8 
 On the go, 
such as when 
you are 
commuting 
or shopping 
 7 
 6 
 5 
 75 
 8 
 Respondents who make calls related to work (n=1,000) 
 On weekends 
 13 
 21 
 29 
 38 
 On vacations 
 5 
 11 
 20 
 64 
 Before you 
go to work 
for the day 
 10 
 17 
 24 
 49 
 After you 
leave work 
for the day 
 11 
 25 
 25 
 39 
 When you 
are sick and 
cannot go to 
work 
 14 
 21 
 27 
 37 
 On the go, 
such as when 
you are 
commuting 
or shopping 
 12 
 17 
 18 
 53 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project, Networked Workers Survey 2008.  

188 
Chapter 7
with both of my children, and my mailbox is not threatening any more 
this evening. And, maybe, I may start a different type of relationship with 
email. Where I do not respond immediately, but I let things sit for a week. 
It looks like email does not go bad in a week. ” 38 
 About three-fifths (58 percent) of the respondents to the Pew Internet 
Networked Worker survey report that ICTs have allowed them to have a 
more flexible schedule and 24 percent say that ICTs have increased work 
flexibility a lot. Yet, teleworking varies greatly by job type, as different 
professions vary in the extent to which the nature of their jobs — and the 
nature of their employer — enables them to work outside of the worksite. 
Bit workers in professional and managerial occupations spend an average 
of about 10 percent of their working hours at home. By contrast, atom 
workers in occupations that require them to be at specific worksites (such 
as restaurants, health care, factories, mining, and construction) hardly ever 
telework. 
 While some teleworkers value the convenience as well as the elimina-
tion of commuting time, organizational analysts are trying to figure out 
the positive and negative impacts that telework has on cost efficiency, 
operations, workers ’ productivity, and commitment to the organization. 
Some companies encourage working at home to reduce real estate costs — a 
savings of over $10,000 per worker per year in major cities, one corporate 
executive told us. A meta-analysis of forty-six studies in 2007 found that, 
overall, telework increased workers ’ autonomy, job satisfaction, flexibility, 
and performance. 
 Most of the teleworkers interviewed by the Connected Lives researchers 
say that ICTs have improved their productivity and their quality of life. 
They say that telework reduces commuting stress, allows more flexible 
work schedules, and avoids interruptions in the office. Moreover, when a 
situation arises in which one parent must stay home with a child, telework 
helps many to deal with the situation easily rather than having to make 
awkward arrangements which might affect their jobs.  39 Yet, there are 
important variations. U.S. data shows that working at home aids multitask-
ing, especially for those Creative Class workers who have some control 
over how they schedule work and other tasks. American women who tele-
work have complex feelings about this, valuing the flexibility of taking 
care of household matters in between work activities but resenting the 
extra burden imposed by the prospect of contact at almost any hour. Male 
managers and professionals, with more authority and responsibility, are 
the most likely of all American men to report that work interferes with 
what is nominally their time off.  40 

Networked Work 
189
 Olivia, interviewed in the Connected Lives study, is a good example 
of a full-time teleworker. In her late 40s, she has worked full-time in 
public relations for two decades, doing corporate writing: speeches, press 
releases, and newsletters. She does not like working from nine to five 
at the office:  “ There was a lot of time in the office where I wasn ’ t really 
making good use of my time. ” Getting a guaranteed workload of fifty-
two hours a month from her primary client, she switched to home-based 
telework. 
 Many workers routinely cross the home – work boundary. When they do 
paid work at home, many workers try to tailor the focus, goals, and inter-
personal styles that are appropriate to each side of the boundary. Because 
it is sometimes hard to maintain the boundary at home, they often have 
an off-limits room where children and spouses know that  “ Mommy is at 
work. ” Almost all of those in the Connected Lives study who work at home 
use ICTs to stay connected with spouses and children, who are out of the 
house, during  “ work ” hours. Full-time home workers favor landlines while 
part-timers favor mobile phones. Yet, the more time people spend working 
at home, the more contact they have with their spouses via ICTs through-
out the day — no matter where they are or what they are doing. Further-
more, the more time people spend working at home, the more they 
integrate their paid and unpaid work tasks in the home. For example, full-
timers spend a mean of three hours per week more than part-timers doing 
chores and cleaning, cooking, and child care, but they also spend a mean 
of two hours more than part-timers per week with their children and 
spouses. In short, the more time people spend working at home, the more 
integrated is their work and family life. 
 Yet, telework can be both an obstacle and a solution to what family 
sociologists call  “ work – life balance. ” Many workers experience some nega-
tive impacts of ICT on their work life: prolonged working hours, increased 
availability outside of normal working hours, and distraction at work. 
The Pew Internet Networked Worker survey shows that almost half of 
workers who use ICTs say that blurred home-work boundaries increase 
working hours and stress. Moreover, teleworkers often pay for flexibility 
with longer, often uncompensated, hours. If circumstance allows, many 
teleworkers would not prefer to telework: Two-thirds work from home 
because of employers ’ requirements rather than individual preference. 
 The blurring boundaries of work and home may create intrusions 
when family members, especially young children, interfere with work. 
For instance, Olivia told the Connected Lives study that once she started 
working full-time at home, her family reduced the help they gave her 

190 
Chapter 7
with household chores:  “ As a general rule, I do it, and I think even more 
so now that I am not working outside of the home anymore. When I 
was working full-time [outside the home], I think there was a lot more 
chipping in. ” 
 Not only does her family expect her to do more household chores but 
Olivia herself also feels that she has to avoid getting preoccupied with 
domestic chores and focus on her work tasks.  “ I seem to be getting very 
good at this though: resisting the urge to do laundry or catch up on what-
ever  – vacuuming or something like that, ” she says.  “ Fortunately, it ’ s not 
something that I like to do. But I know when I first started working at 
home that was difficult. It was like, I ’ m home, so the house should be in 
better shape. My husband shouldn ’ t come home and say,  ‘ well, you ’ ve 
been home all day. ’ ” 
 Teleworkers who work entirely from home may feel isolated due to the 
lack of face-to-face communication with colleagues. They fear that their 
careers could be limited because they are less visible at work. For instance, 
while Olivia is not too concerned about the isolation of working from 
home because she usually works as an individual, nonetheless, she makes 
sure that she goes to the office once or twice a month for meetings or just 
to stay in contact. In a similar vein, Homezilla ’ s CEO Sandy Ward high-
lights maintaining visibility as a key issue for making remote workers 
happy and productive: 
 A remote worker can feel isolated and alone, which will greatly reduce productiv-
ity. Something as simple as them running a monthly meeting, having their manager 
over-communicate some of their achievements, and impromptu personal calls to 
chat (not check in) can all help. A big part of the visibility is connection to 
other team members; team members chatting in the hall over doughnuts doesn ’ t 
happen to remote workers. . . . Impromptu personal calls go a long way: think 
of it as a  ‘ hallway ’  chat for remote workers. Many people say IM is just as good 
but I disagree; a phone call builds relationships very differently than IM, texts, 
or emails.  41 
 Net and Jet: Entrepreneurs Linking North America and China 
 Despite the reliance of distributed organizations on ICTs,  “ travel to trust ” 
is often the watchword of such organizations.  42 As we saw in chapter 
2, airline travel has soared — and along with it, business travel. As much 
as people depend on ICTs to communicate, networked organizations 
must have some in-person contact. That is the way they get a more 
multidimensional range of information about one another — how they 

Networked Work 
191
look, talk, and smell; what the office gossip is, especially regarding their 
own standing within the firm and who is working on what. With such 
bonding, workers get tacit knowledge: the unwritten lore of organizational 
memories and know-how. As one entrepreneur told NetLab ’ s Transnational 
Entrepreneurs project that  “ successful collaboration is a full-contact 
sport. ” 
 In-person contact is crucial for adding a human touch to glocalized 
networks. 43 Chinese-Canadian transnational entrepreneurs both  “ net and 
jet ” to do business. They are jet setters in order to obtain high-value con-
tacts in government and business, develop trust, and obtain deep knowl-
edge of conditions in China. These Chinese-Canadian entrepreneurs have 
large and diverse business networks, with their travel helping them to tap 
into previously unattainable business partners or capital. Ties with govern-
ment officials are a great advantage, but take a lot of time to build and 
maintain.  “ You must hook up with officials and state firms, ” Russell told 
us. As Taylor, another entrepreneur, said,  “ I search for partners on the 
internet. I found four of my joint venture partners on the Internet and the 
other half were recommended by friends. I send emails to people who I 
have never met before. I cannot imagine how I would do business without 
the Internet, ” He went on to say,  “ People ask me how I can trust someone 
who I have never met in person. Online contact is just the first step. You 
will have a lot communication through email. Yet, the most critical step 
is that you sit down together face to face. Then you must travel to China, 
meet him in person, and listen to his idea. ” 
 The entrepreneurs often find it hard to get tacit knowledge and fine-
grained information online. They use face-to-face meetings to fill gaps. For 
instance, Stella does intensive market research on the internet when she 
needs to find new suppliers. However, she finds that  “ what you find on 
the internet, in particular in China, is often trading companies. ” As a trader 
herself, she is 
 not that inspired to deal with other trading companies because I do not want to 
have an additional middleman. I left for China to research what business we could 
do. I selected a few directions. I stayed two weeks in China and met about 20 
people ranging from government officials to business owners: many of them were 
my friends or business contacts. I met with high-level officials in the National 
Committee of Development and Reform, the Ministry of Commerce, and the 
Ministry of Metallurgy. I met directors in imports and exports firms, insurance 
companies, and mining firms. As your contacts are high-level, they know very 
well the policy and the overall trend of the development. You learn a lot from 
chatting with them.  44 

192 
Chapter 7
 The Distributed Designs of the Boeing 777 and 787 Airliners 
 The Boeing 777 and 787 airliners, designed by geographically distributed 
virtual teams, illustrate what such teams in a networked organization 
can — and cannot — achieve.  45 Where the networks of Chinese-Canadian 
transnational entrepreneurs were often interpersonal, Boeing ’ s links were 
interorganizational. Given the competitive time pressure to enter service 
quickly, multiple international and interdisciplinary teams designed the 
777 in more than a dozen countries. At the peak of the work, there were 
more than ten thousand team members. Analysts claim that the five-year 
time span from start to launch was 30 percent to 40 percent faster than 
working with comparable paper-based designs. 
 The 777 ’ s design process was greatly speeded up by computer-assisted 
systems. It was the first plane in history built without physical mock-ups. 
Instead, the design teams worked on virtual mock-ups from 2,200 com-
puter terminals connected to large mainframe computers in the United 
States, United Kingdom, and Japan. Key participants in the design process 
had immediate access to data and could track changes that other design 
teams made. A parts-tracking system monitored the delivery process of 
each plane part. 
 The Boeing 777 project focused on human networks as well as on 
computer networks. Boeing coordinated collaboration within and across 
cross-disciplinary design-build teams. Although Boeing had been an 
organization with strict hierarchical divisions between departments, it 
built a global network for the Boeing 777 project to support data 
exchange and process integration among suppliers, vendors, internal 
units and external customers worldwide. The entire plane was divided 
into specific areas of responsibility and each specific area was further 
broken down into subcomponents — such as the outboard fixed wing —
 with each run by a design-build team. To reduce within-organization 
rivalries and communication breakdowns, each of the two hundred 
teams was cross-disciplinary, bringing together members from engineer-
ing, finance, operations, manufacturing, customer support, suppliers, 
and customers. 
 Management made sure that virtual team members had considerable 
in-person interaction: Team members had to maintain participation, 
develop group cultures, and integrate with colleagues working in other 
places. Boeing worked to establish trust among dispersed team members 
by first trying to build good face-to-face relations, bringing design-build 

Networked Work 
193
teams ’  members from a dozen countries to their headquarters near Seattle 
to work together for eighteen months. The teams also built collaborative 
relationships with major airlines and with foreign manufacturers. For 
instance, Japanese companies manufactured around 20 percent of the 
Boeing 777, with engineers from three major Japanese subcontractors 
working in the design-build teams. 
 Why did the process work so well, with reasonable speed and with all 
parts fitting together? Organizational analysts Arvind Malhotra and Ann 
Majchrzak concluded that Boeing ’ s successful use of ICTs for far-flung 
virtual teams had four distinct dimensions. First, technology supported 
task coordination, in the sense that everyone knew what everyone else was 
working on. Second, ICTs supported the external connectivity needed to 
link the team with outsiders, whether to gain information or a new per-
spective on the project. Third, ICTs supported  “ distributed cognition, ” 
enabling team members to share and integrate their own diverse perspec-
tives. Fourth, more prosaically but crucially, a variety of ICTs enabled the 
teams to interact in many ways, using the media they felt was most appro-
priate to the task at hand.  46 
 Yet these kinds of collaborations through vast distributed networks can 
turn into nightmares. Although the Boeing 777 was a technical and com-
mercial success, distributed work on the newer Boeing 787 Dreamliner has 
been a bumpy ride. The 787 project went further than the 777 project in 
its embrace of distributed work, passing out more of the manufacturing to 
more suppliers. A network of global suppliers is building four-fifths of the 
plane. Suppliers for the plane ’ s structure span nine countries in four 
continents. 47 
 However, the parts shipped in from around the world did not fit 
together well at first and sometimes did not ship on time: a major difficulty 
with interdependent manufacturing processes. Other problems included 
assembly instructions in different languages, variable quality standards 
between companies, and networked work going too far. Work was even 
more distributed when outsourcers further outsourced their work, far from 
Boeing ’ s span of control. For example, one American company struggled 
to meet Boeing ’ s standards in building fuselage sections, ran short of cash, 
and outsourced work to an Israeli company, creating a messy commun-
ication and accountability chain. The program fell three years behind 
schedule and billions of dollars beyond budget, with significant manage-
ment upheavals. It appears that networked work and networked organiza-
tions are better at linking ideas — bits — than at linking parts — atoms.  48 

194 
Chapter 7
 Networked Work On and Offline 
 Technology neither creates nor organizes work relations by itself. Instead, 
it affords possibilities and constraints. Even when computer-based com-
munication developed in the 1980s and 1990s, the large size of the equip-
ment and the low capacity of the communication links meant that almost 
all computer-based contact — if it existed at all — was confined to small 
groups. It is only with contemporary computers, smartphones, and the 
broadband networks to carry them that work has achieved the relative ease 
and low cost of distributed communication. Yet, how workers use ICTs and 
what they use them for are as important as the technological affordances 
of these technologies. 
 On the one hand, ICTs now play an enabling role in supporting inter-
organizational and intraorganizational communication and coordination 
among workers distributed in various locations. Workers are talking to each 
other, showing pictures and videos, and exchanging files that range from 
small documents to the huge databases that organizations from astronomy 
to insurance rely on. In many cases, ICT-using bit workers have been able 
to cut loose from working side by side — even if they are sometimes looking 
at each other face to face on video. And ICTs enable workers to have more 
contact with family members throughout the day. 
 On the other hand, ICTs convey fewer social cues than in-person con-
tacts. That is why people travel to meet in person: to build trust, develop 
nuanced understanding, and exchange tacit knowledge. The success of 
collaboration in the network operating system often depends on a delicate 
balance of computer networks and human networks that provide the trust 
and incentives to share information and knowledge. As Lu Mei and her 
colleagues report,  “ a diverse repertoire of ICTs has created an environment 
where team members are often oblivious to other members ’ locations and 
backgrounds. ”  49 
 Yet the need for in-person contact should not be overstated. Once 
people have established in-depth knowledge and trust, they can blend 
work via ICTs with in-person meetings. Widespread experience with using 
ICTs has created ease and comfort for long-distance communication. 
 Thus, the shift from organization men to networked individuals reflects 
fundamental changes in the organization of work. It makes organizations 
more flexible and more tenuous. More coordination, if not control, is 
needed. It increases problem-solving capabilities, if firms can get the atten-
tion of the teams and keep them focused. It diversifies information flows, 
at the cost of inefficiencies if networks are poorly connected. It increases 

Networked Work 
195
worker mobility at the cost of worker solidarity and, perhaps, worker soli-
tude. It liberates workers from constant in-person supervision but tethers 
them to constant communication channels and digital supervisions. It 
often allows them to be casual in their dress code and punctuality, but puts 
work – life balance at risk. It can make for happier, more relaxed workers 
but it can distract and distress workers as they get torn between work and 
family. 
 Most importantly, the time and space flexibility afforded by ICTs fits 
the shift to networked individualism — at work as well as in the family and 
communities. As IBM vice-president Irving Wladawsky-Berger argues, 
 “ enterprises have had to become much more flexible and dynamic in order 
to survive the intense competition they started to face from companies 
around the world, large and small. ”  50 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 8  Networked Creators 
 An old adage has it that you should never pick a fight with someone who 
buys ink by the barrel.  1 A new adage would be to never pick a fight with 
a networked individual with strong internet and mobile connections. 
 In the age of the Triple Revolution, anyone with an internet connection 
and a bit of digital literacy can create online content that has the potential 
to reach a wide audience. With all the different forms of creating content 
and the increasing ease with which people can do so, the boundaries 
between producers and consumers are becoming blurred in the network 
operating system — with noncredentialed amateurs participating in many 
of the arenas that were once limited to recognized and sanctioned experts. 
 Peter Maranci is one of the legions of digital creators and activists who 
have updated that old adage. He embraces ICTs, and tailors his use to 
satisfy his needs and accomplish his goals. In August 2003, for instance, 
he began a personal blog where he wrote a mixture of personal reflections, 
a chronicle of his young son ’ s early years, political commentary and 
humor, thoughts on religion and atheism, information exchanges with 
fellow video gamers, stories of his experiences at work and play, and even-
tually ran a campaign against the Massachusetts Bay Transportation 
Authority. He had tried to contact local newspapers, rail officials, legisla-
tors, and the governor to voice his concerns over problems of the train 
system but had met with no response. So, he used his LiveJournal blog for 
several years to snipe at the problems he saw — dirty stations, stiflingly hot 
cars, late trains, and overcrowded trains. 
 In July 2007, a woman passed out on a packed, hot train. The aisles 
were so congested with standing riders that it was impossible for those 
near her to summon a conductor for help. An off-duty paramedic and 
a pregnant nurse tended to the woman until, in Maranci ’ s estimation, a 
 “ clueless ”  conductor arrived several minutes later and eventually found 
a way to get the woman an ambulance. 

198 
Chapter 8
 The incident propelled Maranci to create a separate blog specifically 
focused on train problems, which he called  “ Charlie on the Commuter 
Line. ” 2 His first post was about the woman and the woeful conditions on 
the train:  “ Fortunately the ill woman ’ s condition apparently wasn ’ t critical. 
But if it had been, the delay caused by the overcrowding could have had 
serious consequences. ” He then joined a small cadre of other transit riders 
who were similarly blogging about their experiences. Their blogs linked to 
each other via blog rolls, lists of other blogs that are recommended by a 
blog writer. That helped to increase the visibility of all the blogs and to 
bring them new readership. Early in 2008, Maranci started adding photos 
of the crowds on the trains, the late arrivals of trains, and the conditions 
in train stations. 
 Over the following months Maranci could see how his postings were 
beginning to influence changes within the transit system. A conductor 
about whom he and other passengers complained was transferred off the 
train, the crumbling stairwells he documented were patched (albeit poorly), 
and he was contacted by a reporter from a free daily commuter paper, 
 BostonNow , about the chronically crowded conditions on the trains. This 
led to a photo shoot and article. Maranci knows his public campaign was 
not the only reason for these changes, but as he explained in a personal 
interview:  “ It certainly brought more voices of protest to the attention of 
fellow riders, the press, and the officials who run these trains. It was really 
gratifying so many of the changes I ’ d been seeking were made. ” 
 While Maranci is not a celebrity or politician, he is able to act in the 
same environments they do and have influence on the issues that matter 
most to him. He would likely not have been very visible were it not for 
the affordances of ICTs. Still, content creation has its burdens and limits. 
On March 10, 2011, Maranci told his readers that he would blog much less 
often, because he had moved off the transit system to become a telecom-
muter, working from home and ending his four hours of daily travel. He 
said he had less to post, and his withdrawal shows that when unpaid net-
worked creators lose interest or opportunity, they become less involved. 
 While he was at it, networked creator Maranci joined the roughly two-
thirds of adult internet users in America who have created online material, 
taking advantage of these new technological affordances. The act of creat-
ing media — text, photos, audio, artwork, or videos — can serve many pur-
poses. For many digital creators, content creation is a simple act of 
documenting memories, the way traditional photo albums are constructed. 
For others, making and sharing media is a signpost of friendship and 
communication. Then, there are those who create material so that they 

Networked Creators 
199
can learn and explore. Finally, there are content creators who want to 
advertise themselves, reach out to strangers, or show their technical skills. 
 With rapid technological advancement, it becomes difficult to keep pace 
with all of the ways people can create content online. Nevertheless, Pew 
Internet research has tracked some of the clearly identifiable online activi-
ties of networked individuals. It has found that the number of content 
creation activities and the age of networked individuals engaging in such 
activities are increasing over time as is reflected in the following percent-
ages from surveys in 2011:  3 
 •  writing material on a social networking site such as Facebook: 65 percent 
of internet users do this 
 •  sharing photos: 55 percent  
 •  contributing rankings and reviews of products or services: 37 percent  
 •  creating tags of content: 33 percent  
 •  posting comments on third-party websites or blogs: 26 percent 
 •  taking online material and remixing it into a new creation: 15 percent 
of internet users do this with photos, video, audio, or text 
 • creating or working on a blog: 14 percent 
 •  using Twitter: 13 percent  
 Pew Internet ’ s studies show that networked individuals often do not 
confine themselves to one type of content creation activity, but are involved 
in multiple types. For instance, along with his activism as a train rider, 
Maranci, like a third of internet users, reviews products and services. He 
contributes to Yelp — a website that allows users to rate and review local 
businesses such as barber shops and restaurants — where he mixes praise of 
good businesses with withering reviews of firms that fall short of his stan-
dards. He ’ s also similar to the 15 percent of internet users who combine 
material previously created by others to create original material — remixing 
or mashing it up. For example, he created a  “ separated at birth ” video of 
Democrat John Kerry and a zombie from a cult movie, attracting several 
thousand viewers.  4 
 Maranci ’ s history as an online contributor is but one example of how 
content creation affords networked individuals opportunities to solve 
problems, make decisions, increase their social standing, and gain political 
support. Networked creators, such as Maranci, are the focus of this chapter. 
We examine how the rise of ICTs has changed the landscape of creation, 
providing networked individuals with an increasingly accessible vehicle by 
which to display their creativity to a larger audience. Armed with their 
internet connections and mobile phones, they can document and report 

200 
Chapter 8
on what is happening in their surroundings, providing an alternative 
source of news. They can produce online content in ways that not only 
expand their social network but also elevate their social standing. 
 Creating in the Age of the Triple Revolution 
 Media making in the network operating system is a participatory act. Even 
old-style media events turn into social media  “ conversations ”  in the age 
of the Triple Revolution. After President Obama ’ s State of the Union address 
in 2011, Americans still could not respond to their television sets and be 
heard, but networked individuals created simple and original YouTube 
videos to voice their concerns. A week later, Obama spent forty-five minutes 
responding to a few of the videos by answering questions on a number of 
topics including policies in Iraq and Afghanistan, the war on drugs, and 
even his favorite Occidental College course.  5 A similar phenomenon also 
happened the year before when more than fourteen thousand videos were 
generated in response to Obama ’ s 2010 State of the Union speech.  6 Of 
course, these numbers are not representative of the entire population of 
America and creating a video did not ensure a response from Obama. 
Nevertheless, ICTs had opened up the possibility for greater dialogue, 
especially with a public figure who is nearly impossible for an ordinary 
person to reach. 
 “ Making is connecting, ” asserts sociologist David Gauntlett. ICTs not 
only enable people to create their own original work with the material 
available on and offline, they also encourage networked individuals to 
do so collaboratively. As Gauntlett emphasizes,  “ Sites such as YouTube, 
eBay, Facebook, Flickr, Craigslist and Wikipedia only exist and have 
value because people use and contribute to them, and they are clearly 
better the more people are using and contributing to them. ”  7 Similarly, 
social analyst Sebastien Paquet argues that it is  “ ridiculously easy ” to 
create a group in this environment because the transaction costs of 
finding and connecting with others are so miniscule.  8 Paths where only 
recognized experts would once tread are now open to noncredentialed 
amateurs. As media commentator Douglas Rushkoff puts it:  “ The people 
have crashed the gates of professionalism, penetrating the formerly sac-
rosanct boundaries protecting elites of all industries from challenges 
from below. ” 9 
 Thus, networked individuals are voluntarily creating content every 
day in tandem with other networked individuals within and outside of 
their own personal networks, and in ways that can expand and enrich 

Networked Creators 
201
collective knowledge and solve problems. Digital tools have helped net-
worked individuals reconfigure the structure of their social networks 
by extending their reach and their potential for influence, blurring the 
lines between producers and consumers. With costs to creating and 
disseminating technology lowering, many more people are telling stories, 
giving personal testimonies, contributing their ideas, and interacting 
with others. 
 Collaborative Content Creation on Wikipedia 
 Wikipedia relies almost entirely on the collective, creative efforts of net-
worked individuals who create, edit, and manage the content of the more 
than 3.6 million articles currently stored in its English-language version.  10 
Although the online encyclopedia allows any registered user to create and 
edit articles: A small number of the 2.8 million do much of the editing.  11 
At times, the process of contributing is simple and uncontested. At other 
times, it is protracted and contentious as contributors engage in  “ edit wars ” 
over facts, interpretations, and sourcing, all professing to uphold Wikipe-
dia ’ s primary principles of reliable authorities and a neutral point of view. 
After all, the fact that  “ editors have diverse motivations, have never worked 
together before, and [are all] free to participate as little or as much as they 
want ” makes collaboration on something as intricate as an online ency-
clopedia quite a difficult task.  12 
 Wikipedians sprung to work right after the devastating northeastern 
Japan earthquake and tsunami of March 11, 2011, and the subsequent 
nuclear reactor failures. Some Wikipedians updated existing articles on 
topics such as  “ Sendai, ”  the principal city in the area, and  “ boiling water 
reactor, ”  adding discussions of the reactors ’ inadequacies. Wikipedians 
also created new articles, such as  “ Tohoku earthquake and tsunami ” and 
 “ Timeline of the Fukushima 1 nuclear accidents. ” Between March 11 
(0600 UTC, the approximate time the quake began) and March 25 (0000), 
2,871 different editors contributed 13,175 revisions to 75 relevant 
articles.  13 
 Figure 8.1  shows links between Wikipedia editors and the key articles 
they contributed to.  14 The principal articles are the larger rectangles and 
the small dots are the editors. The halo — or if you like, peacock feathers —
 around the principal nodes show those editors who only contributed to 
one article. Yet, there are bridges suggesting that some editors contributed 
to multiple articles, such as the clump at the bottom between  “ Fukushima 
1 Nuclear Power Plant ” and  “ Nuclear 1 nuclear accidents. ” The cluster of 

202 
Chapter 8
small squares running left to right in the middle of the network shows the 
main links among the twenty-nine articles related to the destroyed cities 
and towns. And the cluster of dots in the center — looking like a cluster of 
stars at the heart of a galaxy — shows that many editors were at the core of 
these revisions, contributing to many articles. The graph shows one 
strength of Wikipedia: It itself provides networked information, as hyper-
links connect articles with one mouse click.  
 The graph shows an interconnectivity of articles, ideas, and people: 
what sociologist Ronald Breiger calls a  “ duality of persons and groups. ” 
People link groups, but groups also link people.  15 For example, there were 
more than three hundred edits alone on March 14 — just to the  “ Fukushima 
1 Nuclear Power Plant ”  article, many made minutes apart, and some 
repeatedly made by the same people. A  “ discussion page ” accompanies 
 Figure 8.1 
 Wikipedia links between articles and editors for the 2011 Japanese disasters. 
 Source : Brian Keegan.  © 2011, used with permission. 

Networked Creators 
203
every Wikipedia article for editors to discuss issues. Twenty-five items 
appeared here on March 14 along with a structured vote about whether 
the article should be merged with another one about the accident itself. 
While Wikipedians may argue with and edit each other a lot, the result in 
all the places we have looked appears to be steady progress toward creating 
informative and reliable encyclopedia articles. Indeed, we have judiciously 
relied on Wikipedia in writing this book. 
 In addition to the drive of Wikipedia contributors to chronicle major 
news in real time, there is a more fundamental urge to participate in 
knowledge creation of all kinds — even with the frequent stresses that are 
part of that process. One Wikipedia contributor,  “ Willowaye ” (a pseud-
onym of the real alias), told us about his involvement during the 2008 U.S. 
presidential campaign, where content creation between networked indi-
viduals on Wikipedia became a heated process.  16 Willowaye had made over 
a thousand edits to existing and new articles by that time, which made 
Wikipedia a natural space for him to contribute to the election campaign. 
He shied away from the main articles about Barack Obama and Republican 
candidate John McCain because they were too filled with warring contribu-
tors. Instead, he focused on Obama ’ s mother, Ann Dunham, and stepfa-
ther, Lolo Soetoro. He put these articles on his Wikipedia watch list, 
receiving alerts every time anyone changed the text. 
 When it came to editing the Ann Dunham article, Willowaye encoun-
tered vulgar insults about her sexual exploits and choice in men that were 
not based on any evidence. Although he had to deal with these allegations 
on a recurring basis, they were easy to fix with a one-key-click deletion 
(what Wikipedia calls  “ reversion ” ), using a tool called Twinkle. Another 
issue with the Dunham article was more subtle. Certain editors wanted 
to emphasize her supposedly atheistic beliefs. However, several editors, 
including Willowaye, were able to show that Dunham was broadly sup-
portive of the humanist aspect of religion. The editing battle continued 
behind the scenes on  “ talk pages ” — separate from the main Wikipedia 
pages — until a compromise was made and the section was renamed from 
 “ Religious Beliefs ” to  “ Spiritual Beliefs, ” although further editing has 
renamed it again:  “ Personal Beliefs ” (as of December 25, 2011, 2210 UTC). 
 Meanwhile, the Wikipedia pages on Obama ’ s stepfather, Lolo Soetoro, 
posed another challenge. Several editors wanted to make Soetoro ’ s Muslim 
religion a main focus of the article, which Willowaye thought might well 
affect how people thought about Obama. During the time of the campaign, 
recurring misrepresentations asserted that Obama was a Muslim when he 
was, in fact, a Christian. 

204 
Chapter 8
 The interactions that Willowaye experienced while editing these articles 
illustrate how networked creators collaborate to produce a collection of 
valuable information. In the debates over what to include and exclude for 
the Wikipedia articles, disagreements were phrased according to Wikipe-
dian norms such as verifiability, civility, and neutral point of view:  “ the 
article would be tighter without that ” ;  “ you ’ re providing undue emphasis ” ; 
 “ we need to make the article more complete ” ; and  “ please document your 
facts. ” Without such outwardly civil discourse, cooperative editing could 
not take place. 
 With Wikipedia, ordinary networked individuals who are committed to 
contributing their time and effort have the power to create and amend 
articles that contain valuable information. The content on Wikipedia is 
not necessarily introduced by professional experts. It is almost always 
edited after it is created on the website rather than being edited and fact-
checked by third parties ahead of time. The articles are not usually con-
trolled by the administrators who act as the arbiters of disputed writing. 
In other words, many of the traditional processes of creating reliable infor-
mation are abandoned in favor of a procedure based on interpersonal 
exchanges among networked individuals during their leisure time. 
 This does not mean that the information on Wikipedia is always 
the most accurate, although it usually is the most handy. Willowaye ’ s 
experience demonstrates just how protracted content creation can become 
as many different networked individuals attempt to push their inter-
pretation of information online. Nevertheless, the rise of Wikipedia 
illustrates how power dynamics have changed with the coming of ICTs. 
Professional elite producers no longer hold a monopoly on content 
creation and dissemination. Wikipedia, an online encyclopedia mostly 
edited by amateurs, is a primary example of how knowledge is crowd-
sourced — that is, produced by groups of people who are interested, moti-
vated, and have internet access. It has become the most widely referenced 
work on the internet.  17 
 Tag, You ’ re It! 
 Institutional actors are recognizing the collaborative potential of net-
worked creation and integrating it into their own work processes. For 
instance, the U.S. Library of Congress posted a message on its website in 
January 2008 and sent an email to its list of  “ friends ”  asking them for help. 
A small team of the library ’ s staff managed by Michelle Springer was in the 
process of placing approximately three thousand historic photographs on 

Networked Creators 
205
the popular photo-sharing website Flickr. They needed people who were 
members of Flickr to help provide more information about the photos by 
commenting and adding labels, also known as  “ tags, ” to the photos.  18 The 
august Library of Congress was giving up some control over the creation 
of information to amateurs. 
 Many library officials were stunned in the ensuing weeks at the outpour-
ing of interest and helpful public contributions to the project. They were 
most surprised by the unforeseen outcomes: the pace by which new tags 
and comments piled up over time, the willingness of Flickr members to 
expend effort on history detective work, the sourcing of new information 
through links to newspaper archives and highly specialized websites, and 
the desire of other institutions to launch similar efforts. While cynics pre-
dicted that the project would yield little payoff or that troll users would 
disfigure their photos or overwhelm the site, the Library of Congress team 
noted that the response from Flickr members and observers was  “ over-
whelmingly positive and beneficial ” (  table 8.1 ).  19 
 Thousands of Flickr users made tags and added comments to the 
photos, creating a resource rich with information. At times, comments 
would lead to further discussions of a wide range of topics including 
people ’ s memories of farming practices, recollections of their grandparents ’ 
lives, women ’ s roles in World War II, and the changing landscape of 
local neighborhoods. One particular photo that drew extended interac-
tions was labeled Weavers at Work (  figure 8.2 ). Networked individuals 
created tags to indicate that the women in the photo were blind and 
that they were making rugs at the New York Association for the Blind. 
One networked individual even recognized the photo as one taken by 
his great grandfather, Percy Byron (prompted by the logo at the bottom 
of the photo).  
 Moreover, the Library of Congress team decided to enable Flickr ’ s 
 “ blog this ” functionality, which allowed the photos to be incorporated 
 Table 8.1 
 Library of Congress Project Statistics for 6,416 images in Flickr Commons  
 26.3 million 
 Views of the photos 
 130,033 
 Tags added by 3,507 unique Flickr accounts 
 29,348 comments 
 Left by 7,889 unique Flickr accounts 
 Fewer than 25 
 Instances of user-generated content removed as 
inappropriate 
 Source : Library of Congress (2011).  

206 
Chapter 8
into the personal blogs and websites of networked individuals. At the 
onset, the team worried that the photos would lose context and author-
ity if allowed to migrate to different online venues. Instead, they found 
that networked individuals used the photos in creative — and not abu-
sive — ways. One photo of World War II nurses was used to illustrate a 
blog post on giving blood, an image of a half-built skyscraper was 
embedded in a blog post announcing the blogger ’ s upcoming trip to 
New York City, and a picture of a two-story-high stack of paper outside 
a 1940s paper mill was accompanied by a blog post mocking a judicial 
order regarding access to data. Networked individuals were remixing 
these old photographs from the early 1900s in a way that made sense 
in their contemporary context. Thus, in releasing the historic photos, 
the Library of Congress opened the doors for people to integrate the 
past with the present through their own creations and with their own 
interpretations. 
 Similar to Wikipedia, then, the library ’ s material had been enriched, 
expanded, and made more accurate and accessible by its invitation to 
people to contribute their own insights and engage in their own 
 Figure 8.2 
 Weavers at Work: blind women weaving rugs in Byron, New York, ca. 1910 – 1915. 
 Source : Flickr Commons Project, 2008. 

Networked Creators 
207
conversations about the photos. Instead of asking professional historians 
to fill the missing gaps of information about its artifacts, the Library of 
Congress witnessed networked individuals creating their own information 
taxonomies through their tags. More importantly, it spurred the creation 
of original tools and resources from public institutions and networked 
individuals alike. Other public institutions have been quick to grasp the 
potential of collaborative creation present in the library ’ s pilot project. 
By December 2011, fifty-six additional museums, libraries, and archives 
were participating in the Flickr Commons initiative, a project compiling 
artifacts from the past and crowdsourcing them for modern interpreta-
tion. These dedicated virtual volunteers have created a resource for history 
enthusiasts to share and discuss the collections available in the Commons. 
In addition, they have also served as a programming resource for some 
of the participating institutions as well as pushing for more innovative 
creations.  20 
 The Egyptian Revolt, On and Offline 
 Social media — Facebook, Twitter, and email — plus mobile phones played a 
major part in the  “ Arab spring ” of protests and rebellion against authoritar-
ian regimes in the Middle East and North Africa throughout 2011. The 
activity of networked individuals in Tunisia, Egypt, and other states was a 
prime example of how online content creation and community building, 
in tandem with offline gatherings and backstage maneuvering, can aid 
mass mobilizations.  21 Although only 21 percent of Egyptians subscribed to 
the internet in 2010, these were predominantly the young adult Cairo men 
who were at the heart of the revolt. They also were new kinds of influenc-
ers who could shape a movement that did not emerge in the traditional 
way of relying on a formal, hierarchical opposition organization. Moreover, 
the internet in general — and Facebook in particular — were important meta-
phors for the revolt. The young men pronounced themselves as  “ the 
Facebook generation, ” signifying that they were no longer the nonmodern 
Egyptians of the past.  22 
 The movement toward revolt did not happen overnight, though it may 
have seemed so for the many people around the world who relied on tra-
ditional media for the news: newspapers, radio, and TV. There had been 
serious preparatory links both online and offline between Egyptian activ-
ists and other like-minded activists in other countries. In 2008, Ahmed 
Mahar and his friends had created the  “ April 6 Youth Movement ” as a 
Facebook group to promote and coordinate a nationwide general labor 

208 
Chapter 8
strike. A few months later, young networked individuals in Tunisia created 
the group  “ Progressive Youth of Tunisia, ” which became a link for com-
munication between activists in the two countries.  23 The Egyptian activists 
also communicated with activist networks elsewhere, including the Centre 
for Applied Nonviolent Action and Strategies (Canvas), an offshoot of the 
Serbian youth movement Otpor, which had participated in overthrowing 
the Slobodan Milosevic regime in 2000. Members of the April 6 Youth 
Movement had traveled to Belgrade to learn how to organize peaceful 
protests, and Serbian activists had similarly traveled to Egypt to train 
protest organizers.  24 
 Digital tools also helped Egyptians to build networks within the country. 
When Khaled Said, a twenty-eight-year-old Egyptian businessman, was 
beaten to death by police officers in June 2010, cries of police brutality 
and public outrage erupted. Then-anonymous networked individuals 
created a Facebook page called  “ We Are All Khaled Said, ” posted photos 
taken from a mobile phone of Said ’ s beaten face, and created YouTube 
videos depicting Said as a happy individual prior to his death. One of the 
Facebook group administrators, Wael Ghonim, a marketing executive at 
Google, worked closely with Maher of the April 6 Youth Movement and 
other activist networks, using knowledge he gained from those networks 
to help mobilize those drawn to the new Facebook page.  25 
 The Egyptian movement was galvanized in early 2011 after large-scale 
protests in Tunisia toppled the regime of President Ben Ali on January 14. 
The Tunisian uprising had special resonance in Egypt because it was 
prompted by incidents of police corruption and viral social media con-
demnation of them. When news of the Tunisian revolt ’ s success spread, 
networked individuals in Egypt began to plan protests for January 25. The 
 “ We Are All Khaled Said ” Facebook page was used to actively recruit people 
to join the protest with more than one hundred thousand reportedly 
signing up (  figure 8.3 ).  26 With information widely disseminated online, 
the revolt moved from cyberspace to physical place as protestors occupied 
Tahrir Square on January 25 and the days to come. Facebook became a 
platform where discontented citizens could voice their frustrations, share 
relevant expertise, and overcome the fear that comes with living under 
an oppressive regime.  27 Moreover, where activists of the past had relied 
almost exclusively on direct access to friends to get the word out about a 
cause, these networked individuals simply convened with those who were 
online, even if they were initially strangers to one another. A sense of 
shared purpose arose and communities of mutual trust and assistance 
developed. 

Networked Creators 
209
 While protesting, organizers leveraged their networks and resources. 
They continued to communicate with the experienced activists from 
Tunisia and Serbia who provided practical advice, such as sniffing lemons, 
onions, and vinegar for relief from tear gas, using spray paint to cover 
windshields of police cars, and shielding their bodies with plastic bottles 
or cardboard.  28 They relied on traditional media, such as flyers, to mobilize 
people who might not have access to the internet.  29 And of course, they 
coordinated their efforts online, announcing demonstration sites and 
sharing instructions, and tactics with one another. As Egyptian blogger 
Mahmoud Salem said, the internet created a  “ parallel Egypt ” through 
which networked individuals could communicate.  30 
 Mobile phones played an important role because many more people 
owned them than personal computers. Those in Tahrir Square at the 
center of the revolt relied on mobile phones to learn about fast-paced 
events that were unfolding around them and then share those stories 
via the internet. They — and others — sent bulletins by Twitter and text, 
and uploaded protest (and repression) videos to YouTube, thereby spread-
ing the flow of information worldwide. In fact, after Egyptian authori-
ties closed down Al Jazeera ’ s office in Cairo, the pan-Arab broadcasting 
network called on people to send blog posts and videos of what was 
 Figure 8.3 
 Facebook T-shirts commerating the January 25, 2011, Eqyptian uprising for sale in 
Tahrir Square, Cairo, May 2011. 
 Source : Zeynep Tufekci.  © 2011, used with permission. 

210 
Chapter 8
happening on the ground to expand coverage of the protests.  31 Mobile 
phones were so essential to the group that they ingeniously kept 
them charged by tapping into streetlamp wires to obtain electricity  
(figure 8.4) . 
 Despite the importance of the Internet and Mobile Revolutions, other 
factors were indispensible for the revolt ’ s success. The participants were 
not a random group of Cairenes. As in almost all social movements, the 
revolt was built upon established networks of friends and political groups 
such as the Muslim Brotherhood.  32 Moreover, international pressure played 
a role in the outcome of the revolt.  33 Most significantly, the Egyptian mili-
tary leaders decisively did not intervene violently in the protests. They 
sought to remain powerful after the revolt and were influenced by the 
American government, which has been providing sizeable funds to them.  34 
Their nonintervention contrasted with the Libyan experience a few weeks 
later when most of the military initially remained loyal to the established 
Qaddafi regime. 
 Figure 8.4 
 Egyptian activists recharging their mobile phones during the revolt. 
 Source : Karim Marold.  © 2011, used with permission. 

Networked Creators 
211
 How All This User-Generated Content Is Changing the Media Landscape 
 In addition to serving the needs of networked individuals, the rise of social 
media has also changed the character of the overall media environment. 
The most dramatic evidence of this comes in the content analysis research 
of the Pew Research Center ’ s Project for Excellence in Journalism (PEJ).  35 
Starting in early 2009, on January 19 the PEJ produced a News Coverage 
Index (NCI) of the major news stories covered by the traditional news 
media and a separate New Media Index (NMI) of the top topics that were 
discussed in the social media universe.  36 The NMI looks separately at blogs, 
Twitter posts, and YouTube videos. 
 Side by side, these indexes show strikingly divergent universes of cover-
age and commentary. Even individual social-media channels seem to have 
their own news agenda and personality. A PEJ analysis of a year ’ s worth of 
material in each index showed little overlap among the channels in the 
stories that gained prominence.  37 For instance, PEJ analysts noted that 
bloggers gravitated toward stories that elicited emotion, concerned indi-
vidual or group rights, or triggered ideological passion. Often these were 
stories that people could personalize and then share in the social forum — at 
times in highly partisan language. And unlike in some other types of 
media, the partisanship of the blogosphere as a whole did not lean strongly 
to one side or the other. Both conservative and liberal voices come through 
equally strongly even in stories on contentious topics such as the Tea Party 
protests and public support for President Barack Obama. 
 On Twitter, by contrast, technology itself is a major topic of posts — with 
a heavy focus on Twitter itself — while politics often plays a much smaller 
role.  “ The mission of the short-form messaging site is primarily about 
passing along important — often breaking — information in a way that 
unifies or assumes shared values within the Twitter community, ” the PEJ 
report stated. And the breaking news that trumped all else across Twitter 
in 2009 focused on the protests after the Iranian election. It led as the top 
news story on Twitter for seven weeks in a row — a feat not reached by any 
other news story on any of the platforms studied. 
 YouTube stands apart from other social media channels as well. PEJ 
found:  “ Users don ’ t often add comments or additional insights but instead 
take part by selecting from millions of videos and sharing. Partly as a result, 
the most watched videos have a strong sense of serendipity. They pique 
interest and curiosity with a strong visual appeal. The  ‘ Hey you ’ ve got to 
see this, ’ mentality rings strong. Users also gravitate toward a much broader 

212 
Chapter 8
international mix here as videos transcend language barriers in a way that 
written text cannot. ”   Table 8.2  shows the top five news topics in each of 
the channels. 
 Overall, PEJ found that blogs shared the same lead story with traditional 
media in just thirteen of the forty-nine weeks studied. Twitter was even 
less likely to share the traditional media agenda with the lead story match-
ing that of the mainstream press in just four weeks of the twenty-nine 
weeks studied. On YouTube, the top stories overlapped with traditional 
media eight out of forty-nine weeks. Moreover, even when the topics 
aligned, the treatment of them was very different. News media organiza-
tions focused on new developments in their stories while social media 
creators did several more personal and visceral things in their creations. 
Often, they proselytized about the meaning of those developments, as 
when President Obama ’ s massive stimulus spending package was being 
debated. Other times, social media creators gave personal testimonies in 
reaction to the developments, especially events like the death of pop music 
star Michael Jackson.  
 The Week of March 30 to April 5 
 A more detailed examination of one of the weeks when the coverage 
diverged striklingly illustrates some of the main differences between social 
media and traditional media. In the week of March 30, 2009, three major 
economic stories dominated traditional news media coverage: an eco-
nomic summit among developed nations in London that was aimed at 
 Table 8.2 
 News Topics across Media Platforms, January 19, 2009 – January 15, 2010*  
 Blogs 
(Percent of 
Stories) 
 Twitter 
(Percent of 
Stories)* 
 YouTube 
(Percent of 
Videos) 
 Traditional 
Press (Percent 
of Stories 
 Politics/government 
 17% 
 6% 
 21% 
 15% 
 Foreign events 
(non-U.S.) 
 12 
 13 
 26 
 9 
 Economy 
 7 
 1 
 1 
 9 
 Technology 
 8 
 43 
 1 
 1 
 Health and 
medicine 
 7 
 4 
 6 
 11 
 *Twitter was tracked from June 15, 2009, to January 15, 2010.  
 Source : Pew Research Center ’ s Project for Excellence in Journalism.  

Networked Creators 
213
coordinating global policies to recover from the financial meltdown; con-
tinued problems in U.S. banks that were highlighted when Federal Reserve 
Board Chairman Ben Bernanke spoke of his reluctant support for the 2008 
bailout of investment house Bear Stearns and insurance conglomerate 
AIG, and the problems with the U.S. auto industry that were highlighted 
when the White House forced the dismissal of General Motors CEO Rick 
Wagoner.  38 The fourth major story for traditional media involved a shoot-
ing rampage at an immigration center in Binghamton, New York, that left 
fourteen people dead, including the assailant. And the fifth story involved 
President Obama ’ s attempts to gain support among America ’ s NATO allies 
to provide more troops for the war in Afghanistan. Of course, the economic 
summit was a set-piece news event that drew the highest-ranking journal-
ists among the broadcast networks — all of the anchors were on scene to 
report events. The formality of the venue also drew news-coverage seekers 
to the event. Antiglobalization protestors gained a fair amount of coverage. 
In addition, sidebar stories to the event, such as Michelle Obama ’ s reputa-
tion in Europe, were part of the coverage of the news entourages who 
descended on London. 
 By contrast, the blogosphere and other social media outlets did not 
much care about the summit or any of the other stories on the mainstream 
media list. Bloggers and other social media creators are not  “ on scene ” and 
obliged to cover topics. They are distributed and more distant observers of 
news. This gives them more room to range over subjects and choose where 
they want to link and comment.  
 The most discussed and linked-to story of this same week on the New 
Media Index was not even a real story — or an American story. As an April 
Fool ’ s prank, the  Guardian,  a British newspaper, said it would end its print 
edition and use the popular online communications site Twitter to draw 
attention to its stories.  39 While bloggers got the joke, it gained attention 
because some felt the phony Twitter story offered genuine insight into the 
huge economic and technological changes transforming the news busi-
ness. The attention given to this story also highlighted a special trait of 
social media creators: They love practical jokes. Earlier in the year, the New 
Media Index had registered high levels of linking to a report in Foxnews.
com about hackers in Texas who broke into a traffic-control room and 
digitally altered a road sign so that it warned of a  “ zombie attack. ” The 
index also had high scores for a small BBC report about a British lad who 
painted a sixty-foot penis on the home of his parents ’ house that had gone 
unnoticed for a year. Writing about the penis stunt, Yasha at  Heeb Magazine , 
an online journal that permits user contributions, explained:  “ It ’ s these 

214 
Chapter 8
little things that make life ’ s hiccups — a bleak economy, climate change and 
missing an episode of Gossip Girl  – just a bit more bearable. ” Yasha said 
she had been sent a link to this story, underlining one of the common 
traits of stories that take off among social media creators. They are passed 
around a lot and gain velocity after a critical mass of internet users finds 
them funny or otherwise valuable. 
 That same week, the second-largest story in the New Media Index ques-
tioned the effectiveness of torture as a technique for gaining intelligence 
information. Bloggers, especially liberals, focused on a March 29  Washing-
ton Post  report that the harsh interrogation techniques used on al-Qaeda 
suspect Abu Zubaida had yielded no useful information. The article gave 
fodder to those who opposed the use of such methods by the United States. 
This highlights a common element of stories that gain high levels of atten-
tion in social media: If they address hot-button issues that matter to a 
portion of the blogosphere, they are found and passed around quickly. 
Generally, those in like-minded tribes easily share information. Often, it 
is well-trafficked bloggers who provide the spark as they link to — or their 
posts then become link bait — for viral pass-arounds of stories. In this case, 
liberal media blogger Dan Gillmor ’ s favorable blog report on Abu Zubaida ’ s 
story was one of the sparks of its eventual popularity. 
 The third most linked-to story of the week was a mix of Hollywood and 
politics. It also represented the mirror of the previous story because it was 
especially circulated among conservatives. Actress Angie Harmon, in an 
interview for Fox News, said she was tired of having to defend herself 
against charges of racism because she opposed President Obama. This story 
got a special lift among conservatives when the Sarah Palin blog cited it 
thusly:  “ Support Angie Harmon. She is smart, beautiful, talented, and not 
afraid to stand up for her beliefs! Angie Harmon is an endangered species
 — A Republican in Hollywood. ”  40 Citations like this from key influencers 
are often the drivers that take a story into the highest reaches of the 
content creation world. 
 In sum, the stories in social media often differ from stories in traditional 
media because they frequently cover different subjects, have a different 
narrative sensibility, and have different pathways to capture the attention 
of their audience. Because social media creators are in a participatory frame 
of mind, their material also has a more powerful impact on their sense of 
community and efficacy. Pew Internet studies of the role of social media 
in health care situations, political activities, and news media show that 
social media users are more engaged with their topics and aware of the 
world around them.  41 

Networked Creators 
215
 Networked Stars are Found and Mashed-up 
 Beyond the news, networked individuals can also experiment with ICTs to 
create in other ways. Their networked creations also have the potential to 
reach a wider audience. This, in turn, allows them to build their networks. 
In doing so, they receive validation, reputation enhancement, feedback, 
and crowdsourced social support. 
 Since its launch in 2005, YouTube has become a hub for aspiring 
singers and musicians. Talent managers look to it to find budding pop 
stars. When teen idol singing star Justin Bieber uploaded his first YouTube 
video in 2008, he was, without a doubt, an amateur. He was a thirteen-
year-old boy singing a cover of Chris Brown ’ s song  “ With You ” in his 
living room with a low-quality camera. And yet, the video went viral 
with tens of millions of people watching the clip. Found and signed by 
a talent scout, he has become a best-selling singer with three CDs, a 
movie, a book, and the 2010 Artist of the Year award from the American 
Music Awards.  42 
 Mashups, mixed and modified digital material, are becoming wide-
spread. Although the most widely known are Google maps combined with 
street views, a Pew Internet study found that in 2010, 15 percent of adult 
Americans made mashups: taking digital material they found online such 
as songs, texts, or images and remixing them into their own creations. This 
activity was a particular province of younger users. One-fifth of online 
teens (21 percent) had created remixes, compared with 13 percent of inter-
net users aged thirty and up. 
 Kutiman (Ophir Kutiel) has built his career this way. In early 2009, 
Kutiman downloaded a YouTube clip of American drummer Bernard Purdie 
and began to play guitar along with the recorded percussion.  43  “ All it 
needed was some bass and guitar . . . I loved the idea that I was playing 
along with him and he didn ’ t even know it, ” he told  Wired magazine.  44 
Then it occurred to him that  “ maybe I can find someone else on YouTube 
to play with him. ” He spent the next two months scanning YouTube videos 
and building a widely acclaimed work he called  “ The Mother of All Funk 
Chords. ”  In this video, he combines sounds he gathered from musical clips 
that are in the same key but from a wide array of do-it-yourself videos 
made by similar networked individuals — a guitar instructor showing 
viewers how to play an E-9th chord ( “ the mother of all funk chords ” ), a 
teen practicing trumpet, a middle-aged man playing harmonica and 
wailing the blues, a man playing theremin in a music store, a church 
organist, a Game Boy player, and so on. In all, Kutiman used twenty-two 

216 
Chapter 8
different clips to pull together the right brass section, percussion, and reed 
instrumentation for the work. 
 After assembling this video, Kutiman spent months creating enough 
clips and remixing them into seven songs he calls his  “ ThruYou ”  project.  45 
He posted the material online in March 2008 and sent links to twenty 
friends. A week later, ThruYou had been viewed a million times. When 
Kutiman woke up the morning after uploading the videos, he says he 
 “ opened up my MySpace page and saw all these new friend requests and 
messages. People had found it, and after that, so many people tried to 
look at the site that the whole thing crashed. ” 46 From there, it was a short 
step to laudatory coverage in the mainstream media such as National 
Public Radio. 
 These acts of networked creation by networked individuals were best 
encapsulated by Kutiman himself when he said:  “ I think people are caught 
by the same thing that caught my attention: seeing people sitting in their 
small flat with a webcam, filming a song, hoping for something to 
happen. ”  47 
 Identity Creation and Reputation Management 
 In addition to expressing their artistry, there are people who use the inter-
net and smartphones to advertise themselves and build networks that 
reach out to strangers. They can brand themselves, using ICTs to become 
celebrities of a kind. One typical example studied by scholar Patricia Lange 
concerns a mother named Janet and her daughter Maddie who in 2006 
made a  “ channel ”  on YouTube they call  “ Beyond Reality. ” Their videos 
summarize and discuss reality TV shows such as  Survivor, Big Brother, Beauty 
and the Geek,  and  Top Chef.  48 Maddie, a teenager when the channel was 
created, originally characterized herself as a  “ future filmmaker ” on her 
YouTube channel while her mother joined in to encourage her daughter 
and spend some time together.  49 By the start of 2010, they had created 
over three hundred videos that they uploaded to YouTube, which had col-
lectively been viewed more than 3.8 million times. 
 Lange noted that Maddie and Janet use  “ branding ”  hallmarks in their 
programs. For instance, every video created the by daughter-mother team 
begins with an opening clip of their show ’ s stylized title  “ Beyond Reality 
with Maddie and Janet, ” along with a sound bite. Always sitting in front 
of a graphic with the name of the show they are discussing, they banter 
in the style of celebrity-show news anchors. As Lange described it, Maddie 
and Janet watch a reality show together, each taking notes, and then 

Networked Creators 
217
discuss how they would describe and critique the TV show. After each video 
was posted, Maddie behaved as a networked individual would, alerting 
others on YouTube, posting bulletins on MySpace, and notifying friends 
via instant messaging. 
 Maddie and Janet gained an audience without the help of a professional 
producer or director. They were able to amass more than five thousand 
subscribers to Maddie ’ s channel who wanted to be notified every time a 
new video was posted, gaining influence among reality TV viewers. As one 
viewer commented on a video recapping  The Bachelorette ,  “ I don ’ t even 
watch The Bachelorette. I just watch your recaps. ” Maddie often subscribed 
to the channels of popular YouTube members in the hopes that other 
people would see her channel icon and view her work. Her YouTube port-
folio brought her a step closer to her goal of becoming a filmmaker when 
she was accepted to the New York University film program. By mid-2011 
it was mostly Janet ’ s show, although their YouTube channel says that 
Maddie  “ will continue to do some recaps  & college life vlogs ” [video logs].  50 
 With ICTs acting as doors that could lead to relative fame and increased 
social standing, some networked individuals are becoming more deliberate 
in building their reputations online.  51 They have to think in new ways 
about their identities, creations, and the degree to which their personal 
information is disclosed and archived. The result may be the erosion of 
the distinction between creating for a network of friends and broadcasting 
to the general public. We discuss this more in chapter 9, Networked 
Information. 
 Why Become A Networked Creator? 
 What advantages do networked individuals enjoy by engaging in net-
worked creation? 
 A form of self-expression : Like all other ways of making content, online 
creation provides networked individuals with an outlet to express them-
selves. That motivated Peter Maranci to document his life; Kutiman, the 
creator of the musical YouTube mashups, is another example. He says he 
 “ didn ’ t expect it to blow up like this, even in my wildest dreams. ” Instead, 
he was motivated by the music and the act of creating:  “ I lost track of 
night and day. I ’ d just pass out and wake up on the computer. I was fasci-
nated by the idea. It was magical. ”  52 One study of top political bloggers 
found that the main reasons they blogged were to let off steam, keep track 
of thoughts, and formulate new ideas. As one such blogger explained:  “ I 
am a writer by nature. I have a lot of things to say because my mind never 

218 
Chapter 8
stops working. Blogging allows me to express myself and prevents me from 
being trapped under a mountain of half-formed ideas. ” 53 
 An opportunity to learn:  Networked creation provides powerful informal 
learning opportunities for people to acquire and share knowledge. For 
instance, reality TV commentators Maddie and Janet produced better 
videos over time in terms of both their performance and their technical 
production. Part of this was inspired by feedback that was sometimes brutal 
in the comments section of their YouTube channel. Moreover, a MacArthur 
Foundation study of teenagers and young adults also highlights many 
examples of youth who learned the ropes of ICTs from friends who taught 
them how to create profiles, write elementary computer code, edit and 
remix material, and then upload their creations online.  54 Creating online 
material then gives networked individuals the opportunity to expand skills 
that may prove valuable in other circumstances. 
 A space for collaboration:  Content creation provides milieus in which 
networked individuals interact and negotiate with one another. Reciprocal 
exchanges of information and social interaction are the norm among those 
who use ICTs. As they are creating content, users are often intimately 
involved in bargaining with their peers over social niceties. Consider the 
Wikipedian Willowaye. His editorial experience on Wikipedia during the 
Obama presidential campaign required that he interact with fellow editors 
to produce articles about Obama ’ s parents. This often meant that there 
were back-and-forth discussions of what statements should be included, 
omitted, enhanced, or downplayed, especially when it came to Lolo Soeto-
ro ’ s religion. Creating online material not only gives networked creators a 
sense of teamwork, but also may lead to new forms of innovation.  
 A place to connect with community:  More than the fulfillment that comes 
with self-expression, networked creation produces spaces where people can 
build their social networks among friends and among others who share 
their interests, even if at first those people are strangers. Pew Internet 
researcher Susannah Fox has studied patient support groups whose members 
often start out as strangers helping strangers and turn into friends support-
ing friends. She calls them  “ just-in-time, just-like-me ” communities. They 
are built around content creation and network sharing. 
 One emblematic example is Karen Parles, a research librarian at a New 
York art museum until January 1998, when she learned she had advanced 
lung cancer. Frustrated at how scattered information online was, she found 
a support group on the Lung-Onc mailing list. After this network of new 
friends helped her make a hard choice about proceeding with surgery, she 
recovered and devoted herself to helping others.  “ My membership in the 

Networked Creators 
219
group provided instant access to the wisdom and experience of hundreds 
of other lung cancer patients, ” she said,  “ and I wanted to pass that along. ” 
Parles and her network built a large portal called Lung Cancer Online that 
offered everything from highly specialized medical advice to wellsprings 
of social and emotional support for cancer patients. Tens of thousands of 
them have found help there. Parles said:  “ I treasure the emails I receive, 
thanking me and saying how much I ’ ve helped. When people say,  ‘ If it 
weren ’ t for you, I ’ d be dead — or severely depressed ’ — well, that ’ s gratitude 
on a whole different level. ” 55 
 Parles eventually succumbed to lung cancer in early 2009, eleven years 
after she was given less than a year to live. Many of those she helped posted 
their memories of her and their thanks on a memorial website. And a 
common theme permeated their comments: how important it was that 
Parles ’ s story or other stories on her site so closely paralleled their own. 
This is the special power of just-in-time, just-like-me connections. When 
people are suffering or searching, they strongly prefer connections with 
those whose circumstances are most similar to theirs, rather than those 
who have general empathy. People attach a singular authority and appeal 
to those who have gone through precisely the same circumstances or 
whose experiences match theirs. Networked individuals using ICTs provide 
that kind of community. 
 A sense of empowerment:  Though networked individuals may begin blog-
ging or creating other forms of online content with internal, expressive 
motivations, as they continue to create, they become empowered by the 
act of creating and the potential influence it wields.  56 Egyptians, for 
instance, first created online material as a means of self-expression. The 
initial uploading of images of Khaled Said ’ s brutally beaten face and the 
creation of videos about his life were ways for disillusioned networked 
individuals to express their thoughts and opinions on police brutality and 
the repressive regime. After the Facebook page created in Khaled Said ’ s 
honor amassed many thousands of members, they felt more networked 
and empowered — perhaps in great measure because the volume of traffic 
on the Facebook page made them aware of how many other Egyptians felt 
as they did. As Ghonim, the Google executive behind the page expressed, 
this form of networked creation  “ gave us the impression that — Wow, I ’ m 
not alone! There are a lot of people who are frustrated. There are lots of 
people who actually share the same dream. ”  57 
 Other networked creators have felt similarly empowered not just by the 
support they received from other networked individuals, but also by the 
influence they gained through creation. Citizen journalists, for instance, 

220 
Chapter 8
have the potential to shape political discourse if their blogs or videos gain 
enough traction. As one political blogger attested,  “ I saw that they were 
capable of moving information around the traditional media bottlenecks 
and decided that it was something I could contribute to. ” 58 The rewards 
that come with wielding influence are thus an important motivation for 
networked creators. 
 The prelude to greater glory:  Networked creations are a prelude to greater 
glory as some networked individuals see their creations, and sometimes 
even themselves, become popular and even relatively famous. Kutiman ’ s 
 “ The Mother of All Funk Chords ” mashup received critical acclaim and 
even led to an album of more of his original creations. Maddie ’ s YouTube 
videos enhanced her portfolio to help her gain admission to the New York 
University media program. And once-unknown singer Justin Bieber has 
reached international stardom. Although networked creations usually do 
not provide material rewards in themselves, they can lead to bigger things, 
turning amateurs into professionals. 
 Everybody Wants To Get Into The Act 
 A major impact of this democratization of media participation is that it 
enables a new breed of media creators to step onto the cultural stage. This 
reshuffles the relationship between experts and amateurs and reconfigures 
the ways that people can exert influence in the world. Those who have 
things to say have new opportunities to pitch their voices into the infor-
mation commons and gain a following. At their best, these networked 
individuals can work together to create collective goods — the way many 
Flickr members provided additional information about photos from a 
bygone time. Networked creators can also provide support and information 
for one another as the networked individuals in Egypt did when they 
created and participated in Facebook groups. They can break stories as the 
Egyptian protestors did. Finally, networked individuals can gain relative 
popularity for themselves and for their creations like Maddie and her 
mother ’ s YouTube channel and Kutiman ’ s mashups. 
 Of course there is a dark side to affording everyone the opportunity 
to be a networked creator. In Elizabeth Eisenstein ’ s accounting, the 15th-
century invention of the printing press gave new life to charlatans, quacks, 
alchemists, disseminators of ridiculous folk  “ wisdom, ”  propagandists, and 
other assorted evildoers. The printing press probably created more junk 
information in history, and Eisenstein argues that it took generations of 
Enlightenment insight and research to cleanse the information ecosystem 
of the problems.  59 

Networked Creators 
221
 Digital technology has been roundly challenged for having the same 
impact. But many creators somehow find ways to make it work for them 
in the network operating system. Often, they do this by using the same 
digital applications to provide their own counternarrative to those who 
are spinning information incorrectly. Just as not every violinist makes it 
to Carnegie Hall, not every networked creator becomes a star — or is even 
heard by more than their friends and relatives. Yet, their creations contrib-
ute to the expanding universe of networked information that we will 
describe in chapter 9. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 9  Networked Information 
 Information not only wants to be free, it also wants to be networked.  1 
There is no way to overstress the importance of this insight, first articu-
lated by John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid, that information has a social 
life.  2 The first reader who scribbled a note in the margin of a tract under-
stood this. The first scholar who added a footnote to her writing to 
highlight a primary source or a complementary thought understood this. 
The sixteenth-century Viennese printer who published the Talmud as a 
series of concentric boxes of commentary around the original text under-
stood this.  3 
 Vannevar Bush, the pioneering American scientist and science advocate, 
definitely understood this. His idea of the  “ memex ” was meant to help 
librarians aid scientists in their search for material that existed in an envi-
ronment where information overload had become a daunting problem. He 
envisioned it to be a desk-like device into which people would enter large 
amounts of microfilm that could be tagged by users; then data in disparate 
documents could be associated through  “ trails ” that ran between them. In 
the July 1945 issue of  The Atlantic Monthly , Bush wrote:  “ Thereafter, at any 
time, when one of these items is in view, the other can be instantly 
recalled. It is exactly as though the physical items had been gathered 
together from widely separated sources and bound together to form a new 
book. It is more than this, for any item can be joined into numerous 
trails. ”  4 
 Bush ’ s idea of linking and physically associating information became a 
passion for some computer geeks in the following decades, even more than 
it was embraced by librarians or other scientists. The leading proponent of 
linking information was a computer scientist named Ted Nelson who 
introduced the idea of  “ hypertext, ”  which is the text on electronic devices 
with embedded links.  5 It is this idea that inspired Tim Berners-Lee in his 
creation of the World Wide Web, which then led to the raw material — the 

224 
Chapter 9
billions upon billions of links — that would ultimately fuel Google ’ s search 
algorithms. 
 Information has a special nature now that it has become computerized. 
Because it is composed of bits, information can be easily produced, repro-
duced, remixed, and disseminated. In ways that were never possible when 
a person ’ s encounters with text on a page were linear experiences, digital 
material can be directly and effortlessly connected to related material. It 
can be added to and amended by anyone with access to it. In short, infor-
mation is unleashed when it takes digital form. More obviously than in 
the past, the social life of information can be uncovered and understood 
as part of the network operating system. 
 Getting information has become so much more interactive than the 
twentieth-century way of passively receiving it from printed sources such 
as books and newspapers and from one-way broadcast media such as TV, 
radio, and movies. Take, for instance, the social ways by which we gathered 
information for this chapter. We drew on our memories, to be sure: the 
human  “ memex. ” But we also consulted files of papers that we had archived 
online and in traditional printed paper. We followed up on many links 
that friends gave us via Twitter and we used the Google search engine to 
find material and exact references. We used the Endnote textbase to get 
references right. When we were stuck, we emailed and tweeted friends, 
asking for help in finding the right information. Although we drew on the 
resources curated by University of Toronto — their online catalogues and 
their ejournals — we never set foot in a physical library. 
 This chapter examines the number of ways in which the information 
and media ecology has changed with the Triple Revolution and how these 
changes have affected networked individuals. The growth and acceleration 
of information flows have made it important for networked individuals to 
develop new skills to manage the wealth of information that is available —
 both the institutional information provided by corporations, organiza-
tions, and governments as well as the interpersonal information gathered 
from one ’ s own network. More than that, networked information now also 
includes what was once considered intimate, personal information, giving 
rise to serious privacy concerns. 
 The News Then and Now 
 One way to see how the networking of information changes people ’ s expe-
rience of information is to consider the dimensions of a news story then 
and now. Coauthor Rainie ’ s colleague Tom Rosenstiel at the Pew Research 

Networked Information 
225
Center ’ s Project for Excellence in Journalism has worked with him to 
compile a list of the elements of news stories in printed format compared 
to the elements in digital format. In the print-dominant era of news, news 
stories could have a handful of elements: headlines, narrative texts, photos, 
graphics, sidebar stories, and  “ pull quotes ” that featured people cited in 
the article. In the digital age, the number of features of a news story could 
rise to over fifty items as websites could contain links to other stories and 
primary resources, spaces for readers to add their own comments, tags and 
pictures, links to archives of stories and timelines, full transcripts of inter-
views, audio material, video clips, background material from the reporter 
about the process of gathering the story, photo albums, details about the 
reporter such as a biography and an archive of her previous work. In other 
words, web treatment of news provides fuller context than print media 
because of the associations that can be built into a story such as links to 
background material, other stories, archives of past coverage, as well as 
newsmakers and organizations mentioned. Among other things, the 
digital, linked format invites browsing and  “ horizontal ”  reading through 
links, rather than linear  “ vertical ”  reading.  6 
 This display of digital material also invites challenge, amplification, 
and adjustment by users of the news site. Networked individuals can 
now respond to stories more easily and in more ways than they ever 
could in the  “ Letters to the Editor ” sections of newspapers. With com-
menting features embedded within news stories, readers can immediately 
post their thoughts and opinions — not only for the editorial team to see 
but also for anyone else who happens to be reading that same article. 
With links to the writers ’ email addresses or Twitter accounts, readers 
can communicate directly with journalists and may sometimes receive a 
response with greater speed than they would have in the days when 
readers would mail in their comments and await their publication — if 
they even made it to publication. Online follow-up chat sessions also 
give readers the opportunity to discuss matters directly with the journal-
ists in real time. 
 Of course, these interactive features do not guarantee that readers will 
receive a response from journalists. In fact, the increasingly easy ability to 
contact journalists can work to a disadvantage as it can overload them with 
so much information that they cannot read — let alone respond to — all the 
comments from their readers. Plus, many of these responses are not very 
well thought out and are often vulgar and hate-filled. Nevertheless, news 
in its digital form is unique in that it provides more opportunities for 
networked individuals to interact with journalists and express their views 

226 
Chapter 9
as compared to its print counterpart. And even if journalists do not respond, 
networked individuals can share with one another through the comments 
sections or pass it along to their friends who may have more thoughts to 
add to the discussion, which all together may add a potentially rich supple-
ment to the original text. 
 Compared to the print environment, then, data in the digital environ-
ment are denser, broader, and deeper. The digitalization of news thus offers 
the potential for richer coverage and therefore deeper understanding. 
Moreover, decisions about the structure and hierarchy of content found 
online, on how to allocate attention, and on how to respond are now likely 
to rest in the hands of both the traditional editorial professionals and 
ordinary networked individuals. But while all this applies especially to the 
news, it is also more broadly true of the creation and consumption of all 
kinds of information in its digital form. 
 The Changing Information and Media Ecology 
 The Triple Revolution — Social Network, Internet, and Mobile — has created 
a new information and media ecology that is distinct from the past. The 
process of creating, collecting, assessing, and distributing information is 
increasingly becoming networked through social processes and is very 
much tied to the rise of networked individualism. Key technological 
changes have given rise to new affordances that shape the everyday lives 
of networked individuals as well as their decisions and their behavior. 
 The dramatic growth of information:  More information is generated and 
circulated now. Social scientists Hal Varian and Peter Lyman calculated in 
2002 that the total amount of new information stored on paper, film, 
magnetic, and optical media had doubled in the past three years. This pace 
may well have increased, as Google has become a major consumer of elec-
tricity to run its storage sites.  7 The marketing research firm IDC projected 
that by 2020, the  “ Digital Universe ” — a term IDC uses to describe the 
digital information that is created and replicated — will grow to 35 trillion 
gigabytes.  8 Much of this growth may be attributed to the spread of digital 
media in amateur and professional hands; growing adoption of computers, 
cameras, and audio equipment; increases in the online display of creations 
and information; and the development of large server facilities to store the 
data. 
 The differentiation   of information use:  As all this material becomes dis-
played and distributed online, and as mobile devices and cloud computing 
allow internet users access to media and data from any place and any time, 

Networked Information 
227
users exercise more choice in their media consumption. Sometimes this 
means simply adding more sources to a person ’ s information arsenal, and 
at other times it means gravitating toward new and different material and 
away from more mass-oriented products. Internet analyst Chris Anderson 
found that as the volume of information grows, people focus less on  “ hits ” 
in any media domain — best-selling books, hot music acts, or blockbuster 
movies — and focus more on the particular things that interest them, no 
matter how small and quirky the niche is.  9 
 The greater variety of information:  On the one hand, as communication 
scholar Pablo Boczkowski has shown, fewer organizations than before 
control traditional media, making it less diverse. For example, the News 
Corporation now owns the  Wall Street Journal,  the (London)  Times,  the  New 
York Post , and the  Australian  as well as  HarperCollins (books),  20th-Century 
Fox  (movies), and  Fox News  (radio and TV). And in some ways, the internet 
makes the news less diverse because online availability and rapid dissemi-
nation affords both traditional media and bloggers more opportunities to 
imitate each other. There are also studies suggesting that news organiza-
tions ’ surveillance of competitors — especially through the social media 
posts of correspondents — has resulted in greater similarity of coverage in 
the digital age, rather than differentiation.  10 
 On the other hand, counterbalancing this, the internet and mobile news 
apps enhance people ’ s capacity to obtain diverse information, as does their 
involvement in multiple social networks. People bump into more informa-
tion in more ways when they browse the internet and exchange electronic 
communications. Search and discovery are now kissing cousins because 
when networked individuals search for a specific query, they sometimes 
discover other information that they were not explicitly looking for. In the 
case of news, for instance, people encounter new information by accident 
when they are online for purposes other than finding out the news. In a 
survey after the 2006 election, Pew Internet discovered that 36 percent of 
internet users had run across campaign news and information online while 
they were pursuing other unrelated material on the internet.  11 Moreover, 
in 2004, Pew Internet found that the most active internet users are also the 
most aware of all kinds of political arguments. They are especially attracted 
to material that conforms to their point of view. Yet, the people with the 
most capacity to filter and customize information online — the people who 
use the internet the most and have the most sophisticated connections and 
digital gadgets — are also the most likely to be aware of points of view that 
challenge theirs.  12 Thus, the internet makes available a wide variety of 
information that encompasses a diverse range of perspectives. 

228 
Chapter 9
 The acceleration of information flows:  With high-speed broadband and 
always accessible mobile devices, information flows through people ’ s lives 
more quickly than at any time since most people lived in small villages. 
In 2008, one set of researchers estimated that the average American was 
receiving thirty-four gigabytes (100,500 words) of information on an 
average day. Per capita hours of information consumption had increased 
from 7.4 hours in 1980 to 11.8 in 2008. Thanks to the Internet and Mobile 
Revolutions, they were receiving about one-third of the words they read 
interactively — and more than that of the bytes they looked at (mostly 
pictures). Indeed, reading has tripled since 1980 as a way of receiving 
information: on computer and smartphone screens.  13 With the explosive 
growth of texting, the phone — traditionally a device for exchanging infor-
mation by voice — has become a device for reading. 
 The pace of communication — emails, updates from social networking 
profiles, tweets, text messages, mobile phone calls — has accelerated and 
intensified. All of this connectivity means that news and updates about 
people and institutions cascade through the internet and mobile devices, 
bringing a range of insights and developments into people ’ s lives. Some-
times, big news travels more quickly and disseminates more widely than 
in the past. Half-humorously, some commentators believe that wired indi-
viduals develop FOMO:  “ fear of missing out ” on the latest development.  14 
Moreover, minor developments and information nuggets from niche 
worlds spread more rapidly and to broader audiences than in the past. Co-
authors Rainie and Wellman both have had live bloggers and Twitter users 
write about them in real time as they were speaking at conferences. Their 
PowerPoint slides often appear on conference websites. Photos from these 
events have also been captured with mobile phones and instantly uploaded 
online using photo-sharing services. These efforts expand the audience to 
many times the size of the crowd that is physically present and spreads 
their thoughts far more rapidly than was possible in the days when the 
content of their speeches never left the confines of conference halls. 
 Finding relevant information with greater ease:  The convenience of Google, 
Wikipedia, and other easily accessible sources gives the networked indi-
vidual the instant ability to pull together masses of information directly 
related to every query of the moment. Search engines are instrumental in 
this quest for information. They have consistently shown up in Pew Inter-
net data as the second most popular online activity, behind email but 
catching up to it over time. In mid-2011, Pew Internet surveys found that 
92 percent of online Americans were search engine users and that on any 
given day, 59 percent of internet users had consulted a search engine.  15 On 

Networked Information 
229
a typical day, online searches are done by more people than any other 
online activity — except email. The vast majority of internet users are satis-
fied with the results of their search queries, especially when it comes to 
news, health information, material about products and services, govern-
ment information, and the people they are looking for online.  16 It also 
helps that people can set up alerts and aggregate material for their person-
alized   “ Daily Me ” newspaper to receive information that is relevant to 
individual preferences and tastes.  17 
 Emergence of new signposts of credible and trustworthy sources: In the old 
days, people would cite only print publications such as the  New York Times 
or the Toronto  Globe and Mail  as the source for their news and information. 
But with the rise of networked information, there is the need for new 
markers of trustworthiness and credibility. One such new marker is the 
increasing popularity of user ranking, rating, commenting, and tagging 
systems. A 2008 Pew Internet survey shows that more than 33 percent of 
internet users had tagged online content with descriptive information 
(name, location, etc.), while 32 percent had rated a person, product, or 
service online.  18 At one level, this shapes the credibility of information 
because thoughtful reviews or comments on material can help viewers 
assess what they are reading. At another level, the volume of ranking and 
rating has its own effect as a large number of reviews sometimes signal 
that a seller has a lot of customers. Conversations are a powerful currency 
in the marketplace of goods, services, ideas, and learning for networked 
individuals dealing with networked information. 
 Facebook ’ s pervasive  “ like ”  or  “ recommend ” buttons, which have 
expanded beyond the social networking site into external websites, serve 
a similar function of establishing trust and credibility. These buttons 
can exist anywhere online: news articles, blog posts, photos, videos, or 
entire websites. Once clicked, a notification on one ’ s Facebook profile 
will appear showing that the user has  “ liked ” or  “ recommended ”  that 
item. This can be seen by anyone within that individual ’ s personal 
network, opening up the possibility that those in the network will at 
least click on that link and even  “ like ”  it as well. Capitalizing on the 
trust that traditionally exists in friendship relations, these Facebook 
buttons have established a new signpost for pushing out credible and 
relevant information. 
 A separate measure of information ’ s relevance and worthiness comes 
from the aggregation of user data. Amazon.com has built a successful rec-
ommender system with its feature  “ Customers Who Bought This Item Also 
Bought. ” With this feature, businesses have moved networked information 

230 
Chapter 9
from word of mouth directly to their websites. News websites and others 
commonly point out which stories garner the most traffic and which have 
been passed along most as links in emails. This does not directly address 
trust, but it does allow networking behavior to be some kind of indicator 
of worthiness or entertainment value. Sometimes the giant aggregation of 
user data helps computer systems move toward appropriate decisions 
about the best and most relevant information. Google algorithms, for 
instance, give extra weight in rendering search results to links and websites 
that users seem to find useful. 
 Beyond the direct contributions of users helping to validate informa-
tion, there is one last way that the value of information emerges from its 
 “ networked ”  character. Computers can analyze patterns of information 
and recognize similarities. One popular example is Pandora Radio, a U.S. 
online music service that offers listeners the chance to build playlists by 
declaring favorite songs or artists. Once the service has learned a user ’ s 
preferences, it scans the  “ music genome ” to find attributes in other songs 
that match these preferences. It begins to play music it believes are similar 
to the user ’ s choices and the user then indicates whether the songs Pandora 
chooses should be added to the playlist. Thus, the powerful collection and 
analysis of data by computers to provide individuals with information that 
may suit their needs and tastes has opened up new signposts for credible 
sources. 
 The intermixing of information and communication:  The ancient Greek 
philosopher Socrates reportedly argued against writing because of its dehu-
manizing effects. Among other drawbacks, Socrates reasoned that text 
written on a page cannot respond to questions and can be twisted and 
manipulated without being able to defend itself since it is external from 
the person who first wrote it.  19 
 This is not necessarily the case with the internet. It allows writers to 
respond to the comments and criticisms of their readers in a variety of 
ways: with another comment, a live-chat session, or a follow-up article or 
blog post. The  New York Times  writer Nicholas Kristof, for instance, wrote 
a column about the  “ Do-It-Yourself Foreign Aid Revolution ” that featured 
the efforts of young Americans starting their own grassroots organizations 
in developing countries.  20 This spurred discussion from his readers in the 
comments section of the article and even on their own blogs as many 
criticized the sustainability, accountability, and overall effectiveness of 
such projects. After a week, Kristof responded by writing a follow-up post 
on his own blog, addressing specific complaints and defending his argu-
ments. 21 The original article, honoring the networked form, had a link to 

Networked Information 
231
the archive of comments as well as Kristof ’ s blog response to those com-
ments. Thus, information and communication are tightly bound together 
in digital form, providing richer coverage and the possibility for deeper 
understanding. 
 The social experience that underlies the consumption of networked 
information also deeply connects it to communication. In early 2010, Pew 
Internet research found that half of all American news consumers say they 
rely to some degree on people around them to tell them the news they 
need to know. In the online environment, the social experience is wide-
spread: three-quarters (75 percent) of online news consumers say they get 
news forwarded through email or posts on social networking sites and half 
(52 percent) say they share links to news with others via those means.  22 
 The intermixing of information and communication also deepens the 
interplay of information flows: the feedback process between institutional 
information and interpersonal information. This is different from the 
original two-step flow of information, in which people received informa-
tion from the mass media and then discussed it with their friends and 
families.  23 Nowadays, Connected Lives research has shown that people 
often obtain information first from their friends and family — in person or 
via ICTs — and then go to the internet to check it and amplify it. Instead 
of a two-step flow, there is often a multistep process, with people checking 
back and forth with their social networks and institutional sources on the 
internet. People also often discuss in person with fellow network members 
the news and developments they discover online. Because they are often 
uncertain about whom and what to trust, there is this continuous cycle 
between institutional information and people in their networks (both in 
person and reached via ICTs) to pin down and assess information.  24 
 For instance, in late February 2011, Wellman picked up disconnected 
rumors on Twitter about discontent in China that stemmed largely from 
the Middle Eastern revolutions that were occurring at the same time. 
Curious to learn more, he emailed a student with connections in China 
who in turn found out from a friend that the key word being used on the 
ground was  “ Jasmine Revolution. ” After searching on Google, Wellman 
found 1,610 hits on the phrase, but after realizing that almost all of these 
were speculative and from Western sources, he continued his search. With 
nothing on his  Associated Press  news feed,  Yahoo!  news, or on the radio, 
Wellman decided to check the  New York Times  online where he found a 
short article on the developing story that confirmed the original rumors 
that he heard on Twitter. Finally, he sent a link to the article to a few 
friends who he knew would be interested in the topic. 

232 
Chapter 9
 This sort of cyclical behavior of weaving institutional information with 
interpersonal information means that networked individuals exploit the 
networked information available to them according to their assessments 
of what is most beneficial and efficient for their needs. They use a number 
of different media and human sources to collect and verify information. 
Connections between clusters of friends, websites, professional experts, 
and books and other print media satisfy people ’ s information sources. In 
most key information searches that are taken en route to decision making, 
people have told the Pew Internet project that they have consulted mul-
tiple sources and used a combination of searches of written material and 
conversations with smart friends or professionals. 
 TMI: Too Much Information 
 Perhaps the biggest complaint that people have in the era of networked 
information is that there is just too much information to monitor and 
digest. Still, the feeling of being overwhelmed by information did not start 
with the Internet and Mobile Revolutions. Historian Ann Blair has found 
scholars complaining as early as 1550 about a  “ confusing and harmful 
abundance of books. ”  25 However, what is unique is that ICTs provide not 
only more information but also more channels that connect people to this 
information and feed it to them. The unprecedented abundance of infor-
mation that permeates the networked individual ’ s life can often be difficult 
and stressful to manage. As one Connected Lives participant complained: 
 “ Searching [the] internet for information can be quite tedious, time con-
suming and not quite successful. You can spend hours trying to find one 
stupid fact and there is too much information, which is really hard to 
sort out. ” 
 To deal with TMI, networked individuals employ a number of strategies 
that range in complexity to cope with and manage the information over-
load. They rely on search engines, bookmarks, and tags. Moreover, people 
develop ways to alert them to new information about issues that matter 
to them. Pew Internet data show that two-fifths of Americans have set up 
news alerts through Google, Yahoo, news services, financial sites, and 
sports operations to update them every time a subject is mentioned on the 
web. Close to two-thirds get online newsletters related to work or hobbies. 
Some 37 percent have set up customized web pages to display information 
on subjects they care about — virtually all of which get up-to-date news of 
one kind or another about the people and the subjects that the creators 
have designated.  26 

Networked Information 
233
 Microblogging sites such as Twitter have led to yet another new way 
of managing information flows. With Twitter, networked individuals 
have the power to choose the people they want to follow and receive 
curated information from. Unlike Facebook, Twitter is asymmetric, so 
people can follow more (or fewer) people than follow them.  27 As entre-
preneur Mark Suster blogged,  “ I follow really smart people from a wide 
variety of backgrounds and interests [and] they tell me what to read. 
. . . I pay attention to people I trust  & respect and let them be my 
guides. ” 28  
 Still, these strategies only begin to scratch the surface because they only 
involve gathering and disseminating information. Information assessment 
is another issue. With a deluge of information cascading from a variety of 
different sources, networked individuals must actively develop the skills to 
critically assess the institutional information they find and what they 
receive from their personal networks. The ability to balance these two 
information sources is a key for networked individuals as they cope with 
information overload. 
 Pew Internet conducted research in mid-2009 aimed at understanding 
the new patterns of engagement people had with their social networks 
and with media in a particularly important context. Through a national 
telephone survey, online interviews, and in-depth phone interviews, Pew 
Internet researchers asked people about the ways they were getting infor-
mation and advice about the 2008 recession and its lingering effects.  29 
There was a clear sense in the survey data that people were trying to 
make sense of complex economic problems that were not easily explained 
by traditional economic theories. As such, Pew Internet asked about five 
specific sources of information and support that may help networked 
individuals to better understand the general economy and their own 
personal finances (  table 9.1 ). For information about the general economy, 
a great majority of Americans were most likely to seek out traditional 
news sources in broadcast and print media (84 percent and 64 percent, 
respectively). When it came to the two-thirds (64 percent) of the sample 
who had home broadband internet connection at the time, the internet 
became more prominent as an information source about both the general 
economy and one ’ s personal finances. Significantly, use of the internet 
did not displace people ’ s reliance on interpersonal networks of friends 
and family.  
 The survey showed that during this time of uncertainty, networked 
individuals balanced both institutional and interpersonal information. 
People did not either talk to others or consult a single media platform. 

234 
Chapter 9
Rather, they foraged among sources and communicated with a range 
of people. As the recession took hold, the average American used two 
or three sources of information to make sense of what was happening 
and to plan personal coping strategies. People talked to other people, 
sought updates from media sources like newspapers and broadcast media, 
and actively searched for insights that would help them explain what 
was happening to the economy and how they might adjust to those 
changes. 
 The behavior of networked individuals permeates the survey results. 
One typical example is Sharon Hockensmith, the sixty-six-year-old wife of 
a retired Air Force officer. Sharon was attuned to market vibes in part 
because of her nature as an information omnivore. During the time of the 
recession, she and her husband signed up to receive email newsletters and 
online alerts from several financial companies. They also subscribed to 
some financial blogs with a free market emphasis. Moreover, they began 
to watch cable TV financial shows like  Fast Money  and  The Kudlow Report . 
In short, Sharon juggled networked information the way a networked 
individual would:  “ We research companies online; check with our invest-
ment adviser; exchange ideas with a couple of financially-savvy friends, 
 Table 9.1 
 Sources Used for Information about the Economy and Personal Finance in the 
United States  
 General Population 
 Those with Broadband at 
Home (64% of Sample) 
 Sources of 
Information 
 General 
Economy 
 Personal 
Finance 
 General 
Economy 
 Personal 
Finance 
 Television and 
radio 
 84% 
 45% 
 85% 
 46% 
 Newspapers, 
magazines, 
books 
 64 
 44 
 67 
 43 
 Internet 
 48 
 38 
 67 
 52 
 Friends and 
family 
 40 
 37 
 45 
 40 
 Financial 
professional 
 17 
 24 
 21 
 28 
 None of these 
sources 
 6 
 20 
 5 
 18 
 Source : Pew Internet  & American Life Project.  

Networked Information 
235
and when we know enough, we make investments that, more than ever 
before, take into account the way the political wind is blowing. ” 
 Another example of a networked individual balancing between institu-
tional and interpersonal information sources was a Pew Internet respon-
dent who was looking to buy a new home: 
 We had been in the market to buy a home for a little less than a year. As the 
housing bubble burst our neighborhood (Park Slope, Brooklyn) saw a stagnation 
in housing prices. We felt with our rental lease up we should pounce. We used 
NYTimes.com to check out open houses. That came after a year in which we had 
talked to a lot of brokers to get a sense of what we needed to ask. We used online 
forums (Brooklynian.com and others) to find out about the area and get recom-
mendations for our lawyer. We talked with our parents and siblings (home owners) 
and we talked with friends working in finance to determine if it really did make 
sense to buy. After all this work, we decided it did. We found a place being sold 
by someone not using a broker. We got approved for the mortgage and got the 
place. 
 Thus, networked individuals use a number of strategies to help manage 
the abundance of information that is available to them both online and 
offline and they exploit both institutional and interpersonal information 
to help them in their everyday decisions. 
 The  “ Veillance ” of Personal Information 
 Beyond general information and news, however, much of the content that 
is being unleashed in the digital world is that of networked individuals ’ 
personal information. The increasing popularity of social networking sites, 
especially Facebook, has resulted in the public sharing of sensitive personal 
information such as one ’ s location, marital status, workplace, contact 
information, and many other details. Users are at least partially aware of 
some of the information about them that is available online. In a national 
survey in September 2009, Pew Internet found that 57 percent of internet 
users had used search engines or other search strategies to see if there was 
material about them online and 63 percent of them had found at least 
something about themselves.  30 Among all internet users: 
 •  42 percent know a picture of them is available online 
 •  33 percent know their birth date is listed online 
 •  31 percent know their email address is listed online 
 •  26 percent know their home address is listed online 
 •  23 percent know that something they have written is listed online 

236 
Chapter 9
 •  22 percent know the groups or organizations they belong to are listed 
online 
 •  21 percent know their home phone number is listed online 
 •  12 percent know their political affiliation is listed online 
 •  10 percent know a video of them is available online 
 •  44 percent of employed internet users know the name of their employer 
is listed online 
 •  12 percent of the internet users who have cell phones know their cell 
number is listed online 
 When shared online, personal minutiae can be offered by networked 
individuals to build trust and make online interactions more efficient. 
Though this brings benefits, it also impacts people ’ s privacy.  “ Surveillance ” 
is a commonly used word, adapted from the French. But the rise of net-
worked information in the Internet Revolution has enhanced two other 
forms of  “ veillance, ” or  “ monitoring ” : peer-to-peer  “ coveillance ”  and 
 “ sousveillance ”  by ordinary people of those in authority. 
 Surveillance 
 The social life of digital information has opened up the doors to new 
means of surveillance by government and organizations. Through moni-
toring social media, governments have found a new way to keep an eye 
on the behaviors and actions of their citizens. In China, for instance, the 
Ministry of Public Security has developed an extensive and sophisticated 
system of surveillance that limits access to information that Chinese 
leaders believe may disrupt the state ’ s stability or undermine security. In 
the words of Greg Walton, a researcher for the International Centre for 
Human Rights and Democratic Development:  “ Old style censorship is 
being replaced with a massive, ubiquitous architecture of surveillance . . . 
[and] the aim is to integrate a gigantic online database with an all-encom-
passing surveillance network — incorporating speech and face recognition, 
closed-circuit television, smart cards, credit records, and internet surveil-
lance technologies. ”  31 
 To take one important example, Chinese regulations require all internet 
service providers to record for at least sixty days the identities of their users, 
the websites they access, the time they spend on those websites, and any 
other online activities.  32 That information is handed over to government 
officials when requested. More than monitoring the websites accessed, the 
government also scrutinizes the electronic communications of its citizens. 
Thus the government works with TOM-Skype, the Chinese version of 
Skype, to gather users ’ private voice, video, and text conversations. They 

Networked Information 
237
regularly scan chat messages for specific keywords that are deemed offen-
sive or politically sensitive.  33 
 China is far from being the only state exercising such surveillance prac-
tices. Western democracies, including the United States, also take part in 
such activities. For example, following the September 11, 2001 terror 
attacks that gave rise to Americans ’ safety concerns, the U.S. government 
instituted an eavesdropping program to collect both domestic and inter-
national communications. Corporations, too, are taking advantage of tech-
nological advances to gather information about consumer habits, behaviors, 
and interests as a means of turning a profit.  34 Writer Evgeny Morozov 
quips:  “ The only difference between the two is that one system learns 
everything about us to show us more relevant advertisements, while the 
other one learns everything about us to ban us from accessing relevant 
pages. ” 35 
 Ironically, corporations are exploiting the very same systems of aggrega-
tion of user data that were noted earlier as creating new signposts of 
credible and trustworthy sources. They are using internet-tracking tech-
nologies to collect information about networked individuals ’ online activi-
ties, behaviors, attitudes, buying habits, and interactions. For instance, 
the  Wall Street Journal  found that America ’ s top fifty websites installed an 
average of sixty-four pieces of tracking technology onto computers result-
ing in a total of 3,180 tracking files.  36 These data are often commodified 
and sold to the highest bidder to help businesses market services and 
products. One telling example discovered by the  Journal: A tracking 
 “ cookie ” surreptitiously installed by Lotame Solutions on Ashley Hayes-
Beaty ’ s computer that consists of a single code — 4c812db292272995e
5416a323e79bd37 — accurately identified her as a twenty-six-year-old 
female in Nashville who has searched for information about the movies 
 The Princess Bride  and  50 First Dates . The cookie knows that she has watched 
the  Sex and the City  TV series, browses entertainment news, and likes to 
take quizzes.  37 
 Hackers or criminals can also gather personal information such as loca-
tion tagging or status updates about one ’ s daily activities. To demonstrate 
this, Dave Marcus, director of security research and communications at 
McAfee Labs, has followed people through the location tagging of their 
tweets and documenting their schedules, place of work and home — many 
of which were unwittingly provided online by the individuals themselves.  38 
The website PleaseRobMe.com, established in 2010, also brought attention 
to the dangers of providing such information online. Aggregating and 
live-streaming publicly shared check-ins via foursquare and Twitter, 

238 
Chapter 9
PleaseRobMe.com showed when people left their homes: pointing out just 
how easy it is for technologically savvy and determined criminals to 
accomplish their goals.  39 
 Coveillance: We Watch Each Other 
 Ordinary citizens now frequently engage in practices of  “ coveillance, ” 
which people use so they can observe each other.  40 Search engines and 
social networking sites are the primary sources people use to find out more 
about both known and unknown individuals.  41 While they may be unhappy 
about others checking up on them, Americans are quite willing to exploit 
the internet to check up on others. In a 2009 Pew Internet survey, 69 
percent of internet users reported searching for someone online, up from 
30 percent in 2001 and 53 percent in 2006 when similar surveys were 
conducted. The later survey found that: 
 •  46 percent of internet users had searched for someone from their past or 
someone they had lost touch with 
 •  44 percent had searched for someone whose services or advice they were 
seeking in a professional capacity like a doctor, lawyer, or plumber 
 •  38 percent had searched for friends 
 •  30 percent had searched for family members 
 •  26 percent had searched for coworkers, professional colleagues, or busi-
ness competitors 
 •  19 percent had searched for neighbors or people in their community 
 •  19 percent had searched about someone they just met or someone they 
were about to meet for the first time 
 •  16 percent had searched for people they were dating 
 What do they search for? Contact information (69 percent), social 
network site profile information (48 percent), photos (43 percent), infor-
mation about professional or career accomplishments (36 percent), per-
sonal background information (27 percent), public records related to 
things like real estate transactions, divorce proceedings or bankruptcies 
(27 percent), and whether someone is single or in a relationship (17 
percent). 
 Tracking others in this manner can seem creepy. Indeed, the terms 
 “ Facebook stalking ” and  “ creeping ” have been coined to describe the act 
of using Facebook to find out more information about those within or 
even outside of one ’ s personal network.  42 As one student says of this 
endemic practice:  “ There ’ s only so much you can learn when you first 
meet someone. By Facebook stalking, I can learn more about the person, 

Networked Information 
239
like, who they ’ re dating, their interests, any common friends that we may 
have and random tidbits of information you wouldn ’ t get on your first 
encounter. ” 
 Scholarly research agrees: Facebook stalking has become so prevalent in 
the lives of teens and young adults that a Facebook page called  “ Facebook 
Stalking. . . . Admit it, you do it ” has more than 820,200  “ likes ” in August 
2011. 43 More than that, a Google search of the keywords  “ Facebook stalk-
ing tips ” pulls up a number of blogs and articles of do ’ s and don ’ ts, anec-
dotes, and best practices. The increasing popularity of online dating 
websites has also resulted in more coveillance as individuals looking for 
romantic partners must assess the credibility and reduce the inevitable 
uncertainties of encountering others online. In 2010, nearly one-quarter 
(23%) of American online daters engaged in information-based triangula-
tion: checking public records and cross-referencing and comparing profiles 
on multiple websites.  44 
 There is coveillance in other realms of life. In interviews tied to its 2009 
survey on reputation management, Pew Internet heard from a large number 
of those who learned important things in their searches about others. One 
woman who was adopted as an infant wrote: 
 I used the internet to trace my birth father through a search. He gave me the name 
of my birth mother. Through a combination of in-person research and online 
queries, I patched together the history of my birth mother through property records, 
birth records, divorce records, and genealogical records (especially a family history 
placed online by a birth-great uncle). [T]hrough all of this, I found my birth mother, 
who refused contact. 
 A few years later I found my birth sister. She is now one of my best friends. 
We look alike and are alike in many ways. It turns out she vaguely knew about 
me and looked on the internet for me and came close. We both are very happy 
to have met each other and it would probably have never happened without the 
internet. 45 
 Other respondents to the Pew Internet survey told of tracking down 
damaging personal information on a pastoral candidate who was being 
recruited by their church; described how a search about a physician 
giving important, intimate advice provided details that he is a trans-
sexual; revealed that a man who used to date a Pew respondent ’ s sister 
was an avid participant in  “ furry fandom ” events where people dress 
as animals that exhibit human personality traits; that a dentist who 
had been wrongfully billing the Pew respondent had also been overbill-
ing other clients; that a boss had quietly accepted a job at a competing 
firm; and that a would-be tenant was a convicted pedophile. Many 

240 
Chapter 9
described tracking down old flames and long-lost friends. Some described 
learning too much information about the sexual adventures of younger 
relatives. 
 Some of the most riveting stories came from Karyl Chastain Beal about 
the website she runs for those who want to memorialize suicide victims, 
 suicidegrief.com . 
 A woman named Melissa submitted her own name for our website ’ s memorial wall. 
I only knew she lived in Illinois. I searched and found where she lived and I con-
tacted the police. They got to her house before she died. She was getting ready to 
take an overdose of pills. . . . In another similar case, a woman sent a note to one 
of the suicide-watch groups I run. She sent a suicide note through the group to me. 
I used Google to track her down in Canada and called the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police. They found her on the floor; she had already taken the pills, but fortunately 
they got her to the hospital in time. 
 One of the consequences of all this self-monitoring and tracking of 
others online is that it increases people ’ s awareness of very weak ties —
 and that likely changes the way they mobilize our networks. It gives 
people a better sense of the potential power of their networks and the 
specific people who might help them address a problem — whether that 
problem is finding a cancer specialist or a new job. The disclosures and 
revelations that would have previously been shared with only a small, 
intimate network of family and friends (or not at all) become valuable 
indicators of the professional and personal competencies among net-
worked individuals. Such enhanced awareness also gives networked indi-
viduals more information than they might otherwise have about such 
things as the political views, the cultural tastes, the friendship circles, 
the basic lifestyle preferences, and even the daily activities of those in 
their networks. 
 Sousveillance: Watching the More Powerful 
 In direct opposition to panopticon surveillance where organizations 
observe people from on high,  “ sousveillance ”  is the observation from 
below of more powerful organizations and people. Steve Mann invented 
the term when he decided to watch the watchers by video blogging his 
interactions in department and chain stores, including the surveillance 
cameras on their ceilings.  46 But most of the sousveillance action is now on 
the internet, where networked individuals can now find information that 
has the potential to destabilize power relations. 
 Wikileaks.org has undertaken the most controversial and publicized 
sousveillance. It is an organization that releases confidential governmental 

Networked Information 
241
information online from anonymous news sources who submit sensitive 
material to an electronic drop box. Its motto is:  “ We help you safely 
get the truth out. ” In October 2010, the organization leaked approxi-
mately four hundred thousand private and classified documents that 
became known as the Iraq War Logs. Following that, in November 
2010, Wikileaks began to release and publish a total of 251,287 secret 
diplomatic cables from U.S. embassies around the world dating from 
1966 to February 2010. The release of the cables revealed controversial 
foreign strategies, such as a secret intelligence campaign where informa-
tion such as passwords, credit card numbers, email addresses, and even 
biographic and biometric data of United Nations leaders were collected.  47 
Although proclaiming its openness to multiple contributors, the con-
troversial nature of the site — and the probability of government surveil-
lance of its contributors — has reduced contributions. Indeed, the Wikileaks 
site would not even open on April 9, 2011, and the Wikipedia ’ s  “ Wiki-
leaks ”  article reports that  “ the wikileaks.org domain redirected to  mirror
.wikileaks.info . ”  48 
 Surveillers can also be sousveilled, as when the OpenNet Initiative works 
to  “ investigate, expose and analyze internet filtering and surveillance prac-
tices ”  of seventy countries.  49 It provides information about their filtering 
and censorship practices as well as the legal, technical, and administrative 
tools they use.  50 Its sister project, the Information Warfare Monitor, uncov-
ered the GhostNet cyber-espionage network emanating from within China 
that targeted the computers of the Tibetan community in 2009, including 
the private office of the Dalai Lama.  51 
 The different manifestations and levels of  “ veillance ”  show that net-
worked information, more specifically personal information, is bound 
to privacy concerns. A variety of actors can now more easily exploit 
the wealth of information available online in ways that fulfill their 
respective needs. For governments, this means watching over citizens 
to ensure the  “ stability ”  and  “ security ”  of the state, while for busi-
nesses, this means collecting data about consumer behaviors to find 
new ways of making a profit. Ordinary citizens may also watch each 
other side by side in an attempt to find more nuanced information 
about family, friends, acquaintances, employees and employers, prospec-
tive romantic relationships, and even strangers. And of course, sometimes 
the purpose may be to challenge the surveillance practices of authori-
ties, essentially  “ surveilling the surveillers. ” In this way, networked 
information lives a social life that is deeply complicated and heavily 
layered. 

242 
Chapter 9
 Dealing with the  “ Zero Privacy ” 
 The ever-thorny and increasingly salient issue of privacy has been brought 
to the forefront of popular discourse as networked individuals share infor-
mation about themselves and as governments, organizations, businesses, 
and individuals have more power to watch over one another. Former CEO 
of Sun Microsystems Scott McNealy famously said,  “ You have zero privacy 
. . . get over it. ” 52 Facebook founder and CEO Mark Zuckerberg claims that 
 “ People have really gotten comfortable not only sharing more information 
and different kinds, but more openly and with more people. That social 
norm is just something that has evolved over time. ” 53 His company fol-
lowed that belief by giving third-party application developers access to 
each member ’ s data.  54  
 As surveillance, coveillance, and sousveillance proliferate, people have 
become more aware of the issue of privacy. The evidence shows that net-
worked individuals, both adults and youth alike, would like to keep the 
norm of privacy alive by controlling the information going out both to 
their networks and the wider public. In May 2011, a Pew Internet study 
found that 58 percent of the adult users of social networking sites set their 
accounts so that only friends can see what they post and another 19 
percent use settings to make their account partially private. A quarter of 
those who restrict access to only their friends (26 percent) have taken the 
further step of limiting what their friends can see. Another strategy people 
use to control their identity is to use different profiles on multiple social 
networking sites: 42 percent of social networking site users have profiles 
on at least two sites and another 8 percent have more than one profile on 
the single site they use. Moreover, despite concerns that sites such as Face-
book make it hard for users to adjust their privacy controls, 79 percent of 
social networking site users said they found the privacy-setting systems not 
difficult or not too difficult to use.  56 These strategies show that adult inter-
net users are trying to manage their identity to some extent. 
 danah boyd and Eszter Hargittai found that in response to these issues 
of surveillance, young people are actively seeking ways to protect them-
selves and control the information they release to the public. For example, 
about one-quarter (24 percent) of all Facebook users changed their privacy 
settings four or more times in 2009, with this number increasing to more 
than half (51 percent) in 2010.  57 Similarly, Pew Internet surveys have found 
that 66 percent of all teens with an online social networking profile have 
restricted access by making the profiles private, adding password protec-
tion, hiding them entirely from others, or even taking them offline.  58 

Networked Information 
243
Moreover, tech-savvy youth are creating specialized sublists of friends to 
further manage information flows.  59 One student explained,  “ I put a lot of 
my family members, especially the older ones like aunts and uncles, on 
my Limited Profile list so that they don ’ t see my pics or my status updates. 
Sometimes I have pics at parties and swear on my updates and they just 
don ’ t need to see that. ” 
 Other social media users are even removing friends with whom they no 
longer want or feel obliged to stay in touch.  60 As Pew researchers Amanda 
Lenhart and Mary Madden conclude:  “ For teens, all personal information 
is not created equal. ” They filter the personal information that they share 
with particular others, controlling who is able to see what on the basis of 
the nature of the tie and the particular circumstances. 
 The evidence for both adults and youth show that there is at least some 
deliberate attempt at controlling what personal information is released on 
the internet and for whom specifically. Networked individuals are aware 
of the costs that come with giving unfettered access to their personal 
information online and thus adjust their online behavior accordingly. Of 
course, there are still the covert methods of surveillance practiced by gov-
ernments and organizations. But in the face of these mounting challenges 
against privacy, networked individuals are trying to find ways of adapting 
to surveillance and coveillance. 
 Lifestyles of the Rich in Networked Information 
 The relationship of networked individuals to networked information is a 
key part of their lifestyle. Consumption of information for them can 
be — and often is — a networking experience as they contribute to and share 
it as part of their effort to enrich their network relationships and build 
their reputations. Similarly, social networks help people find the informa-
tion they want and to understand its meaning. It is commonplace now for 
a point to come up in conversation, and for participants to use their smart-
phones or wireless laptops to search for more information. Coauthor 
Wellman notes that he cannot get away with an assertion in a lecture any 
more without having his audience check it out. 
 That is the networking side of the equation. Yet there is an individual-
ism side as well. In the digital world, people ’ s consumption of information 
is increasingly tailored to their personal tastes and they are more in 
charge of what they consume, how they consume it, and where they 
consume it. Twitter and Facebook have become early-warning providers 
of information that sometimes is as prosaically personal as a change in 

244 
Chapter 9
someone ’ s  “ relationship status. ” Other times, social media provide mate-
rial that is earth-shakingly important, such as breaking developments 
about Egyptian upheavals in 2011.  
 Vannevar Bush was trying to think through a  “ library problem ” when 
he concocted the idea of the memex in 1945. He wanted to craft a way 
that librarians could stay on top of things in a world where information 
was growing at a staggering pace. Nowadays, people often have the library 
come to them rather than actually visiting the library. And what search 
engines cannot find for them, their online friends often can. Bush was 
really envisioning the major social change that would unfold as informa-
tion proliferated and became networked. Ever since the Internet and 
Mobile Revolutions took off and gave new power to the network operating 
system, the processes of creating and sharing information have become 
more vividly a networking activity — with all the joys of sharing and the 
perils of disclosure. 
 

 
 Interlude: The Conversation Never Ends 
 Weekend social organizing has a very different flavor with very different com-
munication logistics in the age of hyperconnection. We asked one of Wellman ’ s 
students, Justine Abigail Yu, to describe the process as it plays out in her life. 
 With Reading Week fast approaching, the past few days have been a flurry 
of planning as my friends and I have been busy coordinating with one 
another in an attempt to make the best out of our short, but much-needed 
break from the stress of university life. Many of the plans have been 
ongoing for weeks but it is only now as the date draws nearer do we finally 
start filling in details. It is always a mad influx of phone calls, texts, Face-
book messages, and tweets during the days and even hours prior to an 
event as we must continually clarify what exactly our plans are . . . 
 Thursday 
 2:00 pm   I just finished my tutorial and now have a four-hour break ahead 
of me. I call Nadia to see where she and the rest of my girl friends are and 
if they are available for the afternoon. I meet her and Sally at Sidney Smith 
Hall where we make ourselves comfortable for a long day of  “ studying. ” I 
also send a text to Vic and Abby to tell them where we are and invite them 
to join us. 
 2:30 pm   After awhile, I walk around the building looking for something 
to snack on and I run into Anthony, another good friend of mine. We get 
totally sidetracked and talk for about an hour or so catching up on what 
has been going on in our lives and discussing the birthday party we are 
both invited to on Friday. We try sorting out the details as to when and 
where it ’ s taking place but we ’ re not entirely sure. This plan was made 
about two weeks ago through a Facebook event but at the time, no venue 
or time was indicated on the invitation; that information was simply noted 
as  “ TBA ” (to be announced). 

246 
Interlude: The Conversation Never Ends
 3:30 pm   More than an hour has passed and all I ’ ve managed to do so far 
is socialize so I decide to pack up my things. I need to isolate myself to 
write an essay that ’ s due the following week . . . these things don ’ t write 
themselves, you know. So I head on over to the 11th floor of Robart ’ s 
Library where I know no one can disturb me. I need a computer to do my 
research and after a few minutes of concentration, I need a little break. I 
log on to my Gmail, Twitter, and Facebook accounts and it all goes down-
hill from there . . .  
 I get an email from my mom with her flight details asking me if I can 
pick her up from the airport on Monday. I respond,  “ of course. ” On the 
Twitter front, I respond to tweets asking me about an upcoming  “ tweet-up ” 
that I ’ m organizing at the end of the month. Finally, Facebook is where I 
spend the bulk of my time. I respond to a private message thread from my 
high school friends. They want to go watch a movie on Saturday, but I ’ ve 
already made plans so I try to negotiate another day during the week. 
 At the same time, I check who ’ s online and see that Andrew and Sarah 
are available to chat. They were also invited to the birthday party on Friday, 
and I want to find out if they ’ re attending or not. Sarah is out of town and 
Andrew first wants to know who else is going before he makes his decision. 
So I text our mutual friends Silvia, Heather, and Isaac to find out if they ’ re 
coming. Isaac can ’ t make it; Silvia and Heather can. I relay the message 
back to Andrew. Meanwhile, Sarah is upset that she won ’ t be able to make 
it, but her birthday is next week and she ’ s throwing her own party with 
essentially the same people invited. We look online for various places 
around the Toronto area where she can hold her event, consulting websites 
such as Toronto.com, martiniboys.com, and blogTO.com. She seems pretty 
set on this one bar but is perplexed because there are quite a few bad 
reviews online. This goes on for about another hour or so with back and 
forth emails, tweets, chat messages, and text messages killing my produc-
tivity time. There are too many conversations happening all at once and 
it ’ s starting to get just a bit overwhelming . . . 
 5:00 pm   I have written just a single sentence for my essay and I am start-
ing to feel lonely here in the library. I text Cass and Abby to see if they 
can meet up before my 6 pm class. 
 5:15 pm   I meet Cass downstairs and we grab a bite to eat. We spend most 
of our time brainstorming nearby restaurants for our lunch on Saturday 
with a few other friends. We have been planning this over a Facebook 
private message thread for quite some time now but as usual, the concrete 
details are only being worked out a couple of days beforehand. 

Interlude: The Conversation Never Ends 
247
 6:00 pm   Class again. Today should be interesting as we have a guest 
lecturer who will speak to us via Skype. 
 6:15 pm   Never mind, not interesting at all. I use the TweetDeck applica-
tion on my iPhone and start tweeting with some people. Thank God for 
data plans! 
 9:30 pm  I finally arrive home from a long day on campus and automati-
cally turn on my computer. Just like earlier today, I log into my Gmail, 
Facebook, and Twitter and the whole cycle begins all over again! I check 
the Facebook event for tomorrow’s party and finally, Samantha, the birth-
day girl and hostess, has provided more details about the location. 
 12:00 am   I am finally able to pry myself away from the computer and 
get ready for bed . . . 
 Friday 
 9:00 am   I ’ m up early and ready to start another day! Is it sick that the 
first thing I do every morning is reach for my phone to check my email, 
Twitter, and Facebook? Maybe I should change my morning routine . . . 
 10:00 am   I spend the day working on my essay . . . really this time. 
I am miraculously able to keep myself away from the internet and my 
phone. 
 1:15 pm   My friend Abby gives me a call telling me that she has made 
reservations for our lunch tomorrow and asks if I can pick her up. We agree 
on a time and I quickly get back to writing. It ’ s a busy weekend so I need 
to get as much done as I can now. 
 3:20 pm   A sudden flood of texts from my friends arrive, asking me where 
we are going to meet for tonight ’ s party. It ’ s a back and forth negotiation 
with each of them that goes on for about 20 minutes. We all finally agree 
to meet at 9:00 pm at a specific bar for pre-drinks before we all go to the 
party together at around 10:30 pm. 
 5:00 pm   I start getting ready for the party when I get a call from Silvia. 
We discuss how we will get home tonight and decide on taking a cab and 
just splitting the cost. 
 7:10 pm   I am on my way out of the house when I send Silvia a text 
notifying her that I ’ m about to leave. I do this so that she can time her 
departure in such a way that will ensure that we arrive at the bar at about 
the same time. 

248 
Interlude: The Conversation Never Ends
 8:40 pm   While I walk towards the bar, I send a text to Heather to see if 
she is there already. She ’ s not. I text Silvia and she responds saying that 
she is about 10 minutes away and that I should save us a spot as it will be 
a packed night tonight. 
 9:00 pm   Everyone has arrived and on time too . . . that ’ s unusual for this 
group of friends! I  “ check in ” to the bar, using my foursquare application, 
a location-based social networking site. This particular mobile service 
allows users to give tips on what to order or what to look for at any given 
location. Many users suggested ordering a pitcher of the beer instead of a 
pint to save money so I thought I ’ d follow their advice. I also tweeted 
about where I was and what I was up to.  
 I disconnected myself from technology the rest of the night and instead 
immersed myself fully in the real-life conversation and laughter. 
 Saturday 
 10:30 am   Morning ritual: I grab my phone, check my email, Facebook, 
and Twitter. My high school friends have responded to my message on 
Facebook suggesting that we watch the movie on Wednesday instead. I 
respond to say that I ’ m free and I block the evening off on my iCalendar. 
I also receive a Facebook invite to Sarah ’ s birthday party next Saturday and 
it looks like she has decided to go with the bar that we were talking about 
the other day. I click on  “ attending ” in the RSVP box and block that night 
off on my iCalendar as well. 
 11:15 am   I ’ m almost ready to pick up Abby for our lunch, but before I 
head out of the house I give her a call to make sure that she will be ready 
by the time that I get there. 
 11:30 am   When I arrive there, I call to tell her that I am waiting outside. 
It doesn ’ t take her long to come out and we drive to the restaurant to meet 
everyone else. 
 12:00 pm   As we wait for the others to arrive, I  “ check in ” using the four-
square application on my iPhone again. I’ve been to this place many times 
before, and I add a tip for other users to order the calamari as it is the best 
I ’ ve ever had. Just like last night, I tweet about where I am, who I ’ m with, 
and what I ’ m doing. 
 12:10 pm   Text from Nicole. She ’ s running late, and we should just order 
without her. 

Interlude: The Conversation Never Ends 
249
 12:30 pm   When our food arrives, I tweet a photo of all the goodies 
before us. 
 2:30 pm   Back in my own home, I receive a text message from Nicole 
saying that she had a good time and that we should do it again sometime 
soon. I respond with similar sentiments. Abby texts me as well thanking 
me for the lift to and from the restaurant. 
 2:45 pm   I log into my Facebook account to find myself tagged in a 
number of photos from last night ’ s party. I comment on a few of them 
and write on Silvia ’ s wall reminding her of an inside joke that had us 
laughing for what seemed like hours yesterday. I upload photos from my 
own camera as well. The day after a big party almost always means that 
no work will be accomplished as I usually spend hours looking through 
our pictures online and reliving the night. 
 3:30 pm   Realizing that I don ’ t really have anything else to do for the rest 
of the day, I give one of my high school friends, Carmen, a call to see if 
she ’ s still up for watching a movie. She makes a few phone calls to see if 
our other friends are available. 
 3:45 pm   Carmen calls me back to let me know that everyone is free. 
While chatting on the phone, I go online to tribute.ca to check movie 
times and listings. We decide to catch the 4:30 pm show and I send a text 
to those who are coming with us to let them know about these new 
developments. 
 4:15 pm   I arrive at the movie theatre but I ’ m the only one there. As I use 
the machine to buy my ticket, I make a few phone calls to find out where 
everyone is. 
 4:40 PM   Movie time! 
 6:00 PM   I ’ m back home and don ’ t intend to do anything else for the rest 
of the weekend. I ’ m pooped from all this planning and coordinating so I 
relax in front of (can you guess it?) my computer. I have new emails and 
Facebook messages with friends asking what my plans are for the coming 
week . . . here we go again! 
 Reflections 
 Though I hardly ever think twice about it, there is an incredibly complex 
interplay of mobile, online, and face-to-face interaction that is used 

250 
Interlude: The Conversation Never Ends
to strategically plan and coordinate not just my mundane day-to-day 
activities, but also bigger events and get-togethers with friends. Here are 
my general conclusions. 
 First, it is clear that although my everyday life is heavily bound up with 
technology, it is primarily used as a tool to organize in-person contact —
 various forms of which are strategically employed to fit the audience and 
specific, unique needs. For instance, Facebook invites or private thread 
messages are used to address a greater number of people and for events 
that will usually take place in the relatively far future. I use the mobile 
phone when I need to talk to an individual to discuss a matter that may 
take quite some time, while text messages are sent to individuals for short 
notifications or questions that do not require a lengthy discussion. 
 Second, mobile and online technologies are often used simultaneously, 
sometimes even while engaging in face-to-face interactions. I often find 
myself having multiple conversations with different people over a variety 
of media at the same time. Thus, there is a great deal of multitasking 
involved when it comes to planning and coordinating with friends, jug-
gling the various forms of technology in ways that are best suited to the 
need. 
 Third, most events are planned many days if not even weeks in advance. 
However, at the onset of the planning process, they are often general agree-
ments to meet with details continually negotiated and refined as the date 
of the event draws nearer. A look at my communication journal demon-
strates this, as parties often begin with a Facebook invite or message with 
no location or time specified, but simply a vague description of the event. 
It is only days or even hours prior to the activity that my friends and I 
begin discussing what time we should meet, where we should meet, and 
how we should get there. More than that, we often use our mobile phones 
in the hours and minutes leading up to an event, calling and texting one 
another as a means of sending updates of our location and distance from 
the agreed upon meeting place. 
 Fourth, my friends and I rely heavily on the internet to help with our 
decision-making process. For instance, my friend Sarah and I actively use 
online generated reviews to determine potential venues to host her birth-
day party. I also use websites to check movie show times and listings. 
Mobile applications also play a role with location-based services providing 
various tips for users. These technologies provide us with invaluable infor-
mation that assists us in the planning stages. 
 Finally, it is evident that the use of technology does not only occur prior 
to the event but also during and after. I often tweet about what I am doing 

Interlude: The Conversation Never Ends 
251
as I am doing it, occasionally even tweeting photos live from the event. 
Mobile and online technologies are also used after the event with friends 
posting photos on Facebook, writing on each other ’ s wall, or sending a 
text as a follow-up to our activities. 
 Mobile and online technologies are a constant presence in my life. They 
are strategic and most necessary tools when it comes to planning get-
togethers with friends. Despite its pervasiveness or quite possibly because 
of it, this intricate interplay of mobile, online, and face-to-face interaction 
is one that I rarely ever consciously think about. 

 
 III  How to Operate in a Networked World, Now and in the 
Future 

 
 10   Thriving as a Networked Individual 
 The underlining theme of this book is that it is a networked world, and 
that being networked is not so scary. Rather, it provides opportunities for 
people to thrive if they know how to maneuver in it. Arguably, the emerg-
ing divide in this world is not the  “ digital divide ” but the  “ network divide. ” 
Technology continues to spread through populations, so the emerging 
need is for people to learn how to cultivate their networks — and to get out 
from the cocoon of their bounded groups. 
 Those who want to thrive in the network operating system need insight 
into its realities and need to practice how to function effectively in this 
changed world. People and institutions exist now in information and com-
munication ecologies that are strikingly different from the ones that existed 
just a generation ago. People ’ s relationships remain strong — but they are 
networked. To be sure, neighbors and neighborhoods still exist, but they 
occupy a smaller portion of people ’ s lives. It is hard to borrow a cup of 
sugar from a Facebook friend 1,000 miles away, but it has become easier 
to socialize, get advice, and exchange emotional support at any distance. 
Where commentators had been afraid that the internet would wither in-
person ties, it is clear that they enhance and extend them. It is not an 
either in-person OR online dichotomy; it is an in-person AND the internet 
AND mobile contact comprehensiveness. They all intertwine in the ecology 
of the relationship. 
 These, then, are the hallmarks of the new operating system in which 
networked individuals function. The volume of information has grown 
and the pace is accelerating. The variety of information sources has 
boomed; the velocity of information is accelerating, especially at the level 
of personal news and niche communities. The places and times in which 
people encounter information, media, and each other have expanded to 
anywhere at any time as long as there are mobile connections. People ’ s 
attention to communicating and gathering information has become 

256 
Chapter 10
simultaneously more fractured as sources multiply  and more focused as 
their searches become more specific. Information itself has become net-
worked and more densely packed, making people ’ s experiences with it 
more immersive and participatory. The capacity of people to find relevant, 
abundant information on topics has radically improved in the era of 
instant online search. The ability of people to tell their own stories and 
share their own ideas has substantially broadened in the era of social 
media. Their capacity to rate and rank the value of information (and profit 
from the collected ratings/rankings of others) has grown by leaps. And 
their ability to build, tap into, and learn from personal networks has 
bounded upward with the rise of social networking sites and other 
applications. 
 These changes in the network operating system have affected individual 
behavior and attitudes. Among other things, people now expect to find 
information on almost every subject quickly. They expect that they are 
more findable and reachable at many more times and places than in the 
past — and they assume others are equally as likely to be accessible. They 
have reallocated the way they use their time and attention. They pack more 
information and communications exchanges into their days and they are 
interruptible in their activities more often. Their sense of place, distance, 
and presence with others is transformed as they participate in more 
encounters that feature  “ absent presence ” or  “ present absence. ” Their sense 
of self transforms from a hard unitary shell to a reconfigurable amoeba 
with situationally changing pseudopods. Their sense of personal efficacy 
grows as they practice the art of seeking and gaining social, emotional, and 
economic support using new technologies. Those activities also highlight 
the extra effort that networking requires. 
 This is an operating system that confers social and economic advantages 
to those who behave effectively as networked individuals, blending signifi-
cant personal encounters and new media as they solve problems and build 
social support. 
 Linda Evans Becomes a Networked Individual 
 One telling example is the story of how Linda Evans (her maiden name, 
but not the name she currently uses) has developed into a networked 
individual. Linda ’ s life abruptly changed in January 1995 when her husband 
of twenty-three years told her he wanted a divorce. She had been a stay-
at-home mother for years and had only recently returned to a manageable 
work schedule as a sign-language interpreter at her children ’ s elementary 

Thriving as a Networked Individual 
257
school in a Texas suburb. As the divorce process began, the forty-two-year-
old found herself financially strapped, and she slipped into a serious 
depression as she tried to think about a future with her daughters, ages 
fifteen and thirteen, and son, age eight. 
 Over the next decade, she rebuilt her life with the help of many allies. 
First, she decided to seek a semblance of normalcy after she saw her ex-
husband striding purposefully into a new life with an annoying lack of 
scarring.  “ Time to return to the world, ” she told herself as she joined a 
class of newly divorced and separated people at her church. All of them 
were strangers to her before their encounters in class, but they soon joined 
a core group of caring friends to give Linda succor. She was also comforted 
by several inspiring books and video tapes recommended by friends and 
provided by the church. 
 Linda could tell she was beginning to mend when soon after the divorce 
was settled in 1997, she took her ten-year-old son to a two-week vacation 
at Disney World in Orlando. For the first time striding out on her own, 
she researched the trip through printed material and friends, made the 
reservations by phone, planned the driving itinerary via maps (strictly on 
back roads so they could enjoy the countryside), met her budget, handled 
all the typical trip glitches with aplomb, and got safely back home. But, 
she had not gotten seriously involved with the internet yet. 
 The church class for divorcees became such an important part of her 
life that Linda stayed on as a layperson helper in the class after she felt 
she had recovered. Lucky thing. One of the first new entrants to the class 
after she assumed the modest leadership role was freshly divorced John. 
He was pleasant, but also as distressed as Linda had been at the start of the 
divorce. Yet, as the class went on its regular round of activities, Linda and 
he began to discover common interests. 
 By the time her relationship with John ripened, Linda was a regular 
internet user and that helped her relationship with him build. John worked 
at home as an online support specialist for an electronics firm. On many 
days, he and Linda would spend a decent share of time emailing each 
other. They would start stories and played a little game of add on to each 
other ’ s  “ mystery of the week. ” For example, Linda wrote: 
 It was a lovely spring morning and Susan was thinking of all the things she had to 
do that day. As she sipped her tea, she was drawn to the array of colors in her flower 
garden and decided to cut some blossoms to add a perfumed fragrance to her 
kitchen. Grabbing up her garden shears, she strolled out to the back yard, thinking 
about which blooms she would cut first. Stepping carefully around some bulbs 

258 
Chapter 10
which were just beginning to emerge from the soil, she let out a scream as her eyes 
came to rest upon . . . 
 Then John would append a few sentences and end with ellipses. Linda 
would pick up the story and they would go back and forth until one of 
them would close it out. It all took place on email. They only lived six 
miles apart, but she found that he was often more engaging online than 
in person. He was wittier and just  “ different ” in his digital persona in ways 
she quite liked. 
 As her friendship with John grew, Linda turned for insight, support, and 
guidance to people in her life who were often different from those who 
had helped her during her own recovery. She got help as she pondered the 
romantic stage of their relationship from her teenage daughters, her pastor, 
and other leaders in the local Southern Baptist community who ran semi-
nars and conferences for singles.  “ They were not the hurting divorced 
crowd, they were the right people for the next stage of a relationship, ” 
Linda says.  “ I grabbed at all the things and all the people I thought would 
help me, each step along the way. ” She settled all her questions with the 
support of this group. John found a similar group of allies to coach him 
through the many steps toward commitment. They married in March 
2001. 
 As Linda emerged from her emotional chrysalis, she also wanted to 
improve her job skills. Her associate ’ s degree in sign-language interpreta-
tion did not produce enough income, so she returned for seven semesters 
at a small, local university to get her bachelor ’ s degree in business. While 
she was taking those courses, she also garnered a full-time job with a 
nearby firm that offered sign-language translation services. However, she 
did not feel at home in the commercial world. After getting her bachelor ’ s 
degree she began to talk to a favorite professor and some former teaching 
colleagues to get advice about the steps she would need to take to work in 
education. One teacher on Linda ’ s high school campus, Barb, was a par-
ticularly good sounding board for Linda. Barb was aware of Linda ’ s person-
ality, interests, and strengths, and pointed her to some occupational 
assessment tools and a couple of education-theory books.  “ Barb used her 
knowledge of my experiences and my interest in educational theory to 
help me tie things together, ” Linda notes.  “ This helped me decide teaching 
was for me. ” 
 In mid-2003, Linda enrolled in a program to get a master ’ s degree in 
instructional technology from a large state university not far away. She had 
done some basic research about the program using the internet, but did 
not feel fully confident about the place until she ’ d driven the forty miles 

Thriving as a Networked Individual 
259
to the campus and quizzed an administrator in person.  “ I didn ’ t feel quite 
comfortable with it until I had actually sat down with somebody and 
physically checked out the campus, ” Linda says. By this point, Linda had 
become an avid user of the internet. The coursework for the degree was 
given entirely online. She eventually decided to enroll that fall after 
another couple of rounds of internet research and consultation with the 
segment of her network who were especially tuned in to the world of 
educational careers.  “ I can ’ t tell you where my reading stopped and my 
friends ’  advice began, ” Linda explains.  “ I ’ d read something and then 
huddle with people who had been down this road. That would trigger new 
online searches. Back and forth and forth and back — websites and people 
and books and pamphlets and then websites again. ” 
 It all worked out as Linda graduated with her master ’ s degree two years 
later in 2005, a lot more internet-savvy. Soon after graduation, she enrolled 
in a PhD program in education at an out-of-state college. The program was 
run entirely online. Her decision in this case was aided less by human 
interaction than by resources on the internet. A friendly student named 
Marci inspired Linda by sending her emails with assurances she could 
succeed and brainstorming with Linda about her options. Linda consulted 
other acquaintances who already had PhDs to get information about how 
difficult the whole process was and what their own experiences had been 
like. Still, the vast majority of her digging for background information was 
done through online searches and queries. 
 By this time, Linda had gotten a broadband internet service at home. 
She decided to pay about 50 percent more for her internet connection in 
mid-2002 because she was tired of the login process of her dial-up connec-
tion, tired of waiting for web pages to load, and anxious to do more brows-
ing for everything from recipes to textbook bargains.  “ By then, I wanted 
to do everything online, ” Linda says. She has stayed enrolled. She also 
holds down a full-time job helping her public school district figure out 
how to use new technologies to facilitate online learning, instruction, and 
greater teacher productivity in K – 12 classrooms. 
 In addition to reconstructing her emotional and professional life, Linda 
also activated another part of her social network to gain mastery of her 
financial affairs. The two-year divorce process left her with more than 
$60,000 to invest and some child-support revenue. No one in her immedi-
ate circle of good friends seemed to be as plugged into the commercial 
and investment world as her friend Susan,  1 who ran a firm where Linda 
worked. When she sought advice from Susan about how to handle this 
nest egg, the older women put her in touch with her investment advisor, 

260 
Chapter 10
who, in turn, gave Linda the name of a new junior associate at his invest-
ment firm. 
 That turned out to be a decent-enough relationship for the basics of 
investments, but Linda profited more from an even more casual relation-
ship. Linda reached out to Troy, a financial advisor and the son of Cynthia, 
a local bookkeeper and tax consultant who had previously helped her and 
her husband John with financial basics like tax preparation. Linda and 
John transferred their financial affairs to Troy ’ s care. He, in turn, opened 
up the world of online financial advice to them through his email newslet-
ters that were filled with links and references to online resources for inves-
tors. On their own, Linda and John also have become omnivorous browsers 
of financial websites and discussion groups. They go to Troy ’ s regular client 
gatherings armed with web printouts and questions about financial instru-
ments, the tax implications of various investment strategies, and tips on 
the performance of various stocks. They and Troy have helped the nest egg 
grow several-fold. 
 Linda ’ s mobile phone is now connected to the internet and has been 
adding to what has become her networked life. She says the phone allows 
her to stay in touch with more people, more often, and under more cir-
cumstances than would have been possible if she had been tethered to 
landlines. She often multitasks with multiple devices. For example, she was 
sending emails to individuals who were helping her make her choice about 
continuing her education on the same day she was receiving other emails 
from people in her church support group for the newly divorced. She made 
calls to plan her next meeting on finances within minutes of taking calls 
from the faculty who were grading her term papers.  “ All this technology 
makes it easier for me to take care of lots of things quickly, ” Linda says. 
 “ It ’ s a juggling act with all the things I need to do, but I don ’ t know how 
I ’ d be able to work with so many people on so many different subjects if 
I didn ’ t have this technology. ” 
 When Linda purchased her first mobile phone in 1994, she quickly 
discovered its many virtues. Whenever she had a few idle minutes she 
would find herself thinking,  “ Who do I need to call? ” She had never 
thought about acting so spontaneously in placing calls in the past. The 
mobile phone has also helped her ease the tension of awkward episodes: 
If she is running late for an engagement, she calls and makes apologies. 
When she herself is waiting for others, she uses the phone to do quick 
outreach to those to whom she  “ owes ” calls or those who might feel good 
about a  “ how are you doing? ” call. She says: 
 I use my cell for everything that I can, I just got a BB [BlackBerry] and am now 
learning how to do even more — for example, right now I am researching how to 

Thriving as a Networked Individual 
261
use it as a modem for my laptop! I send photos and videos back and forth between 
my children, text with them all the time, and use my cell for GPS capabilities. I 
also use it for quick research like checking movie times, answering questions, and 
so on. 
 Perhaps most interesting is that the mobile phone has brought Linda 
a modest sense of personal liberation — matched by a sense of loss of 
control when her children got their own mobile phones. The liberation 
came when she was glad not to have to wait her turn for access to the 
family ’ s landline telephone. She also cherished her new power to place 
calls whenever she needed. She was comfortable when her children got 
their own phones because it made it much easier to check on their where-
abouts and stay in contact with them throughout the day. Still, when they 
were free to conduct a lot of their phone conversations — and text ses-
sions — outside the household ’ s  “ public ”  zone, Linda was less thrilled:  “ I 
liked it more when I had an idea of who was on the other end of the 
phone, and I could hear a little of what was being said in my child ’ s half 
of the conversation. ” 
 In addition to using the internet and her mobile phone to draw support, 
Linda has also reached out to others with new technologies. For years, she 
has run her own support group for people with myasthenia gravis, a 
chronic autoimmune neuromuscular disease characterized by varying 
degrees of weakness of the muscles. She was diagnosed with this disease 
while in the middle of her divorce and created the group using online 
outreach that focused on the type of disease she was diagnosed as having. 
Eventually, the diagnosis changed, but she stayed active in the original 
group and formed another one for those who had the same type of disease 
that her second diagnosis revealed. Linda has run an email  “ listserv ”  dis-
cussion for each group and a website for both for about fourteen years. 
The groups also have accounts on Flickr, the photo-sharing site, in order 
to document the disease and to celebrate the relationships that have been 
formed in these communities. 
 “ This is a new kind of way to offer people hope and support, ” Linda 
says.  “ There is nothing quite like sharing a common place with people 
who are just like you. ” She regularly sends emails and makes phone calls 
to those who are anxious for two kinds of help: those who want aid in 
knowing more about the disease and those who want tech support from 
a savvy friend.  “ Since many of the folks who have this disease are invalids, 
I set up a recipe club, joke club, and the like to provide some email com-
munication outside the more serious-focused listserv, ” she recalls  “ I wish 
I could say I have done more, but I can’t. I have been in school for five 

262 
Chapter 10
straight years and it leaves little time. ” Looking back — and forward — Linda 
says: 
 The internet was the place I started, the place that gave me a reality check on things 
I heard, and it was the place that was available all hours of the day and night to 
help me. I love surfing the web — it is my entertainment (looking around, not games) 
and I pay all my bills online, use online banking, etc. If it can be done on the 
internet to make my life simpler, I want to learn how to do it. I even found my 
electricity provider, bought my cell phone, and send my kids and grandkids e-cards, 
stuff from Amazon, etc. I recently had laser eye surgery and scoped out YouTube 
videos on what was entailed! 
 How People Can Thrive as Networked Individuals 
 Like Peter and Trudy Johnson-Lenz in the opening chapter of this book, 
Linda Evans is a networked individual. There are several layers to Linda ’ s 
social network and, as she puts it, she  “ activated ”  those different layers as 
her needs arose. She says she has eight extremely close family members, 
friends, and other allies. They are the kind of people with whom she regu-
larly discusses important matters and on whom she can depend when she 
needs the most important kind of help. She also has eleven friends and 
other buddies that she feels somewhat close to. They are more than just 
casual acquaintances. From time to time they give her help and advice, 
but they are not as close as those in that extremely close group. And then 
she has scores of other people whom she knows and may be available and 
supportive when she reaches out. Remember, average Americans now have 
an estimated six hundred people in their networks. 
 Linda ’ s story of how she used the various strands of her social network 
to meet her needs is typical of those who now navigate their personal 
networks to get the aid and comfort they need. There was very little overlap 
among the various groups who assisted her in different aspects of her life-
rebuilding effort. The people who were most instrumental in helping her 
make her educational and career-development choices did not know the 
people to whom she turned when her emotional and social life was trou-
bled. And people in those groups had no direct point of connection with 
the people and online resources that were important to Linda as she 
wrestled with questions about her finances. 
 Linda ’ s story demonstrates how the social shift toward networked 
individuals changes the rules of the game — the operating system — for 
social, economic, and personal success. Abundant evidence shows that 
good, strong social networks of all kinds have important benefits. 

Thriving as a Networked Individual 
263
Moreover, those with relatively big and diverse networks, including many 
weak-tie associates, gain special advantages. They get information, support, 
and advice from more — and more diversified — sources. They are freer to 
move between different networks, when one becomes too controlling or 
does not supply what they need. They have the capacity to construct 
their own groups and negotiate the terms of their engagement with 
others. 
 Without consciously following the  “ rules ”  of the new social operating 
system, Linda was practicing the precepts of those who generally do better 
in a world of networked individuals: 
 Invest in existing relationships via the Golden Rule so that help will be there 
when needed:  Some old friends were the ones who checked in with Linda 
regularly right after her separation, commiserated during long phone calls 
when she felt poorly, and were sounding boards during the legal process 
leading to divorce. Other long-time pals served as coaches and technical 
support when she needed to master computers and the internet. And still 
others helped out with household logistics such as carpools for her chil-
dren.  “ My best friends walked with me every step of the way, ” she says. 
Surely that was because Linda had given similar aid and comfort to them 
when they had times of need. 
 Use ICTs enthusiastically and nimbly:  Linda developed from having little 
involvement with information and communication technologies (ICTs) to 
becoming an enthusiastic active user of a variety of internet and mobile 
technologies. Beyond appreciation of technology and having the skills to 
use it, media-literate people are in better shape as networked individuals 
in their ability to find information, assess it, react to it, and even remix it 
with their own creative spin on it. With this sort of media literacy, people 
can manage their networks better. Not surprisingly, those who have broad-
band internet connections and are serious internet and mobile users tend 
to have bigger and more diverse networks and have contact with a wider 
array of partners. They do not sacrifice the quality of their relations for the 
greater quantity of their ties. New digital tools give them more ability to 
function in larger networks. 
 This is not a blanket endorsement that urges everyone to be early adopt-
ers of new ICTs. Rather, it is to note that the evidence suggests that people 
do well as networkers if they are not timid about technology. Those in the 
Pew Internet tech-user typology who we classified as  “ motivated by mobile 
connections ” were also the most likely to use the internet for health-
related, civic-related, and news-related material and report good outcomes 
from their information searches. In other Pew Internet findings, more 

264 
Chapter 10
active technology users had bigger and more diverse networks, and more 
socially useful contact on a regular basis. 
 Use technology to develop your access to a wider audience that can share 
your interests:  Look at how Linda ’ s myasthenia gravis groups evolved as 
they became known via search engines and friends telling friends. The 
wisdom of crowds can now be tapped in ways that were impossible in the 
pre-internet era. The web is full of examples of people acting altruistically 
or seeking help from strangers and getting it. The  “ audience ”  layer of 
people ’ s networks often stands ready to respond when a request for help 
comes along. Peter and Trudy Johnson-Lenz received help coping with 
her brain injury from many people they had been scarcely been in touch 
with for a while. 
 In a modest, unscientific sampling of 294 tech-savvy people who had 
agreed to take online surveys, Pew Internet found that roughly two-thirds 
had done something altruistic online on behalf of strangers or just to give 
a distant connection a helping hand. Many had responded on listservs 
and other discussion forums to strangers who had technology problems. 
Many others had given consumer tips on products and services. One 
respondent said he was happy to act as an informal trip adviser just for 
the fun of helping people have good travel experiences. Another performed 
language translation activities for non-English-speaking inquirers. Another 
acted as an advice giver and listener to anonymous victims of domestic 
violence. Another was a group leader on Griefnet and regularly interacted 
with newcomers to the site seeking to be consoled. Another who was an 
amateur genealogical expert after years of practicing it as a hobby online 
said she regularly assisted others get started on their own family trees and 
provided links to relevant resources. Another helped connect people seeking 
to adopt pets to those trying to get rid of pets on Craigslist. Another had 
created an online support group for people suffering from lupus and dealt 
with queries from strangers every day. Another did the same for those 
recovering from weight-loss surgery. Another provided free editing assis-
tance for wannabe writers. Another described a prolonged online session 
where he comforted someone who had received a bogus death threat and 
extortion attempt. A photography enthusiast regularly posted free advice 
columns offering tips to amateur photographers. Another acted as an 
aggregator of links and advice to parents of gifted children. Another took 
it upon herself to become a patient advocate for strangers seeking help 
from the Veterans Benefit Administration. Another ran an online support 
group for families with soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan. And on and on 
and on. 

Thriving as a Networked Individual 
265
 Stay active and nimble:  Know how to scan the different segments of your 
social network so you can access the people who are the most suitable to 
provide the needed information and support. Linda used a variety of con-
tacts as she was making decisions about her educational options — different 
ones during periods when she was pondering new options.  “ When I first 
went back to school, I ran it by a few girlfriends, but it wasn ’ t a hard deci-
sion, ”  she recalls.  “ I had to do it and there was an easy option. When I 
was going for the higher degrees I felt it was best to talk to professionals 
and experts — and do a lot more research on my own. My effort was more 
serious because the stakes were higher and I was less certain at the begin-
ning what the best choice was. ” 
 Do not count on a single, tightly connected group of strong ties to help:  Linda 
pulled together one-to-one encounters or ad hoc groupings on an as-
needed basis.  “ I often had very specific needs and each new need was 
different enough from the last one that I needed another person to help 
me, ” she said. Groups in the networked age are often too weak, small, 
specialized, and uncoordinated to hang together over the course of an 
extended problem-solving period. They often lack access to a shifting 
diversified set of resources. One-to-one relationships and partial networks 
are the ones that usually are most effective and efficient. 
 Develop meaningful new ties as you go along and be especially alert to reach-
ing into new social circles that serve your purposes:  Linda made new friends 
in the church group of divorced people: her teacher buddy Barb who linked 
her to information relevant to entering the master ’ s program, her classmate 
Marci who affirmed her decision to seek a PhD, and her tax preparer ’ s son 
Troy who became her financial mentor. None knew the others or traveled 
in the same circles. They had varying interests and expertise. All were 
appropriate choices for advice and support when Linda was making deci-
sions. Asked if she was consciously trying to diversify her social network 
in these choices, Linda demurred:  “ It would be more accurate to say that 
I had a sense of who had the most knowledge to help me or whose insights 
into me and my personality seemed accurate. ” 
 Develop larger and more diverse networks:  Personal networks can now run 
to more than a thousand people, if you count the most remote but still 
meaningful consequential strangers. Look at all the ties that Linda was 
gathering up in little more than a decade, with many more ties to come and 
few to lose. No doubt she will rely on Facebook or similar software to keep 
in some contact with friends from past years and life experiences. 
 Although bigger is not always better, those with diverse, broad-ranging 
networks are often in better social shape and have a greater capacity to 

266 
Chapter 10
solve problems than those who have smaller networks. Quantity  does equal 
quality. Not only do larger networks provide more overall sociability, 
support, information, and connections to the rest of the world, but pre-
liminary research shows that each tie in a large network is likely to be more 
supportive than those in smaller networks.  2 A culture and network of 
support breeds more support. And, those with many functional  “ weak ties ” 
can find support and solve problems more adeptly than those who are 
deeply embedded in a small, tight social network. 
 In the digital era, networking behavior turns out to be an efficient way 
to collect and verify information. Recent research has shown that connec-
tions between clusters of friends — or websites — are efficient structures for 
acquiring information. Jon Kleinberg ’ s HITS algorithm (Hyperlink-Induced 
Topic Search) notes that websites should be considered important if they 
are both linked to by many others and also themselves link to many others. 
In other words, such sites connect to a wider-ranging array of sources, and 
in doing so illustrate the verb meaning of  “ networking. ”  Most clusters 
contain superconnectors — people linked to large numbers of others in 
multiple social milieus — and these connectors rapidly diffuse information. 
At the same time, talking to friends within clusters allows people to assess 
and validate the information they have received.  3 
 Act  “ transitively ” : Look beyond your friends to become aware of the 
people in their networks who could provide access to new worlds. That is 
what Linda did when she asked her boss Susan for help finding someone 
who could help her manage her divorce nest egg. That was the same 
impulse that prompted Linda to ask a similar question of Cynthia, the tax 
preparer.  “ I didn ’ t know any good financial advisers on my own, ” recalls 
Linda,  “ so I had to get tips from the people who seemed more financially-
savvy than I am. I figured there would be someone in their lives who ’ d be 
a good fit for me. ” 
 Act as autonomous agents to cultivate your personal networks:  In the good 
old days of strong kinship systems and densely knit villages, people could 
sit back and let things happen to them. They ’ d wander to the pub and 
find friendship, or go to their mother-in-law ’ s house every Sunday for 
dinner. They would know there would be support when trouble struck. 
With dispersed, sparsely knit person-to-person networks, those days are no 
longer here. Witness how Linda had to reach out and actively get help and 
advice. She even had to go to her church group for help rather than waiting 
for them to come to her. 
 This is the era of free agents and the ethic of personal agency. Social 
advantages and privileges accrue to those who prospect for network ties 

Thriving as a Networked Individual 
267
the way effective sales agents prospect for clients. The individuals primed 
to take advantage of this are the ones who are motivated to reach out to 
others, share their stories and support, and then invite conversation, feed-
back, and reciprocal gestures. The internet and mobile phones vastly 
expand the capacity of people to do the outreach and nurturing of friend-
ships that are part of prospecting. 
 Monitor and manage your reputation — your personal brand:  At the first level, 
individuals need to monitor the information about them because there is 
likely to be much more available in social media such as Facebook, blogs, 
listservs, photograph sites such as Flickr, video sites such as YouTube, and 
online discussion forums. 
 Information persists once it has been created and communicated online. 
As information scientist danah boyd notes,  “ What you say sticks around. 
This is . . . not so great when everything you’ve ever said has gone down 
on your permanent record. . . . [Moreover,] you can copy and paste a con-
versation from one medium to another, adding to the persistent nature of 
it. This is great for being able to share information, but it is also at the 
crux of rumor-spreading. ”  4 
 In effect, there are limitless possible ways to recreate and reshare and 
recommunicate material after it has been created digitally. Even worse for 
those bent on anonymity, boyd points out that people and information 
are searchable even if you segment your network:  “ With social media, it ’ s 
quite easy to track someone down or to find someone as a result of search-
ing for content. . . . This is great in some circumstances, but when trying 
to avoid those who hold power over you, it may be less than ideal. ” 
 The increased prevalence of self-monitoring and observation of others 
creates a dynamic environment where people promote themselves or 
shroud themselves depending on their intended audience and circum-
stances. In several surveys about reputation management, Pew Internet 
found that 57 percent of American internet users had searched for material 
about themselves online.  5 Some 33 percent of internet users worried about 
how much information is available about them, and 8 percent had asked 
other users to remove information about them. 
 Among social networking site users, more than three-quarters had taken 
steps to limit the amount of information that they shared about them-
selves. For instance 65 percent of adult social networking users have 
changed the privacy settings on their profile to limit what they share with 
others online; 63 percent had  “ unfriended ”  contacts in their network —
 deleting people from their friends list — and 52 percent had kept some 
people from seeing certain updates; 44 percent had deleted comments that 

268 
Chapter 10
others have made on their profile, and 37 percent had removed their name 
from photos that were tagged to identify them. At the same time, many 
reported benefits from sharing information online: 40 percent of internet 
users had been contacted by someone from their past who had found them 
online, which is double the number who had reported that in a 2006 
survey. Another 48 percent said they found it easier and more meaningful 
to meet new people because it was easy to learn things about them online. 
Overall, the message from the surveys was that when people consider the 
trade-offs of disclosure vs. privacy in the digital era, the majority of them 
see advantages in disclosure and the prospect of being findable. They take 
modest steps to limit information about themselves, but most are not 
deeply worried about disclosures they think are reasonable and confer 
benefits. 
 This is a reality for all networked individuals, but it is especially impor-
tant for those whose livelihoods depend on the outside world knowing 
who they are and what their reputation is. In the 2009 Pew Internet survey, 
12 percent of the respondents said their job required them to promote 
themselves or market their name. That population segment will surely 
grow and the portion of them monitoring their online identities will likely 
rise. Fully 84 percent of the people with those jobs had checked for infor-
mation about themselves in 2009; 73 percent were social networking site 
users and 29 percent were bloggers. There will also likely be broader aware-
ness of the online tools that are available to those who want to check up 
on their virtual selves. Those tools include email alerts and syndicated 
news feeds when an individual ’ s name is mentioned on news or other 
prominent sites and buzz-monitoring tools for the rankings, ratings, and 
social media sites where that person ’ s name might pop up. 
 The incentive to monitor and control information will become more 
pronounced as more information about people finds its way into databases 
and online venues. As Daniel Solove argues,   “ once information about us 
finds its way into the minds of others, we can ’ t control what they think 
about it. Our ability to exercise control consists of being able to limit the 
circulation of information about us. ”  6 Solove points to the key conflict for 
networked individuals in reputation management: Too much information 
disclosure harms individuals ’ privacy and freedom to act; too little infor-
mationly inhibits people ’ s ability to promote themselves and, more impor-
tantly, to build trust. Too little information also stifles free speech and the 
free flow of information. 
 Segment your identity:  Linda ’ s networked self operates in multiple net-
works: her church group, her divorce group, her teaching-support group, her 

Thriving as a Networked Individual 
269
graduate school friends, and two different groups focused on myasthenia 
gravis. She does not hide them from each other, but there is not much 
overlap. 
 Over time, more people will take at least a few steps to manage their 
identities by segmenting pieces of themselves — in effect, embracing a net-
worked self in which different parts of themselves are on display to differ-
ent audiences in their networks. It is not that they will have separate selves 
for different segments of their networks, or for online versus offline inter-
actions. Rather than different personas, people ’ s selves are networked: 
There is a core, but different aspects of that self get emphasized in different 
social situations. 
 These are difficult trade-offs for networked individuals to calculate. They 
know, though, that people can be especially hurt by mismanaging their 
identities in one of several ways. For example, if an individual does not 
disclose her needs, talents, and achievements she will miss opportunities 
to gain help or advance. Or, if she discloses too much inappropriate mate-
rial about her life she may likewise find herself denied opportunities. And 
if she doe not monitor what is known or said about her online, she cannot 
know where her reputations falls short of reality or where it could be bol-
stered. As boyd points out,  “ social media scales things in new ways. Con-
versations that were intended for just a friend or two might spiral out of 
control and scale to the . . . whole world. ” That is why segmenting net-
works and watching boundaries make even more sense online. 
 Develop the knack of functioning effectively in different contexts and  “ col-
lapsed contexts ” : For Linda, like all of us, the act of joining and belonging 
to multiple networks requires the development of contextual knowledge 
as each has different histories, norms, folklore structures, and dynamics. 
As boyd puts it:  “ Some behaviors are appropriate in one context but not 
another, in front of one audience but not others. Social media brings all 
of these contexts crashing into one another and it ’ s often difficult to figure 
out what ’ s appropriate, let alone what can be understood. ” 
 People must learn the ropes in these different milieus. The more grace-
fully they can do this, the quicker they can assume greater roles within 
multiple communities and networks. 
 This classic networking behavior — acting smartly in the situation in 
which you find yourself — has new complexity in the digital era. boyd 
argues that a central reality of life in the world of  “ networked publics ” is 
that old social and group contexts collapsed as digital media emerged. She 
notes that in conventional social arrangements, people chose what to say, 
when to say it, how to frame it appropriately for the audience that is 

270 
Chapter 10
obviously listening, and how to set it in the most useful general context. 
 “ Some behaviors are appropriate in one context but not another, in front 
of one audience but not others, ” she argues. 
 Nowadays, a speech that is delivered to a professional audience can also 
be blogged in real time and posted quickly on YouTube, making it available 
to those outside the intended audience and viewable in bedrooms in the 
middle of the night or digested over morning coffee. As boyd maintains: 
 “ Social media brings all of these contexts crashing into one another and 
it ’ s often difficult to figure out what ’ s appropriate, let alone what can be 
understood. ” Effective networkers have to take this into account by 
expanding the milieus in which their activity can be understood, and 
explaining themselves in ways that multiple audiences can comprehend. 
Realize that intense scrutiny — even in unexpected situations — is a realistic 
possibility. As coauthor Rainie ’ s Pew colleague Susannah Fox likes to point 
out, the new social networking environment means that people  “ should 
always be ready for their close-ups ” nowadays, because that close-up 
moment could be viewed and reviewed and reviewed. 
 Build high levels of trust and social capital in each network segment:  Linda 
has worked diligently at this as she has navigated her complex life. Social 
capital can be earned, amassed, to some extent banked, and often used. 
Note how Marlon Brando in  The Godfather  film built his capital:  “ Some-
day — and that day may never come — I ’ ll call upon you to do a service for 
me. But until that day, accept this justice as a gift. . . . ”  7 
 A bedrock law of social networking is that people need to discover and 
interact with those who can provide resources. Although humans seem to 
be hardwired for reciprocity, social capital has its own rewards as it allows 
us to gain prestige with individuals or in networks, get things done, and 
enhance our sense of self. The essential point is that trust and reciprocity 
are primary currencies for networked individuals.  8 
 Digital media and social networks provide new ways to offer and procure 
social capital online, and the basic value of social capital is growing because 
such networks are essential to people ’ s success. Just as digital technology 
has changed the contours of identity and privacy for networked individu-
als, it has also added elements to the dynamics of trust building. One 
particularly challenging change is tied to what the technology community 
calls  “ transparency. ” Trust building at the personal level has always required 
evolving levels of disclosure, but now the audience for such disclosures is 
bigger and the expectation it will take place is also greater. 
 Another aspect of trust building that has intensified in the digital era 
relates to mistakes. Everybody makes them. But when they occur online 

Thriving as a Networked Individual 
271
or are captured digitally, people ’ s mistakes can be more widely dissemi-
nated and accessed. It is not clear yet whether social norms have become —
 or will become — more forgiving of prior indiscretions because of this or 
whether people will pay for their mistakes over a longer period of time 
because such mistakes are archived and findable by would-be friends, 
would-be employers, would-be romantic partners, would-be clients, and 
people from the past. The technology community ’ s response is to encour-
age people to admit their mistakes, correct them if possible, and seek 
forgiveness. This is part of why builders of digital media generally urge that 
people and institutions be transparent. Yet, many networked individuals 
will want to put up walls around parts of their lives and control who has 
access to what information, as well as find ways to prune the internet ’ s 
digital memories. 
 Manage boundaries:  As the power of formal, densely knit groups wanes 
in light of the buildup of networks, personal and community boundaries 
are less distinct. With digital technologies, more private information is 
potentially available to interested members of the public — and to govern-
ment and organizational surveillance authorities. Networked individuals 
need to develop nuanced understandings of what to make public, which 
publics to make information available to, and how to intermix technolo-
gies of privacy with those of public narrowcasting. People used to do that 
more or less routinely in real life, as they encountered the sights, sounds, 
smells, and the people of different social milieus. But online, all they face 
is a screen. As danah boyd puts it: 
 There ’ s the blurring of public and private. These distinctions are normally structured 
around audience and context with certain places or conversations being  “ public ” 
or  “ private. ” These distinctions are much harder to manage when you have to 
contend with the shifts in how the environment is organized. . . . Trying to keep 
social acts to one space online is futile, even though that is the norm in unmediated 
environments. 
 Other identity-shaping boundaries are also blurred or obliterated in the 
digital age. The edge between home and work (or school) becomes less 
distinct as people work at home outside  “ regular ”  work hours and do 
 “ leisure ” activities while they are sitting at their desks on the clock at the 
office. Similarly, the border between education and entertainment is not 
as clear as it used to be in the era of  “ serious games ” that have educational 
purposes at their core. Surely, the longstanding distinction between con-
sumer and producer has eroded as people remix media, and as nonprofes-
sionals broadcast their works on video-sharing websites and publish their 
thoughts on blogging sites. 

272 
Chapter 10
 Be aware of invisible audiences:  In this book, we have argued that the 
converging internet and mobile environments facilitate creation of a dis-
tinctive new layer to social networks: the audience layer. Its inhabitants 
can be socially helpful when they are activated and motivated, as were 
some strangers when they learned of Trudy Johnson-Lenz ’ s medical prob-
lems and donated money because friends of hers had put out a call for 
help. At the same time, lurkers may be less well-meaning. They may be 
stalkers or competitors who now can have easy access to much more per-
sonal and professional information about people than in the past. As boyd 
points out, there are also  “ visitors who access our content at a later date 
or in a different environment than where we first produced them. As a 
result, we are having to present ourselves and communicate without fully 
understanding the potential or actual audience. ”  9  The challenge in this for 
networked individuals is striking the right balance between disclosures that 
bring help and broadcasting too much information that invites trouble. 
 Manage time well; multitask strategically:  People need to manage their 
attention more carefully than ever before. Effective networkers exploit this 
new digital environment more powerfully than those who get lost in their 
browsing or swamped by information inputs. Under the conditions of 
networked individualism, people need to work harder to stay on top of 
their own needs. They must spend more time maintaining ties in their 
networks and making sure that stores of social capital are replenished. 
Moreover, they know they are a part of others ’ networks and they have a 
heightened sense of obligation to meet the needs of those who consider 
them social ties. A new widely accepted etiquette for transitory networked 
relationships has not emerged to create acceptable social rules that allow 
people to more easily enter into or break off from networked relationships. 
But it is taking shape in the context of perpetual engagement and partial 
attention.  
 New Literacies for Networked Individuals 
 The networked individuals who thrive have a combination of talent, 
energy, altruism, social acuity, and tech-savviness that allows them to 
build big, diverse networks and tap into these networks when they have 
needs. They are mastering a set of new literacies to navigate the network 
operating system.  10 
 They have  graphic literacy  that recognizes that more and more of life is 
experienced as communications and media on screens. They can interpret 
this material and feel some need to contribute to it. They know how to 

Thriving as a Networked Individual 
273
participate in digital conversation and creation. This literacy requires net-
working behavior that is often conducted graphically. 
 Networked individuals also have  navigation literacy  ,  a sense of internet 
geography that allows them to maneuver through multiple information 
channels and formats. They understand the change that has occurred as 
linear information formats such as print and broadcast media have given 
way to the nonlinear realities of hyperlinked, networked information. Not 
only do they know how to navigate, they also use their communications 
and contributions to help others navigate, often by recommending links 
in their digital communications or by creating their own posts to show 
others what they have learned. 
 Beyond that, they have  context and connections literacy  that helps them 
weave together the information and chatter that is flowing into their lives 
at a quickening pace. Even if the tidbits they gather are disaggregated from 
any larger context, they have the wherewithal — often with help from the 
network helpers — to puzzle through the material they collect. Networked 
individuals draw on their family, friends, and associates to make meaning 
of the things they encounter and the things that happen around them. 
 We suspect that networked individuals who are thriving also have  focus 
literacy : the capacity to minimize the distractions of the digital cacophony 
and complete the work they need to do for their jobs and their personal 
enrichment, even as they multitask. The paradox is that even while con-
necting people to multiple social networks, digital technologies carry with 
them almost an insistence that people stay connected on their mobile 
phones or the internet. Yet, there are other times when people who are 
completing an urgent or personally satisfying project require a more indi-
vidualized mastery of material and creation of knowledge. The most 
accomplished networked individuals are better at turning the solitude 
switch on so that they can focus. 
 Despite their focus, networked individuals also have  multitasking literacy: 
the ability to do several things (almost) at once. With multiple inputs from 
family, friends, work, and institutions — and multiple in-person, internet, 
and mobile sources provide these inputs — thriving networkers such as Nelu 
Handa (in chapter 4) have gained the ability to attend to them all without 
fuss. Those who say it can ’ t be done forget the reality of driving a car in a big 
city while routinely integrating steering, braking, checking gauges, scan-
ning the surroundings, chatting with passengers, and listening to music. 
 One of the great challenges in this age of overabundance of information 
requires  skepticism literacy . Internet veteran Howard Rheingold ’ s new book 
about new literacies focuses on what he calls  “ crap detection ” — the ability 

274 
Chapter 10
of individuals to evaluate what they encounter online. This is especially 
urgent for those who get an unrelenting stream of material from others in 
their social networks. The most successful networked individuals have the 
capacity to assess inputs from friends and media sources for their accuracy, 
authority, relevance, objectivity, and scope. Skepticism literacy is the ability 
to weed out the media and people who have outdated, biased, incomplete, 
and agenda-driven or just dead-wrong ideas to pass along. 
 Connected to this is the idea that networked individuals should have 
an  ethical literacy  as they network with others. Successful networked indi-
viduals build trust and value for their partners by being accurate and 
thoughtful with the information they create and pass along. When every-
one can be a publisher and broadcaster, there are advantages that accrue 
to those who are found to be reliable and transparent about the informa-
tion they share. In contrast, social penalties are conferred on those who 
cheat, misrepresent information, cut corners, exploit relationships, and are 
mysterious about the sources of their information. 
 In a sense, you could say that the basic argument of this chapter is 
that the most successful networked individuals have  networking literacy  .  
Like Linda Evans, they know how to move adroitly through their network 
operating system — personal, institutional, and digital — without getting 
locked into one world. They follow the Golden Rule. They scan their 
existing networks for the possibility of gaining introduction to new net-
works that can expand their reach and diversify their sources of informa-
tion. They strike useful balances between being  “ on the grid ” taking 
advantage of digital opportunities and being available to help others, and 
 “ off the grid ” when they need time to rebalance and contemplate without 
interruption. In short, they are masters of the new network operating 
system ’ s universe. 

 
 11   The Future of Networked Individualism 
 Large-scale forces in economics, politics, culture, and religion drive social 
change, and societies change as they embrace new information and com-
munication technologies (ICTs).  1 Changes toward a network operating 
system have brought a host of unsettling things. For starters, new ICTs 
bring fundamental challenges to the societal role of experts and informa-
tion gatekeepers. In response, they fight back, claiming that their institu-
tional connections and credentials give them the authority that amateurs 
lack. Doctors have to deal with e-patients who get information from the 
internet, and journalists sniff at bloggers who riff on civic events. That is 
invariably followed by a populist backlash as people demand access to new 
tools to create and share information and new pathways to ever-larger 
stores of information. As a byproduct, the new tools also give new life to 
crackpot propagandists and scam artists. 
 Still, the march of social adjustments presses onward. New methods of 
accessing, cataloging, sorting, and searching information have burst on the 
scene as people try to cope with information overload. Wholly new institu-
tions and organizational structures form as enterprises take advantage of 
the new technologies and try to sort through a mountain of new informa-
tion. At the same time, fights over intellectual property break out as cre-
ators who existed in the old order are threatened by the way technology 
facilitates easier duplication and sharing of information. Subgroups based 
on personal identities and tastes multiply as people use technology to seek 
out and bond with others who have things in common with them: life-
styles, belief systems, medical conditions, political outlooks, hobbies, pas-
sions, phobias, enthusiasms for learning, life-stage similarities, common 
enemies, pop-culture favorites, professional aspirations, and on and on. 
New languages and ways of expression come into being — think of emoti-
cons and cryptic abbreviations like POS ( “ parent over shoulder, ” which 
teens instant message to friends as a warning). New professions take shape, 

276 
Chapter 11
such as search engine optimizers who work to get their clients listed high 
in search engine results and privacy consultants who work to protect their 
clients ’ information from unauthorized disclosure. ICTs foster the recon-
figuration of social norms and spaces as people adopt and fit them into 
their lives. What were once formal boundaries between public and private 
realms either become more permeable or break down completely. 
 The Triple Revolution — Social Network, Internet, and Mobile — has 
given rise to far-reaching consequences, though it is not yet clear what the 
outermost limits of the impact will be. What is evident is that networked 
individualism is tied to technological changes that are on the horizon. So, 
it is not too soon to project from current trends to predictions about the 
technosphere of the future, and to consider how upcoming developments 
will affect the pursuits of networked individuals. We start with an explora-
tion of how ICTs will change, and then we explore how such changes could 
affect the lives of networked individuals. 
 The Enablers of Future Trends: The  “ Laws ” of Digital Development 
 As the Triple Revolution moves on, what will it bring? The simplest — and 
perhaps the most accurate — answer is  “ We don ’ t really know. ” We have 
nowhere near the hubris of Isaac Asimov ’ s science-fiction hero Hari Seldon, 
who tried to predict a thousand years ahead for the galactic empire.  2 Seldon 
got it wrong anyway. Would-be forecasters often forget that human societ-
ies coevolve with technology. Within two decades, the internet and mobile 
phones have evolved into universal extensions of people ’ s networked indi-
vidualism. As Norman Augustine ’ s  “ Second Law of Socio science (and engi-
neering) ” puts it:  “ For every scientific (or engineering) action, there is an 
equal and opposite social reaction. ” 3 
 But why be only cautionary when we can have fun thinking about 
near-term possibilities that the continuing mutual feedback of technical 
developments and social situations provide? We begin by thinking about 
some emerging technological changes: increased computing capacity; min-
iaturization; density of graphical displays; digital storage capacity, file 
compression, and faster connections. They are the basis for the technologi-
cal trends we discuss in the next section, and the social trends we antici-
pate — and in one scenario, fear. 
 One of the most useful and formal exercises in futurism in recent years 
was the 2006 – 2007 work of the Metaverse Roadmap project. It was driven 
by the Acceleration Studies Foundation of Mountain View, California, and 
originally conceived of as a brief for the future of the World Wide Web 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
277
as it became three dimensional. Once the leaders of the effort began to 
hear from several dozen thinkers, their own views branched out in other 
directions. The leaders, John Smart, Jamais Cascio, and Jerry Paffendorf, 
had started their inquiries with the notion of a   “ Metaverse ”  that was first 
conceived by the influential science fiction writer Neal Stephenson in his 
1982 classic,  Snow Crash .  4 To Stevenson, the Metaverse was an immersive, 
virtual space with 3D technologies. Yet, the Metaverse Roadmap thinkers 
went beyond seeing the Metaverse as a virtual domain. They saw it as 
the  “ convergence of 1) virtually enhanced physical reality and 2) physi-
cally persistent virtual space. It is a fusion of both, while allowing users 
to experience it as either. ” 5 In other words, it is the connection of the 
physical and virtual worlds. Although we do not foresee people living 
mostly in virtual space, the technological directions suggested by the 
Metaverse Roadmap provide guides for how networked individualism may 
proceed.  
 The  “ laws ”  we summarize here do not really describe universal physical 
or social phenomena. Rather, Such laws are forecasts based on what has 
happened and what the laws ’ creators expect to happen. Such laws are 
especially popular in the high-tech industry, and with its pundits, who are 
keen to capitalize on trends. Taken together, the laws identify the probabil-
ity that pushing more bits through wires and over airwaves will get easier 
and cheaper. This will further enable networked individuals to share greater 
amounts of information and interact with various parts of their networks 
more quickly and affordably by using information-dense media in an 
increasingly portable manner. Most importantly, physical and digital phe-
nomena will converge as networks go beyond linking networked individu-
als and ICTs to connecting them with objects. 
 Computing capacity — the price-to-performance ratio of computing hard-
ware — may continue to double every eighteen to twenty-four months. The 
timeframe of every five years of continued development has been esti-
mated to provide as much as ten times the computing capacity, and as 
much as one thousand times every fifteen years. This has come to be widely 
known as Moore ’ s Law,  6 which is neither a real physical nor social law, 
but an empirical generalization of past trends that have proven to be true 
until now. 
 The  miniaturization of technology will arguably have an even more 
powerful impact because of the efficiencies and computing power it 
creates in miniscule objects. It has become a clich é that we carry in 
our smartphones more computing power than the first manned space 
flights did. 

278 
Chapter 11
 The  density of graphical displays — the capacity to represent the world 
visually — doubles every two years in what is known as  “ Nishimura ’ s Law ” : 
The display size available for the same cost doubles every 3.6 years.  7 These 
developments make representations of people and processes more realistic 
and dynamic by transforming the internet from a series of static snapshots 
to more interactive and detailed graphic representations. Enabled by this, 
networking becomes more fluid and engaging. 
 Computer  storage capacity  has increased to terabytes:  “ Kryder ’ s Law ” 
asserts that digital storage capacities have doubled every twenty-three 
months since 1956.  8 At the same time, improved  file compression  could 
allow another ten times ’ worth of digital material to be packed into the 
space now occupied by today ’ s typical MP3 files. In addition, there is cur-
rently a seismic change from inherently fragile hard disks to smaller, faster, 
and more reliable solid-state flash drives. These changes in usable file size 
would allow higher resolution for more detailed — and hence more realis-
tic — images. They would also allow larger files to be routinely and quickly 
exchanged.  “ In combination with the storage growth trends, today ’ s 60 
GB, 15,000 song iPod will be capable of storing 2.4 million songs in 2014, ” 
the authors of the Metaverse Roadmap calculate.  9 
 Other laws point to the doubling of  available bandwidth  within the wired 
environment every two years or so ( “ Gilder ’ s Law ” ),  internet connection 
speeds increasing by fifty percent every year ( “ Nielsen ’ s Law ” ), and the 
number of  possible wireless communications  doubling every two and a half 
years ( “ Cooper ’ s Law ” ).  10 This enhanced speed coupled with the  greater 
reliability  of the internet and mobile networks makes it more feasible to 
move personal data from one ’ s own computer and tablet to the internet 
cloud. Security remains an issue, not only from criminal elements but also 
because cloud-based storage is more easily subject to government and 
organizational surveillance and subpoena.  11 
 Convergence of the Physical with the Digital 
 Remember Tom Cruise in the film  Minority Report,  when he waved his 
hands to access information from computers, and when the shop fronts 
blazed with personalized signs as he walked past?  12 This is a dramatic 
change from the current situation. Until now, humans have been exter-
nal users of rather impersonal phone and computer networks that did 
not know much about them other than their phone numbers and 
login identifications. By contrast, we are at the start of an environment 
in which people are intimately intertwined with digital networks that 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
279
follow them everywhere they go, with all of their individualized set-
tings and information.  
 In coming years relatively ordinary objects — as well as computers and 
phones — will become ubiquitously networked with each other, and net-
worked individuals will be able to augment their information through 
direct contact with databases and objects that have become smarter and 
more communicative. Increased computing power may make user involve-
ment with virtual worlds more immersive and compelling, although expe-
riences to date suggest that people are more apt to use computer networks 
that integrate with real life rather than becoming totally immersed in 
virtual worlds — virtual game players excepted. 
 Ubiquitous computing  ,  sometimes called  “ the internet of things   ”   (or 
 “ everyware ” ), describes human – computer interaction that goes beyond 
personal computing to an environment of objects processing information 
and networking with each other and humans.  13 Objects would share infor-
mation: appliances, utility grids, clothing and jewelry, cars, books, house-
hold and workplace furnishings, as well as buildings and landscapes. They 
would learn additional information and preferred methods of use by gath-
ering data about people who are in their environment. For example, cars 
could tell each other not to be in the same spot at the same time, and 
bicycles could tell car doors not to open when the bikes pass by. More 
grandly, nuclear arms could control themselves by broadcasting to the 
world when people start to activate them. Through such systems, people 
might engage with multiple computational systems without even knowing 
they are doing so. Although people do that now when they drive — aided 
by the car ’ s geographical positioning system, antiskid control, and anticol-
lision device — in the future, such networks would be even more connected 
and encompassing. 
 Smart objects are emerging, although they are far from ubiquitous. In 
addition to general-purpose computers and smartphones, there will be 
specialized smart appliances. Already, Microsoft ’ s Surface is a table that 
recognizes, responds to, and networks with objects that are placed on it. 
At present, it can only recognize other electronic devices. For example, 
smartphones placed on it can show scheduled events in calendars and 
simultaneously display route maps to these events. Walls can be smart too. 
Painters and designers could work collaboratively and remotely as they 
draw on their networked surfaces as if sharing a single canvas, drafting 
table, or white board.  14 
 Interactive  “ blogjects ” would have memories and network with both 
other objects and people.  15 For example, a networked camera would have 

280 
Chapter 11
its own picture-sharing account as well as context-aware capabilities 
making it trackable by other networked objects and traceable via Google 
and GPS. The camera could develop a sense of its surroundings and tasks 
(such as surveillance), by knowing what other blogjects are around it and 
communicating with them. 
 On a grander scale, an intelligent travel system would rely on sensors 
in streets and cars to provide realistic current information to each driver 
about preferred routes and anticipated travel times. Sensors would com-
municate reports of accidents, alert other drivers, and dispatch help. Ulti-
mately, cars might drive themselves, relying on their own computational 
power and ubiquitous computing in their environments,  16 freeing drivers 
to safely use their mobile devices. 
 This world of ubiquitous computing is one in which both aspects of 
 networked individualism  will be enhanced.  Individualism  will be heightened 
as people can seek, scan, sift, sort through, and make sense of more and 
more information on their own. Their technology and their smart agents 
(or bots) will increase their capacity to navigate the world. They will also 
have the ability to participate as individual agents in the world, leaving 
information and insights in their digital wakes. This material will be 
helpful to them, because it will teach their objects and technologies about 
their interests and personal data such as calendars, preferred vendors, 
friends, and communities. In short, improvements in technology will give 
people more capability to be on their own and to act and network when 
they choose. 
 At the same time, the  networked side of networked individualism could 
be enhanced by such technological changes. The coming changes in 
technology will allow people to locate and join forces with others who 
have sought the same material or shared similar paths of experience and 
exploration. People will be better able to find experts who know more 
than they do and to locate communities — both formal organizations and 
informal tribes — that can help them solve problems and make decisions. 
They will also be able to reach out to others whose disclosures about 
themselves make them seem simpatico and emotionally helpful to become 
connected citizens with shared cultural, economic, social, or political 
interests.  17 Similarly, networked individuals who disclose what they know 
and what they have been through will find that others reach out to 
them as part of their networking activity. The fluidity and value of per-
sonally assembled networks is likely to develop in this environment and 
the effort required to create those networks should decrease. In sum, the 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
281
value and appeal of the behaviors tied to networked individuals will 
increase. 
 Active agents and the semantic web:  To accomplish ubiquitous comput-
ing, it would be useful to have a widely accessible computer language —
 such as the  semantic web  championed by World Wide Web inventor Tim 
Berners-Lee.  18 This system could enable virtual assistants to conduct tasks 
on behalf of people. Such networked agents would access the web more 
intelligently and systematically by finding relevant information and acting 
on it. They would compile and disseminate information, such as getting 
directions and aggregating and passing on news stories that are useful 
and pertinent for their users. As agents of networked individuals, they 
would also be able to schedule appointments in concert with other 
agents, resolving conflicts and presenting alternative plans, routes, and 
locales. They would also share personal information with appropriate 
network members based on the privacy preferences learned through their 
past uses. To some extent, agents could eliminate the need for people 
to comb through lists of search results, as the agent would understand 
how pieces of information relate to one another and would search for 
whole concepts and their linked notions instead of disconnected key-
words. This would help alleviate information overload by filtering out 
unwanted information and communication. It would create more aware-
ness among continuously updated network members but also increase 
social control.  19 
 Many observers of technology believe that even if the particulars of the 
semantic web vision do not come to pass, there will be vast and unstop-
pable movement on the internet toward technology-driven understanding 
of information that will make the web smarter and more capable of helping 
people coordinate their lives, find the data they want, and locate the 
people and organizations that can help them get their needs met. Data 
mining, social network analysis tools, social-computing studies, and user-
generated folksonomies (collaborative creation of tags and catalogues) will 
make the web easier to navigate and allow information now scattered in 
various places to be pulled together in meaningful ways for networked 
individuals. More layers of information will be added to things — for 
instance, as location-aware applications become widely used. Search 
engines will also have better algorithms to help locate high-quality infor-
mation. More digital material that is currently difficult to parse will be 
much more searchable: especially videos, images, and material generated 
in foreign languages. 

282 
Chapter 11
 Interfaces will diversify. People ’ s voices, and perhaps even their 
thoughts, will trigger interactions with machines and other humans. 
Interfaces manipulated by hands and body movements will become 
common. Screens that display data of all kinds will not have to be carried 
around, as active walls and tabletops become display areas. 
 Augmented reality  ( AR) systems and interfaces process and layer net-
worked information on top of people ’ s everyday perceptions of the world. 
They help people view the physical environment with computer-generated 
information enhancing what is being observed through images, videos, 
audio files, or text. As the Metaverse Roadmap authors see it:  “ The aug-
mented reality scenario offers a world in which every item within view has 
a potential information shadow, a history and presence accessible via stan-
dard interfaces. ” Two widely-seen examples are the yellow first-down lines 
that are inserted on American TV screens during football games and the 
digital ads and logos that are displayed during televised athletic contents 
worldwide on fields or walls. 
 More often, augmented reality interacts with an individual in a symbi-
otic relationship. For example, the growing use of smartphones with built-
in cameras has pushed the beginnings of handheld AR to the forefront. 
There are already dozens of AR apps that, among other things, allow people 
to find bars and restaurants near them, get directions to them and call up 
reviews, menu details, and discount coupons. Other apps allow people to 
load relevant Wikipedia articles into their phones as they gaze at objects, 
find WiFi hotspots in the storefronts they are passing, turn their smart-
phones into spyglasses through added compass and GPS information, or 
decipher constellations using digital star charts of the night sky layered 
over images taken by digital cameras. Other apps create digital graffiti by 
 “ painting ”  a building in ways that people with similar apps can see. Digital 
 “ painting ” can also help find cars in parking lots by tagging their location 
and leading drivers back to them by putting arrows over video images of 
the parking lot. 
 As mobile devices become smaller and more aware of where they are 
located, and as objects become more intelligent and communicative, 
people could have greater dialogues with the world around them that are 
integrated with additional material drawn from the internet. Indeed, this 
is what the Brazilian security officials want to do at the 2014 World Cup. 
They hope to equip police officers with  “ Robocop ”  eyeglasses that will scan 
400 facial images per second, acquire 46,000 biometric data points for each 
face, and send them to a central computer database storing up to thirteen 
million faces. Police officers expect to receive information back rapidly 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
283
about the person at whom they are looking. If there is a match to a suspect, 
an alerting signal will appear on a screen in their eyeglasses, informing 
the police officers of the situation.  20 In less fraught circumstances, people 
might expect to receive visual briefings in their eyeglasses of the Wikipedia 
entry of nearby objects (and celebrities) they are viewing or Facebook 
profiles of the acquaintances they encounter. Perhaps, they would have 
their text messages streamed to a section of their eyeglasses. Utilizing such 
technology, different people may experience the same physical locations 
in quite different ways.  21 
 Augmented reality offers a world in which many objects could have 
digital material appended to them, accessible to anyone by observing them 
and following the links they provide. The physical and the digital would 
become more mutually informed. Empty parking spots could show you 
where they are; restaurants could show you their menu offerings ’ ingredi-
ents — helpful for food allergies — and previous patrons could recommend 
their favorite dishes. Perhaps all patrons would be encouraged to rate and 
comment on the restaurant — much like Yelp does today — with ratings 
summaries interactively readable on the restaurant ’ s outdoor sign and 
website. Objects that could change state (be turned on or off, change 
appearance, etc.) could be interactively controlled wirelessly. For instance, 
when entering a theater or meeting, mobile phones would identify it as a 
 “ silent zone, ” automatically switch to silent mode, and then go back to 
regular mode when leaving. 
 Mirror worlds are another form of physical and digital convergence to 
augmented depictions of environments. Mirror worlds augment represen-
tations of physical spaces, such as maps. They might involve geographic 
information systems (GIS) for mapping, modeling, annotating, sensor-
based inputs, and location-aware technology. Google Earth is the proto-
typical mirror world as it is a web-based digital map that adds cartographic 
and informational overlays, providing contours and alerts about important 
buildings. Later, Google Street View developed to show specific buildings 
on streets: a boon to people finding their way at the cost of the privacy 
of people near those buildings. While Street View requires elaborate cor-
porate arrangements, ordinary people can use GPS to add descriptions of 
places, paths, and tagged photos.  22 In the future, people could use geo-
aware tools to scan places to see if friends, friends of friends, or followers 
are in the vicinity and interested in a meal, a drink, a stroll in the park, 
or a shopping binge. This is a particular kind of  “ smart mobbing  ” — to use 
Howard Rheingold ’ s phrase  23 — that will be enabled more readily in an 
environment that is aware of who and what is where. Thus, mirror worlds 

284 
Chapter 11
can make networked individuals more aware of each other ’ s physical 
environments and aid in-person meetings to find a suitable location and 
travel to it. 
 Automated technology could convert digital pictures, videos, and sensor 
inputs into jointly manipulable 3D models: a tabletop Grand Canyon or 
a model of a friend ’ s home.  24 Going further, data-rich geographic simula-
tions could provide insight into complex global systems such as climate 
change, migration patterns, and the expansions of human settlement.  25 
 Virtual worlds differ from augmented reality and mirror worlds because 
they are online  “ places ” where all content is graphically simulated, rather 
than projecting information onto the real world. Virtual worlds are quite 
vivid and have been featured in movies such as  Avatar  and  Tron.  Mil-
lions of people enter virtual gaming environments to join in massively 
multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs), such as World of 
Warcraft, where they can virtually lose themselves.  26 Besides the games 
themselves — which involve bonding and movement among social net-
works as well as competition — people can try on different identities and 
roles. As science fiction author Neal Stephenson puts it in  Snow Crash: 
 “ Your avatar can look any way you want it to. . . . If you ’ re ugly, you 
can make your avatar beautiful. If you ’ ve just gotten out of bed, your 
avatar can still be wearing beautiful clothes and professionally applied 
makeup. ” 27 
 Second Life is the most active virtual world that is not a game. People 
virtually dress in costumes, interact, and sometimes buy land and prod-
ucts. 28 Although many user activities involve sexual fantasies, Second Life 
can have serious uses. For example, coauthor Wellman participated in a 
grant review session in Second Life that was organized by the U.S. National 
Science Foundation. (He dressed as a mashup of Agent Smith from  The 
Matrix , with Robocop wrap-around sunglasses and TV warrior princess 
Xena ’ s lace-up high boots.) By working together on Second Life for two 
days, the review panelists saved themselves a three-day stay in Washing-
ton, D.C. Yet, interpersonal dynamics were muted, and panelists were free 
to do other things concurrently without being observed. Moreover, Well-
man — and other participants new to Second Life — had difficulty using the 
avatar and navigating the NSF ’ s walled (password-protected) island. Perhaps 
these difficulties — along with Second Life ’ s lack of compellingness as com-
pared to games — helps to explain why most of its twenty-three million 
registered users are not active. As registration is free, many may have just 
been sightseeing or sampling. Only about fifty thousand have recently 
been participating actively.  29 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
285
 While virtual games and Second Life allow people to get away from it 
all in the real world, we suspect that it is more likely that virtual reality —
 rather than fully immersive worlds — will become incorporated into every-
day life. Although we doubt that societies will ever become like the one in 
Asimov ’ s science fiction thriller  The Naked Sun , where no one ever meets 
in person,  30 we expect that virtual drop-ins will become as routinely con-
venient for person-to-person contact as video phone calls have become 
today — another enhancement of  “ the next best thing to being there, ” as 
the old AT & T long-distance phone commercial used to say. 
 Convergence of Social, Internet, and Mobile Networks 
 This book has shown the rapid convergence of mobile and desktop internet 
networks. The following technological innovations can potentially further 
enhance these tendencies. 
 Convergence of information and communication:  As social networking 
applications gain users and allow them to connect with and embed infor-
mation-rich media, they become portals: points of access to information 
all over the web. Increasingly, social media sites are used for communicat-
ing information. For example, when Facebook users click on the  “ like ” 
button of other websites, links to these websites are posted on their various 
news feeds. This simultaneously informs others in their Facebook network 
and informs the sites ’ operators about their users ’ interests.  31 There is 
already a mad rush in Silicon Valley to create products to embed this kind 
of social interplay in most kinds of information and media encounters, 
and it will likely accelerate in the future. 
 Networked selves become osmotic.  Our notion of a networked self in this 
book has been amoeboid: going beyond the conceptions of a holistic self 
or a multiple self to seeing a core  “ me ” that creates  “ pseudopods ” as it 
responds to different persons, networks, and situations. But as information 
and communication become more available, we suggest a conception of 
an osmotic self that is able to absorb new information about people and 
situations even before encountering them directly. If in the past we actually 
needed to interact with almost all people to learn personal details about 
them, the online aggregation and synthesis of information in the future 
will provide a head start before interaction. 
 “ Lifelogging ”  represents a convergence of past experiences, current life, 
and future possibilities. It is a combination of hardware and software that 
allows experiences to be captured, stored, integrated, remembered, and 
disseminated to others. It does this by automatically recording and sharing 

286 
Chapter 11
people ’ s daily lives, including the places they visit, interactions they have, 
the media they use, and the objects they interact with — be they maga-
zines, meals, or automobiles. Lifelogging technologies offer two primary 
functions: First, they serve as a kind of video recorder for a person ’ s life, 
recording the sights and sounds an individual encounters throughout the 
day, and making them more retrievable at later dates. Second, they enable 
collaborative sharing and aggregation of life experiences.  32 Lifelogging 
thus presents possibilities for the convergence of the past and present, 
and for personal memories and interactions with family, friends, and 
coworkers. 
 To give some examples of lifelogging: a small number of people, such 
as computer engineer Steve Mann and social scientist Theresa Senft, have 
recorded and streamed their lives on  “ vlogs ” via headcams, wall-mounted 
cameras, or sensors.  33 Senft investigated camgirls:  “ women who broadcast 
themselves over the web for the general public while trying to cultivate a 
measure of celebrity in the process. ” 34 She showed how these networked 
creators are sharing and distributing their personal information, sometimes 
promoting themselves as micro-celebrities via the internet.  35 
 There are more limited lifelogging situations. Nike and Apple have a 
partnership that uploads jogging statistics from Nike runners ’ shoes to 
Apple iPhones that can be shared with friends around the world. Devices 
such as Fitbit track people ’ s exercise and sleep rhythms and upload them 
to their online communities who can provide monitoring and support.  36 
Likewise, cameras in police cars can transmit a continuous video stream. 
This can both protect the officers from false charges and document crimi-
nal behavior. While lifeloggers are currently narrowcasting pictures, videos, 
opinions, and status updates to friends, in the future more people may use 
social media to share more information more widely. 
 In many ways, Facebook, Google, and mobile phone service providers 
are lifelogging as they record who people are connected to, what their 
interests are, what they talk about, and where they go.  “ We know your 
normal behavior and who is likely to be your friend, ” asserted a Facebook 
engineer at a Georgia Tech security seminar on April 22, 2011.  37 Google 
matches its ads to Gmail content and uses earlier messages to guess who 
people want to chat with even if the message is in Tagalog.  38 Apple ’ s iPhone 
captures and stores all the places it (and its user) have been for at least 
one year — suitable for retrieval for lawsuits or by law-enforcement agen-
cies.  39 Facebook ’ s Timeline makes visible to members of their personal 
networks the historical record of people ’ s posts, milestones, pictures, and 
websites they have liked. 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
287
 More elaborate lifelogging may come to be embraced. A prototype life-
logging exercise has been going on since 1998 in computer scientist Gordon 
Bell ’ s  “ MyLifeBits ” effort at Microsoft. Bell has built on Vannevar Bush ’ s 
1945 idea of creating a memex. But where Bush focused on external docu-
ments (see chapter 9,  “ Networked Information ” ), Bell focuses on himself 
and his interactions. He tries to capture and archive every bit of his life, 
wearing a camera capturing everything he sees and keeping records of: 
 •  all the videos from his camera 
 •  emails he has exchanged 
 •  phone calls he has exchanged 
 •  documents he has read 
 •  DVD films he has viewed 
 •  MP3 music files he has played 
 •  the places he has been as captured by his mobile phone ’ s GPS system 
 •  web pages he has scanned 
 •  pictures he has taken and observed 
 •  regular recordings of his vital signs captured by sensors he wears 
 As Vannevar Bush suggested about the memex, this is  “ an enlarged 
intimate supplement ” 40 to a person ’ s memory. Now, Gordon Bell can 
search much of his own memory. He claims that his lifelog will provide 
the memory and data for better personal health, productivity, and inter-
personal relationships. Bell argues (as does his research partner Jim 
Gemmell) that lifelogging is going to transform how people think about 
the meaning of their lives because the self-knowledge that comes from this 
would be revelatory. A deeply searchable past, accessible through a never-
blinking memory changes people ’ s notions of their identity and their role 
with others. Bell postulates that people ’ s devices will automatically com-
municate with each other regarding privacy issues, recording permissions 
and so forth through artificial intelligence programs: 
 Total Recall will come about within the context of networks within networks, inter-
connecting everything from in-body networks to home networks to global networks 
and finally to networks that include satellites and space vehicles. Dust-sized sensors 
will automatically form wireless networks and connect to everything that can be 
sensed. In-body implants will communicate with each other to form a  “ body-area ” 
network. The body network will connect to the car network when you ’ re driving. 
The garden network will connect to the home network. The car and home network 
will connect to the worldwide internet. This vast network of networks will host huge 
farms of servers with millions of processers and petabytes of storage space. . . . From 
the microscopic to the heavens, all will be sensed, networked and stored. This is not 
a forty-year-out wild guess. This is a decade-out sure bet. And I don ’ t lose many bets.  41 

288 
Chapter 11
 One future step would be to develop techniques to combine Bell ’ s lifelog 
with augmented reality so that people might see, for example, a visual clip 
of their last interaction with the people they are now meeting: a boon to 
salespeople, alumni get-togethers, and those with faltering memories.  42 
 Despite the practical and sentimental benefits of having a cumulative, 
multimedia, and searchable lifelog, there are the inevitable costs of surveil-
lance. Any such log could be obtained legitimately by the authorities and 
possibly by malefactors. Few lives can exist unblemished with that kind of 
in-depth scrutiny, and it would not be easy to erase embarrassing moments. 
Moreover, identities might be forged. 
 Privacy:  As the lifelogging discussion suggests, the loss of privacy is an 
important trade-off for the benefits of the Internet and Mobile Revolutions. 
Networked individuals have to balance the recording and sharing of per-
sonal information with the potential risks that this information may be 
used against them. This is amplified in a  “ total recall ” environment where 
digital footprints that can be traced back and reveal detailed patterns about 
people ’ s tastes, preferences, and intimate thoughts.  43 Are we reverting to 
the total visibility of the preindustrial villages discussed in chapter 5? 
 How do internet users minimize the risk of leaving these digital foot-
prints? It is likely that a new equilibrium will be established in the legal, 
commercial, and personal spheres. At the legal level, there will be pressure 
on legislators to pass new laws and courts to apply new standards about 
how personal information can and cannot be used by organizations and 
government agencies. At the commercial level, it is also likely that firms 
will see market opportunities in helping people find more personal ways 
to decide what aspects of their digital lives should be hidden from others. 
And at the personal level it is likely that people will develop new norms 
around how to treat the information they can discover about others — and 
how much importance to assign to facts about people ’ s pasts or tastes.  44 
Ultimately, the use of ICTs is inherently a trade-off between convenience 
and privacy. Going forward, both government agencies and service provid-
ers will play a role in developing new privacy standards and people may 
have some discretion about their threshold for potential risks.  45 
 The assertion of national sovereignty online:  One critical uncertainty about 
the extent of convergence between data worlds and real worlds will be the 
role that countries play. In a countertrend to convergence, they can put 
barriers on the free communication and information sharing of the 
global village. In principle, like the telephone network the internet con-
nects everywhere. Indeed, governments and organizations have to go to 
some trouble to build private networks to keep their communications 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
289
off the internet. Only a few countries — such as North Korea and Myanmar
 — block or severely restrict the internet, although others channel most 
communication through government internet service providers with sur-
veillance capabilities.  46 
 Yet, decades after the manifestation of the internet as a global network, 
some governments are asserting their online sovereignty. If  “ information 
wants to be free, ” as the saying goes,  47 not every government agrees to let 
it be free. The very success of the internet has given rise to the trend toward 
barriers. The internet is too important for governments to ignore. When 
the Egyptian authorities tried to shut it down within that country in 
January 2011 to quell a revolt, the chaos and loss of commercial function-
ality stopped this attempted disconnection in a few days.  48 
 If governments do not want to stop the march of internet and mobile 
networks, they may surveill and regulate them. Hence some countries have 
blocked their citizens from accessing particular websites and some online 
services. More than a dozen countries block internet content for political, 
social, and security reasons.  49 China is one example where Facebook and 
Twitter are among the sites blocked under its Golden Shield policy and 
even tightened restrictions since the Arab spring.  50 And the U.S. govern-
ment has the capability of looking at the huge amount of traffic through 
its main internet routing points.  51 Surveillance, even without blocking, can 
have a chilling effect on networked individuals ’ information access and 
communication. As the internet becomes more central in everyday life, 
there are likely to be further attempts by governments to establish their 
online sovereignty.  52 
 The New Logic of Personal Transparency and Connectedness 
 We discussed in chapter 10 that a moral imperative of successful network-
ing is to follow the Golden Rule. Similarly, the acquisition of social capital 
depends on the expenditure of social capital. There are other social realities 
that networked individuals face in the emerging technological environ-
ment. One potent imperative of social networking is for actively sharing 
information and creations. People cannot build networks without describ-
ing who they are, what talents or skills they possess, what they know, and 
what their needs are. There are also some pressures toward deliberate, 
considered disclosure in social media when people cannot fall back on 
close, long-term friends who perpetually stand ready to help them. 
 Besides the imperative to share, there is a push to be connected. 
People cannot easily ask for help from their networks without using 

290 
Chapter 11
digital tools and they cannot be available to help others if they are off 
the grid. The social requirement of the age of networked individuals is 
to be connected and findable. It is a precondition to successful network-
ing and network building. It is also a reality that is anathema to privacy 
and solitude. 
 Already, online social networking allows people to activate their net-
works quickly and to generate immediate data inputs and responses from 
the crowd that can be as authoritative and useful for information as deep 
encyclopedic searches. In the Metaverse, interactions with people will not 
just be conscious. Machines and objects will play a role in social network-
ing activities. They will amass vast amounts of information about people ’ s 
behavior, transactions, and interactions and then try to anticipate their 
desires and shape their activities. Once a person ’ s preferences are embed-
ded in hardware and software, there will be digitally enhanced, automatic 
social networking. Networked individuals will be actively connecting with 
other people and things without much thought or exertion after they have 
checked off their preferences with the technology. The richness of their 
social connections should grow. The depth of their understanding of the 
people they know and the environment around them should increase 
dramatically. Their ability to tap into smart crowds and vast databases of 
information will expand — and, with that, their capacity to tap into greater 
levels of knowledge. 
 Alas, the cost of more transparency and connectedness will be addi-
tional transparency and connectedness, whether people like it or not. 
There will be ways in the emerging environment that people will find 
harder to hide or disconnect. When objects become networked, then 
people will be transmitting information as their appliances, their clothes, 
their goods, and their gadgets give digital readings that are assigned 
meaning by other people and even machines. Much of this disclosure will 
occur without nearly as much awareness as people now give to personal 
disclosures. As people get evermore defined by  “ learning ” machines as they 
make choices in the media they consume, the friends they have, the things 
they purchase, the places they go, and the things they disclose, it becomes 
a societal danger that the machines will start surrounding them with an 
echo chamber of similar people and similar ideas. This  “ filter bubble, ” as 
Eli Pariser calls it, might make it harder for people to encounter other 
people and information that does not fit their  “ profiles ” and that will 
balkanize the culture, diminish serendipitous encounters with fresh and 
diverse kinds of people and media.  53 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
291
 With all these trends rolling along into the future, there is still reason 
to be uncertain about how the environment of networked individuals will 
evolve. We offer two different scenarios that seem credible. 
 Scenario 1: Even More Networked Individuals 
 Waking up in a networked future, his digital agent ’ s soft voice slowly grows 
into Harry Sanchez ’ s hearing range. It ’ s been monitoring his sleep rhythms 
and cross-referencing them with data from his ongoing brain scans to see 
when it ’ s most appropriate to wake him. After stretching and rubbing the 
sleep from his eyes, Harry suddenly and happily recalls yesterday ’ s pur-
chase. He found a collaborative coupon on the web the other day for a 
deal on a new pair of augmented reality (AR) contact lenses and the haptic 
feedback implant everyone ’ s been raving about. 
 The implantation was a simple and quick outpatient procedure that 
reminded him more of getting his ears pierced than of surgery. It was not 
the real Doctor McCoy in person, but a projection whose robot mimicked 
his every move as the doctor mimed the procedure. It was not as though 
Harry could really tell, however, since his AR glasses had  “ skinned ” 
(covered) the robot with the doctor ’ s virtual image. In this way, the doctor 
efficiently treats dozens of patients a day projecting in from his home. 
 Now that he is awake, Harry eagerly slips on his new AR contact lenses 
for the first time. Up until yesterday he had to use an old-fashioned pair 
of eyeglasses with a projected display on them. The contacts instantly 
network with his microcomputer, smartphone, and the internet. His per-
sonalized augmented overlay appears in his field of vision: the time and 
date, the weather and air quality, a few applications he left open from the 
previous night minimized into his peripheral vision, a faintly blinking icon 
notifying him of some messages he missed overnight, an icon notifying 
him of information updates on news stories aggregated for him by his 
agent, and an InterFace lifelog update showing what his friends did last 
night, cross-referenced with the media they consumed and the tagged 
conversations they had. He sees a call for participating in a political smart 
mob in the virtual world, but he tells his agent to disregard it. 
 His agent also warns him about his health. He hasn ’ t been sleeping well, 
as his late-night virtual meetings with people in China have taken a toll 
on his system. Yet, he ’ s happy to not have to fly there ever since they ’ ve 
been able to collaborate long-distance by using the Cavecat productivity 
system with active walls and tables holding spreadsheets, texts, drawings, 

292 
Chapter 11
and videos. Harry and his Chinese team members edited together, with 
each person using different colors for legibility. It was great to see how 
the webcams showed everybody ’ s faces while emphasizing who was 
speaking. 
 As Harry settles in at the kitchen table, the surface notices he ’ s put down 
his morning cup of coffee, but his agent tells the table to wait five minutes 
before it displays the morning news on the active wall facing him. When 
Harry is online, it always feels like high noon and happy hour combined, 
and he ’ s not quite awake enough for that yet. It ’ s another time zone effect 
as the majority of people from any one part of the world are always most 
actively online during midday work hours and for their evening entertain-
ment. The news comes as manipulable augmented reality overlays of 
Harry ’ s social network with pictures of each network member blinking 
when she or he posts updates such as messages, videos, or lifelog entries. 
The new haptic implant gives him a sensory understanding of the news: 
He can feel the continuing battle in Kabul, experiencing its sounds and 
vibrations as if he were at the scene. And it now feels as if the computer 
icons of his various applications have weight and texture. 
 Having not found any urgent messages, Harry ’ s agent organizes his 
correspondence by topic and relevance. Noticing a conversation he had 
that he does not want many network members see, Harry has his agent 
make the information private across his entire InterFace network. His 
agent makes suggestions based on Harry ’ s past experiences regarding who 
should see what, but Harry doublechecks these with his graphical network 
overlay to confirm who gets what. His agent also sends out a quick update 
to his entire network, letting them know his plans for the day. Unless his 
contacts are on special alert, Harry ’ s calendar update doesn ’ t interrupt 
them because their agents automatically direct his updates into their own 
daily calendars. 
 Harry is distracted by a knocking sound. His agent informs him that his 
best friend Neal is projecting in for their regular weekend virtual breakfast. 
Though they only live fifty kilometers apart, this is a nice way for them 
to check in on one another and spend some time together. Harry hasn ’ t 
shaved, and so he puts on his shiny-face skin before he opens the virtual 
door. He uses his new haptic chip to get the sensation of shaking his 
friend ’ s hand. It ’ s a little strange at first since there ’ s nothing actually 
present to shake, but his nervous system responds as though he had 
reached out and touched someone. 
 Harry and Neal chat about how everyone who was at the pub ’ s avatar 
party last night has shared recordings of the evening with friends. Their 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
293
agents have already automatically tagged these recordings with relevant 
information about the people and location. Avatar parties have become 
popular these days. Everyone dresses like their favorite game character; 
some even come looking like one another. It can be a lot of fun role playing 
like this, and the collected and tagged videos are highly amusing as peo-
ple ’ s voices, looks, and even smells can be altered in the virtual world. 
 After visualizing and flipping through these tags for mentions of his 
name, Harry updates the conversation file with some witty things he 
thought of after the fact, and his agent forwards the updates to the relevant 
people. He also tells his agent to delete information about last night ’ s 
embarrassing ice-cube escapade at the avatar party, and to ask his friends 
to delete their versions. His agent also notifies him of music they listened 
to, especially the New Jersey Symphony ’ s classic  O was f ü r eine Nacht.  His 
agent tells his personal server to download this concerto from the universal 
library, put it on his Memories playlist, and play it. Perceiving the change 
in sound, his friend Neal turns his attention back to Harry, phasing out 
his other communications by uploading a temporary away message he 
recorded in the past. 
 Harry ’ s agent softly chimes in just as he ’ s saying goodbye to Neal, 
reminding him that he has to meet his sister Merril today. She has changed 
the schedule on him since she has to first drop her kids off at daycare. 
Noticing the change in times, his agent uses his preset preferences to work 
out the details by corresponding with her agent. Harry had originally 
wanted to meet Merril at their regular place downtown, but noticing a 
scheduling conflict due to travel time, their agents present both of them 
with other, more local options. They work with their agents to narrow the 
agents ’  search parameters and settle on a place down the road. It ’ s local 
and the tables there get automatically reserved. 
 Never having been there, Harry wants to make sure the restaurant is 
right for them. He had fallen into this trap once before when his new agent 
hadn ’ t learned his preferences yet and ended up sending him to a local 
theme restaurant where the servers had skinned themselves with former 
celebrities: It was uncomfortable to have Arnold Schwarzenegger (skinned 
as  Demolition Man) serve him food. Harry projects himself into the restau-
rant ’ s virtual space and finds that it keeps a good online presence, with a 
nice menu, list of ingredients, health report, and real-time webcam view. 
Wanting to talk privately with Merril, Harry checks the integrated RFID/
GPS personal locator software to make sure no friends are nearby. He ’ s 
comfortable with their privacy, for most people leave their RFID trackers 
on as they ’ ve been doing since before kindergarten. 

294 
Chapter 11
 As Harry gets ready for the day, his agent presents him with a few cloth-
ing options. He decides to wear the new trousers suggested by his girlfriend, 
but calls up another app to make sure his sister would also approve. Harry ’ s 
girlfriend had tagged the info to the trousers while doing some virtual 
window shopping and had a pair in his size set aside after asking his belt 
how big his waist was. 
 Not wanting to be late, Harry has his agent arrange a car for him 
through a collaborative consumption app that recognizes his high trust 
score. He rarely uses a car, as his fridge automatically schedules grocery 
deliveries. Slipping his microcomputer into his pocket, Harry goes to the 
car, has his agent set the restaurant ’ s coordinates, and leans back to check 
his messages as the car pulls out. 
 Scenario 2: A Walled and Surveilled World 
 As Will Li rouses himself from sleep, he walks over to  “ his ” computer to 
see what he ’ s missed overnight. The computer isn ’ t really his. He owns 
rights to its usage but isn ’ t allowed to change its hardware or software or 
else he ’ d void his warranty or break the law. His computer is really only 
an access point as all his data are in the cloud, yet another thing that ’ s 
owned — with all the data in it — by a big corporation. Before Will can reach 
for the cloud, the system completes its mandatory scan of his computer 
for viruses and copyright infringement. 
 The price of media access has spawned its own subculture of media 
pirates. They usually meet in person, sharing miniature portable terabyte 
flash drives back and forth packed with music, TV shows, movies, ebooks, 
and more. The pirates often get their  “ warez ” from people who collected 
old computers from trash heaps, recycling centers, and garage sales. They ’ ve 
even developed a code language to arrange meet-ups, but Will hardly keeps 
up with the ever-evolving lingo: He would much rather rely on his best 
friend Spider to help him when they get together in person at Callahan ’ s 
wine bar. 
 Leaning over his morning coffee, Will dreams of how nice it would be 
to have a personal agent, but he ’ s heard most are double agents that also 
report back to the authorities and sell information to corporations. And 
he doesn ’ t like the way FaceWall is collecting all the information on him 
whenever he uses it. He also can ’ t afford to hire the technician it would 
require to help him set up the devices and access all the fragmented net-
works of media sites, search engines, and social applications online. Each 
has a tricky  “ right to information ” form to sign. So he ’ s reduced his online 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
295
presence to a minimum, trying to limit himself to good old-fashioned 
emails and avoid social media. 
 However, Will needs to use FaceWall today to find something. He ’ s 
forced to wait thirty seconds to let the mandatory ad play. It has his 
picture in it. CoffeeCo must have bought a recent photo that tagged him 
on a friend ’ s wall. Will notices that his system slows down as the massive 
data file from the advertisement clogs up his bandwidth, but since the 
corporations pay more to guarantee themselves fast access, he endures 
the wait. It ’ s almost ironic to see a return to the days of loading screens 
since the amount of available bandwidth has only increased, but all that 
bandwidth is either auctioned at sky-high prices or owned by a few 
companies. 
 Finally finding the photo, Will learns he cannot delete it because Cof-
feeCo now owns it. Perhaps he should make sure no one ever uploads 
anything about him again, although that would be difficult. Most people 
seem to put up with these situations because they want to keep going 
online. Will assumes that from now on he ’ ll get peppered with ads geared 
to the tastes that FaceWall has observed online — both for him and for all 
those other forty-year-olds who became unemployed when countries set 
up their own walled-off internets, claiming morality and national security 
demanded it. 
 Giving the situation further thought, Will starts to browse his friends ’ 
profiles, and finds that his sister is earning extra money by selling her 
personal information to FaceWall, including links to his profile. Maybe 
that ’ s how CoffeeCo found his photo. He ’ ll ask her to never do it again. 
You can never be quite sure of who ’ s informing on you, only in this case 
it ’ s not only the state but data-aggregating organizations. Will remembers 
from history class how in the 1960s, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover had used 
his dossiers on the Kennedys to keep power. Now, FaceWall has even more 
comprehensive dossiers on everyone. 
 Doing what he knows he shouldn ’ t, Will reaches for a doughnut. Maybe 
he can sneak one without his insurance company ’ s sensors registering it. 
At least Will made the right decision by paying extra for their privacy 
clause. Otherwise, his health data might have just been sold off to the 
highest bidder at an info auction. But, since he ’ s not able to see the infor-
mation himself, he can ’ t be sure. 
 Will and Spider prefer to meet in person. There is less chance for any 
number of things happening. They remember how someone pretending 
to be an insurance representative once duped Spider online to steal private 
information. The latest scam is reverse-identity theft. The thieves pose as 

296 
Chapter 11
old friends, using detailed avatars whose digital image and voice have been 
reconstructed from public profiles. Too bad the government killed the 
trusted identities program.  54 
 Will calls his sister Lorelei to meet for coffee. They avoid the local Cof-
feeCo franchise because its low-cost internet access makes it always busy 
even though people must sign away their privacy rights to use it. Will and 
Lorelei decide instead to go to a local restaurant. Lorelei hopes the guards 
will let her through the city gate this time: She ’ s brought her travel pass 
up to date. 
 Abruptly, Will ’ s computer comes to a stop as the local net ’ s virus filter 
kicks in. Someone must have accidently shared a virus with him, and the 
system has gone haywire. His gated community monitors his network 
continuously and has a strict quarantine procedure that cuts infected 
computers off from the net until their  “ owners ” can have the manufactur-
ers clean them. He shuts off his computer, grabs his phone and travel pass, 
and goes out past the security scanner. 
 After a wait, Lorelei pulls up giggling about the whole-body security 
scan at the gate.  “ Hope they got a better picture this time. ” She ’ s also 
worried that the guards may have found the incriminating photo of her 
online. She ’ s already lost one job because of it, even though it was taken 
without her permission and out of context. They head off for their meal, 
but arrive just in time to see the last open table become occupied. 
 The Possible Futures of Networked Individuals 
 Although present technologies are still far from being capable of imple-
menting either scenario in its entirety, each represents a potential evo-
lution from current trajectories. The first scenario assumes a move toward 
more networked individualism based on continued technological progress 
and trust in computer and human networks — including the withering 
of boundaries. The second scenario assumes more boundaries, more 
costs, more corporate concentration, and more surveillance. At present, 
the Western world is trending in the direction of the first scenario, 
but we would be na ï ve to think that the second scenario could not 
happen here. 
 We close the book by highlighting a selected set of premises that we 
have considered while envisioning these scenarios. At the same time, we 
take into account how the technological enablers discussed earlier can 
contribute to their realization. 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
297
 Networked Individuals ++ 
 This moment in ICT history marks the stage at which a fuller impact of 
digital technology will become evident.  55 The impact of technology unfolds 
in three stages. The first stage is  substitution  as new technology performs 
older technology ’ s tasks more efficiently. The second stage is  enlargement 
as new technology is used to increase the volume and complexity of tasks 
that old technology used to perform. The final state is  reconfiguration as 
new technology fundamentally changes the nature of the things it was 
created to address.  56 
 In not too many years, technology will have afforded changes in 
people ’ s relationships with others and reconfigured information. For 
networked individuals, that will mean a number of things. The trans-
formations wrought by the Triple Revolution that we identified at the 
beginning of this book will intensify and become more widespread. 
People will be more connected as individuals and less embedded in 
groups. They will get their needs met more often in spatially dispersed 
and loosely knit networks, rather than relying on a small number of 
tightly knit connections. They are likely to test partial membership in 
more milieus and rely less on permanent membership in settled groups. 
The nature of their networks will change as they find more ways to 
connect with weak ties. That, in turn, will lead to more diversified social 
networks. 
 We can see how Harry in Scenario 1 relies on collaborative consump-
tion when searching for new products, by using both a collaborative 
coupon and by sharing resources such as a car with his peers. The notion 
of collaborative consumption actually integrates Harry with consequential 
strangers who share his consumption needs. This process is enabled by 
the convergence of communication and information, which allows Harry 
to access valuable resources while effectively managing his membership 
in different groups. 
 We can further see in both scenarios how people ’ s contributions to the 
online world will multiply and perhaps change character as they become 
more aware of how their postings are used, aggregated, and surveilled and 
of how tweets, texts, blogs, searches, and social media posts are captured, 
stored, analyzed, and reassembled into profiles that affect individuals ’ 
reputations. Their relationships will be built more around networks. In line 
with these notions, we can see in Scenario 1 how Harry aggregates social 
media as well as updating and sharing lifelogs. To learn what his friends 
did last night, he links the updates of their lifelogs to their social network 

298 
Chapter 11
information. Harry also uses an augmented pictograph to help him quickly 
visualize his network to assess who he does — and does not — want to know 
about his recent activities. By doing so, he can better guard his privacy and 
shape his online representation. By contrast, Will ’ s sister Lorelei in Scenario 
2 has had her reputation damaged by the circulation of an incriminating 
image. 
 Scenario 1 also shows how people ’ s social networks will have a more 
vivid presence in their lives as they carry their networks with them by 
using mobile connections, content creation tools, and crowdsourced 
methods to help them draw upon helpers to solve problems, make deci-
sions, and provide social support. In Scenario 1, Harry owns a computer, 
but he also relies on ubiquitous computing and objects. Harry especially 
relies on his agent to access content gathered by his network: Netsourcing 
from trusted others has replaced indiscriminate crowdsourcing. He con-
sults these sources while making decisions about important matters, such 
as where to travel this summer. By sensing his interest, his agent can notify 
him about relevant information: comparing his interest with the available 
content generated through netsourcing. One example for this can be seen 
in Harry ’ s exposure to new music that came from his friends ’ music prefer-
ences. By contrast, in Scenario 2, Will uses limited online sources: He owns 
neither hardware, nor software, nor agent, nor his own files. What he does 
use is utilized by others, and his behavior — like his sister ’ s — is subject to 
government and organizational scrutiny. Their networks bind them, rather 
than liberate them. 
 Centrifugal and Centripetal Forces 
 Scenario 1 shows the Triple Revolution is a complex interplay of centrifugal 
and centripetal forces. Harry is working across an ocean with Chinese col-
leagues. His interactions with friends and his sister are dispersed. His life 
merges the corporeal and the digital. His agent-based connections with the 
internet give him comprehensive knowledge about his friends ’ where-
abouts and plans for the day. This makes easier both the initiation and 
coordination of potential meetings. 
 Yet, the internet draws his network together centripetally as both the 
avatar party and Harry ’ s virtual meeting with his physically distant best 
friend show. This centripetal process is enabled by the information gener-
ated and shared via the internet of things, linking digital calendars, RFID/
GPS tags, and people. Technologies such as lifelogging, social aggregation 
tools, and smart tagging keep track of friends ’ past and present activities, 
as well as facilitating further interactions with them. Harry ’ s inquiries 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
299
about his virtual pub escapade can be seen as an example of this, where 
Harry was able to retrospectively shape his input through comments and 
delete the notorious ice-cube incident. 
 This centripetal social process also has the potential to enhance in-
person interactions. After all, there will always be people who prefer to 
meet in person: Even Harry feels that it is a little strange to shake his 
friend ’ s hand in an AR encounter. In Scenario 1, we can see how the 
network of things makes it easier for Harry to coordinate an in-person 
meeting with his sister, and how mirror and virtual worlds have been used 
for choosing a suitable location. 
 By contrast, Scenario 2 shows the future going back to the past: to a 
more thoroughgoing centripetal society that hearkens back to the prein-
dustrial door-to-door towns described in chapter 5. The city is gated and 
national internets have become walled off because of cost and security 
fears. Social media also form gated virtual communities with quarantine 
policies that instantly wall-off infected computers from the net. 
 How could this second scenario happen? Science fiction has repeatedly 
shown a post-apocalyptic reversion to small, local, walled-off groups who 
fear outsiders and trust only their own tribe members whom they see every 
day. It is a continuing theme in movies since at least the 1930s, such as 
 Things to Come  (starring Ralph Richardson),  Mad Max 2: The Road Warrior 
(Mel Gibson), the  Terminator (Arnold Schwarzenegger),  George Romero ’ s 
Land of the Dead  (Dennis Hopper), and  The Book of Eli  (Denzel Washing-
ton).  57 This reversion also appears in novels such as Walter Miller ’ s  A 
Canticle for Leibowitz  (1960) through Doris Lessing ’ s  Memoirs of a Survivor 
(1974) to Margaret Atwood ’ s  The Year of the Flood  (2009).  58 
 Nor is the possibility only fictional. It has happened before. The open 
Greek cites gave way to walled Roman and medieval towns designed to 
protect against external attack and to control the residents.  59 To some 
extent, it is happening now, as street gangs work hard to control local ter-
ritories and American suburbs erect gates to keep their terrors out. Thus it 
is possible, but hopefully not likely, that a bounded world of small, insular 
groups might reemerge. 
 Augmented Reality Augments, and Does Not Replace 
 As Scenario 1 shows, ubiquitous computing, augmented reality, mirror 
worlds, and virtual worlds have the potential to enhance the external 
physical world for networked individuals. The interpenetration of ICTs and 
people ’ s activities will grow as the boundary between the digital and the 
corporeal becomes as transparent as Harry ’ s AR lenses. 

300 
Chapter 11
 Scenario 1 shows how augmented reality and virtual worlds enable 
Harry to receive medical treatment by the remotely located doctor, a treat-
ment that is actually performed by a robot that mimics every move made 
by the human doctor. The same scenario also illustrates location-aware 
systems and interfaces that process and layer networked information on 
top of people ’ s everyday perceptions of the world. An example of this 
development is Harry ’ s exploration of the restaurant by means of a mirror 
world, while at the same time he checks on his friends ’ physical proximity 
to the location by analyzing their RFID/GPS signals. Another important 
component in this scenario is that people may contribute material through 
tagging, blogging, commenting on, and mashing up virtual spaces and 
avatars. By contrast, in the second scenario, the surveillance risks for Will 
are too high for him to benefit from an agent. 
 Digital Divides 
 The net surfers in Scenario 1 appear to have transcended the digital divide, 
although they surely vary in how they use their tools and handle their 
agents. Scenario 2 shows an economic divide where costs have cut off 
many from much control over their digital lives. People curtail their use 
of the internet because of cost and fear; many become jaded and used to 
having their information marketed and surveilled. 
 Another digital divide debate appears in Scenario 2, with regard to the 
speed of connections and the cost of agents. Will has trouble paying for 
sufficient bandwidth to access media-rich websites, and he cannot take 
advantage of the capabilities that augmented reality, virtual worlds, and 
mirror worlds offer. He does not have special eyeglasses to see skins or 
manifestations of ubiquitous computing. 
 Privacy and Digital Shadows 
 Harry blithely erases the ice-cube incident in Scenario 1. In Scenario 2, 
governments and organizations constantly scrutenize online activities. As 
a result, Will has reduced his online presence to a minimum. He has also 
tried to avoid having anyone upload anything about him again — but that ’ s 
impossible in a world of automatic photo tagging. Will also realizes that 
it is so easy to falsely burnish one ’ s status — it ’ s called  “ gilding the 
FaceWall ” — that he has become skeptical of the validity of online content. 
He prefers meeting people in person. 
 Online information also plays a major role in determining the reputa-
tion of his sister Lorelei. She suffers from being on the wrong side of 
the law — or at least her internet-circulated picture is — a situation of 

The Future of Networked Individualism 
301
continuing stress as she cannot erase her past. As it becomes possible for 
people to access stored references about someone or something, it is easy 
to conceive of circumstances where this will help people burnish their 
status and build social capital. It is also easy to conceive, just as in Lore-
lei ’ s case, how this could become a world where, in the words of blogger 
and CUNY professor Jeff Jarvis, people live in a state of  “ mutually assured 
humiliation. ”  60 
 The management of online privacy plays a role in both scenarios. The 
key questions concern control: Who controls the data, the software, and 
the hardware? This is more than a national matter, for as Scenario 1 shows, 
many connections are international. Ultimately the use of new technolo-
gies will remain a trade-off between convenience and privacy. Going 
forward, both government agencies and service providers will have to 
develop new, secure privacy standards and networked individuals will have 
to receive usable information to evaluate their own potential risks. 
 The Future Will Be What It Will Be 
 The future reality presented in our two scenarios is probably too tame and 
homogeneous for what the likely reality of networked individuals will be 
in the coming years. Even if one scenario largely comes true, the digital 
and social events will not appear coherently. There are visible elements of 
both of these scenarios in today ’ s more advanced networkers — people such 
as the eager digital natives who networked with us to write this book — and 
those among their elders who have similar tastes. That would include people 
like Peter and Trudy Johnson-Lenz, the couple whose story about her fall 
and their networked aftermath began our story. But much is to come — and 
not at one time — and some potential developments will never be. 
 We envision at least four arenas for future issues:  
 •  The internet itself — what it is and how its architecture functions: literally 
the plumbing and the code; 
 •  The legislative and legal realms — where big policy battles about privacy 
and intellectual property will shape the future of who owns what; who 
shares what; who pays for what; 
 •  The world of social norms and etiquette — where we figure out the social 
rules of engagement; and 
 •  The commercial technology (apps and devices) realm — where people 
create the new tools that will help shape what is possible for networked 
individuals. 

302 
Chapter 11
 The Triple Revolution — in social networks, the internet, and mobile 
connectedness — will change but never end in the ongoing turn to a net-
worked operating system. That means that the foreseeable future holds the 
prospect that individuals will be able to act more independently with 
greater power to shape their lives, if they choose to do so and if the cir-
cumstances will enable them to do so. Yet, the foreseeable future also 
contains the burden of knowing that people will have to work harder on 
their own to get their needs met. Tightly knit permanent groups will con-
tinue to be stable cores for some, and social networks will play greater roles 
in all human activities. The work of networked individuals is never quite 
done — and the satisfactions and uncertainties of netweaving are always 
available. 

 
 Notes 
 Chapter 1 
 1.  Jeffrey Boase, Christine Ensslen, Tracy Kennedy, Stephen Perelgut, Beverly Well-
man, and Xiaolin Zhuo gave good advice for this chapter. 
 2.  See Kurtelling.com/forum.  
 3.  Lisa Kimball ’ s company is called Group Jazz and its website is located at  http://
www.groupjazz.com. 
 4.  Jessica Lipnack heads NetAge, an organization focused on developing networked 
teams within organizations. See Jessica Lipnack,  “ NetAge Endless Knots, ” Decem-
ber 7, 2007,  http://endlessknots.netage.com/endlessknots/2007/12/pt-paying-it-ba
.html. 
 5.  Lotsa Helping Hands says it is a free, private, web-based community for organ-
izing friends, family, and colleagues — people ’ s  “ circles of community ” — during times 
of need.  http://www.lotsahelpinghands.com . 
 6.  INFJ (Introversion, iNtuition, Feeling, Judging) is one of sixteen personality types 
in the Myers-Briggs personality scale. See Isabelle Briggs Myers,  Gifts Differing: Under-
standing Personality Type . [New York: Davies-Black, 1995]. 
 7.  At our request, Peter and Trudy Johnson-Lenz wrote us about their experiences on 
June 24, 2008. They added details in a series of interviews and email messages that 
took place between December 2008 and January 2011. 
 8.  For example: Robert Putnam,  Bowling Alone (New York: Simon  & Schuster, 2000). 
 9.  For example, Sherry Turkle,  Alone Together  (New York: Basic Books, 2011). See 
also the review in Jeffrey Boase and Barry Wellman,  “ Personal Relationships, ” in 
 Cambridge Handbook of Personal Relationships,  ed. Anita Vangelisti and Dan Perlman, 
709 – 723 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006). 
 10.   Hua Wang and Barry Wellman,  “ Social Connectivity in America, ”  American 
Behavioral Scientist 53, no. 8 (2010): 1148 – 1169. 
 11.   Eric Schmidt is quoted by Derek Thompson,  “ Google ’ s CEO:  ‘ The Laws Are 
Written by Lobbyists, ’  ”  The Atlantic,  October 1, 2010,  http://www.theatlantic.com/
technology/archive/2010/10/googles-ceo-the-laws-are-written-by-lobbyists/63908.  

304 
Notes to Chapter 2
 Chapter 2 
 1.  Vincent Chua contributed to this chapter. Special thanks to Mohammad Haque, 
who did most of the data gathering and prepared the ﬁ gures for the  “ Toward the 
Social Network Revolution ” section of this chapter; Anatoliy Gruzd for constructing 
the Twitter network; and Valdis Krebs for constructing ﬁ gure 2.16, which shows the 
links between book purchases before the 2008 U.S. presidential election. We appre-
ciate the advice of Juan-Antonio Carrasco, Wenhong Chen, Rochelle C ô t é , David 
Gillen, Christine Ensslen, Mirna Ghazarian, Keith Hampton, Zack Hayat, Caroline 
Haythornthwaite, Bernie Hogan, Tracy Kennedy, Mohammad Keyhani, Alexandra 
Marin, William Michelson, Diana Mok, Adrienne Redd, Tom Smith, Mo Guang Ying, 
and Esther and Irving Zeitlin; as well as the assistance of Juan-Antonio Carrasco, 
Justin Couture, Zack Garcia, Anatoliy Gruzd, Gregory Jancelewicz, Shawna Korosi, 
Tom Snijders, Lilia Smale, David Toews, Mehdi Zabet, and Yu Janice Zhang. 
 2.  Although the indicators we present in this section come from authoritative 
sources, scholars have debated their exact measurement. We avoid those debates as 
our goal here is to put the indicators together to suggest the turn toward a networked 
society. For a social history of America leading up to the trends we discuss here, see 
Claude Fischer,  Made in America  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010); for 
comparing U.S. values with those of other countries, see Wayne Baker,  America ’ s 
Crisis of Values (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005). 
 On affordances, see Donald Norman,  “ Affordance, Conventions, and Design, ” 
 Interactions (May 1999): 38 – 44; Erin Bradner,  “ Understanding Groupware Adoption: 
The Social Affordances of Computer-Mediated Communication among Distributed 
Groups. ”  Working Paper, Department of Information and Computer Science, Uni-
versity of California, Irvine, February 2000. 
 3.  Figure 2.1: Automobile travel data from Patricia Hu and Timothy Reuscher, 
 “ Summary of Travel Trends: 2001 National Household Travel Survey, ”  USDOT 
Federal Highway Administration Report 2004 , http://nhts.ornl.gov/2001/pub/STT.
pdf. See table 17: Availability of Household Vehicles. U.S. Department of Trans-
portation Federal Highway Administration, Washington, DC. 1969 data do not 
include light trucks (pickups, vans). 1969, 1977, 1983, 1990, and 1995 surveys: 
the Nation wide Personal Transportation Survey. 2001 survey: the National House-
hold Transportation Survey. Automobile reliability data from the J. D. Power Ve-
hicle Dependability Study is only available since 2000 when there were an aver-
age of 4.45 problems for each three-year-old car. In 2010 the average was 1.55: a 
two-thirds (65 percent) decrease in problems per car from the start of the decade. 
2010 data are from the National Highway Trafﬁ c Safety Administration,  “ Early 
Estimate of Motor Vehicle Trafﬁ c Fatalities in 2010, ” http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot
.gov/Pubs/811451.pdf. 
 4.  Figure 2.2: Per-capita airline boardings data from Research and Innovative Tech-
nology and Administration Bureau of Transportation Statistics (RITA), Historical 
Air Trafﬁ c, Annual 1954 – 2007, http://www.bts.gov/programs/airline_information/

Notes to Chapter 2 
305
air_carrier_trafﬁ c_statistics/airtrafﬁ c/annual/1954_1980 and http://www.bts.gov/
programs/airline_information/air_carrier_trafﬁ c_statistics/airtrafﬁ c/annual/1981
_present.html. The trafﬁ c data presented are reported to the Department of Transpor-
tation on BTS Form 41 by Large Certiﬁ cated Air Carriers and includes these carrier 
groups: Majors, Nationals, Large Regionals, and Medium Regionals. Trafﬁ c statistics 
for Small Certiﬁ cated Air Carriers and Commuter Air Carriers are not included. En-
planements were then divided by the estimated U.S. population based on the U.S. 
Census Bureau ’ s population ﬁ gures, available at http://www.census.gov/compendia/
statab/2010/tables/10s0002.xls. Note that the 1954 ﬁ gure of 0.22  airplane boarders 
per capita is misleading, as a few ﬂ ew probably often and most never ﬂ ew. This is a 
problem of interpreting from statistics when only averages are available. Joyce Dargay 
and Mark Hanly give similar decline data for the United Kingdom for both leisure 
and business ﬂ ights:  “ The Determinants of the Demand for International Air Travel 
to and from the UK, ” Universities ’ Transport Studies Group Conference, Edinburgh, 
November 2001. http://www2.cege.ucl.ac.uk/cts/tsu/papers/UTSGAIR2002.pdf .
 5.  Figures 2.3 and 2.4: Telephone data from the U.S. Census Bureau,  “ Table 
1110: Telephone Systems Summary, ”  Statistical Abstract of the United States:   2010 . 
http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2010. See also Claude. Fischer,  America 
Calling (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992); U.S. Federal Communica-
tions Commission, 2008, Industry Analysis and Technology Division, Wireline 
Competition Bureau,  “ Trends in Telephone Services, ” http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/
edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-284932A1.pdf. 
 6.  Stephen J. Blumburg and Julian V. Luke,  “ Wireless Substitution: Early Release of 
Estimates from the National Health Interview Survey, July-December 2010. ” Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, June 2011, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhis/
earlyrelease/wireless201106.pdf. 
 7.  Figure 2.5: Personal computer data from International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU) World telecommunication/ICT indicators database 2008 ed. Geneva. ITU. For 
review of change in nature of cities, see Zachary Neal,  “ From Central Places to Net-
work Bases, ”  City  & Community  10, no. 1 (2011): 49 – 74. 
 8.  Figure 2.6: Data on international wars from  “ Number of State-Based Armed-
Conﬂ icts by Type, 1946 – 2006, ”   Human Security Brief 2007  (Vancouver: Human 
Security Report Project, 2007). Available as table 3.3 at http://www.hsrgroup.org/
human-security-reports/2007/graphs-and-tables.aspx. 
 9.  Figure 2.7: Data on international trade obtained via Wolfram Alpha data archive 
and analysis program (http://www.wolframalpha.com). 
 10.   Figure 2.8: Photomontage of fruit signs by Gregory Jancelewicz and Barry Well-
man, Fiesta Farms Supermarket, Toronto May 2010. For a broad account of globaliza-
tion, see Nobel prizewinner Joseph Stiglitz ’ s book  Globalization and Its Discontents 
(New York: Norton, 2002). 
 11.   Statistics Canada time-use data for non-sleep activities at home for ages 18 – 65, 
from the General Social Survey Cycle 7 (1992) and Cycle 19 (2005). Thanks to Wil-
liam Michelson for guiding this book ’ s authors through this. The data on meals 

306 
Notes to Chapter 2
eaten alone are from Martin Turcotte,  “ Time Spent with Family during a Typical 
Workday, 1986 to 2005, ”  Canadian Social Trends , November 21, 2008, http://www
.statcan.gc.ca/pub/11-008-x/11-008-x2006007-eng.htm. 
 12.   Robert Putnam,  Bowling Alone  (New York: Simon  & Schuster, 2000); Sidney 
Tarrow,  Power in Movement , updated and revised ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2011); Beth Kanter and Allison Fine,  The Networked Nonproﬁ t (New York: 
Jossey-Bass, 2010); U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, updated and revised from  “ Fam-
ilies and Work in Transition in 12 Countries, 1980 – 2001, ”   Monthly Labor Review, 
September 2003 plus unpublished data, http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/
2008/tables/08s1304.pdf. 
 13.   Table 2.1: Data from the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life/U.S. Religious 
Landscape Survey, June 2008, http://religions.pewforum.org/reports. See also Michael 
Hout and Claude Fischer,  “ Unchurched Believers. ” Working Paper, Survey Research 
Center, University of California, Berkeley, December 2009; Peggy Levitt,  “ Redeﬁ ning 
the Boundaries of Belonging, ”  Sociology of   Religion  65, no. 1 (2004): 1018; Heidi 
Campbell,  Exploring Religious Community Online  (New York: Peter Lang, 2005); Robert 
Putnam and David Campbell,  American Grace  (New York: Simon  & Schuster, 2010). 
 14.   Figure 2.10: U.S. Census Bureau,  “ Table 1095 Utilization of Selected Media, ” 
Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2010. Based on Television Bureau of Adver-
tising,  “ Trends in Television ” annual report, http://www.census.gov/compendia/
statab/2010/tables/10s1095.xls; TVB Research Central,  “ Media Trends Track: TV 
Basics TV Sets per Household, ” http://www.tvb.org/media/ﬁ le/TV_Basics.pdf; http://
www.tvb.org.central/MediaTrendsTrack/tvbasics/07_5_TV_Per_HH.asp. 
 15.   Figure 2.11: Percentage of Creative Class source, courtesy of Kevin Stolarick, Mar-
tin Prosperity Institute, University of Toronto. The  “ Creative Class ” and its  “ Super-
Creative ”  subset come from Richard Florida,  The Rise of the Creative Class  (New York: 
Basic Books, 2002). Florida deﬁ nes Creatives as  “ people whose economic function is 
to create new ideas, new technology, and/or new creative content ” (p. 8) and Super-
Creatives as  “ the thought leadership of modern society . . . [who produce] new forms 
or designs that are readily transferable and widely useful ” (p. 69). We do not need to 
get into the controversies about Florida ’ s data to agree that many more workers are 
now using computers to work with texts, numbers, and drawings. 
 16.   Figure 2.12: In sociological terms, greater tolerance and less discrimination is 
a shift from  “ ascriptive ” to  “ achieved ”  attitudes and behavior. It is documented by 
Molly Andolina, and Jeremy Mayer,  “ Demographic Shifts and Racial Attitudes, ” 
 Social Science Journal 40 (2003): 19 – 31. The intermarriage attitude data come from 
James A. Davis and Tom Smith, General Social Surveys, 1972 – 2008 [machine-
readable data ﬁ le] (Chicago: National Opinion Research Center), using all valid 
responses (excluding  “ Don ’ t Know, ” etc.) to the General Social Survey ’ s question: 
 “ Do you think there should be laws against marriages between African-Americans 
and whites? ” The percentage of respondents is based on valid responses (yes or no) 
to the question. The sample consisted of non-institutionalized English-speaking 
residents aged eighteen years or older and living in the United States between 1972 

Notes to Chapter 2 
307
and 1977; only non-black respondents were asked this question. Starting in 1978, 
all respondents were asked this question. This difference is indicated by the break 
in the ﬁ gure. See also John Iceland, Daniel Weinberg, and Erika Steinmetz,  Racial 
and Ethnic Residential Segregation in the United States: 1980 – 2002,  U.S. Census Bureau, 
Series CENSR-3 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁ ce, 2002), p. 60. 
The actual intermarriage data come from Jeffrey Passel, Wendy Wang, and Paul 
Taylor,  “ Marrying Out, ” Pew Research Center, June 4, 2010, http://pewsocialtrends
.org/2010/06/04/marrying-out. 
 17.  The GSS, funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation, is the preeminent 
large-scale national sociological survey. See http://www.norc.org/GSS+Website. 
 18.  Will Herbert ’ s 1955 book is  Protestant, Catholic, Jew  (Garden City, NY: Double-
day). Contemporary trends toward lower religious afﬁ liation are documented in 
Mark Chaves ’ s book  American Religion  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2011). The  “ love that dare not speak its name ” is from Lord Alfred Douglas,  “ Two 
Poems ”  (1894), and was crucial evidence in the  “ gross indecency ” trial of his lover 
Oscar Wilde. 
 19.   Data from the Employee Beneﬁ t Research Institute, http://www.ebri.org. See also 
Steven Greenhouse,  “ Pensions on the Move, ”  New York Times,  March 1, 2011, B1, B4. 
 20.   Our argument resonates in parts with thoughts expressed in Albert-Laszlo 
Barabasi,  Linked  (New York: Plume, 2003); Yochai Benkler,  The Wealth of Networks 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006); Manuel Castells,  The Rise of the Net-
work Society,  2nd ed. (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000); Nicholas A. Christakis and James 
H. Fowler,  Connected (Boston: Little, Brown, 2009); Dalton Conley,  Elsewhere USA 
(New York: Pantheon, 2009); Charles Kadushin,  Making Connections  (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2011); Duncan Watts,  Six Degrees (New York: Norton, 
2003); David Weinberger,  Small Pieces Loosely Joined (New York: Perseus, 2002); 
Barry Wellman,  “ Structural Analysis: From Method and Metaphor to Theory and 
Substance, ”  in  Social Structures: A Network Approach,  ed. Barry Wellman and S. D. 
Berkowitz, 19 – 61 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988); Barry Wellman, 
 “ From Little Boxes to Loosely-Bounded Networks, ” in  Sociology for the Twenty-
First Century , ed. Janet Abu-Lughod, 94 – 114 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1999); Bernie Hogan,  “ The Networked Individual: A Proﬁ le of Barry Wellman, ” 
 The Semiotician  14 (2009): 5. 
 21.   Linton Freeman, Sue Freeman, and Alaina Michaelson,  “ How Humans See Social 
Groups, ”  Journal of Quantitative Anthropology 1 (1989): 229 – 238. 
 22.   É mile Durkheim,  The Division of Labor in Society , (New York: Macmillan, 1933 
[1893]) . 
 23.   Norman Shulman,  “ Urban Social Networks, ” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of 
Sociology, University of Toronto, 1972. Barry Wellman, Renita Yuk-Lin Wong, David 
Tindall, and Nancy Nazer,  “ A Decade of Network Change, ”  Social Networks  19, no. 1 
(1997): 27 – 51. 
 24.   The Buzz story is nicely summarized in Barbara Ortutay,  “ Google Tweaks Buzz 
Social Hub after Privacy Woes, ” Associated Press, February 12, 2010; and Riva 

308 
Notes to Chapter 2
Richmond,  “ What You Need to Know about Google Buzz, ” New York Times, February 
18, 2010, http://gadgetwise.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/02/17/what-you-need-to-know
-about-google-buzz. 
 25.   Harriet Jacobs [writing as  “ Fugitivus ” ],  “ Fuck You, Google, ” February 11, 2010, 
http://www.fugitivus.net/2010/02/11/fuck-you-google. 
 26.   Eric Goldman,  “ Google Settles Buzz User Privacy Litigation, ”  Technol-
ogy and Mar keting Law Blog,  September 9, 2010, http://blog.ericgoldman.org/
archives/2010/09/googles_buzz_us.htm; Richard Wray,  “ Google Boss Says  ‘ Nobody 
Was Harmed ’ by Buzz Debacle, ”  Guardian , February 17, 2010, http://www.guardian
.co.uk/technology/2010/feb/17/google-buzz-schmidt. Schmidt ’ s no privacy com-
ment and Harbour ’ s rejoinder are in Emily Steel,  “ Google Buzz Exempliﬁ es Pri-
vacy Problems, FTC Commissioner Says ”  Wall Street Journal Blogs,  March 17, 2010; 
http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2010/03/17/google-buzz-exempliﬁ es-privacy-problems
-ftc-commissioner-says;  “ FTC Charges Deceptive Privacy Practices in Google ’ s 
Rollout of Its Buzz Social Network, ” FTC news release, http://ftc.gov/opa/2011/03/
google.shtm. 
 27.   “ FTC Charges Deceptive Privacy Practices, ” see note 26. 
 28.  Ian Hacking,  Why Does Language Matter in Philosophy?  (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1975); M[ark] E. J. Newnan,  “ Complex Systems: A Survey, ”  Ameri-
can Journal of Physics 79 (2011): 800 – 810, arXiv:112.1440v1. 
 29.   James Bagrow, Sune Lehmann, and Yong-Yeol Ahn,  “ Robustness and Modular 
Structure in Networks, ”  arXiv (archive) 1102 – 5085v1, February 24, 2011. 
 30.   Richard Leowontin,  “ The Corpse in the Elevator, ”  New York Review of Books,  Jan-
uary 20, 1983, p. 36. 
 31.   For the argument that society is nothing more than the sum of two-person rela-
tionships, see sociologist George Homans,  Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms  (New 
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1961). 
 32.   Michael Adams,  Fire and Ice  (Toronto: Penguin Canada, 2003); Wayne Baker, 
 America ’ s Crisis of Values (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004). 
 33.  Craig Kinsley, personal communication to Sinye Tang and Barry Wellman, April 
17, 2009. Kelly Lambert and Craig Kinsley,  Clinical Neuroscience  (New York: Worth, 
2004). 
 34.   For a modern take on old boy networks , see Parag Khanna,  “ Davos: Congress 
of the New Middle Ages, ”  Ideas Market  blog ,  Wall Street Journal , January 24, 2011. 
http://blogs.wsj.com/ideas-market/2011/01/24/davos-congress-of-the-new-middle
-ages. The classic book on interlocking corporate directorships is Beth Mintz and 
Michael Schwartz,  The Power Structure of American Business (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1985). A more recent update is Mark Mizruchi,  “ What Do Interlocks 
Do? ”   Annual Review of Sociology  22 (2003): 271 – 298. For replacement of board mem-
bers, see R. Jack Richardson,  “ Directorship Interlocks and Corporate Proﬁ tability, ” 
 Administrative Science Quarterly  32 (1987): 367 – 386. For European interlocks, see 
Eelke Heemskerk,  “ The Social Field of the European Corporate Elite, ”  Global Networks 
22, no. 4 (2011): 1 – 21. 

Notes to Chapter 2 
309
 35.   “ Text of Tiger Woods ’ Statement ” as transcribed by  ASAP Sports , Associated 
Press, February 19 2010, http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2010/02/19/sportsline/
main6223331.shtml. 
 36.   Beverly Wellman,  “ Lay Referral Networks. ”  Sociology of Health Care  12 (1995): 
213 – 238. 
 37.   Membership in the major professional organization devoted to social network 
analysis has doubled since 2000. The International Network for Social Network Anal-
ysis, founded by coauthor Wellman in 1976 – 1977, now has more than 1,300 mem-
bers (http://www.insna.org) .  For a summary of the social network perspective see 
Alexandra Marin and Barry Wellman,  “ Social Network Analysis: An Introduction, ” 
in the  Handbook of Social Network Analysis,  ed. Peter Carrington and John Scott, 
11 – 25 (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2011). The basic guide to social network analy-
sis is Stanley Wasserman and Katharine Faust,  Social Network Analysis  (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1994). 
 38.   Google NGram source includes lower-case only. Smoothing = 2. http://ngrams
.googlelabs.com/graph?content=social+networks,social+network & year_start=1950
 & year_end=2008 & corpus=0 & smoothing=2. 
 39.  Barry Wellman and Kenneth Frank,  “ Network Capital in a Multi-Level World: 
Getting Support in Personal Communities, ” in  Social Capital , ed. Nan Lin, Karen 
Cook, and Ronald Burt, 233 – 273 (Chicago: Aldine DeGruyter, 2001). 
 40.   Nicholas Christakis and James Fowler,  Connected  (New York: Little Brown, 2009). 
 41.   J. Niels Rosenquist, James Fowler, and Nicholas Christakis,  “ Social Network 
Determinants of Depression, ”  Molecular Psychiatry  16 (March 16, 2011): 273 – 281, 
http://jhfowler.ucsd.edu/social_network_determinants_of_depression.pdf. 
 42.   J. Niels Rosenquist, Joanne Murabito, James H. Fowler, and Nicholas A. Chris-
takis,  “ The Spread of Alcohol Consumption Behavior in a Large Social Network, ” 
 Annals of Internal Medicine 152, no. 7 (2010): 426 – 433. 
 43.   Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M. Cook,  “ Birds of a Feather: 
Homophily in Social Networks, ”  Annual Review of Sociolo gy 27 (2001): 415 – 444; Sinal 
Aral, Lev Muchnik, and Arun Sundarajan,  “ Distinguishing Inﬂ uence-Based Conta-
gion from Homophily-Driven Diffusion in Dynamic Networks, ”  PNAS  [Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Science] 106, no. 51: 21544 – 21549; Damon Centola, 
 “ The Spread of Behavior in an Online Social Network Experiment, ”  Science  329 (Sep-
tember 3, 2010): 1194 – 1197. 
 44.   James Fowler, Jaime Settle, and Nicholas Christakis,  “ Correlated Genotypes in 
Friendship Networks, ”  PNAS: Proceedings of the National Academy of Science , Janu-
ary 18, 2011, http://www.phas.org/content/108/5/1993.full; on network gregari-
ousness, see also Barry Wellman and Milena Gulia,  “ A Network Is More Than 
the Sum of Its Ties, ” in  Networks in the Global Village , ed. Barry Wellman, 83 – 118 
(Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1999). For critiques of Christakis and colleagues ’ 
work, see Ethan Cohen-Cole and Jason Fletcher,  “ Detecting Implausible Social 
Network Effects in Acne, Height, and Headaches: Longitudinal Analysis, ”  British 
Medical Journal  337 (2008), http://www.bmj.com/content/337/bmj.a2533.full; 

310 
Notes to Chapter 2
Ethan Cohen-Cole and Jason Fletcher,   “ Is Obesity Contagious? ”  Journal of Health 
Economics 27, no. 5 (2008): 1382 – 1387, http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0167629608000362; Russell Lyons,  “ The Spread of Evidence-Poor Medi-
cine via Flawed Social-Network Analysis, ”  Statistics, Politics, and Policy  2, no. 1 (2011), 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1007.2876. 
 45.   Bernie Hogan,  “ The Networked Individual, ”  Semiotix,  January 2009, http://www
.semioticon.com/semiotix/semiotix14/sem-14-05.html. See also Linton Freeman, 
 The Development of Social Network Analysis (Vancouver: Empirical Press, 2004). 
 46.   Simmel ’ s life and work appears in a number of English-language compilations, 
including Georg Simmel,  The Sociology of Georg Simmel , trans. and ed. Kurt Wolff 
(Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1950); Georg Simmel,  Conﬂ ict and the Web of Group Afﬁ lia-
tions,  ed. Kurt Wolff (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1955); Georg Simmel,  On Individuality 
and Social Forms,  trans. and ed. Donald Levine (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1971); Ferdinand T ö nnies,  Community and Organization [Gemeinschaft und Gesell-
schaft] (London: Routledge  & Kegan Paul [1887] 1955). 
 47.   Georg Simmel,  “ The Metropolis and Mental Life ” (1903), translated and pub-
lished in  The Sociology of Georg Simmel , ed. Kurt Wolff (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1950), 
409 – 424. 
 48.   For Africa , see J. Clyde Mitchell, ed.,  Social Networks in Urban Situations  (Man-
chester: Manchester University Press, 1969). Alvin Wolfe provides a complementary 
anthropologist ’ s account in  “ Anthropologists View of Social Network Analysis and 
Data Mining, ”  Social Network Analysis and Mining 1, no. 1 (2001): 3 – 19. 
 49.  Elizabeth Bott,  Family and Social Network (London: Tavistock, 1957). 
 50.  Joe Feagin and Harlan Hahn,  Ghetto Revolt  (New York: Macmillan, 1973); for 
a general historical account at that time, see Charles Tilly,  “ Collective Violence in 
European Perspective, ” in  Violence in America , ed. Hugh Graham and Ted Gurr, 4 – 45 
(Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁ ce, 1969); There are many more 
recent studies, reviewed in Doug McAdam, Sidney Tarrow, and Charles Tilly,  
Dynamics of Contention (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973). 
 51.   Herbert Gans,  The Urban Villagers  (New York: Free Press, 1962); Elliot Liebow, 
 Tally ’ s Corner  (Boston: Little, Brown, 1967); Carol Stack,  All Our Kin  (New York: 
Harper  &  Row, 1974); Sudhir Venkatesh,  Gang Leader for a Day  (New York: Pen-
guin, 2008). 
 52.   Jeffrey Boase and Barry Wellman,  “ A Plague of Viruses,  ” Current Sociology  49, no. 
6 (2001): 39 – 55. 
 53.   For an overall review, see Thomas Valente,  Network Models of the Diffusion of 
Innovations (Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 1995). For recent work on AIDS networks, 
see Susan Cotts Watkins and Ann Swidler,  “ Hearsay Ethnography, ” eScholarship 
series, March 2006, California Center for Population Research, UC Los Angeles, 
http://www.escholarship.org/uc/item/3bq2n770. For discussions on how insurgent 
networks are analyzed, see the work of Kathleen Carley, such as her 2009 paper 
 “ Dynamic Network Analysis for Counter-Terrorism Overview, ” http://citeseerx.ist
.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.137.9475 & rep=rep1 & type=pdf. 

Notes to Chapter 2 
311
 54.   Everett Rogers,  Diffusion of Innovations,  5th ed. (New York: Free Press, 2003). Rog-
ers ’  bell curve is still useful, although further research has suggested more complex 
models. See the review in Raghurim Iyengar, Christophe Van den Buite, and Thomas 
Valente,  “ Opinion Leadership and Contagion in New Product Diffusion, ”  Marketing 
Science 30, no. 2 (2011): 195 – 212. 
 55.   Simon Cauchemez, Achuyt Bhattari, Tiffany Marchbanks, Ryan Fagan, Ste-
phen Ostroff, Neil Ferguson, David Swerdlow, and the Pennsylvania H1N1 work-
ing group,  “ Role of Social Networks in Shaping Disease Transmission During a 
Community Outbreak of 2009 H1N1 Pandemic Inﬂ uenza, ”  Publications of the 
National Academy of Sciences,  January 31, 2011, http://www.pnas.org/content/early/
2011/01/28/1008895108.full.pdf+htm. 
 56.   For identiﬁ cation of inﬂ uential spreaders in the core and periphery, see Maksim 
Kitsak, Lazaros Gallos, Shlomo Havlin, Fredrik Liljeros, Lev Muchnik, H. Eugene 
Stanley, and Hern á n Makse,  “ Identiﬁ cation of Inﬂ uential Spreaders in Complex Net-
works, ”  Nature Physics 6 (2010): 888 – 893. 
 57.   Duncan Watts,  Everything is Obvious (New York: Crown Business, 2011). 
 58.   Alberto L á szl ó Barabasi  Linked  (Cambridge, MA: Perseus, 2002). See also Joseph 
Kong, Nima Sarshar, and Vwani Roychowdhur,  “ Experience versus Talent Shapes the 
Structure of the Web, ”  PNAS  [Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences] 105, 
no. 37 (2008): 13724 – 13729. 
 59.  Robert K. Merton,  “ The Matthew Effect in Science, ”  Science  159 (January 5, 
1968): 56 – 63. 
 60.   Barry Wellman,  “ Structural Analysis: From Method and Metaphor to Theory and 
Substance, ”  in  Social Structures: A Network Approach , ed. Barry Wellman and S. D. 
Berkowitz, 19 – 61 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988). 
 61.   David Easley and Jon Kleinberg,  Networks, Crowds and Markets  (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2010); Andrei Broder, Ravi Kumar, Farzin Maghoul, 
Prabhakar Raghavan, Sridhar Rajagopalan, Raymie Stata, Andrew Tomkins, and Janet 
Wiener,  “ Graph Structure in the Web, ”  Proceedings of the 9th International World-Wide 
Web Conference (2000), pp. 309 – 320. See also Watts,  Six Degrees , note 20. 
 62.   Mark Granovetter,  “ The Strength of Weak Ties: A Network Theory Revisited, ” 
Sociological Theory 1 (1983): 201 – 233. 
 63.   Ronald Burt,  Neighbor Networks (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009). 
 64.  Ronald Burt,  “ Structural Holes in Virtual Worlds, ” University of Chicago, June 
2011, http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/ronald.burt/research/ﬁ les/SHVW.pdf. 
 65.   Robert K. Merton,  “ Patterns of Inﬂ uence: Cosmopolitans and Locals, ” in  Social 
Theory and Social Structure , ed. R. Merton, 387 – 420 (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1957). 
 66.   Nathan Eagle, Michael Macy, and Rob Claxton,  “ Network Diversity and Eco-
nomic Development, ”  Science 328 (May 21, 2010): 1029 – 1031. 
 67.   Burton Pasternak and Janet Salaff,  Cowboys and Cultivators  (Boulder, CO: West-
view, 1993). 
 68.   Twitter analyses come from Alex Cheng,  “ Six Degrees of Separation, Twitter 
Style, ” April 2010, http://www.sysomos.com/insidetwitter/sixdegrees; Dierderik van 

312 
Notes to Chapter 2
Liere,  “ How Far Does a Tweet Travel? ” Modeling Social Media conference, Toron-
to, June 2010; Yuri Takhteyev, Anatoliy Gruzd, and Barry Wellman,  “ Geography 
of Twitter Networks. ” NetLab working paper, 2010, http://homes.chass.utoronto
.ca/~wellman; Gruzd and Wellman ’ s network data is from August 2010, and was pre-
pared by Anatoliy Gruzd. It is discussed more in Anatoliy Gruzd, Barry Wellman, and 
Yuri Takhteyev,  “ Imagining Twitter as an Imagined Community.  American Behavioral 
Scientist 55, no. 10: 1294 – 1318. 
 69.   Scott Feld,  “ The Focused Organization of Social Ties, ”  American Journal of Sociol-
ogy 86 (1981): 1015 – 1035. More than forty-ﬁ ve years ago, network analysis pioneer 
Harrison White called the combination of shared characteristics and network mem-
bership a  “ catnet ” for the intersection of categories (people with similar attributes) 
and networks:  “ Notes on the Constituents of Social Structure, ” working paper (Har-
vard University: Department of Social Relations, 1965). For more recent work, see 
Mason Porter, Jukka-Pella Onnela,  and Peter Mucha,  “ Communities in Networks, ” 
 Notices of the AMS 56, no. 9 (2009): 1082 – 1097, 1164 – 1166. 
 70.   Ronald Breiger,  “ The Duality of Persons and Groups, ”  Social Forces  53 (1974): 
181 – 190. A community example is in John Hipp and Andrew Perrin,   “ Nested Loyal-
ties, ”  Urban Studies 43, no. 13 (2006): 2503 – 2523. 
 71.   Figure 2.16 was constructed from the standard Amazon book purchasing note: 
 “ People who bought ThisBook also bought ThatBook and ThatOtherBook. ”  “ To 
reduce noise, the data were cleaned slightly with k cores to remove weak associa-
tions, with k=2. All books that were not connected or had only one link with another 
book were removed. However no bridges were removed: the clusters are truly discon-
nected. ” Valdis Krebs, personal communication, April 24, 2010. 
 72.   Stanley Milgram,  “ The Small-World Problem, ”  Psychology Today 1 (1967): 62 – 67. 
See also Watts,  Six Degrees , note 18. However, Judith Kleinfeld has noted that Mil-
gram ’ s original experiment had ﬂ aws. See her  “ The Small World Problem, ”  Society 39, 
no. 2 (2002): 61 – 66. 
 73.   Anatoliy Gruzd did the retweeting analysis. For the airline-like connectivity 
of Twitter, see Yuri Takhteyev, Anatoliy Gruzd, and Barry Wellman,  “ Geography of 
Twitter Networks, ”  Social Networks  34 (2012): 73 – 81. 
 74.   Moli è re,  The Bourgeois Gentleman [Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme ], trans. Timothy 
Mooney, 1670, act 2, scene 4, http://moliere-in-english.com/bourgeois.html (about 
the adaptation). 
 75.   Benoit Mandelbrot,  The Fractal Geometry of Nature  (San Francisco: Freeman, 
1983) p. 1. 
 76.   Robert K. Merton,  “ Patterns of Inﬂ uence: Cosmopolitans and Locals, ” in  Social 
Theory and Social Structure,  ed. R. Merton, 387 – 420 (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1957); 
Mark Granovetter,  “ The Strength of Weak Ties: A Network Theory Revisited, ”  Socio-
logical Theory 1 (1983): 201 – 233. 
 77.   Personal communication from Hogan to Wellman, June 10, 2010. See also 
Hogan ’ s doctoral dissertation,  “ Networking in Everyday Life, ” Department of 
Sociology, University of Toronto, 2008. 

Notes to Chapter 3 
313
 Chapter 3 
 1.  We appreciate the advice, assistance, and contributions to this chapter of Chris-
tine Ensslen and Mirna Ghazarian (especially) as well as Mo Guang Ying and Barbara 
Barbosa Neves. 
 2.  For an engaging account of how the ﬁ rst personal computers came to be, see John 
Markoff,  What the Dormouse Said (New York: Viking, 2005). 
 3.  Ray Tomlinson has written about the ﬁ rst email,  “ The First Network Email, ” at 
http://openmap.bbn.com/~tomlinso/ray/ﬁ rstemailframe.html. 
 4.  Survey by Southern New England Telephone, conducted by Louis Harris  & 
Associates, September 1 to September 11, 1983 and based on telephone interviews 
with a national adult sample of 1,256. Polling done by Louis Harris  & Associ-
ates with data from The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of 
Connecticut. See: http://webapps.ropercenter.uconn.edu/CFIDE/cf/action/catalog/
abstract.cfm?label= & keyword=USHARRIS1983-2033 & fromDate= & toDate= & organiz
ation=Any & type= & keywordOptions=1 & start=1 & id= & exclude= & excludeOptions=1 
& topic=Any & sortBy=DESC & archno=USHARRIS1983-2033 & abstract=abstract & x=32 
& y=9. 
 5.  Peter Lewis,  “ The Executive Computer: A Growing Internet Is Trying to Take Care 
of Business, ”  New York Times , December 12, 1993, http://www.nytimes.com/1993/
12/12/business/the-executive-computer-a-growing-internet-is-trying-to-take-care
-of-business.html. 
 6.  The creators of HTML thus perniciously inﬂ ected on billions of websites (and 
users) the preﬁ x  “ http ” for  “ hypertext transfer protocol. ” 
 7.  For a more detailed history of the internet, see Katie Hafner and Matthew Lyon, 
 Where Wizards Stay Up Late  (New York: Simon  & Schuster, 1996) . See also Henry 
Edward Hardy,  “ A Short History of the Net, ” in  The Internet World Guide to Multimedia 
on the Internet , ed. Gary Welz, (Westport, CT: Mecklermedia, 1995). 
 8.  Kevin Werbach,  “ Digital Tornado, ” OPP Working Paper No. 29, March 1997, 
http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/OPP/working_papers/oppwp29.pdf. 
 9.  Gordon Moore,  “ Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits, ”  Elec-
tronics  38, no. 8 (April 19, 1965), ftp://download.intel.com/museum/Moores_Law/
Articles-Press_Releases/Gordon_Moore_1965_Article.pdf. 
 10.   “ Moore ’ s Law: 40th Anniversary, ” http://www.intel.com/pressroom/kits/events/
moores_law_40th/index.htm?iid=tech_mooreslaw+body_presskit. 
 11.   “ Google Brings High-speed Broadband Network to Kan, ” Associated Press, March 
30, 2011, http://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory?id=13256735. 
 12.   “ 10 Gigabit Ethernet, ” Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/10_Gigabit
_Ethernet. 
 13.   Jason Oxman,  “ The FCC and the Unregulation of the Internet, ” OPP Working 
Paper No. 31, July 1999, http://transition.fcc.gov/Bureaus/OPP/working_papers/
oppwp31.pdf, p 14. See also Jacob Nielsen ’ s articulation of  “ Nielsen ’ s Law of Internet 
Bandwidth ” at http://www.useit.com/alertbox/980405.html. 

314 
Notes to Chapter 3
 14.   Wellman invented the term  “ network of networks ” well before the advent of 
the internet. See Paul Craven and Barry Wellman,  “ The Network City, ”  Sociological 
Inquiry 43 (1973): 57 – 88. For the possible balkanization of the Internet, see Nancy 
Scola,  “ When the Internet Nearly Fractured, and How It Could Happen Again, ”  The 
Atlantic,  February 24, 2011, http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2011/
02/when-the-internet-nearly-fractured-and-how-it-could-happen-again/71662. 
 15.  Chip Walker,  “ Kryder ’ s Law, ”  Scientiﬁ c American , July 2005, http://www.sciam
.com/article.cfm?id=kryders-law. 
 16.   “ Falling Through the Net II: New Data on the Digital Divide, ” National Telecom-
munication and Information Administration, July 1998, http://www.ntia.doc.gov/
ntiahome/fttn99/part2.html. 
 17.   Kristen Purcell,  “ Search and Email Still Top the List of the Most Popular Online 
Activities, ” Pew Internet  & American Life Project, August 2011, http://pewinternet
.org/Reports/2011/Search-and-email.aspx. 
 18.  Joshua Meyrowitz, personal communication. See also: Claude Fischer,  America 
Calling (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), p. 40. 
 19.   Affordances quotation (p. 228) and description is from Donald Norman, 
 Living with Complexity  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011). For a discussion of how 
affordances affect social interaction, see: Erin Bradner, Wendy Kellogg, and Thomas 
Erickson,  “ Social Affordances of BABBLE, ” paper presented at the European Com-
puter Supported Cooperative Work Conference, Copenhagen, November 1998. 
 20.   John Markoff,  “ A Fight to Win the Future: Computers vs. Humans, ”  New York 
Times,  February 14, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/15/science/15essay
.html. As Markoff shows in his 2005 book  What the Dormouse Said  (New York: 
Penguin) , the artiﬁ cial intelligence debate goes back to the earliest days of human-
centered computing. 
 21.   Sheila Htoo is now a community planner, but was a University of Toronto stu-
dent. Her story is used with her permission. 
 22.  Lee Rainie, Amanda Lenhart, Susannah Fox, Tom Spooner, and John Horrigan, 
 “ Tracking Online Life, ” Pew Internet  & American Life Project, May 10, 2000, http://
pewinternet.org/Reports/2000/Tracking-Online-Life.aspx. 
 23.   Rainie, Lenhart, Fox, Spooner, and Horrigan,  “ Tracking Online Life, ” see note 
22. 
 24.   Rainie, Lenhart, Fox, Spooner, and Horrigan,  “ Tracking Online Life, ” see 
note 22. 
 25.   Pew Internet  & American Life Project report,  “ Getting Serious Online, ” March 
3, 2002, http://www.pewinternet.org/~/media/Files/Reports/2002/PIP_Getting
_Serious_Online3ng.pdf.pdf. 
 26.   Leonard Witt ’ s blog is at http://pjnet.org. 
 27.  John Horrigan,  “ The Broadband Difference, ” Pew Internet  & American Life 
Pro ject, June 23, 2002, http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2002/The-Broadband
-Difference-How-online-behavior-changes-with-highspeed-Internet-connections
.aspx. 

Notes to Chapter 3 
315
 28.   Kathleen Moore,  “ 71% of Online Adults Now Use Video-Sharing Sites, ” Pew 
Internet  &  American Life Project, July 26, 2011, http://pewinternet.org/Reports/
2011/Video-sharing-sites.aspx. 
 29.   In Pew Internet surveys this means internet users said in a phone interview they 
had used the internet  “ yesterday ” — or the day before they were reached in the survey. 
 30.   Leigh Estabrook, Evans Witt, and Lee Rainie,  “ Information Searches That Solve 
Problems, ” Pew Internet  & American Life Project. December 30, 2007, http://www
.pewinternet.org/Reports/2007/Information-Searches-That-Solve-Problems.aspx. 
 31.  Tom Rosenstiel, Amy Mitchell, Lee Rainie, and Kristen Purcell.  “ The Local 
News Ecology, ” Pew Internet  & American Life Project, September, 2011, http://
pewinternet.org. 
 32.   Statistics on the composition of the American online population and the general 
activities Americans pursue on the internet are updated several times a year after 
national surveys by the Pew Internet  & American Life Project. The latest ﬁ ndings 
from Pew Internet are available at http://pewinternet.org/Static-Pages/Trend-Data
.aspx. For information on rural Internet use by physically isolated northern Canadi-
ans, see Jessica Collins and Barry Wellman,  “ Small Town in Internet Society, ”  American 
Behavioral Scientist 53, no. 9 (2010): 1344 – 1366. 
 33.   A general reading on digital differences in Pew Internet  & American Life 
Project data can be found on the  “ Who ’ s Online ” page at http://pewinternet
.org/Static-Pages/Trend-Data/Online-Activities-Daily.aspx. In addition, these Pew 
Internet reports have focused on why some Americans do not use the internet: 
Aaron Smith,  “ Home Broadband 2010, ” August 11, 2010, http://pewinternet.org/
Reports/2010/Home-Broadband-2010.aspx; John Horrigan,  “ Home Broadband Adop-
tion in Rural America, ” February 26, 2006, http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2006/
Home-Broadband-Adoption-in-Rural-America.aspx; and Amanda Lenhart,  “ Who ’ s 
Not Online, ” September 21, 2000, http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2000/Whos-Not
-Online.aspx. 
 34.   For digital skills, see various papers by Eszter Hargittai, including  “ Differences in 
Actual and Perceived Online Skills ” (with Steven Shafer),  Social Science Quarterly 87, 
no. 2 (2006): 432 – 448;  “ Digital Inequality ” (with Amanda Hinnant),  Communica-
tion Research  35, no. 5 (2006): 602 – 621;  “ The Digital Reproduction of Inequality, ” 
in Social Stratiﬁ cation,  ed. David Grusky, 936 – 944 (Boulder, CO: Westview, 2008, 3rd 
ed); Philip Howard, Laura Busch, and Penelope Sheets,  “ Comparing Digital Divides: 
Internet Access and Social Inequality in Canada and the United States, ”  Canadian 
Journal of Communication  35, no. 1 (2010), http://www.cjc-online.ca/index.php/
journal/article/view/2192; Keith Hampton,  “ Internet Use and the Concentration of 
Disadvantage, ”   American Behavioral Scientist  53, no. 8 (2010): 1111 – 1132; Howard 
Rheingold,  Net Smarts (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012). 
 35.  Manuel Castells ’ s most thorough explanation appears in his book  The Internet 
Galaxy  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001). See esp. pp. 36 – 63; quotation from 
pp. 46 – 47. See also Manuel Castells,  The Rise of the Network Society,  2nd ed (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2000). 

316 
Notes to Chapter 4
 36.   Scott Cleland,  “ Google ’ s Self-Serving  ‘ Innovation without Permission, ’ ”  The 
Precursor Blog,  November 1, 2006, http://www.precursorblog.com/node/212. See 
also Castells, note 35, pp. 46 – 47. A good description of early hacker culture is John 
Markoff,  What the Dormouse Said (New York: Viking, 2005). 
 37.  For a good example, see Howard Rheingold,  The Virtual Community , 2nd ed. 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000). 
 38.   Castells, note 35, pp. 52 – 55. 
 39.  See Bernard Girard,  The Google Way  (San Francisco: No Starch, 2009); Doug 
Coupland,  Microserfs (New York: HarperCollins, 1995). 
 40.  William Dutton,  “ Through the Network (of Networks) — the Fifth Estate. ” 
Lecture, Examination Schools, University of Oxford, October 15, 2007, http://
people.oii.ox.ac.uk/dutton/wp-content/uploads/2007/10/5th-estate-lecture-text
.pdf. The idea of the Fifth Estate is debated and explored on Dutton ’ s blog: http://
people.oii.ox.ac.uk/dutton. 
 41.   Mary Madden and Aaron Smith,  “ Reputation Management and Social Media, ” 
Pew Internet  &  American Life Project, May 26, 2010, http://pewinternet.org/Reports/
2010/Reputation-Management.aspx. Susannah Fox, Mary Madden, Aaron Smith, and 
Jessica Vitak,  “ Digital Footprints, ” Pew Internet  & American Life Project, December 
16, 2007, http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2007/Digital-Footprints.aspx. 
 Chapter 4 
 1.  Thanks to Anna Brady, Loi Sessions Goulet, Bernie Hogan, Lee Humphreys, and 
Rhonda McEwen for their advice and assistance. 
 2.  Pamela Rabe,  “ Surviving Mumbai, ”  The Passionate Eye,  CBC News TV Documen-
tary, November 29, 2009. 
 3.  Nate Orenstam,  “ Doctor Cellphone: Can You Hear Me Now? ”  Valley of the Geeks, 
December 20, 2007, http://www.valleyofthegeeks.com/Features/Cooper.html. Also, 
coauthor Rainie ’ s interview with Martin Cooper, April 29, 2011. 
 4.  Rich Ling,  The Mobile Connection  (San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, 2004), pp 
6 – 11. See also AT & T,  “ 1946: First Mobile Telephone Call, ” http://www.corp.att.com/
attlabs/reputation/timeline/46mobile.html. 
 5.  Wikipedia,  “ History of Mobile Phones, ” Wikimedia Foundation, Inc, March 19, 
2010, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_mobile_phones. 
 6.  For the latest U.S. statistics on wireless subscribers, see  “ CTIA Semi-Annual 
Wireless Industry Survey, ” http://www.ctia.org/media/industry_info/index.cfm/
AID/10316. 
 7.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data through 2010 reported in  “ Wire-
less Substitution: Early Release of Estimates from the National Health Interview 
Survey, July-December 2010, ” http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhis/earlyrelease/
wireless201106.pdf. Future releases can be found by doing a search on  “ wireless sub-
stitution ”  at this site for the National Health Interview Survey: http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/nhis.htm. 

Notes to Chapter 4 
317
 8.  Hotspex,  “ Survey Reveals Less than 10 Per Cent of Canadians State They Can Live 
without Their Mobile Device, ”  Exchange,  September 10, 2010, http://www.exchange
magazine.com/morningpost/2009/week37/Thursday/091023.htm#anchor. 
 9.  Kristen Purcell,  “ Half of Adult Cell Phone Owners Have Apps on Their Phones, ” 
Pew Internet and American Life Project, November 2, 2001, http://pewinternet.org/
Reports/2011/Apps-update.aspx. 
 10.   James Katz and Mark Aakhus, eds.,  Perpetual Contact  (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2002); see also Mary Chayko,  Portable Communities  (Albany: SUNY 
Press, 2008). 
 11.   John Horrigan,  “ The Mobile Difference, ” Pew Internet  & American Life 
Project, March 25, 2009, http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2009/5-The-Mobile
-Difference--Typology.aspx. 
 12.   International Telecommunication Union statistics are available at http://
www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/at_glance/KeyTelecom.html. See also Samuel Green-
gard, Samuel,  “ Upwardly Mobile. ”  Communications of the ACM  51, no. 12 (2009): 
17 – 19. 
 13.   Rich Ling and Scott Campbell,  The Reconstruction of Space and Time  (New Bruns-
wick, NJ: Transaction, 2009); Kathleen Diga,  “ Mobile Cell Phones and Poverty 
Reduction, ” MS thesis, School of Development Studies, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 
2007. 
 14.   Nyaga Mbatia, Paul Palackal, Antony Dzorgbo, Dan Bright, Ricardo Duque, 
Marcus Antonious Ynalvez, and Wesley Shrum,  “ Mobile Telephony and Core 
Network Expansion in Kenya, ” Working Paper, Department of Sociology, Louisi-
ana State University, 2009. See also Tom Standage,  “ Mobile Marvels, ”  The Econo-
mist, September 24, 2009, http://www.economist.com/specialreports/displayStory.
cfm?story_id=14483896; James Katz, ed.,  Handbook of Mobile Communication Studies 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008). For information by country , see Richard Heeks, 
 “ Mobile Phone Penetration, ”  ICTs for Development  blog , November 30, 2009, http://
ict4dblog.wordpress.com. 
 15.   “ China ’ s Mobile Phone Users Top 879m in February, ” China Daily, March 
25, 2011, http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/bizchina/2011-03/25/content_12229631.
htm. 
 16.   Daniel Miller,  “ The Unpredictable Mobile Phone, ”  BT Technology Journal  24, no. 
3 (2006): 41 – 48. 
 17.   Mark Milian,  “ Why Text Messages Are Limited to 160 Characters, ”  Los Angeles 
Times , May 3, 2009, http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/technology/2009/05/invented
-text-messaging.html. 
 18.   Amanda Lenhart, Rich Ling, Scott Campbell, and Kristen Purcell,  “ Teens and 
Mobile Phones, ” Pew Internet  & American Life Project, April 20, 2010, http://www
.pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Teens-and-Mobile-Phones.aspx. 
 19.  Rhonda McEwen,   “ A World More Intimate: Exploring the Role of Mobile Phones 
in Maintaining and Extending Social Networks, ” PhD dissertation, Faculty of Infor-
mation, University of Toronto, 2009. For accounts of microcoordination in Japanese 

318 
Notes to Chapter 4
life, see Mazuko Ito, Misa Matsuda, and Okabe Daisuke, eds.,  Portable, Personal, Pedes-
trian (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005). 
 20.   Tess Kalinowski,  “ TTC Driver Caught on Break Suspended, ”  Toronto Star,  Feb-
ruary 4, 2005, http://www.thestar.com/news/gta/article/760507--ttc-driver-caught
-on-break-suspended. See also  “ TTC Workers ’ Facebook Site Swamped with Com-
plaints, ”  CBC News,  February 8, 2010, http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/story/
2010/02/08/ttc-facebook.html. 
 21.   Debra Donston,  “ The Decade ’ s Most Important Tech, ”  eWeek , January 4, 2010, 
p. 10; Kakuko Miyata, Barry Wellman, and Jeffrey Boase,  “ The Wired — and Wireless
 — Japanese, ”  in  Mobile Communication , ed. Rich Ling and Per Pedersen, 427 – 449 
(London: Springer, 2005). 
 22.   Kristen Purcell, Roger Entner, and Nichole Henderson,  “ The Rise of Apps 
Culture, ”  Pew Internet  & American Life Project, September 14, 2010, http://www
.pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/The-Rise-of-Apps-Culture.aspx. 
 23.  Jeff Bertolucci,  “ 10 Things Killed by the Smartphone, ”  PC World , April 15, 2010, 
http://www.pcworld.com/article/225372/10_things_killed_by_the_smartphone
.html. 
 24.   Chris Anderson and Michael Wolff,  “ The Web Is Dead. Long Live the Internet, ” 
 Wired, August 17, 2010, http://www.wired.com/magazine/2010/08/ff_webrip/all/1. 
 25.   Pew Research Center ’ s Internet  & American Life Project. Unpublished data from 
survey conducted in May 2011. 
 26.   See Pew Internet survey data available at http://pewinternet.org/Shared
-Content/Data-Sets/2010/May-2010--Cell-Phones.aspx. 
 27.  John Packzkowski,  “ Microsoft/Danger. Enough Said, ”  All Things D  blog, http://
digitaldaily.allthingsd.com/20091012/sidekick/; BBC,  “  ‘ Iranian cyber army ’ hits 
Twitter, ”  BBC News,  December 18, 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/
8420233.stm. 
 28.  Manuel Castells,  “ Afterword, ”  in  Handbook of Mobile Communications Studies , ed. 
James Katz, 448 – 449 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008). 
 29.   Scott Campbell and Michael Kelley,  “ Mobile Phone Use in AA Networks, ”  Journal 
of Applied Communication Research 34, no. 2 (2006): 191 – 208. 
 30.   Aaron Smith,  “ Americans and Their Cell Phones, ” Pew Internet  & American Life 
Project, August 2011, http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Cell-Phones.aspx. 
 31.   Cartoon by  “ Gregory, ”   New Yorker,  August 2, 2010, p. 56. See also Naomi Baron, 
 Always On (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008). 
 32.   Howard Rheingold,  Smart Mobs  (New York: Perseus, 2002); Ling,  The Mobile 
Connection , see note 4. 
 33.   Ling,  The Mobile Connection , see note 4. 
 34.  Rheingold,  Smart Mobs , see note 32. Ling,  The Mobile Connection , see note 4. 
 35.   Ling,  The Mobile Connection , see note 4. See also Ling and Campbell,  The Recon-
struction of Space and Time , see note 13. 
 36.   Rich Ling,  The Mobile Connection,  see note 14; Eva Thulin and Bertil Vilhelmson, 
 “ Mobiles Everywhere, ”  Young  15, no. 3 (2007): 235 – 253. 

Notes to Chapter 4 
319
 37.   Frances Cairncross quotation is from the back cover of  The Death of Distance: 
How the Communications Revolution Is Changing Our  Lives, 2nd ed. (Boston: Harvard 
Business School Press, 2001). 
 38.   Email to Barry Wellman, December 20, 2010, based on her tweet of December 
19, 2010. 
 39.  For home-based internet, see Diane Mok, Barry Wellman, and Juan-Antonio 
Carrasco,  “ Does Distance Matter in the Age of the Internet?  Urban Studies  47, no. 13 
(2010): 2747 – 2783. 
 40.   Manuel Castells,  The Rise of the Network Society, Oxford: Blackwell, 2000). 
 41.  Scott Campbell and Yong Jin Park,  “ Social Implications of Mobile Telephony, ” 
 Sociology Compass (January 2008): 371 – 387. 
 42.   Kenneth Gergen,  The Saturated Self (New York: Basic Books, 1991). 
 43.   Mary Madden and Lee Rainie,  “ Adults and Cell Phone Distractions, ” Pew Inter-
net  &  American Life Project , June 18, 2010, http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/
Cell-Phone-Distractions.aspx. 
 44.   Madden and Rainie,  “ Adults and Cell Phone Distractions, ” see note 43. Also 
 “ Sixth of Cell Phone Owners Have Bumped into Someone or Something while 
Using Their Handhelds, ” June 18, 2010,  http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/
Cell-Phone-Distractions/Major-Findings/5-Bumping-into-people-and-objects.aspx. 
 45.   The studies, which may not be representative, are summarized by Michael 
Kesterson,  “ Social Studies, ”  Toronto Globe and Mail,  December 19, 2009: A22; Ira 
Hyman Jr., S. Matthew Boss, Breanne Wise, Kira McKenzie, and Jenna Caggiano,  “ Did 
You See the Unicycling Clown? ”  Applied Cognitive Psychology  23, no. 2 (2010), http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/acp.1638/abstract. 
 46.   Abigail van Buren,  “ Cell Phone Users Should Give It a Rest in the Ladies Room, ” 
 Dear Abby on uExpress, October 24, 2008, http://www.uexpress.com/dearabby/
?uc_full_date=20081024. 
 47.   “ A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to New York (Or: Pillsbury Associates, 
Brace Yourselves), ”  Above the Law,  an insider website devoted to gossip about law 
ﬁ rms and courts, February 2009, http://abovethelaw.com/2009/02/a-funny-thing
-happened-on-the-way-to-new-yorkor-pillsbury-associates-brace-yourselves-. 
 48.   Erving Goffman,  Behavior in Public Places  (New York: Free Press, 1963). See also 
Georg Simmel,  “ The Metropolis and Mental Life, ” in  The Sociology of Georg Simmel , 
ed. Kurt Wolff, 409 – 424 (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, [1903] 1950); Ruth Rettie,  “ Mobile 
Phone Communication: Extending Goffman to Mediated Interaction, ”  Sociology  43 
(2009): 421 – 438. 
 49.   Lynn Loucester,  “ At My Wedding Twittering [sic] and Facebooking at the Altar, ” 
 YouTube, November 22, 2009, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VSkT5XykJzo. 
 50.   John B. Horrigan,  “ Mobile Access to Data and Information, ” Pew Internet  & 
American Society Project , March 2008, http://www.pewinternet.org/PPF/r/244/
report_display.asp. 
 51.  “ Continuous partial attention ” is a concept developed by internet analyst Linda 
Stone, http://lindastone.net. 

320 
Notes to Chapter 5
 Chapter 5 
 1.  Sharanpreet Kelley, Rhonda McEwen, and Justine Yu contributed to the writing 
of this chapter. We thank Kay Axhausen, Kristen Berg, Jeffrey Boase, Juan-Antonio 
Carrasco, Julia Chae, Jessica Collins, Sabrina Cutaia, Claude Fischer, Mirna Ghazar-
ian, Melissa Godbout, Keith Hampton, Bernie Hogan, Chang Lin, Julia Madej, Eric 
Miller, Mo Guang Ying, John Robinson, Telus, Hua Helen Wang, Erin Weinkauf, and 
Yu Janice Zhang for their advice and assistance. 
 2.  Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and Matthew Brashears,  “ Social Isolation 
in America, ”  American Sociological Review 71 (2008): 353 – 375. 
 3.  Sebastian Mallaby,  “ Why So Lonesome? ”  Washington Post , June 26, 2006, p. 
A21, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/06/25/AR2006
062500566.html; Douglas Cornish,  “ Is Computer-Glow the New Hearth-Light? ” 
 Toronto Globe  & Mail,  October 13, 2006, p. A13, http://www.theglobeandmail.com/
news/technology/is-computer-glow-the-new-hearth-light/article848997. 
 4.  Leo Marx,  The Machine in the Garden  (New York: Oxford University Press, 1964); 
Claude Fischer,  America Calling  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992); Jane 
Jacobs,  The Death and Life of Great American Cities  (New York: Random House, 1961); 
Andres Duany, Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk, and Jeff Speck,  Suburban Nation  (New York: 
North Point, 2000); Kay Axhausen,  “ Geographies of Somewhere, ”  Urban Studies  37, 
no. 10 (2000): 1849 – 1864. 
 5.  David Riesman, Reuel Denney, and Nathan Glazer,  The Lonely Crowd  (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1950); William Kornhauser,  The Politics of Mass 
Society  (New York: Free Press, 1959); Robert Nisbet,  The Quest for Community  (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1953). 
 6.  Maurice Stein,  The Eclipse of Community  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1960). 
 7.  Jim Hightower is quoted in Robert Fox,  “ Newstrack, ”   Communications of the ACM , 
38, no. 8 (1995): 11 – 12. 
 8.  The original article is Robert Kraut, Michael Patterson, Vicki Lundmark, Sara 
Kiesler, Tridas Mukhopadhyay, and William Scherlis,  “ Internet Paradox, ”  American 
Psychologist 53, no. 9 (1998): 1017 – 1031. One front-page story about this article 
is Amy Harmon ’ s  “ Sad, Lonely World Discovered in Cyberspace, ”  New York Times , 
August 30, 1998. The follow-up study is Robert Kraut, Sara Kiesler, Bonka Boneva, 
Jonathon Cummings, Vicki Helgeson, and Anne Crawford,  “ Internet Paradox 
Revisited, ”  Journal of Social Issues 58, no. 1 (2002): 49 – 74. 
 9.  William Gibson,  Neuromancer (New York: Ace, 1984). 
 10.  Sherry Turkle,  “ Who Am We? ”  Wired , January 1996, http://www.wired.com/
wired/archive/4.01/turkle.html; Sherry Turkle,  Alone Together  (New York: Basic 
Books, 2011). 
 11.   Keith Hampton, Lauren Sessions, Eun Ja Her, and Lee Rainie,  “ Social Isolation 
and New Technology, ” Pew Internet  & American Life Project, November 2009, http://
www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2009/18--Social-Isolation-and-New-Technology.aspx. 

Notes to Chapter 5 
321
 12.   Marshall McLuhan,  Understanding Media: The Extension of Man  (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1964). A good guide to McLuhan ’ s thoughts is Phillip Marchand and 
Neil Postman,  Marshall McLuhan: The Medium and the Messenger , rev. ed. (Cambridge 
MA: MIT Press, 1998). 
 13.   Paul McCartney,  “ Eleanor Rigby, ”  Revolver 1966 (Parlophone), London. 
 14.   Not opening door to strangers: Stanley Milgram,  “ The Experience of Living in 
Cities. ” Science, 167 (1970), 1461 – 1468. John Perry Barlow,  “ Is There a There in 
Cyberspace? ”  Utne Reader 68 (March – April 1995): 50. 
 15.   Pre-internet research is summarized in Barry Wellman,  “ Physical Place and 
Cyber Place, ”  International Journal of Urban and Regional Research  25, no. 2 (2001) : 
227 – 252; Barry Wellman,  “ The Persistence and Transformation of Community: 
From Neighbourhood Groups to Social Networks, ” Report to the Law Commis-
sion of Canada, Ottawa, October 2001, http://homes.chass.utoronto.ca/~wellman/
publications/lawcomm/lawcomm7.PDF. 
 16.   Robert Putnam,  Bowling Alone,  (New York: Simon  & Schuster, 2000), pp. 111 –
 112. For a critique of his argument, see Robert Andersen, James Curtis, and Edward 
Grabb,  “ Trends in Civic Association Activity in Four Democracies, ”  American Socio-
logical Review 71 (2006): 376 – 400. 
 17.   Barry Wellman,  “ The Community Question, ”  American Journal of Sociology  84 
(1979): 1201 – 1231; Barry Wellman and N. Scot Wortley,  “ Different Strokes from Dif-
ferent Folks, ”  American Journal of Sociology 96, no. 3 (1990): 558 – 588; Diana Mok 
and Barry Wellman,  “ How Much Did Distance Matter before the Internet? ”  Social 
Networks  29, no. 3 (2007): 430 – 461; Gabriele Plickert, Rochelle C ô t é , and Barry Well-
man,  “ It ’ s Not Who You Know, It ’ s How You Know Them, ”  Social Networks  29, no. 3 
(2007): 405 – 429; Claude Fischer,  To Dwell among Friends: Personal Networks in Town 
and City  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982) and  Still Connected  (New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation, 2011). 
 18.   Wellman,  “ The Community Question, ” note 17; Barry Wellman, Peter Car-
rington, and Alan Hall,  “ Networks as Personal Communities, ” in  Social Structures, 
ed. Barry Wellman and S. D. Berkowitz, 130 – 184 (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1988); Wellman and Wortley,  “ Different Strokes, ” note 17; Barry Wellman 
and David Tindall,  “ How Telephone Networks Connect Social Networks, ”  Progress in 
Communication Science 12 (1993): 63 – 94. 
 19.   Lauren Sessions,  “ How Ofﬂ ine Gatherings Affect Online Communities, ”  Infor-
mation, Communication  & Society 13, no. 3 (2010): 375 – 395. 
 20.   “ Limited liability ” is the key concept in sociologist Scott Greer ’ s  The Emerging 
City (New York: Free Press, 1962), the ﬁ rst book to document Americans ’ participa-
tion in multiple glocalized communities. 
 21.   Christena Nippert-Eng,  Islands of Privacy  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2011); Nicole Ellison, Jessica Vitak, Charles Steinfeld, Rebecca Gray, and Cliff Lampe, 
 “ Negotiating Privacy Concerns and Social Capital Needs in a Social Media Envi-
ronment, ” in  Privacy Online,  eds. Sabine Trepte and Leonard Reinecke (New York: 
Springer, 2011), pp. 19 – 32; danah boyd and Alice Marwick,  “ Social Steganography: 

322 
Notes to Chapter 5
Privacy in Networked Publics, ” paper presented to International Communication 
Association, Boston, May 2011. 
 22.   Wellman and Wortley,  “ Different Strokes, ” see note 17. 
 23.  Constantine Sedikides and Steven Spencer, eds.,  The Self  (New York: Psychology 
Press, 2007). 
 24.   Sherry Turkle,  The Second Self  (New York: Simon  & Schuster, 1984) and  Life on the 
Screen (New York: Simon  & Schuster, 1995). 
 25.   See also Kenneth Gergen,  The Saturated Self  (New York: Basic Books, 1991), 
Gergen,  “ Self and Community in the New Floating Worlds, ” in  Mobile Democracy, 
ed. Kristof Nyiri, 103 – 114 (Vienna: Passagen, 2002). 
 26.   Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin,  Remediation  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1999), quotation p. 232. Note that despite its title, Zizi Papacharissi ’ s edited work  A 
Networked Self (London: Routledge, 2010) is more about online social networks than 
about the self. 
 27.  Amanda Lenhart, Sousan Arafeh, Aaron Smith, and Alexandra Macgill,  “ Writing, 
Technology and Teens, ” Pew Internet Project, April 24, 2008, http://www.pewinternet
.org/Reports/2008/Writing-Technology-and-Teens.aspx. 
 28.  Marshall McLuhan and Bruce Powers,  The Global Village (Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1989). 
 29.   Pope Benedict XVI,  “ Message for the World Communication Day, ” January 24, 
2011, http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/benedict_xvi/messages/communications/
documents/hf_ben-xvi_mes_20110124_45th-world-communications-day_en.html. 
 30.   Juan-Antonio Carrasco, Barry Wellman, and Eric Miller,  “ How Far — and with 
Whom — Do People Socialize? ”  Transportation Research Record  2076 (2008): 114 – 122; 
Diana Mok, Barry Wellman, and Juan Carrasco,  “ Does Distance Matter in the Age of 
the Internet? ”  Urban  Studies 47, no. 13 (2010): 2747 – 2783; Steven Farber and Anto-
nio Paez,  “ Running to Stay in Place, ”  Journal of Transport Geograph  19, no. 4 (2011): 
782 – 793; Lauren Dugan,  “ Survey: Twitter Users Are More Active in Their Real Life 
Communities, ” July 15, 2010. 
 31.  Hua Wang and Barry Wellman,  “ Social Connectivity in America, ”  American 
Behavioral Scientist 53, no. 8 (2010): 1148 – 1169;  Jeffrey Boase, John Horrigan, Barry 
Wellman, and Lee Rainie,  “ The Strength of Internet Ties, ” Pew Internet  & Ameri-
can Life Project, 2006, http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2006/The-Strength-of
-Internet-Ties.aspx. 
 32.   Nancy Baym and Andrew Ledbetter,  “ Tunes that Bind? ”  Information, Communi-
cation  & Society  12, no. 3 (2009): 408 – 427; Keith Hampton, Lauren Sessions Goulet, 
Lee Rainie, and Kristen Purcell,  “ Social Networking Sites and Our Lives, ” Pew Inter-
net  & American Life Project, June 2011, http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/
Technology-and-social-networks/Summary.aspx; Randy Lynn and James Witte, 
 “ Social Network Sites, Social Ties, and Social Capital, ” paper presented to American 
Sociological Association, Las Vegas, August, 2011; Keith Hampton, Chul-joo Lee, 
and Eun Ja Her,  “ How New Media Affords Network Diversity, ”  New Media  & Society 
13 (2011); Keith Hampton,  “ Comparing Bonding and Bridging Ties for Democratic 

Notes to Chapter 5 
323
Engagement, ”   Information, Communication  & Society  14, no. 4 (2011): 510 – 528; 
Jennifer Earl and Katrina Kimport,  Digially Enabled Social Change  (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 2011); Stefan Bauernschuster, Oliver Falck, and Ludger Woessmann,  “ Surf-
ing Alone? The Internet and Social Capital, ” CESifo Working Paper 3469, Ifo Insti-
tute, Munich, August, http://www.cesifo-group.de/portal/pls/portal/docs/1/1205909
.PDF. 
 33.   Personal email to coauthor Wellman, February 5, 2010. 
 34.  Wang and Wellman,  “ Social Connectivity, ” see note 31. 
 35.  Nardi ’ s quotation is from http://darrouzet-nardi.net/bonnie/. Her research is 
reported in her work  My Life as a Night Elf Priest  (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Press, 2010). See also William Bainbridge,  The Warcraft Civilization  (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press 2010); Eleni Stroulia,  “ Smart Services across the Real and Virtual Worlds, ” 
in  The Smart Internet,  ed. James Cordy, Mark Chignell, Joanna Ng, and Yelena Yesha, 
178 – 196 (Berlin: Springer, 2010). 
 36.  Keith Hampton and Barry Wellman,  “ Neighboring in Netville, ”  City and Com-
munity 2, no. 3 (2003): 277 – 311. 
 37.   Keith Hampton,  “ Neighborhoods in the Network Society, ”  Information, Commu-
nication and Society 10, no. 5 (2007): 714 – 748. 
 38.   Aaron Smith,  “ Neighbors Online, ” Pew Internet  & American Life Project, 
Washington, DC, June 2009, http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Neighbors
-Online.aspx. 
 39.   Robin Dunbar, email communication to coauthor Wellman, March 30, 2010. 
 40.  Robin Dunbar,  “ How Many Friends Do You Need? Dunbar ’ s Number, ”  BBC News , 
February 4, 2010, http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_8497000/8497541
.stm. See also Dunbar,  “ The Social Brain Hypothesis, ”  Evolutionary Anthropology  6, 
no. 5 (1998): 178 – 190; Robin Dunbar, Clive Gamble, and John Gowlett, eds.,  Social 
Brain, Distributed Mind  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), especially Sam Rob-
erts,  “ Constraints on Networks, ” pp. 115 – 134. See also Sam Roberts, Robin Dunbar, 
Thomas Pollet, and Toon Kuppens,  “ Exploring Variation in Active Network Size, ” 
Social Networks  31 (2009): 138 – 146; Alistair Sutcliffe, Robin Dunbar, Jens Binder, and 
Holly Arrow,  “ Relationships and the Social Brain, ”  British Journal of Psychology  102, 
no. 4 (2011). 
 41.   For an example of computer scientists and media coverage of Dunbar ’ s number, 
see Chris Gourlay,   “ OMG: Brains Can ’ t Handle All Our Facebook Friends, ” [Lon-
don]  Sunday Times , January 24, 2010, http://technology.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/
tech_and_web/the_web/article6999879.ece. 
 42.   Putnam,  Bowling Alone , see note 16.  
 43.  John Cacioppo and William Patrick,  Loneliness (New York: Norton, 2008). 
 44.   Thomas Valente,  Social Networks and Health  (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2010). 
 45.   Keith Hampton and Barry Wellman,  “ The Not So Global Village of Netville, ” 
in The Internet in Everyday Life,  ed. Barry Wellman and Caroline Haythornthwaite, 
345 – 371 (Oxford: Blackwell, 2002). 

324 
Notes to Chapter 5
 46.   Jeffrey Boase and Barry Wellman,  “ A Plague of Viruses, ”  Current Sociology  49, no. 
6 (2001): 39 – 55; Emanuel Rosen,  The Anatomy of Buzz Revisited  (New York: Broadway 
Business, 2009). 
 47.   Mark Granovetter,  “ The Strength of Weak Ties: A Network Theory Revisited, ” 
 Sociological Theory 1 (1983): 201 – 233. 
 48.   É mile Durkheim,  The Division of Labor in Society  (New York: Macmillan, [1893] 
1993). 
 49.   Lijun Song, Joonmo Son, and Nan Lin,  “ Social Support, ” in  Sage Handbook of 
Social Network Analysis,  ed. John Scott and Peter Carrington (London: Sage, 2011), 
116 – 128; Linjun Song, Joonmo Son, and Nan Lin,  “ Social Capial and Health, ” in  The 
New Companion to Medical Sociology,  ed. William Cockerham (Oxford: Wiley-Black-
well, 210), 184 – 210; Lijun Song,  “ Social Capital and Psychological Distress, ”  Journal 
of Health and Social Behavior  (forthcoming); Sheldon Cohen, William Doyle, David 
Skoner, Bruce S. Rabin, and Jack Gwaltney,  “ Social Ties and Susceptibility to the 
Common Cold, ”  Journal of the American Medical Association 277 (1997): 1940 – 1944; 
Nicholas Christakis and James Fowler,  Connected  (New York: Little, Brown, 2009). 
 50.   Jeffrey Boase and Barry Wellman,  “ Personal Relationships: On and Off the Inter-
net, ” in  Cambridge Handbook of Personal Relationships , ed. Anita Vangelisti and Daniel 
Perlman, 709 – 723 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006); Boase, Horrigan, 
Wellman, and Rainie,  “ The Strength of Internet Ties, ” see note 31. 
 51.   Barry Wellman and Milena Gulia,  “ A Network Is More Than the Sum of Its Ties, ” 
in  Networks in the Global Village , ed. Barry Wellman, 83 – 118 (Boulder CO: Westview, 
1999). 
 52.   H. Russell Bernard, Peter Killworth, Eugene Johnsen, Gene Shelley, and Chris-
topher McCarty,  “ Estimating the Ripple Effect of a Disaster, ”  Connections  24, no. 2 
(2001): 18 – 22. 
 53.   Tyler McCormick, Matthew Salganik, and Tian Zheng,  “ How Many People Do 
You Know? Efﬁ ciently Estimating Personal Network Size, ”  Journal of the American 
Statistical Association  105, no. 489 (2010): 59 – 70;  Tian Zheng, Matthew Salganik, and 
Andrew Gelman,  “ How Many People Do You Know in Prison? ”  Journal of the Ameri-
can Statistical Association  101, no. 474 (2006): 409 – 423. See also Thomas DiPrete, 
Andrew Gelman, Tyler McCormack, Julien Teitler, and Tian Zhang,  “ Segregation in 
Social Networks Based on Acquaintanceship and Trust, ”  American Journal of Sociology 
116, no. 4 (2011): 1234 – 1283. 
 54.   Hampton, Sessions, Rainie, and Purcell.  “ Social Networking Sites and Our Lives, ” 
see note 32.  
 55.   Melinda Blau and Karen Fingerman,  Consequential Strangers  (New York: Norton, 
2009). 
 56.   Jeremy Boissevain,  Friends of Friends (Oxford: Blackwell, 1974). 
 57.  Raymond Firth, Jane Hubert, and Anthony Forge,  Families and Their Relatives 
(London: Routledge, 1969). 
 58.   Boase, Horrigan, Wellman, and Rainie.  “ The Strength of Internet Ties, ” see 
note 31. 

Notes to Chapter 5 
325
 59.   Melissa Godbout, Tracy Kennedy, Barry Wellman, and Yu Janice Zhang,  “ The 
Colors of Closeness, ” International Sunbelt Social Network Conference, St. Pete 
Beach, FL, February 2011. 
 60.  Wellman, Carrington, and Hall,  “ Networks as Personal Communities, ” see 
note 18. 
 61.   Barry Wellman,  “ The Place of Kinfolk in Personal Community Networks, ”  Mar-
riage and Family Review  15, no. 1/2 (1990): 195 – 228; Wellman and Wortley,  “ Differ-
ent Strokes, ” see note 17; Jacob Habinek, John Levi Martin, and Benjamin Zablocki, 
 “ Long Term Persistence and Re-Formation of Close Personal Ties, ” Working Paper, 
University of Chicago Department of Sociology, April 2010. 
 62.   Beverly Wellman and Barry Wellman,  “ Domestic Affairs and Network Rela-
tions, ”  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 9 (1992): 385 – 409. 
 63.   Fischer,  To Dwell among Friends , see note 17 . 
 64.   Rochelle C ô t é , Gabriele Plickert, and Barry Wellman,  “ Does the Golden Rule, 
Rule? ”  in  Contexts of Social Capital , ed. Ray-May Hsung, Nan Lin and Ronald Breiger, 
49 – 71 (London: Routledge, 2009). 
 65.   “ Oxford Word of the Year 2009: Unfriend, ”  OUPblog , http://blog.oup.com/
2009/11/unfriend; Chirstopher Sibona and Steven Walczak,  “ Unfriending on Face-
book, ”   Proceedings of the 2011 Hawaii International Conference on System Science 
(Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society, 2011), http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HICSS
.2011.467. 
 66.   Barry Wellman, Renita Wong, David Tindall, and Nancy Nazer,  “ A Decade of 
Network Change, ”  Social Networks  19 (1997): 27 – 51; Niles Eldredge and Stephen 
Gould,  “ Punctuated Equilibria ” in  Models in Paleobiology , ed. Thomas Schopf, 82 – 115 
(San Francisco: Freeman, Cooper, 1972). 
 67.   While we discuss substantive matters here, see also the methodological discus-
sions in Claude Fischer,  “ The 2004 GSS Finding of Shrunken Social Networks, ”  Amer-
ican Sociological Review  74 (2009): 657 – 669; Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith-Lovin, 
and Matthew Brashears,  “ Models and Marginals, ”  American Sociological Review  74 
(2009): 670 – 681; Peter Marsden and Karen Campbell,  “ Measuring Tie Strength, ” 
 Social Forces 63 (1984): 482 – 450. 
 68.   Peter Bearman and Paolo Parigi,  “ Cloning Headless Frogs and Other Important 
Matters, ”  Social Forces 83, no. 2 (2004): 535 – 557. 
 69.   Fischer,  To Dwell among Friends , note 17. 
 70.   The  “ target ”  closeness question started with:  “ Here is the sheet where we will draw 
your social network. It will look something like this when it is done. [Show them the 
example sheet.] Start with the very close names. Put the people who know each other 
closer together, and put the people who you feel closest to nearest to you. ” The second 
set of closeness questions began this way:  “ In the survey, we asked you about people 
who are Very Close and Somewhat Close to you. VERY CLOSE: Discuss important 
matters with, or regularly keep in touch with, or there for you if you need help. This 
is our Name Template. On each of the little strips, you will be able to write down 
the names of people you know. Okay, now think of people who ﬁ t that  ‘ Very Close ’ 

326 
Notes to Chapter 5
description. Please write down all the names of the people you feel very close. Please do 
not include people who you live with. ” For further information, see the interview and 
survey instruments themselves: http://homes.chass.utoronto.ca/~wellman/cgi-bin/
counter.php?url=http://chass.utoronto.ca/~wellman/publications/ConnectedLives/
InterviewGuide.htm & f=InterviewGuidea & mode=1. For more information, see: Barry 
Wellman, Bernie Hogan, Kristen Berg, Jeffrey Boase, Juan-Antonio Carrasco, Rochelle 
C ô t é , Jennifer Kayahara, Tracy Kennedy, and Phuoc Tran,  “ Connected Lives: The 
Project, ”  in  Networked Neighborhoods,  ed. Patrick Purcell (Guildford , UK: Springer, 
2006), 157 – 211. The study only looked at relationships outside of the household and 
not with spouses or others living at home. 
 71.   McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Brashears,  “ Social Isolation, ” see note 2. 
 72.  As does a recent Pew Internet survey reported in: Keith Hampton, Lauren Ses-
sions, and Eun Ja Her,  “ Core Networks and New Media, ”  Information Communication 
and Society 14, no. 1 (2011): 130 – 155. 
 73.   Email to coauthor Wellman, October 2, 2009. 
 74.  Barry Wellman,  “ Domestic Work, Paid Work and Net Work, ” in  Understanding 
Personal Relationships,  ed. Steve Duck and Daniel Perlman (London: Sage, 1985), 
159 – 191. 
 75.  Gwen Moore,  “ Structural Determinants of Men ’ s and Women ’ s Personal Net-
works, ”   American Sociological Review  55 (1990): 726 – 735; Arlie Russell Hochschild,  The 
Time Bind  (New York: Metropolitan, 1997); Wellman,  “ Domestic Work, ” see note 74. 
 76.   Eszter Hargittai and Yu-li Patrick Hsieh,  “ Predictors and Consequences of Differ-
entiated Practices on Social Network Sites, ”  Information, Communication and Society 
13, no. 4 (2010): 515 – 536. 
 77.  Jon Kleinberg,  “ The Human Texture of Information, ” World Question Center, 
2010, http://edge.org/q2010/q10_9.html#kleinberg. 
 78.   Mary Madden and Kathryn Zickuhr.  “ 65% of Online Adults Use Social 
Networking Sites. ” Pew Internet  & American Life Project survey. August 2011, 
http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Social-Networking-Sites.aspx. 
 79.   Hampton, Sessions, Rainie, and Purcell,  “ Social Networking Sites and Our Lifes, ” 
see note 32. 
 80.   KABC News Los Angeles,  “ Nielsen: Google Most Visited Site, But More Time Spent 
on Facebook, ” April 14, 2011, http://abclocal.go.com/kabc/story?section=news/
consumer & id=8072533. 
 81.   David Kirkpatrick,  The Facebook Effect  (New York: Simon  & Schuster, 2010), 
p. 199. 
 82.   Jacob Habinek, John Levi Martin, and Benjamin Zablocki,  “ Long Term Persis-
tence and Re-Formation of Close Personal Ties, ” Working Paper, Department of 
Sociology, University of Chicago, 2010; Bernie Hogan, Nai Li, and William Dutton, 
 “ A Global Shift in the Social Relationships of Networked Individuals, ” Working 
Paper, Oxford University, Oxford Internet Institute, February 14, 2010, http://papers
.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1763884. 
 83.   For Facebook ’ s growing international presence, see Miguel Helft,  “ Friending the 
World, ”  New York Times,  July 8 2010; Ben Parr,  “ Facebook Is the Web ’ s Ultimate 

Notes to Chapter 5 
327
Timesink, ”  February 16, 2010, http://mashable.com/2010/02/16/facebook-nielsen
-stats. 
 84.  Scott Golder and Sarita Yardi,  “ Structural Predictors of Tie Formation in Twitter, ” 
 Proceedings of the Second IEEE International Conference on Social Computing , August 
20 – 22, 2010, Minneapolis, MN; Nicole Ellison, Cliff Lampe, Charles Steinﬁ eld, and 
Jessica Vitak,  “ With a Little Help from My Friends, ” in  A Networked Self , ed. Zizi 
Papacharissi (London: Routledge, 2010), 124 – 145; danah boyd,  “ Why Youth (Heart) 
Social Network Sites, ” in  Youth, Identity and Digital Media , ed. David Buckingham 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007), 119 – 142. 
 85.   Leopoldina Fortunati, James Katz, and Raimonda Riccini,  Mediating the Human 
Body (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2003). 
 86.   Hampton, Sessions, Her, and Rainie,  “ Social Isolation and New Technology, ” 
see note 11; John Robinson and Steven Marin,  “ Of Time and Television, ”  Annals of 
Political and Social Sciences 625, no. 1 (2009): 74 – 86. 
 87.   Nicole Ellison, Charles Steinﬁ eld, and Cliff Lampe,  “ The Beneﬁ ts of Facebook 
 ‘ Friends, ’ ”   Journal of Computer Mediated Communication  12, no. 4 (2007): article 1, 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00367.x/pdf; 
Moira 
Burke, Cameron Marlow, and Thomas Lento,  “ Social Network Activity and Social 
Well-Being, ” paper presented to the  CHI conference  (International Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems), Atlanta, April 2010. Michael Stern, Jessica Col-
lins, and Barry Wellman, ed.,  “ The Internet in Rural North American Life, ”  American 
Behavioral Scientist 53, no. 9 (2010): 1344 – 1366. 
 88.   Irina Shklovski, Sara Kiesler, and Robert Kraut,  “ The Internet and Social Interac-
tion, ” in  Computers, Phones and the Internet, ed. Robert Kraut, Malcolm Brynin, and 
Sara Kiesler (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006), 250 – 264; Hampton, Sessions, 
and Eun Ja,  “ Core Networks, ” see note 71; Wang and Wellman,  “ Social Connectiv-
ity, ” see note 31. 
 89.   Keith Hampton, Chul-joo Lee, and Eun Ja Her,  “ How New Media Affords Net-
work Diversity, ”  New Media  & Society 13, preprint doi: 10.1177/1461444810390342. 
 90.  Stephen Rains and Valerie Young,  “ A Meta-Analysis of Research on Formal 
Computer-Mediated Support Groups, ”  Human Communication Research  35 (2009): 
309 – 336; Boase, Horrigan, and Wellman,  “ The Strength of Internet Ties, ” see note 
31; Jeffrey Boase,  “ America Online and Ofﬂ ine, ” Ph.D. dissertation, Department 
of Sociology, University of Toronto, 2006; Lijun Song, Joonmo Son, and Nan Lin, 
 “ Social Support, ” in  Sage Handbook of Social Network Analysis,  ed. John Scott and 
Peter Carrington (London: Sage, 2011), 116 – 128; Kristen Berg,  “ Health Management 
in the Age of the Internet, ” PhD dissertation, Faculty of Social Work, University of 
Toronto, 2011. 
 91.  Susannah Fox,  “ Peer to Peer Healthcare, ” Pew Internet  & American Life 
Project, Feb. 28, 2011, http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/P2PHealthcare.
aspx, p. 2. 
 92.   Quoted by Claire Cain Miller,  “ Social Networks a Lifeline for the Chronically 
Ill, ”  New York Times , March 24, 2010, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/03/25/
technology/25disable.html. 

328 
Notes to Chapter 6
 93.   Patti Valkenburg and Jochen Peter,  “ Online Communication and Adolescent 
Well-Being, ”  Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication  12, no. 4 (2007): article 2, 
http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol12/issue4/valkenburg.html. 
 94.   Jessica Vitak and Nicole Ellison,  “ There ’ s a Network Out There That You Might 
as Well Tap, ” paper presented at the National Communication Association, San Fran-
cisco, November 2010. 
 95.  Juan-Antonio Carrasco, Eric Miller, and Barry Wellman,  “ How Far and with 
Whom Do People Socialize? ”  Transportation Research Record  2076, (2008): 114 – 122. 
 Chapter 6 
 1.  Tracy L. M. Kennedy coauthored this chapter. We appreciate the advice and 
assistance we received from Mohammad Haque, Arlie Hochschild, Maria Majerski, 
Melissa Milkie, and Yu Janice Zhang. 
 2.  Hillary Rodham Clinton,  It Takes A Village  (New York: Simon  & Schuster, 1996), 
p. 14. 
 3.  Martin Turcotte,  “ Time Spent with Family during a Typical Work Day, 1986 
to 2006, ” Statistics Canada,  Canadian Social Trends , April 13, 2010; Melissa Milkie, 
Marybeth Mattingly, Kei Nomaguchi, Suzanne Bianchi, and John Robinson,  “ The 
Time Squeeze, ”  Journal of Marriage and Family 66, no. 3 (2004): 739 – 761. 
 4.  This is further described in Tracy L. M. Kennedy,  “ The Household Internet, ” PhD 
dissertation, Department of Sociology, University of Toronto, 2010. 
 5.  Throughout this chapter we use the term  “ partner ”  instead of  “ married ”  to 
include those North Americans cohabiting without being formally married. (In 
Canada, they would often be called  “ living common-law. ” ) We use  “ spouse ” to 
refer to a cohabiting partner. Where our sources only report about formally married 
people, we use  “ married ” instead of  “ partner. ” 
 6.  Tom Edwards,  “ As Baby Boomers Age, Fewer Families Have Children under 18 
at Home, ” U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce, February 25, 2009, 
http://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/families_households/cb09-29
.html. 
 7.  Figure 6.1: Household size data from Gretchen Livingstone and D ’ Vera Cohn, 
 “ Childlessness Up among All Women; Down among Women with Advanced 
Degrees, ”  Pew Social  & Demographic Trends, Pew Research Center, http://pewso
cialtrends.org/pubs/758/rising-share-women-have-no-children-childlessness; Statis-
tics Canada, Census 1971, Publication number 93 – 715, Ottawa; Statistics Canada, 
Census 1981: Proﬁ le of Census Subdivisions, Catalogue no. SDP81A10, Ottawa; 
Statistics Canada, Census 1981 – 1991: Proﬁ le of Census Subdivisions, Statistics 
Canada Catalogue no. 95F0072XCB, Ottawa; Statistics Canada, Census 1996: Proﬁ le 
of Federal Electoral District, Catalogue no. 95F0180XDB, Ottawa, 1998); Statistics 
Canada, Census 2001: Proﬁ le of Federal Electoral District, Catalogue no. 95F0495X-
CB2001007, Ottawa, 2003; Statistics Canada, Census 2006: Proﬁ le of Federal Elec-
toral District, Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 94 – 581-X2006007, Ottawa, 2008; U.S. 

Notes to Chapter 6 
329
Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, March and Annual Social and Economic 
Supplements, 2008 and earlier, Table FM-3: http://www.census.gov/population/
www/socdemo/hh-fam.html (1960/1, 1970/1, etc., refers to data available for 1960 
in the United States and for 1961 in Canada, up to 2005 for United States and 2006 
for Canada). 
 8.  Later marriage data are from D ’ Vera Cohn,  “ The States of Marriage and Divorce: 
Lots of Ex ’ s Live in Texas, ” Pew Social  & Demographic Trends. Pew Research Center, 
http://pewsocialtrends.org/2009/10/15/the-states-of-marriage-and-divorce/; Richard 
Fry and D ’ Vera Cohn,  “ Women, Men and the New Economics of Marriage, ” Pew 
Social  &  Demographic Trends, Pew Research Center, http://pewsocialtrends.org/
pubs/750/new-economics-of-marriage; Jason Fields,  “ America ’ s Families and Living 
Arrangements: 2003, ” U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce, Econom-
ics and Statistics, November 2004, http://www.census.gov/prod/2004pubs/p20-553
.pdf. 
 9.  Divorce rate data from  “ Divorces, ”   The Daily , March 9, 2005, http://www.statcan
.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/050309/dq050309b-eng.htm; R. D. Fraser,  “ Section B: Vital 
Statistics and Health, ” Series B75-81: Number of marriages and rate, average age at 
marriages, number of divorces and rate, net family formation, Canada, 1921 to 1947, 
 Historical Statistics of Canada , Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 11 – 516-X Ottawa, 
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/11-516-x/pdf/5500093-eng.pdf [1960 – 1970 source]; 
Statistics Canada,  “ Population Estimates, ”  Annual Demographic Statistics 2005 , Cata-
logue no. 91 – 213-XPB, Ottawa, 2006, http://www.chass.utoronto.ca./datalib/code
books/dsp/ads2000.htm [1975 – 2000 population estimates]; Statistics Canada,  Table 
053 – 0002 — Vital statistics, divorces, annual (number)  (table), http://www40.statcan
.gc.ca/l01/cst01/famil02-eng.htm; Statistics Canada,  Table 101 – 6501 — Divorces and 
crude divorce rates, Canada, provinces and territories, annual  (table), http://estat.statcan
.gc.ca/cgi-win/cnsmcgi.exe?Lang=E & EST-Fi=EStat/English/CII_1-eng.htm[2005 
source]; U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2009, based 
on U.S. National Center for Health Statistics,  Vital Statistics of the United States , 
and  National Vital Statistics Report (NSVR):   1960 – 2006 , http://www.census.gov/
prod/2008pubs/09statab/vitstat.pdf. U.S. divorce rate data include reported 
annulments, but exclude rates from 2000 for California, Colorado, Indiana, and 
Louisiana, and from 2005 for California, Georgia, Hawaii, Indiana, Louisiana, and 
Minnesota. 
 Household stability data from Richard Fry and D ’ Vera Cohn,  “ Women, Men and 
the New Economics of Marriage, ” Pew Social  & Demographic Trends, see note 8. 
 10.   Doug Anderson and Radha Subramanyam,  “ The New Digital American Family, ” 
Nielsen Report, April 2011, New York. http://www.mobimatter.com/wp-content/
uploads/2011/04/New-Digital-American-Family.pdf. 
 11.   Elizabeth Abbott,  A History of Marriage  (Toronto: Penguin, 2010); Andrew Cher-
lin,  The Marriage Go-Round  (New York: Random House, 2009). For a more alarmed 
view, see Paul Amato, Alan Booth, David Johnson, and Stacy Rogers,  Alone Together 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007). 

330 
Notes to Chapter 6
 12.   Dual-earner household data from Frank T. Denton,  “ Section D: The Labour 
Force, ” Series D8-85: Work force, by industrial category and sex, census years 1911 
to 1971 (gainfully occupied 1911 to 1941, labour force 1951 to 1971),  Historical Sta-
tistics of Canada,  Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 11 – 516-X, Ottawa, section D, p. 
12, http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/11-516-x/pdf/5500094-eng.pdf; Statistics Canada, 
 “ Population Estimates and Projections: Citizenship and Immigration 1921 – 1971, ” 
report 91 – 512 (1973): pp. 50 and 60; Statistics Canada,  “ Labour Force Historical 
Review, 2008, ” labor force estimates by detailed age groups, sex, Canada, province, 
annual averages, Statistics Canada Labour Statistics Division, Ottawa; Communi-
cation Canada, Depository Services Program, STC cat. 71F0004XCB, 2009, http://
datalib.chass.utoronto.ca/inventory/3000/3833.htm; U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical 
Abstract of the United States: 2008, based on U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Bulle-
tin 2307 and Employment and Earnings, monthly, January 2008 issue:  “ Table 569. 
Civilian Population — Employment Status by Sex, Race, and Ethnicity, ” http://www
.census.gov/prod/2007pubs/08abstract/labor.pdf. Authors ’ calculations for Canadi-
an percentages based on number of employed individuals divided over population 
estimates. 
 Time use data from Liana C. Sayer,  “ More Work for Mothers? ” in  Time Competi-
tion , ed. Tanja van der Lippe and Pascalla Petters, pp. 41 – 56 (Northampton, MA: 
Elgar, 2007); Liana C. Sayer,  “ Gender, Time and Inequality: Trends in Women ’ s 
and Men ’ s Paid Work, Unpaid Work and Free Time, ”  Social Forces  84, no. 1 (2005): 
285 – 303. 
 13.   Statistics Canada, Table 355-0001: Restaurant, caterer, and tavern statistics, 
monthly dollars, CANSIM last updated November 2007, http://www5.statcan.gc
.ca/cansim/pick-choisir?lang=eng & searchTypeByValue=1 & id=3550001; U.S. Census 
Bureau,  “ County Business Patterns, ” 1998 – 2007 (Table 1238 — Service Related 
Industries). 
 14.   Francine Blau, Marianne Ferber, and Anne Winkler,  Economics of Women, Men, 
and Work , 5th ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2006); U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics,  “ Employment Characteristics of Families Summary, ” United States Depart-
ment of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, http://www.bls.gov/news.release/famee
.nr0.htm. 
 15.   Arlene Moscovitch,  “ Electronic Media and the Family, ” Ottawa: Vanier Institute 
of the Family, 1998; Martin Turcotte,  “ Time Spent with Family during a Typical Work 
Day, 1986 to 2006, ”  Canadian Social Trends  (Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 2008), http://
www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/11-008-x/2006007/9574-eng.htm; Jerry Jacobs and Kathleen 
Gerson,  “ Overworked Individuals or Overworked Families? ”  Work and Occupations 
28, no. 1 (2001): 40 – 63. 
 16.   Liana Sayer,  “ Gender, Time and Inequality: Trends in Women ’ s and Men ’ s Paid 
Work, Unpaid Work and Free Time, ”  Social Forces  84, no. 1 (2005): 285 – 303; Ben 
Veenhof,  “ The Internet: Is It Changing the Way Canadians Spend Their Time? ” 
Statistics Canada, Science, Innovation and Electronic Information Division, 
2006. Shira Offer and Barbara Schneider,  “ The Gender Gap in Time-Use Patterns, ” 
 American Sociological Review 20 (2011): 809 – 833. 

Notes to Chapter 6 
331
 17.   Glenn Stalker,  “ Change in the Social and Environmental Context of Canadian 
Leisure Time, 1986 – 1998. ”  Presented to the International Association for Time Use 
Research, Halifax, Nova Scotia, November 2005; William Michelson,  From Sun to Sun 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2005); Heather Menzies,  No Time  (Vancouver: 
Douglas  & McIntyre, 2005). 
 18.   Barry Wellman and Beverly Wellman,  “ Domestic Affairs and Network Rela-
tions, ”   Journal of Social and Personal Relationships  9 (1992): 385 – 409; Barry Wellman, 
 “ Domestic Work, Paid Work and Net Work, ” in  Understanding Personal Relationships, 
ed. Steve Duck and Daniel Perlman (London: Sage, 1985), 159 – 191. 
 19.   Leslie Haddon,  “ Explaining ICT Consumption, ” in  Consuming Technologies , ed. 
Roger Silverstone and Eric Hirsch (Routledge, London), 82 – 96; Roger Silverstone 
and Leslie Haddon,  “ Design and the Domestication of Information and Commu-
nication Technologies, ” in  Communication by Design , ed. Roger Silverstone and 
Robin Mansell (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), 44 – 74. Environics Analytics 
and Delvinia,  “ New Database Reveals Social Media Habits Tied to Canadian Life-
styles, ”  March 21, 2011, http://www.environicsanalytics.ca/media_room.aspx?tab
=news & item=2011Mar21_Database. 
 20.   Survey data from Pew Internet  & American Life Project, August 2011, unpub-
lished. 
 21.   Stephen Blumberg and Julian Luke,  “ Wireless Substitution: Early Release of Esti-
mates From the National Health Interview Survey, July-December 2010, ” Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhis/earlyrelease/
wireless201106.pdf; Statistics Canada,  “ Household Internet Use Survey, ”  The Dai-
ly , July 8, 2004, http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/040708/dq040708a-eng
.htm; Eric Newburger,  “ Home Computers and Internet Use in the United States: 
August 2000, ”  Current Population Reports , U.S. Census Bureau, September 2001, 
http://www.census.gov/prod/2001pubs/p23-207.pdf. 
 22.   Annenberg Center for the Digital Future,  “ Family Time Decreasing with Internet 
Use, ”  University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 2009, http://uscnews.usc.edu/
digital_media/family_time_decreases_with_internet_use.html;  USA Today,   “ Family 
Eroding in U.S. as Internet Use Soars, ” June 15 2009; Garey Ramey and Valerie 
Ramey,  “ The Rug Rat Race, ” National Bureau of Economic Research, Washington, 
DC, August 2009. 
 23.   Melissa Milkie, Marybeth Mattingly, Kei Nomaguchi, Suzanne Bianchi, 
and John Robinson,  “ The Time Squeeze, ”  Journal of Marriage and Family  66, no. 3 
(2004): 739 – 761; Marybeth Mattingly and Suzanne Bianchi,  “ Gender Differences 
in the Quantity and Quality of Free Time, ”  Social Forces  81, no. 3 (2003): 999 – 1030. 
 24.   Pew Research Center,  “ 62% — Crowded Tables This Thanksgiving, ” March 25, 
2011, http://pewresearch.org/databank/dailynumber/?NumberID=1137. 
 25.   Raelene Wilding,  “ ‘ Virtual ’ Intimacies, ”  Global Networks  6, no. 2 (2006): 125 –
 142; Michael Stern and Chris Messer,  “ How Family Members Stay in Touch, ”  Mar-
riage  & Family Review 45 (2009): 654 – 676. 
 26.   Telus,  “ Technology Usage and Attitudes of the Consumer, ” August 2009, 
unpublished report. 

332 
Notes to Chapter 6
 27.   Katie Hafner,  “ If the Kitchen ’ s Warm, It May be the PC, ”  New York Times,  De-
cember 11, 2003, http://www.nytimes.com/2003/12/11/technology/if-the-kitchen-s
-warm-it-may-be-the-pc.html. 
 28.   Maria Lianos-Carbone,  “ Kids Who Love Technology: My Kid is Tech Savvy, ” 
 Amother World  blog, http://amotherworld.com/main/parenting/tech-savvy-kids, 
September 28, 2009. 
 29.   Quoted in Hilary Stout,  “ Toddlers ’ Favorite Toy: The iPhone, ”  New York Times, 
October 15, 2010, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/17/fashion/17TODDLERS.
html; see also Avivia Lucas Gutnick, Michael Robb, Lori Takeuchi, and Jennifer 
Kotler,  “ Always Connected, ” New York: Joan Ganz Cooney Center, 201. 
 30.   Telus,  “ Technology Usage, ” see note 26. 
 31.  Amanda Lenhart, Kristen Purcell, Aaron Smith, and Kathryn Zickuhr,   “ Social 
Media  & Young Adults, ” Pew Internet  & American Life Project, February 3, 2010, 
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Social-Media-and-Young-Adults/Part-2/
1-Cell-phones.aspx. See also the detailed ethnography of teens ’ online life in Mizuko 
Ito, Sonja Baumer, Matteo Bittanti, danah boyd, Rachel Cody, Becky Herr-Stephen-
son, Heather Horst, Patricia Lange, Dilan Mahendran, Katynka Martinez, C. J. Pas-
coe, Dan Perkel, Laura Robinson, Christo Sims, and Lisa Tripp,  Hanging Out, Messing 
Around, and Geeking Out (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009). 
 32.   Jill Dimond, Erika Shehan Poole, and Sarita Yardi,  “ The Effects of Life Disruptions 
on Home Technology Routines, ” Proceedings of the Group  ’ 10 Conference (New 
York: ACM, 2010), 85 – 88, http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1880071.1880085. 
 33.   Tracy Kennedy and Barry Wellman,  “ The Networked Household, ”  Information, 
Communication  & Society 10, no. 5 (2007): 644 – 669. 
 34.   Caroline Haythornthwaite and Barry Wellman,  “ Work, Friendship, and Media 
Use for Information Exchange in a Networked Organization, ”  Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science 49 (1988): 1101 – 1014. 
 35.   Margaret Nelson,  Parenting Out of Control  (New York: New York University Press, 
2010). 
 36.   Sarita Yardi and Amy Bruckman,  “ Social and Technical Challenges in Parenting 
Teens ’ Social Media Use, ” Presented to the  CHI 2011  conference, May 7 – 12, 2011, 
Vancouver, http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~yardi/pubs/Yardi_ParentsTechnology11.pdf. 
 37.   Caroline Haythornthwaite and Richard Andrew,  E-Learning Theory and Practice 
(London: Sage, 2011). 
 38.   Hua Wang and Arvind Singhal,  “ Entertainment Education through Digital 
Games, ”  in  Serious Games , ed. Ute Ritterfeld, Michael Cody, and Peter Vorderer (Lon-
don: Routledge, 2009), 271 – 291. 
 39.  Sara Rimer,  “ Play with Your Food, Just Don ’ t Text! ”  The New York Times , May 
26 2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/27/dining/27text.html; Laura Holson, 
 “ Text Generation Gap: U R 2 Old (JK), ”  The New York Times , March 9, 2008, http://
www.nytimes.com/2008/03/09/business/09cell.html;  “ Family Time Eroding in U.S. 
as Internet Use Soars, ”  USA Today , June 15, 2009, http://www.usatoday.com/tech/
news/2009-06-15-internet-family_N.htm. 

Notes to Chapter 7 
333
 40.   Robert Paul Smith,  Where Did You Go? Out. What Did You Do? Nothing  (New York: 
Norton, 1957). 
 41.   Sherry Turkle,  Alone Together (New York: Basic Books, 2011). 
 42.   Steve Collins,  “ There ’ s No We in iPod, ”  Metro Toronto, May 18, 2010, p. 21. 
 43.   “ No Texting @ Dinner! Parenting Digital Kids, ”  Associated Press , October 1, 2009, 
http://today.msnbc.msn.com/id/33122598/ns/today-parenting_and_family. 
 44.   Alexandra Macgill,  “ Parent and Teen Internet Use, ” Pew Internet  & American 
Life Project, Oct. 24, 2007, http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2007/Parent-and-Teen
-Internet-Use.aspx. 
 45.   Margaret Nelson,  Parenting Out of Control  (New York: New York University Press, 
2010); Robert Tokunaga,  “ Following You Home from School, ”  Computers in Human 
Behavior 26 (2010): 277 – 287; Gustavo Mesch,  “ Parental Mediation, Online Activities, 
and Cyberbullying,. ”  Cyberpsychology and Behavior 12, no. 4 (2009): 387 – 393. 
 46.   Amanda Lenhart, “Social Networking Websites and Teens, ” Pew Internet  & 
American Life Project, http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2007/Social-Networking
-websites-and-Teens.aspx. 
 Chapter 7 
 1.  Wenhong Chen coauthored this chapter. We appreciate the major assistance pro-
vided by Anna Brady and the advice and assistance provided by Julie Amoroso, Amy 
Bruckman, Joseph Cothrel, Maya Collum, Dimitrina Dimitrova, Richard Florida, 
Melissa Godbout, Jonathan Grudin, Mohammad Haque, Cliff Lampe, Zara Mathe-
son, Stephen Perelgut, Anabel Quan-Haase, Kevin Stolarick, Charles Steinﬁ eld, and 
Justine Yu. 
 2.  Aﬁ cionados of  Mad Men will note the exception that proves the rule. One woman, 
 “ Peggy, ”  does rise on merit from secretarial ranks to become a much-remarked-on 
account executive. See also William H. Whyte, Jr.,  The Organization Man  (New York: 
Simon  & Schuster, 1956). 
 3.  Key statements about the nature of networked work and networked organizations 
include Manuel Castells,  The Rise of the Network Society , 2nd ed. (Oxford: Blackwell, 
2000); David Limerick and Bert Cunnington,  Managing the New Organisation , 2nd 
ed. (London: Allen  & Unwin, 2003); David Knoke,  Changing Organizations  (Boul-
der, CO: Westview Press, 2001); Andrew Hargadon,  “ Firms as Knowledge Brokers, ” 
 California Management Review  40, no. 3 (1998): 209 – 227; Wayne Baker,  Networking 
Smart  (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994); Rob Cross and Andrew Parker,  The Hidden 
Power of Networks  (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2004); Charles Heckscher 
and Paul Adler, eds.,  The Firm as a Collaborative Community  (New York: Oxford 
University Press 2006); Peter Monge and Noshir Contractor,  Theories of Communica-
tion Networks  (New York: Oxford University Press 2003); Nitin Nohria and Robert 
Eccles, eds.,  Networks and Organizations , 2nd ed. (Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press, 1992); Andrew McAfee,  Enterprise 2.0 . (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 
2009); Rob Cross, Andrew Parker, and Lisa Sasson, eds.,  Networks in the Knowledge 

334 
Notes to Chapter 7
Economy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003); Katherine Chudoba, Eleanor 
Wynn, Mei Lu, and Mary Watson-Manheim,  “ How Virtual Are We? ”  Information 
Systems Journal  15, no. 4 (2005): 279 – 306; Manju Ahuja and Kathleen Carley, 
 “ Network Structure in Virtual Organizations, ”  Organization Science  10, no. 6 (1999): 
741 – 757; Michael Barrett, David Grant, and Nick Wailes,  “ ICT and Organizational 
Change, ”   Journal of Applied Behavioral Science  42, no. 1 (2006): 16 – 22, see 17; 
Peter Monge and Noshir Contractor,  Theories of Communication Networks  (Oxford 
University Press, New York, 2003); Ronald Burt,  Structural Holes  (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1992); and Lynn Wu, Ching-Yung Lin, Sinan Aral, and Erik 
Brynjolfsson,  “ Value of Social Network, ” presentation, Winter Information Systems 
Conference, Salt Lake City, Utah, February 2009,  http://smallblue.research.ibm.com/
projects/snvalue . 
 4.  Richard Florida,  The Rise of the Creative Class (New York: Basic Books, 2002), p. 8. 
 5.  As far as we can tell, the concepts of  “ atom workers ” and  “ bit workers ” come from 
Nicholas Negroponte (former head of the MIT Media Lab) in the early 1990s. See 
Nicholas Negroponte,  Being Digital  (New York: Random House Vintage, 1995). See 
also Florida,  The Rise of the Creative Class , see note 4. 
 6.  Thomas Friedman,  The World Is Flat  (Vancouver: Douglas  & McIntyre, 2007). See 
also John Friedmann,  The Prospect of Cities  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 2002). 
 7.  The quotation is from pp. 28 – 29 of Charles Heckscher and Paul Adler,  “ Towards 
Collaborative Community, ” in  The Firm as a Collaborative Community , ed. Charles 
Heckscher and Paul Adler (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006), 11 – 105. 
 8.  For a nice example of networks in both hierarchies and markets, see Thomas 
Gold, Doug Guthrie, and David Wank, eds.,  Social Connections in China (Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002). 
 9.  On nineteenth-century ships see Allan Pred,  Urban Growth and the Circulation of 
Information (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1973). 
 10.   For the history of computers see Paul Ceruzzi,  A History of Modern Computing , 
2nd ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003). 
 11.   Andrew McAfee,  “ IT Is Everywhere. Why? ”  Harvard Business Review , HBR Blog 
Network, April 29, 2010,  http://blogs.hbr.org/hbr/mcafee/2010/04/it-is-everywhere
-why.html ; data on ICT use from Andrew McAfee,  “ Corporate America ’ s Ongoing 
Love Affair with Geek Gear, ”  Harvard Business Review ,   HBR Blog Network, April 
16 2010,  http://blogs.hbr.org/hbr/mcafee/2010/04/corporate-americas-ongoing-lov
.html . 
 12.   Lee Rainie,  “ Wired Workers: Who They Are, What They ’ re Doing Online, ” Pew 
Internet  &  American Life Project, Current Population Survey (CPS) Reports, CPS 
September 2000, Detailed Tables — Computer and Internet Use in the United States, 
PPL-175,  http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2000/Wired-Workers.aspx . 
 13.   Data on hours of work at the computer per week from the University of South-
ern California ’ s Center for the Digital Future ’ s annual survey, headed by Jeff Cole 
and compiled by Andromeda Salvador. 

Notes to Chapter 7 
335
 14.   Mary Madden and Sydney Jones,  “ Networked Workers, ” Pew Internet  & Ameri-
can Life Project, September 24, 2008,  http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2008/
Networked-Workers.aspx . 
 15.   Jacques Bughin and Michael Chui,  “ The Rise of the Networked Enterprise, ”  Mc-
Kinsey Quarterly,  December 2010,  http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/Organization/
Strategic_Organization/The_rise_of_the_networked_enterprise_Web_20_ﬁ nds_its
_payday_2716?pagenum=3 . 
 16.   Networked ofﬁ ce design discussed by Malcolm Gladwell,  “ Designs for Working, ” 
in  Networks in the Knowledge Economy , ed. Rob Cross, Andrew Parker, and Lisa Sasson, 
180 – 189 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003). 
 17.   Benjamin Waber, Sinan Aral, Daniel Olguin Olguin, Lynn Wu, Erik Brynjolfs-
son, and Alex Pentland,  “ Sociometric Badges, ” March 17, 2011,  http://ssrn.com/
abstract=1789103 . 
 18.   Gary Olson and Judith Olson,  “ Mitigating the Effects of Distance on Collabora-
tive Intellectual Work, ”  Economic Innovation and New Technologies  12, no. 1 (2003): 
27 – 42; Jim Suchan and Greg Hayzak,  “ The Communication Characteristics of Virtual 
Teams, ”   IEEE Transactions on Professional Communications  44, no. 3 (2001): 174 – 186; 
Wu, Lin, Aral, and Brynjolfsson,  “ Value of Social Network, ” see note 3. 
 19.   Dimitrina Dimitrova and Emmanuel Koku,  “ Managing Collaborative Research 
Networks, ”  International Journal of Virtual Communities and Social Networking  20, 2 
(2010): 1 – 22. 
 20.   Neil Gandal, Charles King, and Marshall Van Alstyne,  “ The Social Network 
within a Management Recruiting Firm, ”  Review of Network Economics 8, no. 4 (2009): 
302 – 324. See also Ronald Burt,  Structural Holes  (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1992); Valdis Krebs,  “ Managing the 21 st Century Organization, ”  IHRIM Journal 
[International Association for Human Resources Information Management] 11, no. 4 
(2007): 2 – 8; Arent Greve, Mario Benassi, and Arne Dag Sti,  “ Exploring the Contribu-
tions of Human and Social Capital to Productivity, ”  International Review of Sociology 
20, no. 1 (2010): 35 – 58. 
 21.   Caroline Haythornthwaite and Barry Wellman,  “ Work, Friendship, and Media 
Use for Information Exchange in a Networked Organization, ”  Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science  49, no. 12 (Oct. 1998): 1101 – 1114; Seungyoon Lee 
and Peter Monge,  “ The Consolidation of Multiplex Communication Networks in 
Organizational Communities, ”  Journal of Communication  61, no. 4 (August 2011): 
758 – 779. 
 22.   Alexander Pentland quotation is from Sarah Underwood,  “ Making Sense of 
Real-Time Behavior, ”  Communications of the ACM  53, no. 8 (2010): 17 – 18. See also 
Alexander Pentland,  Honest Signals (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010). 
 23.   Dimitrina Dimitrova,  “ Controlling Teleworkers, ”  New Technology, Work and 
Employment 18, no. 3 (2010): 181 – 195. 
 24.   Google ’ s former CEO Schmidt ’ s quotation is from Elizabeth Tenety and Andrea 
Useem,  “ On Leadership: Google CEO Eric Schmidt on Google Culture, ”  Wash-
ington Post , May 5, 2009,  http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/on-leadership

336 
Notes to Chapter 7
-google-ceo-eric-schmidt-on-workplace-culture/2011/07/15/gIQAajkPGI_video
.html . The descri ption of Google is from  “ The Google Culture, ” 2009,  http://www
.google.ca/intl/en/corporate/culture.html . See also Bernard Girard,  The Google Way 
(San Francisco: No Starch Press, 2009). 
 25.   Etienne Wenger, Richard McDermott, and William Snyder,  Cultivating Communi-
ties of Practice  (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2000). The quotation is from 
p. 142 in Arent Greve,  “ Social Networks and Creativity, ” in  Routledge Companion to 
Creativity,  ed. Tudor Rickards, Mark Runco, and Susan Moger (London: Routledge, 
2008), 132 – 145. See also Arent Greve and Janet Salaff,  “ The Development of Cor-
porate Social Capital in Complex Innovation Processes, ”  Research in the Sociology of 
Organizations 18 (2001): 107 – 134. 
 26.   Peter Monge and Noshir Contractor,  Theories of Communication Networks  (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2003). 
 27.   Ronald Burt,  Neighbor Networks (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010). 
 28.  Wu, Lin, Aral, and Brynjolfsson,  “ Value of Social Network, ” see note 3. 
 29.  Bill McDermott is quoted by Simon Avery and Sinclair Stewart in  “ BlackBerry to 
Use SAP ’ s Programs, ”  Toronto Globe and Mail, May 3, 2008, p. B4. 
 30.  Steven Poltrock and Gloria Mark,  “ Implementation of Data Conferencing in the 
Boeing Company, ” in  Implementing Collaboration Technologies in Industry , ed. Bj ø rn 
Erik Munkvold (London: Springer, 2003), p. 157. 
 31.   Peter Cappelli, Laurie Bassi, Harry Katz, David Knoke, Paul Osterman, and 
Michael Useem,  Change at Work (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997). 
 32.  David Knoke,  Changing Organizations (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2001). 
 33.   Mark Mortensen, Anita Williams Woolley, and Michael O ’ Leary,  “ Conditions 
Enabling Effective Multiple Team Membership, ” International Federation for Infor-
mation Processing Report No. 236 (Laxenburg, Austria: 2007), 215 – 228. 
 34.   Katherine Chudoba, Mei Lu, Mary Beth Watson-Manheim, and Eleanor Wynn, 
 “ How Virtual Are We? ”  Information Systems Journal  15 (2005): 279 – 306; Mei Lu, Mary 
Beth Watson-Manheim, Katherine Chudoba, and Eleanor Wynn,  “ Virtuality and 
Team Performance, ”  Journal of Global Information Technology Management  9, no. 1 
(2006): 4 – 23. 
 35.   Email to coauthor Wellman, March 9, 2009, from an administrator who wishes 
to remain anonymous. 
 36.  The Nungesser quote comes from Chris Kirkham,  “ As Oil Spill Cleanup Workers 
Toil, Ofﬁ cials ’ Frustration Mounts, ”  New Orleans Times-Picayune, June 12, 2010. 
 37.   The general U.S. data come from Madden and Jones,  “ Networked Workers, ” see 
note 14. See also teleworking statistics by occupation, reported in the Bureau of 
Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor,  “ Work-At-Home Patterns by Occupa-
tion, ”  Issues in Labor Statistics , 2009. Meta-analysis reported in Ravi Gajendran and 
David Harrison,  “ The Good, the Bad, and the Unknown about Telecommuting, ” 
 Journal of Applied Psychology 92, no. 6 (2007): 1524 – 1541. 
 38.   Eleni Stroulia,  “ email, ”  On Services, 2.0 and 3D  [blog], February 28, 2011,  http://
ssrg.cs.ualberta.ca/blogs/WS-20-3D/2011/02/28/email . 

Notes to Chapter 7 
337
 39.   Tracy Kennedy, Julie Amoroso, and Barry Wellman,  “ Can You Take It with You? ” 
in  Mobile Communication , ed. James Katz (Piscataway, NJ: Transaction, 2011), 191 – 210. 
 40.   Scott Schieman and Marisa Young,  “ Is There a Downside to Schedule Control 
for the Work-Family Interface? ”  Journal of Family Issues  31, no. 10 (2010) 1391 – 1414; 
Scott Schieman and Marisa Young,  “ The Demands of Creative Work, ”  Social Science 
Research 39 (2010): 246 – 259. 
 41.   Sandy Ward interviewed by Mark Evans,  “ Homezilla CEO on Managing Remote 
Workers, ”   Toronto Globe and Mail,  February 12, 2010,  http://www.theglobeandmail
.com/news/technology/homezilla-ceo-on-managing-remote-workers/article
1464811 . 
 42.   The term  “ travel to trust ” was coined by Charles Grantham and Larry Nichols, 
 The Digital Workplace (New York: Wiley, 1993). 
 43.  Sara Kiesler and Jonathon Cummings,  “ What Do We Know about Proximity and 
Distance in Work Groups? ” in  Distributed Work , eds. Pamela Hinds and Sara Kiesler 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002): 57 – 81. 
 44.   More detailed information can be founded in Wenhong Chen and Barry Well-
man,  “ Net and Jet, ”  Information, Communication and Society  12, no. 4 (2009): 525 – 547. 
A recent review is Ivan Light,  “ Transnational Entrepreneurs in an English-Speaking 
World, ”  Die Erde 14, no. 1 (2010): 1 – 16. 
 45.  Jennifer Gibbs, Dina Nekrassova, Svetlana Grushina, and Sally Abdul Wahab, 
 “ Reconceptualizing Virtual Teaming from a Constitutive Perspective, ”  Communica-
tion Yearbook  32 (2008): 187 – 229; Jennifer Gibbs,  “ Dialectics in a Global Software 
Team, ”  Human Relations 62, no. 6 (2009): 905 – 935. 
 46.   Arvind Malhotra and Ann Majchrzak,  “ Enabling Knowledge Creation in Far-
Flung Teams: Best Practices for IT Support and Knowledge Sharing, ”  Journal of Knowl-
edge Management  8, no. 4 (2004): 75 – 88; Gloria Mark and Steven Poltrock,  “ Diffusion 
of a Collaborative Technology Across Distance, ” Proceedings of Group  ’ 01 Confer-
ence on Supporting Group Work (New York: Association for Computing Machin-
ery Press, 2001),  http://www.ics.uci.edu/~gmark/Group01.pdf ; Steven Poltrock and 
George Engelbeck,  “ Requirements for a Virtual Collocation Environment, ”  Informa-
tion  & Software Technology 41, no. 6 (1999): 331 – 339. 
 47.   Dominic Gates,  “ Boeing 787: Parts from around World Will Be Swiftly Inte-
grated, ”   Seattle Times  September 11, 2005,  http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/
businesstechnology/2002486348_787global11.html . 
 48.   J. Lynn Lunsford,  “ Fastener Woes to Delay Flight of First Boeing 787 Jets, ” 
 Wall Street Journal , November 5, 2008; Wendy Kaufman,  “ Woes Mount for Boeing ’ s 
Much-Awaited Dreamliner, ”  NPR Morning Edition , December 9, 2010,  http://www.npr
.org/2010/12/09/131856033/woes-mount-for-boeing-s-much-awaited-dreamliner ; 
Laura Myers and Kyle Peterson,  “ Boeing ’ s Game-Changing Dreamliner Gets Green 
Light. ” See also  “ Boeing’s Dreamliner Becomes Commercial Reality, ” Reuters, August 
26, 2011,  http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/08/26/us-boeing-idUSTRE77P0VS201
10826 . 
 49.  The quotation is from Lu, Watson-Manheim, Chudoba, and Wynn,  “ Virtuality 
and Team Performance, ” p. 16, see note 34. 

338 
Notes to Chapter 8
 50.   Quotation from Irving Wladawsky-Berger,  “ The Entrepreneurial Society, ” blog 
entry, April 20, 2009,  http://blog.irvingwb.com/blog/2009/04/the-entrepreneurial
-society.html . 
 Chapter 8 
 1.  Justine Yu and Xiaolin Zhuo coauthored this chapter. Brian Keegan and  “ Wiki-
waye ” contributed to the writing.  
 2.  For Peter Maranci ’ s posts, visit his blog  Charlie on the Commuter Rail , http://
charlieonthecommuterrail.blogspot.com. 
 3.  Pew Internet  & American Life Project,  “ Trend Data, ” September l, 2011, http://
www.pewinternet.org/Static-Pages/Trend-Data/Online-Activites-Total.aspx. 
 4.  Peter Maranci,  “ The Diary of a Simple Man — Separated At Birth? ” November 16, 
2003, http://bobquasit.livejournal.com/32952.html. 
 5.  Abby Philipp,  “ Obama Takes Questions on YouTube, ” January 27, 2011, http://
www.politico.com/news/stories/0111/48324.html. 
 6.  “ President Obama Takes Questions from YouTube, ” January 27, 2011, http://www
.hufﬁ ngtonpost.com/2011/01/27/president-obama-youtube-live-video_n_814955
.html. Jeff Zeleny,  “ Obama Takes Questions on YouTube, ”  The Caucus  blog,  New York 
Times,  February 1, 2010, http://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/02/01/obama
-takes-questions-on-youtube 
 7.  David Gauntlett,  Making Is Connecting  (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2011), quotation 
on p. 5. 
 8.  Sebastien Paquet,  “ Making Group-Forming Ridiculously Easy, ”  Seb ’ s Open Research 
blog, October 9, 2002, http://radio-weblogs.com/0110772/2002/10/09.html. 
 9.  Douglas Rushkoff,  “ The Rise of the Amateur, ” May 2010, http://www.mpiweb
.org/Magazine/Archive/US/May2010/RiseOfTheAmateur. 
 10.   “ Wikipedia: Size Comparisons, ” March 31, 2011, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Size_comparisons. There are also Wikipedias in 278 other languages: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia#Language_editions. 
 11.   Aaron Swartz,  “ Who Writes Wikipedia? ” September 4, 2006, http://www.aaronsw
.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia. The most detailed description of Wikipedia ’ s ori-
gins and policies is in Joseph Reagle,  Good Faith Collaboration  (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2010). 
 12.   Brian Keegan, Darren Gergle, and Noshir Contractor,  “ A Multi-theoretical, 
Multi-level Model of High Tempo Collaboration in an Online Community, ” paper 
presented at the International Sunbelt Social Network Conference, St. Pete Beach, FL, 
February 2011, quotation on p. 1. 
 13.   UTC stands for Universal Coordinated Time in French ( “ Temps Universel Coor-
donn é ” ), which is the worldwide time stamp that Wikipedia uses. 
 14.   We thank communication doctoral student Brian Keegan for preparing ﬁ gure 
8.1 and making it available to us, and Mark Smith for writing the NodeXL software 
used to analyze the data. The Girvan-Newman algorithm was used to group the 

Notes to Chapter 8 
339
nodes into coherent communities. The ﬁ gure is available in color at: http://www
.ﬂ ickr.com/photos/7371117@N05/sets/72157626529369758. For further description, 
see Brian Keegan, Darren Gergle, and Noshir Contractor,  “ Hot off the Wiki, ” SONIC 
Lab, School of Communication, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, March 2011. 
For the animated version,  “ 100 Hours of Wikipedia Activity for Sendai Earthquake, ” 
April 6, 2011, see http://vimeo.com/21088958. 
 15.   Ronald Breiger,  “ The Duality of Persons and Groups, ”  Social Forces  53 (1974): 
181 – 190. 
 16.   Many Wikipedians use aliases to avoid spillovers between Wikipedia conﬂ icts 
and the rest of their lives. Disclaimer: Rainie ’ s Pew Internet Project is nonpartisan 
and takes no positions on policy and political matters of any kind. 
 17.   Bill Tancer,  “ Look Who ’ s Using Wikipedia, ”  Time , March 1, 2007, http://www
.time.com/time/business/article/0,8599,1595184,00.html; Lev Grossman,  “ You — Yes 
You — Are TIME ’ s Person of the Year, ”  Time , December 25, 2006, http://www.time
.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1570810,0.html. 
 18.   Much of the information in this section is drawn from the material gathered 
at the Library of Congress ’ s Flickr Project at http://www.loc.gov/rr/print/ﬂ ickr_pilot
.html; 1,600 color photographs were from its Farm Security Administration/Ofﬁ ce of 
War Information (FSA/OWI) collection and another 1,500 black-and-white photos 
were from its George Grantham Bain News Service Collection. All photos can be 
accessed at http://www.ﬂ ickr.com/photos/library_of_congress. 
 19.   Michelle Springer, Beth Dulabahn, Phil Michel, Barbara Natanson, David Reser, 
David Woodward, and Helena Zinkham,  “ For the Common Good: The Library of 
Congress Flickr Pilot Project, ” October 30, 2008, http://www.loc.gov/rr/print/ﬂ ickr
_report_ﬁ nal.pdf, quotation on p. iv. 
 20.   Flickr Commons Initiative is accessible at http://www.ﬂ ickr.com/commons. To 
view the different tools that have been created, visit http://www.indicommons.org/
tools. 
 21.   For a timeline of the Middle Eastern revolutions of the ﬁ rst quarter of 2011, 
see http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/interactive/2011/mar/22/middle-east-protest
-interactive-timeline. Here are links to some key webpages: April 6 Youth Movement, 
http://www.facebook.com/april6youth; We Are All Khaled Said, http://www.face
book.com/elshaheeed.co.uk. The Progressive Youth of Tunisia webpage is no longer 
available (September 5, 2011). 
 22.  Mona Eltahawy,  “ Generation Facebook Creating Egyptians ’ Political Party of 
the Internet, ” Aspen Institute, 2010, http://www.aspeninstitute.org/policy-work/
communications-society/programs-topic/journalism/arab-us-media-forum/dead
-sea-scrolling/generation-. 
 23.  David Kirkpatrick and David Sanger,  “ A Tunisian-Egyptian Link That Shook Arab 
History, ”   New York Times , February 14, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/14/
world/middleeast/14egypt-tunisia-protests.html. 
 24.  Dusan Stojanovic,  “ Serbian Ousters of Milosevic Make Mark in Egypt, ”  Newsvine , 
February 22, 2011, http://www.newsvine.com/_news/2011/02/22/6104771-serbian

340 
Notes to Chapter 8
-ousters-of-milosevic-make-mark-in-egypt; Kirkpatrick and Sanger,  “ A Tunisian-
Egyptian Link, ” see note 23. 
 25.   Kirkpatrick and Sanger,  “ A Tunisian-Egyptian Link, ” note 25. 
 26.  “ Egypt Protestor Clash with Police, ” Aljazeera English, January 25, 2011, http://
english.aljazeera.net/news/middleeast/2011/01/201112511362207742.html; 
Kirk-
patrick and Sanger,  “ A Tunisian-Egyptian Link, ” see note 25. 
 27.   Wael Ghonim,  “ Inside the Egyptian Revolution, ” TED Conference, Cairo, 
Egypt, March 2011, http://www.ted.com/talks/wael_ghonim_inside_the_egyptian
_revolution.html . 
 28.   Kirkpatrick and Sanger,  “ A Tunisian-Egyptian Link, ” see note 25. 
 29.  Charles Levinson and Margaret Coker,  “ The Secret Rally That Sparked an Upris-
ing, ”  Wall Street Journal,  February 11, 2011, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142
4052748704132204576135882356532702.html. 
 30.   Mahmoud Salem ’ s quotation from John Sutter,  “ The faces of Egypt ’ s  ‘ Revolution 
2.0, ’ ”  CNN, February 21, 2011, http://www.cnn.com/2011/TECH/innovation/02/21/
egypt.internet.revolution/index.html. 
 31.   “ Deﬁ ant Al-Jazeera Asks Egypt Audience for Help, ” CBS News, January 31, 2011, 
http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2011/01/31/world/main7300870.shtml?tag=stack. 
 32.   Doug McAdam, Sidney Tarrow, and Charles Tilly,  Dynamics of Contention  (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001). See also Jennifer Earl and Katrina Kim-
port,  Digitally Enabled Social Change.  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011); Philip 
Howard,  The Digital Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy.  (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2010); Barry Wellman and Christena Nippert-Eng, eds.,  The Contentious 
Internet , special section of  Information, Community  & Society  13, no. 2 (2010): 151 – 225. 
 33.   Kirkpatrick and Sanger,  “ A Tunisian-Egyptian Link, ” see note 23. 
 34.  Marian Wong / ProPublica,  “ Where Does the U.S. Money to Egypt Go — And 
Who Decides How It ’ s Spent? ”  Seattle PostGlobe , January 31, 2011, http://seattlepost
globe.org/2011/02/01/where-does-the-us-money-to-egypt-goand-who-decides-how
-its-spent. 
 35.   See http://www.journalism.org. 
 36.  PEJ New Media Index (NMI) methodology described at http://www.journalism
.org/index_report/social_media_aid_haiti_relief_effort, at the bottom of the page. 
From January through June 2010, PEJ used both Icerocket and Technorati. 
 37.  The empirical material in this content comes from an analysis of a year ’ s worth 
of News Coverage Index ﬁ ndings and New Media Index ﬁ ndings done by the Pew 
Research Center ’ s Project for Excellence in Journalism called  “ New Media, Old Media: 
How Blogs and Social Media Agendas Relate and Differ from the Traditional Press, ” 
May 23, 2010, http://www.journalism.org/analysis_report/new_media_old_media. 
 38.   See details of PEJ ’ s News Coverage Index for this week at http://www.journalism
.org/index_report/pej_news_coverage_index_march_30_april_5_2009. 
 39.   See details of PEJ ’ s New Media Index for this week at: http://www.journalism
.org/index_report/bloggers_focus_april_fools%E2%80%99_joke_interrogation
_techniques_and_outspoken_actress. 

Notes to Chapter 8 
341
 40.   http://www.thesarahpalinblog.com (this is not Sarah Palin ’ s ofﬁ cial blog). 
 41.   See, for instance: Aaron Smith,  “ The Internet and Campaign 2010, ” Pew Inter-
net  &  American Life Project, March 17, 2011, http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/
The-Internet-and-Campaign-2010.aspx; Susannah Fox,  “ Peer-to-Peer Healthcare, ” 
Pew Internet  &  American Life Project, February 28, 2011, http://pewinternet.org/
Reports/2011/P2PHealthcare.aspx.  
 42.   The video that led to Justin Bieber ’ s discovery: http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=eQOFRZ1wNLw; see also http://www.justinbiebermusic.com. 
 43.   Joan Anderman,  “ All Together Now: His YouTube Mashups Have Become a Hit, ” 
 Boston Globe,  May 10, 2009, http://www.boston.com/ae/music/articles/2009/05/10/
all_together_now. 
 44.  Scott Thill,  “ Kutiman ’ s ThruYou Mashup Turns YouTube into Funk Machine, ” 
 Wired , 
March 
25, 
2009, 
http://www.wired.com/underwire/2009/03/kutimans
-pionee. 
 45.   Kutiman [Ophir Kutiel],  “ The Mother of All Funk Chords, ” http://www.youtube
.com/watch?v=tprMEs-zfQA. See the follow-up project at http://thru-you.com. 
 46.   Sasha Frere-Jones,  “ Heavy Sifting: An Interview with Kutiman, ”  New Yorker,  May 
30, 2009, http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/sashafrerejones/2009/03/heavy
-sifting-a-1.html. 
 47.   Anderman,  “ All Together Now, ” see note 43. 
 48.  The  “ Beyond Reality ” channel can be accessed at: http://www.youtube.com/
user/Madrosed. 
 49.   See  “ All in the Family, ” a rich portrait of the mother and daughter duo produced 
by Patricia G. Lange, http://digitalyouth.ischool.berkeley.edu/book-creativeproduc
tion. Find this sidebar in the main volume by scrolling about a third of the way 
through the website or searching for  “ Lange. ” 
 50.  http://www.youtube.com/user/Madrosed, April 19, 2011. 
 51.   Mary Madden and Aaron Smith,  “ Reputation Management and Social Media, ” 
Pew Internet  &  American Life Project, May 26, 2010, http://www.pewinternet.org/
Reports/2010/Reputation-Management.aspx. 
 52.  Frere-Jones,  “ Heavy Sifting, ” see note 46.  
 53.  Brian Erkdale, Namkoong Kang, Timothy Fung, and David Perlmutter,  “ Why Blog? 
(Then and Now), ”  New Media  & Society  12, no. 2 (2009): 217 – 234, quotation on p. 227. 
 54.   Mizuko Ito, Sonja Baumer, Matteo Bittanti, danah boyd, Rachel Cody, Becky 
Herr-Stephenson, Heather A. Horst, Patricia G. Lange, Dilan Mahendran, Katynka 
Z. Martinez, C. J. Pascoe, Dan Perkel, Laura Robinson, Christo Sims, and Lisa Tripp, 
 Hanging Out, Messing Around, and Geeking Out:  Kids Living and Learning with New 
Media (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009). 
 55.   Much of the material about Parles is drawn from a white paper about the rise 
of empowered  “ e-patients ”  that researcher Dr. Tom Ferguson began and his friends, 
including Pew Internet ’ s Susannah Fox, completed in 2008 after his death:  “ E-
Patients: How They Can Help Us Heal Health Care, ” http://e-patients.net/e-Patients
_White_Paper.pdf. Lung Cancer Online, http://www.lungcanceronline.org. 

342 
Notes to Chapter 9
 56.   Erkdale, Kang, Fung, and Perlmutter,  “ Why Blog?, ” see note 53. 
 57.  Wael Ghonim,  “ Inside the Egyptian Revolution, ” TED Conference, Cairo, 
March 2011, http://www.ted.com/talks/wael_ghonim_inside_the_egyptian_revolu
tion.html. 
 58.   Erkdale, Kang, Fung, and Perlmutter,  “ Why Blog?, ” quotation on p. 226, see 
note 53. One online news source, ProPublica.com, received the 2011 Pulitzer Prize 
for national reporting about the Wall Street banking scandals. It is the ﬁ rst such 
prize for journalists not working for traditional printed newspapers. However, they 
are not citizen journalists but rather professional journalists using a new form of 
distribution. 
 59.   Elizabeth Eisenstein,  The Printing Press as an Agent of Change  (Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 1980). 
 Chapter 9 
 1.  Justine Abigail Yu coauthored this chapter. Sharanpreet Kelley, Gustavo Mesch, 
Zeynep Tufecki, and Hal Varian provided useful advice. 
 2.  John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid,  The Social Life of Information  (Boston: Harvard 
Business School Press, 2000). 
 3.  See  http://www.experiencefestival.com/a/Talmud/id/1897212  for a description of 
Daniel Bomberg ’ s interpretation of the modern Talmud with text and commentaries. 
 4.  Vannevar Bush,  “ As We May Think, ”  The Atlantic Monthly,  July 1945,  http://www
.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1945/07/as-we-may-think/3881 . 
 5.  See Ted Nelson,  “ Ted Nelson Specs, ”  http://hyperland.com/mlawLeast.html . 
 6.  Tom Rosenstiel has shared his working  “ list ” and presentation slides on this sub-
ject. Also see his recent book, coauthored with Bill Kovach:  Blur (New York: Blooms-
bury, 2010). 
 7.  Hal Varian and Peter Lyman,  “ How Much Information? ” 2003,  http://www2
.sims.berkeley.edu/research/projects/how-much-info-2003/execsum.htm . 
 8.  Report available at  http://www.emc.com/collateral/demos/microsites/idc-digital
-universe/iview.htm . In 2009, they found that the amount of information in the 
Digital Universe grew to 800,000 petabytes. 
 9.  Chris Anderson,  The Long Tail (New York: Hyperion, 2006). 
 10.  Pablo Boczkowski,  News at Work (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010) .
 11.   Lee Rainie and John Horrigan,  “ Election 2006 Online, ” January 17, 2007,  http://
www.pewInternet.org/~/media/Files/Reports/2007/PIP_Politics_2006.pdf.pdf . 
 12.   John Horrigan, Kelly Garrett, and Paul Resnick,  “ The Internet and Democratic 
Debate, ” October 27, 2004,  http://www.pewInternet.org/Reports/2004/The-Internet
-and-Democratic-Debate.aspx . 
 13.   Estimates from an analysis of more than twenty sources of information including 
books, newspapers, satellite radio, and Internet video. Global Industry Information 
Center, University of California San Diego,  “ How Much Information? ” December 
2009,  http://hmi.ucsd.edu/pdf/HMI_2009_ConsumerReport_Dec9_2009.pdf . 

Notes to Chapter 9 
343
 14.   Jenna Wortham,  “ Feel Like a Wallﬂ ower? Maybe It ’ s Your Facebook Wall, ”  New 
York Times,  April 9, 2011,  http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/10/business/10ping
.html?ref=technology . 
 15.   Deborah Fallows,  “ Internet Searchers Are Conﬁ dent, Satisﬁ ed and Trusting 
But Are Also Unaware and Na ï ve, ” January 23, 2005,  http://www.pewinternet.org/
Reports/2005/Search-Engine-Users.aspx . 
 16.   Lee Rainie and John Horrigan,  “ Counting on the Internet: Most Find the Infor-
mation They Seek, Expect, ” December 29, 2002,  http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/
2002/Counting-on-the-Internet-Most-ﬁ nd-the-information-they-seek-expect.aspx . 
 17.   Nicholas Negroponte,  Being Digital  (New York: Vintage, 1995). See also the forth-
coming: Joseph Turow,  The Daily You: How the New Advertising Industry is Deﬁ ning 
Your Identity and Your Worth  (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012). 
 18.   Paul Hitlin and Lee Rainie,  “ Booking Travel Online Soars — And Slows, ” Octo-
ber 2004,  http://www.pewinternet.org/~/media/Files/Reports/2004/PIP_Datamemo
_Reputation.pdf.pdf . See also Lee Rainie,  “ Tagging, ” January 2007,  http://www
.pewinternet.org/Reports/2007/Tagging/Report.aspx . 
 19.   Socrates in a conversation with Phaedrus in Plato ’ s  Phaedrus. 
 20.   Nicholas D. Kristof,  “ D.I.Y. Foreign-Aid Revolution, ” New York Times,  October 
20, 2010,  http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/24/magazine/24volunteerism-t.html
?pagewanted=1 & ref=nicholasdkristof . 
 21.  Nicholas D. Kristof,  “ Answering Readers on DIY Aid, ”  On the Ground , October 
29, 2010,  http://kristof.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/10/29/a-postscript-on-diy-aid/?ref
=magazine . 
 22.   Kristen Purcell, Lee Rainie, Amy Mitchell, and Tom Rosenstiel,  “ Understanding 
the Participatory News Consumer, ” Pew Internet  & American Life Project, March 1, 
2010,  http://pewInternet.org/Reports/2010/Online-News.aspx . 
 23.   Elihu Katz and Paul Lazarsfeld,  Personal Inﬂ uence  (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 
1955). 
 24.   Jennifer Kayahara and Barry Wellman,  “ Searching for Culture — High and Low, ” 
 Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication  12, no. 3 (2007):  http://jcmc.indiana
.edu/vol12/issue3/kayahara.html . 
 25.   Ann Blair,  “ Reading Strategies for Coping with Information Overload ca. 
1550 – 1700, ”   Journal of the History of Ideas  64, no. 1 (2003): 11 – 28, quotation on 
p. 11. 
 26.   Kayahara and Wellman,  “ Searching for Culture, ” see note 24; see also David 
Weinberger,  Too Big to Know (New York: Basic Books, 2012). 
 27.   Fallows,  “ Internet Searchers, ” see note 15. 
 28.  Mark Suster,  Both Sides of the Table,  December 20, 2010,   http://www.bothside
softhetable.com/2010/12/20/the-power-of-twitter-in-information-discovery . 
 29.   Lee Rainie and Aaron Smith,  “ The Internet and the Recession, ” July 2009,  http://
www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2009/11-The-Internet-and-the-Recession/3-How-the
-internet-and-other-sources-have-helped-people-cope-with-the-recession/1-Ameri
cans-have-used-several-sources-of-information-and-advice-in-the-recession.aspx . 

344 
Notes to Chapter 9
 30.   Mary Madden and Aaron Smith,  “ Reputation Management and Social Media, ” 
Pew Internet  &  American Life Project, May 26, 2010,  http://www.pewinternet.org/
Reports/2010/Reputation-Management.aspx . 
 31.   Greg Walton,  “ China ’ s Golden Shield: Corporations and the Development of 
Surveillance Technology in the People ’ s Republic of China, ”  http://www.dd-rd.ca/
site/_PDF/publications/globalization/CGS_ENG.PDF . 
 32.   Article 14 of the government of China ’ s Measures for Managing Internet Infor-
mation Services,  http://www.chinaculture.org/library/2008-02/06/content_23369
.htm . 
 33.  Nart Villeneuve,  “ Breaching Trust: An analysis of surveillance and security 
practices on China ’ s TOM-Skype platform, ”  http://www.scribd.com/doc/13712715/
Breaching-Trust-An-analysis-of-surveillance-and-security-practices-on-Chinas-TOM
Skype-platform . 
 34.   The  Wall Street Journal ’ s  “ What They Know ” series reports on the Internet-track-
ing technologies being used by businesses,  http://online.wsj.com/public/page/what
-they-know-digital-privacy.html . 
 35.   Evgeny Morozov,  The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom (New York: 
Public Affairs, 2011), p. 97. 
 36.   Wall Street Journal ,  “ What They Know, ” see note 34. 
 37.  Julia Angwin,  “ The Web ’ s New Gold Mine: Your Secrets, ”  Wall Street Journal,  July 
30, 2010,  http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142405274870394090457539507351
2989404.html . 
 38.  Lynn Greiner,  “ The Perils of Social Networking, ”  ComputerWorld Canada , 
October 18, 2010,  http://www.itworldcanada.com/news/the-perils-of-social-net
working/141749 . 
 39.   PleaseRobMe.com has stopped showing these check-ins after making the 
point that  “ if you don ’ t want your information to show up everywhere, don ’ t over-
share. ” 
 40.   The term  “ coveillance ”  was invented by Barry Wellman. See Steve Mann, Jason 
Nolan, and Barry Wellman,  “ Sousveillance, ”  Surveillance and Society  1, no. 3 (2003): 
331 – 355. 
 41.   David Westerman, Brandon Van Der Heide, Katherine Klein, and Joseph Wal-
ther,  “ How Do People Really Seek Information about Others? ”  Journal of Computer 
Mediated Communication 13 (2008), no. 3: 751 – 767. 
 42.   Bonnie Ruberg,  “ 10 Signs You ’ ve Ofﬁ cially Become a Facebook Stalker, ” 
January 5, 2009,  http://www.heartlessdoll.com/2009/01/10_signs_youve_ofﬁ cially
_become_a_facebook_stalke.php . 
 43.   Facebook.com,  “ Facebook Stalking, ”  http://www.facebook.com/pages/Face-book
-Stalking-Admit-it-you-do-it/147838687575 . 
 44.   Madden and Smith,  “ Reputation Management and Social Media, ” see note 30. 
 45.  Jennifer Gibbs, Nicole Ellison, and Chih-Hui Lai,  “ First Comes Love, Then 
Comes Google, ”  Communication Research 38, no. 1 (December 2010): 70 – 100. 

Notes to Chapter 9 
345
 46.   The term  “ sousveillance ” was invented by Steve Mann. See Mann, Nolan, and 
Wellman,  “ Sousveillance, ” see note 40. 
 47.   Wikileaks Secret U.S. Embassy Cables database available at   http://wikileaks.org/
cablegate.html . 
 48.   Robert Booth and Julian Borger,  “ US Diplomats Spied on UN Leadership, ”  The 
Guardian , November 28, 2010,  http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/nov/28/
us-embassy-cables-spying-un ;  Wikipedia ,  “ Wikileaks, ” 2011,  http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Wikileaks . 
 49.   The National Institute on Money in State Politics was founded in 1999 and 
 “ dedicated to accurate, comprehensive and unbiased documentation and research 
on campaign ﬁ nance at the state level, ”  http://www.followthemoney.org ; Scott 
Walker information from  http://www.followthemoney.org/database/StateGlance/
candidate.phtml?c=116585 . 
 50.  The OpenNet Initiative is a collaborative project between the Citizen Lab at the 
University of Toronto, the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard Uni-
versity, and the SecDev Group:  http://opennet.net . 
 51.  OpenNet Initiative Regional Overviews are available at  http://opennet.net/
research/regions ; Information Warfare Monitory,  Tracking GhostNet: Investigating a 
Cyber Espionage Network,  March 29, 2009,  http://www.scribd.com/doc/13731776/
Tracking-GhostNet-Investigating-a-Cyber-Espionage-Network . 
 52.   Sun Microsystems ’ former CEO Scott McNealy said this as early as 1999. See 
 http://www.wired.com/politics/law/news/1999/01/17538 . 
 53.  Zuckerberg, Remarks at the  Crunchie Awards,  January 2010,  http://www
.computerworld.com/s/article/9143859/Facebook_CEO_Zuckerberg_causes_stir
_over_privacy; see also  http://crunchies2009.techcrunch.com/about . 
 54.   David Kirkpatrick,  The Facebook Effect  (New York: Simon  & Schuster, 
2010). 
 55.   Interview with Eric Schmidt,  “ Google ’ s CEO:  “ The Laws Are Written By Lob-
byists, ”   The Atlantic , October 1, 2010,  http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/
archive/2010/10/googles-ceo-the-laws-are-written-by-lobbyists/63908 . 
 56.   Mary Madden and Aaron Smith,  “ Reputation Management Online, ” September 
2011. 
 57.   danah boyd and Eszter Hargittai,  “ Facebook Privacy Setting: Who Cares? ”  First 
Monday 15, no. 8 (2010):  http://ﬁ rstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/
fm/article/view/3086/2589 . 
 58.   Amanda Lenhart and Mary Madden,  “ Teens, Privacy, and Online Social Net-
works, ”  April 2007,  http://www.pewInternet.org/Reports/2007/Teens-Privacy-and
-Online-Social-Networks/1-Summary-of-Findings.aspx . 
 59.   Brady Robarts,  “ Randoms in My Bedroom: Negotiating Privacy and Unsolicited 
Contact on Social Network Sites, ”  PRism  7, no. 3 (2010),  http://www.prismjournal
.org/ﬁ leadmin/Social_media/Robards.pdf . 
 60.   See note 59. 

346 
Notes to Chapter 10
 Chapter 10 
 1.  Unlike other names in this chapter, this one is a pseudonym. 
 2.  Barry Wellman and Milena Gulia,  “ A Network Is More Than the Sum of Its Ties: 
The Network Basis of Social Support, ” in  Networks in the Global Village,  ed. Barry Well-
man (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1999), 83 – 118. 
 3.  See Jon Kleinberg,  “ Authoritative Sources in a Hyperlinked Environment, ” 
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/kleinber/auth.pdf ;  
 http://www.cs.cornell.edu/
home/kleinber;  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jon_Kleinberg ; also David Easley and 
Jon Kleinberg,  Networks, Crowds and Markets  (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2010). 
 4.  danah boyd,  “ Social Media Is Here to Stay. Now What? ” Microsoft Research Tech 
Fest, Redmond, Washington, February 26, 2009,  http://www.danah.org/papers/
talks/MSRTechFest2009.html . All boyd quotations in this chapter section are from 
this paper. 
 5.  Mary Madden and Aaron Smith,  “ Reputation Management and Social Media, ” 
Pew Internet  &  American Life Project, May 26, 2010,  http://pewinternet.org/
Reports/2010/Reputation-Management.aspx ; and unpublished data collected in a 
survey in May 2011. 
 6.  Daniel Solove,  The Future of Reputation (Ann Arbor, MI: Caravan, 2007), p. 35. 
 7.  The Godfather  (Paramount, 1972) screenplay by Mario Puzo and Francis Ford 
Coppola. 
 8.  Rochelle C ô t é , Gabriele Plickert, and Barry Wellman,  “ Does the Golden Rule, 
Rule? ”  in  Contexts of Social Capital , ed. Ray-May Hsung, Nan Lin, and Ronald Breiger 
(London: Routledge, 2009), 49 – 71. 
 9.  danah boyd,  “ Taken Out of Context: American Teen Sociality in Networked Pub-
lics, ”  PhD dissertation, School of Information, University of California, fall 2008, 
p. 172,  http://www.danah.org/papers/TakenOutOfContext.pdf . 
 10.   Much of this framework for new literacies was inspired by the  “ Networked Lit-
eracy ”  lecture of Howard Rheingold, University of Toronto, October 2010; see also 
Howard Rheingold,  Net Smarts  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012); the writings of Pam 
Berger on her Infosearcher blog,  Learning in the Web 2.0 World ,  http://infosearcher
.typepad.com/infosearcher/2007/04/learning_in_the.html ; and the work of Henry 
Jenkins, especially  “ Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: Media 
Education for the 21st Century, ” with Katie Clinton, Ravi Purushotma, Alice J. Robin-
son, and Margaret Weigel,  http://digitallearning.macfound.org/atf/cf/%7B7E45C7E0
-A3E0-4B89-AC9C-E807E1B0AE4E%7D/JENKINS_WHITE_PAPER.PDF . 
 Chapter 11  
 1.  Christian Beermann and Tsahi Hayat coauthored this chapter. Jesse Hirsh, Eden 
Litt, Mitchell Ruda, Theresa Senft, and Sarita Yardi gave good advice. 
 2.  Isaac Asimov,  Foundation (New York: Gnome Press, 1951). 

Notes to Chapter 11 
347
 3.  Norman Augustine,  “ What We Don’t Know Does Hurt Us, ”  Science  279, no. 5357 
(1998): 1640 – 1641,  http://www.sciencemag.org/content/279/5357/1640.full . 
 4.  Neal Stephenson,  Snow Crash (New York: Bantam, 1982). 
 5.  John Smart, Jamais Cascio, and Jerry Paffendorf,  The Metaverse Roadmap , Accelera-
tion Studies Foundation, 2007,  http://metaverseroadmap.org . The authors state that 
this is  “ the ﬁ rst public ten-year forecast and visioning survey of 3D Web technolo-
gies, applications, markets, and potential social impacts. ” 
 6.  Gordon Moore,  “ Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits, ”  Elec-
tronics  38, no. 8 (April 19, 1965),  http://download.intel.com/research/silicon/
moorespaper.pdf . 
 7.  Smart, Cascio, and Paffendorf,  The Metaverse Roadmap , see note 5. 
 8.  Chip Walter,  “ Kryder ’ s Law, ”  Scientiﬁ c American , August 2005,  http://www
.scientiﬁ camerican.com/article.cfm?id=kryders-law . 
 9.  Smart, Cascio, and Paffendorf,  The Metaverse Roadmap , see note 5. 
 10.   George Gilder,  Telecosm  (New York: Touchstone, 2000); Jakob Nielsen,  “ Nielsen ’ s 
Law of Internet Bandwidth, ” April 5, 1998,  http://www.useit.com/alertbox/980405
.html ; Cooper ’ s Law: story about its creator Marty Cooper in  The Economist ,  “ Father 
of the Cell Phone, June 4, 2009,  http://www.economist.com/node/13725793?story
_id=13725793 . 
 11.   Sarah Jacobsson Purewal,  “ Dropbox Will Hand Over Your Files to the Feds If 
Asked, ”   PCWorld, April 19, 2011,  http://www.pcworld.com/article/225549/dropbox
_will_hand_over_your_ﬁ les_to_the_feds_if_asked.html . 
 12.   Wikipedia,  “ Technologies in  Minority Report , ”  Accessed April 20, 2011, from 
update of March 5, 2011,  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technologies_in_Minority
_Report . 
 13.   Mark Weiser,  “ The Computer of the 21st Century, ”  Scientiﬁ c American , Septem-
ber (1991): 66 – 75; Adam Greenﬁ eld,  Everyware (Indianapolis: New Riders, 2006). 
 14.   Microsoft,  “ Welcome to Surface 2.0, ” 2011,  http://www.microsoft.com/surface/
en/us/default.aspx . 
 15.   Julian Bleeckner,  A Manifesto for Networked Objects  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2006), p. 4. 
 16.   John Markoff,  “ Crashes and Trafﬁ c Jams in Military Test of Robotic Vehi-
cles, ”   New York Times , November 5, 2007,  http://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/05/
technology/05robot.htm?adxnnl=1 & adxnnlx=1303431109-jXXebZtwobwVBjOs1d
OsMw ; Byron Spice and Anne Watzman,  “ Carnegie Mellon Tartan Racing Wins 
$2 Million DARPA Urban Challenge, ” Carnegie Mellon University, November 4, 
2007,  http://www.cmu.edu/news/archive/2007/November/nov4_tartanracingwins.
shtml . 
 17.   Diana Scearce,  Connected Citizens , Knight Foundation, Miami, 2011; Stephen 
Soleman and Peter Shane, eds.  Connecting Democrary (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2012). 
 18.   Grigoris Antoniou and Frank van Harmelen,  A Semantic Web Primer , 2nd ed. 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008). 

348 
Notes to Chapter 11
 19.   See the discussion of the semantic web in Janna Anderson and Lee Rainie,  “ The 
Fate of the Semantic Web, ” May 2010,  http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Semantic
-Web/Overview.aspx?r=1 ; and Lee Rainie and Janna Anderson,  “ The Future of the 
Internet III, ” December 2008,  http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/2008/the-future
-of-the-internet-iii.aspx . 
 20.   Robin Yapp,  “ Brazilian Police to Use  ‘ Robocop-Style ’  Glasses at World Cup, ” 
 London Telegraph , 12 April, 2011,  http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/
southamerica/brazil/8446088/Brazilian-police-to-use-Robocop-style-glasses-at
-World-Cup.html . 
 21.   Amy-Mae Elliott,  “ 10 Amazing Augmented Reality iPhone Apps, ” Mashable.
com, 2009,  http://mashable.com/2009/12/05/augmented-reality-iphone ;  “ 40 Best 
Augmented Reality iPhone Applications, ” iPhoneness.com,  http://www.iphoneness
.com/iphone-apps/best-augmented-reality-iphone-applications . 
 22.   Google,  “ Annotating Google Earth, ” Google Earth Outreach,  http://earth.google
.com/outreach/tutorial_annotate.html . 
 23.   Howard Rheingold,  Smart Mobs (New York: Basic Books, 2002). 
 24.  Smart, Cascio, and Paffendorf,  The Metaverse Roadmap , p. 9, see note 5. 
 25.   David Gelernter,  Mirror Worlds (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992). 
 26.  Bonnie Nardi,  My Life as a Night Elf Priest  (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Press, 2010). 
 27.   Stephenson,  Snow Crash , pp. 35 – 36, see note 4. 
 28.  Michael Rymaszewski,  Second Life: The Ofﬁ cial Guide (New York: Sybex, 2008); 
Smart, Cascio, and Paffendorf,  The Metaverse Roadmap , p. 7, see note 5. 
 29.   Tateru Nino,  “ Second Life Statistical Charts, ” 2011,  http://dwellonit.taterunino
.net/sl-statistical-charts . 
 30.   Isaac Asimov,  The Naked Sun (New York: Doubleday, 1957). 
 31.  Josh Constine,  “ Facebook Announces Friendship Pages That Show Friends ’ 
Mutual Content, ”  Inside Facebook , 2010,  http://www.insidefacebook.com/2010/10/
28/friendship-pages-mutual-content . 
 32.   Smart, Cascio, and Paffendorf,  The Metaverse Roadmap , see note 5. 
 33.   Steve Mann,  “ Wearable Computing, ”  IEEE Intelligent Systems  16, no. 3 (2001) : 
10 – 15. 
 34.   Theresa Senft,  Cam Girls (New York: Peter Lang, 2008), p. 1. 
 35.   Theresa Senft, “ Fame to Fifteen: My Talk for TED , ”  2010,  http://tsenft.livejournal
.com/412814.html . 
 36.   FitBit,  “ About the Fitbit, ” Fitbit.com, 2010,  http://www.ﬁ tbit.com/product ; Kate 
Green,  “ Self Surveillance, ”  MIT Technology Review , September 10, 2008,  http://www
.technologyreview.com/communications/21361/page1 . 
 37.   See also Arnold Roosendaal,  “ Facebook Tracks and Traces Everyone: Like This! ” 
Tilburg Institute for Law, Technology and Society, Tilburg University, Netherlands, 
November 30, 2010,  http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1717563 . 
 38.   Justine Yu, email message to coauthor Wellman, April 19, 2011. 

Notes to Chapter 11 
349
 39.   Nick Bilton,  “ Tracking File Found in iPhones, ”  New York Times,  April 20, 2011, 
 http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/21/business/21data.html?_r=2 . 
 40.   Vannevar Bush,  “ As We May Think, ”  The Atlantic Monthly  (July 1945): 101 – 108. 
The quotation is from p. 106. 
 41.   Gordon Bell and Jim Gemmell,  Total Recall  (New York: Dutton, 2009). The quo-
tation is from p. 218. For a less positive view of a world permeated by networked 
microsensors, see Neal Stephenson ’ s science ﬁ ction novel,  The Diamond Age  (New 
York: Bantam, 1995). 
 42.   Ronald Baecker and associates,  “ Digital Life Histories, ” TAGlab [Techniques for 
Aging Gracefully], 2011,  http://taglab.utoronto.ca/projects/digital-life-history . 
 43.   Jeffrey Rosen,  The Unwanted Gaze (New York: Knopf, 2001). 
 44.  Rainey Reitman,  “ Well-Meaning  ‘ Privacy Bill of Rights ’ Wouldn ’ t Stop Online 
Tracking, ”  Electronic Frontier Foundation, April 14, 2011,  http://www.eff.org/deep
links/2011/04/well-meaning-privacy-bill-rights-could-codify . 
 45.   Ciaran Giles,  “ Internet  ‘ Right to be Forgotten ’ Debate Hits Spain, ”  Associated Press , 
April 20, 2011,  http://www.boston.com/news/world/europe/articles/2011/04/20/
internet_right_to_be_forgotten_debate_hits_spain . 
 46.   Ronald Deibert, John Palfrey, Rafal Rohozinski, and Jonathan Zittrain, eds.,  
Access Denied (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008). 
 47.   This widely circulated saying is attributed to Stewart Brand, also the editor of the 
epochal  Whole Earth Catalog. See R. Polk Wagner,  “ Information Wants to Be Free, ” 
University of Pennsylvania Law School, May 2003,  http://www.law.upenn.edu/fac/
pwagner/wagner.control.pdf . 
 48.   Jordan Robinson,  “ The Day Part of the Internet Died, ”  Washington Times , 
January 28, 2011,  http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2011/jan/28/day-part
-internet-died-egypt-goes-dark . 
 49.  Economist ,  “ The Future of the Internet: A Virtual Counter-Revolution, ” Sep-
tember 2, 2010, pp. 75 – 77,  http://www.economist.com/node/16941635?story_id
=16941635 & fsrc=rss . 
 50.  Wikipedia,  “ List of Websites Blocked in the People ’ s Republic of China, ” accessed 
April 20, 2011, from update of April 20, 2011, 0758 UTC,  http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/List_of_websites_blocked_in_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China#Other
_websites . 
 51.   Electronic Frontier Foundation,  “ AT & T ’ s Role in Dragnet Surveillance of Mil-
lions of Its Customers, ” November 12, 2007,  http://www.eff.org/ﬁ les/ﬁ lenode/att/
presskit/ATT_onepager.pdf . 
 52.   Ronald Deibert, John Palfrey, Rafal Rohozinski, and Jonathan Zittrain, eds., 
 Access Controlled (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010);  The Economist , see note 49 . 
 53.   Eli Pariser,  The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You  (London: Pen-
guin, 2011). 
 54.   Dan Rowinski,  “ Wave of the Future: Trusted Identities in Cyberspace, ”  Read-
WriteWeb , April 20, 2011,  http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/wave_of_the
_future_trusted_identities_in_cyberspac.php . 

350 
Notes to Chapter 11
 55.   Our heading is inspired by William Mitchell,  Me ++  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2003). 
 56.   Barry Wellman and Barry Leighton,  “ Networks, Neighborhoods, and Communi-
ties, ”  Urban Affairs Quarterly  14 (1979): 363 – 390; Peter Monge and Noshir Contrac-
tor,  Theories of Communication Networks (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003). 
 57.   Motion picture of H. G. Wells ’ s  Things to Come (United Artists, 1936); Terry 
Hayes, George Miller, and Brian Hannant,  Mad Max 2: The Road Warrior  (Warner 
Bros., 1981); Jame Cameron, Gale Anne Hurd, and William Wisher Jr.,  The Terminator 
(Orion, 1984); George Romero,  George Romero ’ s Land of the Dead  (Universal, 2005); 
Gary Whitta,  Book of Eli (Warner Bros., 2010). 
 58.   Walter B. Miller,  A Canticle for Leibowitz  (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1960); Doris 
Lessing,  Memoirs of a Survivor  (London: Octagon, 1974); Margaret Atwood,  The Year 
of the Flood (London: Bloomsbury, 2009). 
 59.   Lewis Mumford summarizes the change to walled towns in  The City in History 
(New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1961). The classic article on the conditions for localism 
is: Charles Tilly,  “ Do Communities Act? ”  Sociological Inquiry  43 (1973): 209 – 240. A 
good account of gang control of their neighborhoods is in Sudhir Venkatesh,  Gang 
Leader for the Day (New York: Penguin, 2008). 
 60.   Jeff Jarvis,  “ Friends Forever, ”  BuzzMachine , November 28, 2007,  http://www
.buzzmachine.com/2007/11/28/friends-forever-the-advantages-of-publicness . 

 
 Index 
 Absent presence, 102, 105 
 Active surfaces, 279 – 280, 292 
 Ad hoc communities and groups, 98, 
200 
 Adler, Paul and Charles Heckscher, 173 
 Advertising, 46, 295 
 Affordances, 65 – 67 
 Age, 76, 86, 90 
 Agency, 9, 19, 21 – 22, 32 – 33, 66 – 67, 
266 – 267 
 Agents, 281, 291 – 294 
 Amazon, 229 – 230 
 Apparatgeist, 87 
 Apps and Applications, 64, 107, 
291 – 294, 302 
 Arab Spring.  See Egyptian revolt 
 Aristotelian-Linnaean thinking, 37 
 Asimov, Isaac, 276 
 Asynchronicity, 67 
 Audiences, invisible, 272 
 Augmented reality, 282 – 283, 291 
 Autonomy, 31 – 34, 38 – 39, 266 – 267 
 Avatars, 284, 293, 300 
  
 Baron, Naomi, 96 
 Bearman, Peter and Paolo Parigi, 136 
 Bell, Gordon, 286 – 287.  See also 
Lifelogging 
 Benedict XVI, Pope, 127 
 Berners-Lee, Tim, 61 
 Beyond Reality, 216 – 218, 220 
 Bit-work, 31 – 32, 153, 172 – 174, 
180 – 181 
 Blair, Ann, 232 
 Blogjects.  See  Internet, of things 
 Blogs, 181, 198 – 199, 211 – 214, 
217 – 218, 237, 300 
 Boeing, 192 – 193 
 Bonding ties, 49, 143 
 Bott, Elizabeth, 45 
 Bowling Alone. See  Putnam, Robert 
 Breiger, Ronald, 202 
 Bridging ties, 49, 51, 56, 143 
 Broadband, 63, 72 – 74, 259, 278 
 Brown, John Seely and Paul Duguid, 223 
 Browsing, 61, 227 
 Bureaucracies, 15 – 16, 171 – 173, 
178 – 179, 192 
 Burt, Ronald, 49 
 Bush, Vannevar, 223, 244, 286 – 287 
  
 Cairncross, Frances, 100 – 101 
 Cairo, 207 – 210 
 Calendaring, 248 
 Camgirls, 286 
 Campbell, Scott, 102 
 Castells, Manuel, 77 – 79, 101 – 102 
 Cavecat and Telepresence projects, 174, 
291 
 Censorship, 288 – 289 
 Center for the Digital Future, 129, 
154 – 155, 186 

352 
Index
 Centrifugal forces, 298 – 299 
 Centripetal forces, 298 – 299 
 Childcare, 138, 149 – 154, 157 – 170, 
188 – 190 
 Children, 149 – 154, 157 – 162 
 China, 191, 231, 236 – 237, 241, 289, 
291 – 292 
 Christakis, Nicholas and James Fowler, 
42 
 Civic engagement, 79 – 80 
 Civil inattention, 105 – 106 
 Clinton, Hillary, 147 
 Close ties, 117 – 121, 131, 136 – 139 
 Clusters, 50 – 54 
 Clouds, 94, 294, 298 
 Collaborative consumption, 297 
 Collum, Maya, 109 – 113 
 Community, 38, 44 – 46, 53 – 54, 98, 
118 – 128 
 Community of ideas, 53 – 54 
 Computerization, 25 – 26, 65 – 68, 
174 – 175, 277 – 278 
 Computers.  See Personal computers 
 Connected Lives project, 125, 137 – 138, 
159 – 164, 167 – 169, 188 – 190, 231, 
232 
 Connected presence, 102, 289 – 294 
 Connection speeds.  See Broadband 
 Consequential strangers.  See Weak 
ties 
 Continuous partial attention, 108 
 Convergence of information and 
communication, 14, 230 – 232, 285, 
297 
 Cooper ’ s Law, 278 
 Cosmopolitans and locals, 49 
 Coveillance, 235, 238 – 240, 288 – 293 
 Coworkers, 134 – 135, 180, 236 
 Cracking, 94 
 Creative class, 31 – 32, 172 – 174 
 Creeping.  See Stalking 
 Crime, 81 – 82, 94, 237, 294 – 296 
 Culture, 30 – 31 
  
 Daily Me, 229 
 Dalai Lama, 241 
 Dating, 236 – 237, 257 – 258 
 Densely knit groups and networks, 8, 
34 – 38, 122 – 123 
 Developing countries, 44 – 45, 66, 
88 – 89, 101 
 Dial-up connections, 71 – 73 
 Diffusion of innovation, 46 – 47, 60 – 61 
 Digital divides, 75 – 77, 86 – 89, 300. 
 See also  Digital literacies; Ethnicity 
and race 
 Digital literacies, 76, 272 – 274.  See also 
Digital divides 
 Discrimination, 32 – 33 
 Distance, 100 – 101, 173, 177, 255, 
291 – 293.  See also  Neighbors and 
neighborhood 
 Distraction, 103 
 Distributed cognition, 193 
 Distributed work, 192 – 195, 201 – 204, 
291 – 292 
 Door-to-door connectivity, 122 – 123, 
294 – 296, 299 
 Driving, 102 – 103 
 Duality of persons and groups, 202 
 Dunbar ’ s number, 131 – 133 
 Dunham, Ann, 203 
 Dutton, William, 79 – 80 
 Dystopias, 294 – 296, 299 
  
 East York, 123, 125, 137, 160 – 161, 
167 – 168, 188 – 190 
 Ecommerce, 6, 177, 199, 295 
 Education, 164 
 Egyptian revolt, 207 – 210, 219, 289 
 Elite networks, 38 – 39 
 Email, 64, 74, 76, 109 – 111, 137, 161, 
176, 186 – 187, 246 – 249 
 Empowerment, 14, 219, 257 – 262 
 Endnote, 224 
 Entrepreneurs, 78 – 79, 190 – 191, 233 
 Ethics, 274 

Index 
353
 Ethiopia, 101 
 Ethnicity and race, 86, 90.  See also 
Digital divides 
 Evans, Linda, 256 – 262 
  
 Facebook, 75, 97, 109 – 112, 139 – 144, 
199 – 200, 207 – 208, 229, 242, 
245 – 251, 255, 286.  See also  Social 
media 
 Facebook generation in Middle East, 
207 – 210 
 Family roles.  See Household roles 
 Feagin, Joe and Harlan Hahn, 45 
 Fear of missing out (FOMO), 104, 228 
 Feld, Scott, 52 – 53 
 File sharing, 69 
 Filter bubbles, 290 
 Financial transactions, 74 – 76 
 Fischer, Claude, 136 – 137 
 Flickr.  See Photos online 
 Florida, Richard, 172.  See also  Creative 
class 
 Foci, 52 – 53 
 Fox, Susannah, 145, 218 
 Fraud.  See Crime 
 Frequency of contact, 137 
 Friends, 38, 127, 134 – 135, 176, 234, 
236, 242, 245 – 249, 258 – 261, 
292 – 293, 295 
 Future developments, 275 – 302 
  
 Games online, 69, 129, 147, 164, 177 
 Gans, Herbert, 45 
 Gated communities, 296, 299 
 Gauntlett, David, 200 
 Gender, 76, 86, 90 
 Gergen, Kenneth, 101 – 102 
 Ghazarian, Mirna, 138 
 GhostNet, 241 
 Gibson, William, 118 
 Gilder ’ s Law, 278 
 Globalization, 23 – 28, 63, 84 – 85, 172, 
174, 208 – 209, 301 
 Goffman, Erving, 105 – 106 
 Google, 48, 63, 70, 224, 286, S ee also 
Search 
 Buzz, 36 – 37 
 Goulet, Lauren Sessions, 133 – 134 
 GPS, 293 
 Graphical user interfaces (GUIs), 65 – 66, 
278 – 279, 282 – 284 
 Groups.  See  Densely knit groups and 
networks 
 Gruzd, Anatoliy, 52 – 53 
  
 Hackers and hacking, 77 – 78, 94 
 Hampton, Keith, 104 – 105, 119, 
130 – 131, 133 – 134 
 Handa, Nelu, 104 – 105, 120 
 Haythornthwaite, Caroline, 163, 164 
 Health care, 39, 103, 132, 145, 
218 – 219, 291, 295 
 Health sites, 21, 69, 218 – 219 
 Homosexuality, 33 
 Households, 27 – 29, 127, 149 – 151, 
155 – 170.  See also  Networked 
families 
 dual-earner, 151 – 154 
 family dinners, 155 – 156 
 roles, 148, 151 – 157, 166 – 170 
 single adult, 148 – 151, 161, 163, 
167 – 168 
 Howard, Gordon and Hammer, 158 
 Htoo, Sheila, 66 
 Hubs, 48 – 49 
 Hyperconnectivity, 95 – 96, 104, 
109 – 113, 245 – 250 
 Hypercoordination, 99, 207 – 210, 
245 – 250 
  
 Indirect ties, 51, 266 
 Individualism, 38 – 39 
 Industrial Revolution, 99, 117 – 118, 
141, 171 
 Information, 226 – 235 
 Information Warfare Monitor, 241 

354 
Index
 In-person, 98 – 106, 119, 127, 144, 192, 
194, 295 – 296, 299 
 Instant messaging, 69, 109 – 112, 176 
 Intel Corporation, 184 – 186 
 Intellectual property, 294 – 296, 301 
 Internet Revolution, 11 – 12, 59 – 80, 
126 – 128 
 as scapegoat, 118 – 120 
 literacy ( see Digital literacies) 
 non-use of, 75 
 of things, 279 – 280, 290 – 294 
 regulation, 62 
 Interracial, 32 – 33 
  
 Japanese earthquake and tsunami, 
201 – 202 
 Johnson-Lenz, Peter and Trudy, 3 – 11, 
132, 146, 262 
 Journalism, 224 – 226.  See also  News 
  
 Keegan, Brian, 201 – 202 
 Kelley, Sharanpreet, 144 – 145 
 Kennedy, Tracy, 148 – 149 
 Kimball, Lisa, 4 
 Kin, 38, 134 – 135, 176, 234, 236 – 237, 
293, 296 
 Knoke, David, 183 – 184 
 Kraut, Robert, 118 
 Krebs, Valdis, 54 
 Kryder ’ s Law, 64, 278 
 Kutiel, Ophir.  See Kutiman 
 Kutiman, 215 – 217, 220 
  
 Landline telephone, 23 – 25, 88, 112, 123 
 Lange, Patricia, 216 
 Laptops, 104 – 107 
 Lenhard, Amanda, 243 
 Libraries, 245, 293 
 Library of Congress, U.S., 204 – 207 
 Liebow, Eliot, 45 
 Lifelogging, 285 – 288, 297 – 298 
 Ling, Rich, 98 – 99 
 Lipnack, Jessica, 4 – 5 
 Location awareness, 108, 237 – 238, 
246 – 248, 291 – 294, 300 
  
 Madden, Mary, 243 
 Madej, Julia, 98 
 Mad Men,  171 
 Mainframes, 174 – 175, 194 
 Majchrzak, Ann, 193 
 Malhotra, Arvind, 193 
 Mann, Steve, 240, 286 
 Maranci, Peter, 197 – 199, 217 
 Marriage, 134, 138, 149 – 151, 159, 
161 – 162, 167, 188 – 190, 258 – 259 
 Mashups, 199, 215 – 216, 300 
 Mass media, 46 
 Matthew effect, 48 – 49 
 McEwen, Rhonda, 91, 100 
 McLuhan, Marshall, 120, 126 
 McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin 
and Matthew Brashears, 117 – 119, 121 
 Mechanical solidarity, 35 
 Media choice, 97 
 Media cost, 23 – 24, 63 – 64, 294 – 296, 
300 
 Media multiplexity, 108 – 113, 148, 163, 
290 – 298 
 Medium is the message, 120 
 Memex, 223 – 224, 244, 286 – 287 
 Merton, Robert K., 48 – 49 
 Metaverse Roadmap, 276 – 278 
 Metiquette, 104 – 105, 301 
 Migration, 44 – 46 
 Milgram, Stanley, 55 
 Miniaturization, 82 – 84, 91, 95, 107, 
277 – 278 
 Minority Report , 278 
 Mirror worlds, 283 – 284, 293, 300 
 MMORPG.  See  Games online 
 Mobile phones, 111, 207 – 210, 236, 
247 – 251 
 children ’ s and teenagers ’ use of, 
158 – 160, 164 – 166 
 demographics of users, 86 – 91, 160 

Index 
355
 Mobile Revolution, 12, 25, 81 – 108, 282 
 Mobile workers, 174, 186, 190 – 191 
 Mobility, 21 – 23 
 Moore ’ s Law, 62, 277 
 Moral panics, 117 – 119 
 Morozov, Evgeny, 237 
 MSN.  See Instant messaging 
 Multiple networks, 12 – 13, 124 – 126, 
275 
 Multiple profiles, 242.  See also 
Networked selves 
 Multitasking, 10, 93, 273 – 274 
 Music, 69, 104, 215 – 217, 278 
  
 National boundaries and sovereignty, 
25 – 27, 288 – 289 
 Neighbors and neighborhood, 3, 13, 
122, 128, 130, 134 – 135, 236, 255. 
 See also  Door-to-door connectivity 
 Netiquette, 125, 301 
 NetLab, xii – xiii, 121, 125, 191 
 Netville, 130 
 Network brokerage, 49 
 Networked creators, 13 – 14, 197 – 221 
 Networked families, 16 – 17, 27 – 29, 34, 
109 – 113, 147 – 170, 176.  See also 
Households 
 Networked identity.  See Networked 
selves 
 Networked individualism, 6, 12 – 18, 
65 – 71, 95 – 96, 123 – 131, 147 – 154, 
217 – 221, 243 – 251, 255 – 274, 
280 – 281, 291 – 294, 296 – 304 
 Networked information, 18, 81 – 82, 
223 – 244, 281 
 Networked organizations, 38, 172 – 174, 
181 – 185, 194 – 195 
 Networked selves, 15, 125 – 126, 242, 
268 – 272, 285 
 Networked work, 15 – 17, 31 – 32, 35, 
110 – 111, 171 – 185, 201 – 204, 218 – 219 
 Network heterogeneity, 13, 38, 265, 
290 
 Network operating system 6 – 19, 41 – 43, 
49, 56 – 59, 80, 95 – 96, 146, 255 – 256, 
262 – 272, 275 – 276 
 Network size, 119, 127 – 129, 131 – 139, 
145, 265 – 266 
 Networks of networks, 51 
 News, 69, 74, 93 – 94, 211 – 214, 
224 – 227, 229, 234, 292 
 Nielsen ’ s Law, 278 
 Nishimura ’ s Law, 278 
 Norms.  See Metiquette; Netiquette 
  
 Obama, Barack, 53 – 54, 200, 203 
 Old movies, novels, plays, and TV 
shows, 81 – 82, 171, 299 
 Online participation, 79 – 80 
 OpenNet Initiative, 241 
 Organizational networks, 52 
 Overload, 96 – 98 
 Oy-vey -ism, 6, 56 
  
 Paquet, Sebastien, 200 
 Pariser, Eli, 290 
 Park, Yong Jin, 102 
 Parles, Karen, 218 – 219 
 Parochialism, 121 
 Peace, 25 – 26 
 Pentland, Alexander (Sandy), 180 
 Personal communities.  See  Personal 
networks 
 Personal computers, 65 – 68, 278 – 280, 
298 
 growth of, 25 – 26 
 in households, 157 – 162 
 storage in, 64, 278 
 Personalization, 278 – 280 
 Personal networks, 7, 55 – 56, 123 – 146 
 Person-to-person connectivity, 65, 
123 – 126, 291 – 294 
 Pew Internet  & American Life Project, 
xi, 72 – 75, 86 – 87, 89 – 92, 119, 121, 
133 – 134, 154, 164 – 166, 199, 227, 
229, 232, 236 – 238, 243, 264, 267 – 268 

356 
Index
Pew Internet & American Life Project 
(cont.)
 Neighbors Online Project, 131 
 Networked Family Survey, 155 – 157, 
162 – 169 
 Networked Workers survey, 175 – 178, 
184 – 188 
 Pew Project for Excellence in 
Journalism, 211 – 214, 224 – 226 
 Photos online, 199, 205 – 207, 225, 249 
 Picasso, Pablo, 37 
 Place-to-place connectivity, 122 – 126 
 Planning events, 246 – 251 
 Politics, 45, 53 – 54, 197 – 198, 207 – 210, 
212 – 214, 217 – 219, 236 – 238, 240 – 241 
 Pornography online, 69 
 Power law, 48 
 Preindustrial times, 8 – 9, 99, 232, 299 
 Prejudice, 32 – 33 
 Present absence, 101 – 103 
 Presentism, 121 
 Privacy, 17 – 18, 125, 238 – 243, 288, 292, 
300 – 301.  See also  Public-private 
boundaries; Transparency 
 Public-private boundaries, 17 – 18, 35, 
97, 103 – 106, 111, 122, 185 – 190, 
271 – 272, 288 
 Putnam, Robert, 121, 124, 155 
  
 Quan-Haase, Anabel, 180 
  
 Radio online, 69, 230 
 Ranking.  See Reviews 
 Ratings.  See Reviews 
 Reciprocity, 263, 270 – 271 
 Reduced social cues, 120, 194 
 Religion, 29 – 30, 33, 203 
 Reputation management, 17, 267 – 269, 
300.  See also  Networked selves; Privacy 
 Retirement, 33 – 34 
 Reviews, 199, 248 – 250, 256, 293, 297, 
300 
 RFID, 293 
 Road warriors.  See  Mobile workers 
 Rogers, Everett, 47 
 Romance.  See  Dating 
 Rural, 86, 90, 145 
 Rushkoff, Douglas, 200 
  
 Safety, 81 – 82 
 Salami analysis, 137 
 Scheduling, 293.  See also  Time use 
 Science, the network revolution in, 
37 – 38 
 Search, 74, 228 – 229, 238 – 240, 249, 
295, 301. S ee also  Google 
 Second Life, 284.  See also  Virtual worlds 
 Security, 125, 296 
 Segmented networks, 12, 123 – 126, 
135 – 136 
 Seldon, Hari, 276 
 Self-expression, 217 – 218 
 Self-development, 218, 255 – 262 
 Self-monitoring, 237 – 238 
 Semantic web, 281 
 Senft, Theresa, 286 
 Serbia, 208 – 209 
 Simmel, Georg, 43 – 44, 99 
 Singhal, Arvind, 164 
 Six degrees of separation, 55 
 Skype.  See Video phones 
 Smart objects, 279 – 280 
 Smartphones, 91 – 93, 107.  See also 
Mobile phones; Mobile Revolution 
 Social capital, 38, 263, 270 – 271 
 Social control, 38 
 Social isolation, 81 – 82, 96, 117 – 121, 
131, 137, 144 – 145, 166, 190 
 Social media, 176 – 177, 199, 212 – 214. 
 See also  Facebook; Twitter 
 Social mobility, 220 
 Social movements, 44 – 45, 207 – 210, 231 
 Social network analysis, 42 – 47, 50 – 54 
 Social Network Revolution, 11 – 20, 
39 – 57 
 Social networks, 21, 39 – 43, 48 – 57 

Index 
357
 Social support, 7, 19, 98, 146, 219 – 220, 
257 – 261 
 Soetoro, Lolo, 202 
 Solove, Daniel, 268 
 Sousveillance, 240 – 241, 288 – 290 
 Sparsely knit networks, 7, 12, 56, 
123 – 126, 135 – 136, 265, 298 – 299 
 Stalking, 236 – 239 
 Stark, Carol, 45 
 Stephenson, Neal, 277, 284 
 Stroulia, Eleni, 186 
 Substitution argument, 144 – 145 
 Superconnectors, 48 – 49 
 Surveillance, 94, 235 – 238, 288 – 290, 
294 – 296 
  
 Tablets, 93 – 94, 107 
 Tagging, 199, 204 – 207, 237, 300 
 Techno-elites, 77 
 Technological determinism, 65 
 Teenagers, 81 – 82, 89 – 91, 95, 100, 148, 
164 – 166, 242 – 243, 256 
 Telephone.  See Landline telephone; 
Mobile telephone 
 Television, 30 – 31, 156 – 157, 216 – 217, 
234 
 Telework.  See Work at home 
 Telus Canadians and Technology 
Survey, 88, 127, 158 
 Textbases, 224 
 Texting, 89 – 91, 97 – 98, 105, 110 – 111, 
164 – 166, 176, 236, 247 – 249 
 Thomas, Kristin, 101 
 Time use, 67, 151 – 157, 188 – 190, 272, 
293 
 T ö nnies, Ferdinand, 43 
 Toronto.  See East York 
 Tracking files, 237.  See also  Surveillance 
 Transformation argument, 145 – 146 
 Transnational Entrepreneurs Study, 191 
 Transparency, 17 – 18, 80, 289 – 296. 
 See also  Coveillance; Privacy; 
Sousveillance; Surveillance 
 Transitivity.  See  Indirect ties 
 Travel, 22 – 27, 102 – 104, 190 – 194, 
280 
 Triple revolution, 11 – 20, 107 – 108, 170, 
276, 302 
 Trust, 270 – 271, 296 
 Tunisia, 208 – 209 
 Turkle, Sherry, 118 – 119, 166 
 Twitter, 55, 127, 199, 211 – 212, 224, 
231, 233, 245 – 248.  See also  Social 
media 
  
 Ubiquitous computing, 107, 279 – 280, 
291 – 294, 298 
 United Kingdom, 79 – 80 
 Urban, 44 – 45, 86, 90, 145, 207 – 210 
  
 Varian, Hal and Peter Lyman, 226 
 Venkatesh, Sudhir, 45 
 Video phones, 247 
 Videos online, 106, 177, 181, 200, 
211 – 212, 215 – 218, 225, 236, 
286 
 Virtual worlds, 78, 119, 283 – 284, 
293 
 Virus, 296 
 Vlogs, 286.  See also  Videos online 
 Voluntary organizations, 29, 35, 38, 
128, 134 – 135, 236, 257 – 264 
  
 Wang, Hua, 128, 164 
 Watts, Duncan, 48 
 Weak ties, 13, 132 – 134, 143, 236, 
264 
 Wellman, Beverly, 39 
 Wikileaks, 240 – 241 
 Wikipedia, 201 – 204, 218, 228 – 229 
 Wireless internet connectivity, 93 – 94, 
106 
 Witt, Leonard, 67 – 74 
 Woods, Tiger, 39 
 Work, 15 – 17, 152 – 154, 171 – 181, 
236 

358 
Index
 Work at home, 16 – 17, 155, 179, 
184 – 190, 198 
 Work-life balance, 96, 195 
 Work teams, 183 – 185 
  
 YouTube.  See Videos online 
 Yu, Justine Abigail, 245 – 251 
  
 Zuckerberg, Mark, 242 

