Lecture Notes in Production Engineering   
New Production 
Technologies in 
Aerospace Industry
Berend Denkena Editor
Proceedings of the 4th Machining 
Innovations Conference, Hannover, 
September 2013

Lecture Notes in Production Engineering
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/10642

Berend Denkena
Editor
New Production
Technologies in Aerospace
Industry
Proceedings of the 4th Machining
Innovations Conference, Hannover,
September 2013
123

Editor
Berend Denkena
Institut für Fertigungstechnik und Werkzeugmaschinen
Leibniz Universität Hannover
Garbsen
Germany
ISSN 2194-0525
ISSN 2194-0533
(electronic)
ISBN 978-3-319-01963-5
ISBN 978-3-319-01964-2
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2
Springer Cham Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013946936
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or
information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief
excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the
purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the
work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of
the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must
always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the
Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with
respect to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Preface
The aerospace industry is characterized by a high degree of research intensity and
rapid developments. Due to this, aerospace industry has a high strategic impor-
tance in the development of innovative technologies.
‘‘The aerospace industry is one of the most successful industries in Europe, but
also one of the most challenging,’’ says Hans-Joachim Peters, Chairman of the
Machining Innovations Network e.V. and Head of Core Business Unit Part Pro-
duction, Premium AEROTEC GmbH. ‘‘An important contribution to this leader-
ship role is the innovative capacity of the suppliers with their production
equipment and technology research,’’ adds Peters. Despite the long timescales of
individual projects due to the necessary approvals innovations are continuously
implemented. Currently processes with a high resource efﬁciency but still good
quality and increasing productivity, both in products and in production processes is
sought after.
The demand for fuel and resource efﬁcient aircrafts and ﬂights is growing fast
from a political as well as social viewpoint. This gives new relevance for the
research of new materials and processes, which enable the production of safe and
economic aircrafts. Innovative materials need adapted manufacturing processes
and this in turn has an impact on planning and organization of factories, machine
tools and manufacturing processes.
The Institute of Production Engineering and Machine Tools and the Machining
Innovations Network e.V. present in 2013 the Machining Innovations Conference
New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry. A total of 26 experts from
industry and science will report on two half-days in plenary and technical pre-
sentations of the latest innovations and trends. The topics of the different sessions
are current trends in manufacturing and production technology as well as planning
and organization. For the ﬁrst time in the 13 year history of the conference,
scientiﬁc presentations are presented with the latest research results on the key
topics of the conference in an extra session. The articles belonging to this scientiﬁc
session are presented within this issue of ‘‘Lecture Notes in Production
Engineering’’.
Therefore, I’m looking forward to the conference as a whole and the scientiﬁc
aspects in particular with presentations on current research, captivating presenta-
tions and lively discussions about the various aspects of New Production Tech-
nologies in Aerospace Industry.
v

Contents
High Performance Turning of High Temperature Alloys
on Multi-Tasking Machine Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
U. Karagüzel, U. Olgun, E. Uysal, E. Budak and M. Bakkal
Impact of Clamping Technology on Horizontal and Vertical
Process Chain Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Roman Kalocsay, Thomas Bergs and Fritz Klocke
Simulation of the NC Milling Process for the Prediction
and Prevention of Chatter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
S. Odendahl, R. Joliet, E. Ungemach, A. Zabel,
P. Kersting and D. Biermann
Improved Quality of Drilled Holes in Laminated Carbon Fiber
Reinforced Plastics via Laser-Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
F. Schneider, B. Kirsch, M. Gurka, T. Hermann,
J. A. L’huiller and J. C. Aurich
Flexible Production of Small Lot Sizes by Incremental Sheet
Metal Forming with Two Moving Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
Christian Magnus, Bolko Buff and Horst Meier
Dedicated Machine Tool Development for Blisk Milling . . . . . . . . . . .
39
B. Bringmann, R. Bacon and B. Güntert
Surface Characterization of Components Subjected to Deep
Rolling for Cyclic Loading Applications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A. M. Abrão, B. Breidenstein, T. Mörke and B. Denkena
Small-Scaled Modular Design for Aircraft Wings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
L. Overmeyer and A. Bentlage
vii

Development of Machining Strategies for Aerospace Components,
Using Virtual Machining Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
L. Estman, D. Merdol, K.-G.Brask, V. Kalhori and Y. Altintas
Inﬂuence of 5-axes-kinematics Geometrical Accuracy
in Riblet Manufacturing Processes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Berend Denkena, Jens Köhler and Thomas Krawczyk
New Technology for High Speed Cutting of Titanium Alloys. . . . . . . .
75
Eberhard Abele and Roland Hölscher
Cutting Lightweight Materials with Surface Modiﬁed Tools . . . . . . . .
83
Frank Barthelmä and Heiko Frank
Process Force and Stability Prediction of End Mills
with Unequal Helix Angles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
R. Grabowski, B. Denkena and J. Köhler
High Rate Production of Laminar Wing Covers:
With Modular ‘‘Shoe Box’’ Tooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
Markus Kleineberg and Matthias Grote
Simulation of Residual Stress Related Part Distortion. . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
Berend Denkena and Steven Dreier
Increasing Accuracy of Industrial Robots in Machining
of Carbon Fiber Reinforced Plastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
Martin Freising, Simon Kothe, Markus Rott, Hendrik Susemihl
and Wolfgang Hintze
Production of Customized Hybrid Fiber-Reinforced
Thermoplastic Composite Components Using Laser-Assisted
Tape Placement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
C. Brecher, M. Emonts, J. Stimpfl and A. Kermer-Meyer
Efﬁcient Production of CFRP Lightweight Structures
on the Basis of Manufacturing Considerations
at an Early Design Stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
131
B. Denkena, P. Horst, C. Schmidt, M. Behr and J. Krieglsteiner
Inﬂuence of the Fiber Cutting Angle on Work Piece
Temperature in Drilling of Unidirectional CFRP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
137
Wolfgang Hintze, Christoph Schütte and Stefan Steinbach
viii
Contents

Increase of Process Stability with Innovative Spindle Drives . . . . . . . .
145
W. Bickel, K. M. Litwinski and B. Denkena
Towards a Cax-Framework for Adaptive Programming
Using Generic Process Blocks for Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
153
Gunter Spöcker, Thomas Bobek, Lothar Glasmacher and Fritz Klocke
The Initial Analysis of Ethernet Bus for Monitoring
HSM Process in Aerospace Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
163
Piotr Szulewski
Producing Better Turbines by Using Process Monitoring
and Documentation Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
173
Jan Brinkhaus, Martin Eckstein and Joachim Imiela
From Fuzzy Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul Data
to Reliable Capacity Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
181
Steffen C. Eickemeyer, Simon Steinkamp, Bernhardt Schuster
and Sebastian Schäfer
Machine Tool Thermal Errors Reduction for 5-axis Machining
of Aircraft Parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
187
Jerzy Jedrzejewski and Wojciech Kwasny
Recycling of Aluminum Chips by Hot Extrusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
197
Matthias Haase, Andreas Jäger and A. Erman Tekkaya
Contents
ix

High Performance Turning of High
Temperature Alloys on Multi-Tasking
Machine Tools
U. Karagüzel, U. Olgun, E. Uysal, E. Budak
and M. Bakkal
Demands of aerospace industry for high performance alloys have been increasing
due to their superior thermal and mechanical properties. These properties, on the
other hand, decrease the machinability resulting in lower productivity. Conven-
tional machining techniques can be insufﬁcient to provide higher productivity for
these cases. Special processes such as turn-milling and rotary turning can be
remedy in increasing productivity in these applications. In order to test the per-
formance of these processes, Mori Seiki NTX2000 mill-turn machining center is
used. This machine includes nine axes with two chucks, a milling spindle and a
turning turret. The milling spindle whose head moves along the X-, Y- and Z-axes
and rotates around the B-axis is used to control the inclination angle in turn-
milling and rotary turning tests.
Turn-Milling
Turn-milling (Fig. 1) is relatively a new cutting operation which combines two
conventional manufacturing processes; turning and milling. This promising tech-
nology becomes an alternative to classical turning due to its advantages such as
higher productivity and lower cutting temperatures which provide longer tool life.
Intermittent characteristics of turn-milling helps maintaining lower cutting tem-
peratures which make higher cutting speeds possible, produce smaller chips and
reduce cutting forces. Parts with large diameters which cannot be turned at high
speeds can be machined with increased productivity using milling tools at high
rotational speeds. Furthermore, in turn-milling cutting forces applied on the part
U. Karagüzel (&)  M. Bakkal
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
e-mail: ukaraguzel@yahoo.com
U. Olgun  E. Uysal  E. Budak
Manufacturing Research Laboratory, Sabanci University, Istanbul, Turkey
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_1,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
1

are reduced reducing deformations. Therefore, turn-milling had the potential to
offer increased productivity and quality especially in machining of critical parts.
Tool wear
A cutting cycle in turn milling includes cutting and non-cutting periods which
allows cutting edges to cool down reducing diffusive tool wear. In order to
investigate this, tool wear experiments were conducted on a Mori Seiki NTX2000
multi-tasking machine. A 32 mm diameter Seco micro turbo 217.69-03 milling
tool with three cutting teeth was used in the experiments. The inserts were F40 M
grade which is recommended for machining super alloys. The work piece mate-
rials were Inconel 718 and Waspaloy which are commonly used in gas turbine hot
sections. The cutting conditions used in experiments are as follows: 45 m/min
cutting speed, 0.4 mm/rev feed, 0.2 mm depth of cut and 8 mm feed per work
piece revolution. Flank wear land on the cutting tools was measured at regular
intervals using a microscope as shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
Figure 2 shows tool wear measurement results in machining of Inconel 718
with conventional turning using carbide tooling and turn-milling for different
cooling conditions according to the tool life per cutting edge considering the fact
that the milling tool has three cutting teeth. Overall, it can be concluded from these
results that tool life is improved substantially in turn-milling. Turn-milling, even
under dry cutting conditions, provides about 50 % times higher tool life compared
to wet conventional turning. It can clearly be seen that coolant has a signiﬁcant
effect on tool wear in turn-milling. For a carbide tool life criteria of 0.4 mm of
ﬂank wear, turn-milling with coolant (either conventional or MQL, although MQL
seems to yield better life at higher speeds) provides about 3–3.5 times higher life
compared to conventional turning.
Waspaloy is another important material in aerospace engineering. Figure 3
shows comparison between conventional turning under dry conditions and turn-
milling with wet and MQL cooling for the tool life per cutting edge as the cutting
Fig. 1 a Turn-milling operation. b Chip disposal compared to conventional turning (Sandvik).
c High performance turn-milling (Mori Seiki)
2
U. Karagüzel et al.

inserts immediately broke in dry turn-milling of waspalloy. One can see from
Fig. 3 that tool life is increased substantially (up to 30 times) by turn-milling per
cutting edge.
MRR (Material Removal Rate) Optimization
High MRR (Material Removal Rate) is possible in turn-milling but it may cause
increased form errors in ﬁnishing as shown in Fig. 4. Turn-milling process does
not produce an ideal circle. Since in turn-milling cutting tool and work piece rotate
simultaneously, the resulting machined part cross section is a polygon as shown in
Fig. 2 Tool wear results of Inconel 718 for different cutting conditions
Fig. 3 Tool wear comparison between turn milling and conventional turning of Waspaloy
High Performance Turning
3

Fig. 4. If the feed per work piece revolution is increased for higher material
removal rates, the cusp height shown in Fig. 4a is also increased.
Equations (1) and (2) explain the circularity error in turn-milling operations. In
Fig. 4b, an ideal cross section and the one obtained in turn-milling can be seen.
OB-OA in Eq. (2) describes the difference between desired and obtained cross
sections.
h ¼ 2p
zrn
ð1Þ
OB  OA ¼ Rw  ap


1
cos h
2
1
 
!
ð2Þ
where z is the number of cutting teeth, rn is the tool speed to work piece speed
ratio, Rw is the work piece radius and ap is the depth of cut. Figure 5 shows the
effects of cutting conditions on the form error and tool life. As expected the tool
life can be improved by decreasing the cutting speed at the cost of increased in
circularity error. Figure 5b shows that MRR can be increased using higher feed per
work piece revolution but again at the cost of reduced quality.
Fig. 4 a Form errors in turn-milling. b Circularity error (cross section view)
Fig. 5 Effect of cutting conditions on MRR and part quality in turn-milling
4
U. Karagüzel et al.

Rotary Turning
Rotary turning, which is a specialized turning process, can also be a remedy to
improve the machinability and productivity of difﬁcult-to-cut alloys. In this
process, the round insert rotates continuously about its own axis during cutting.
This tool rotation distributes the generated thermal energy to the whole cutting
edge resulting lowered cutting temperatures and uniformly distributed ﬂank wear
on cutting edge. There are two types of rotary turning tools which are Self-
Propelled Rotary Turning (SPRT) and Actively Driven Rotary Turning (ADRT)
tools. In the former one, the tool is rotated by the action of the chip and cutting
forces where the tool rotary speed depends on the workpiece geometry and the
cutting speed. For the latter one, on the other hand, an external power source is
used to rotate the insert. In this type, the tool speed and inclination can be adjusted
independently. SPRT and ADRT processes can be seen in Fig. 6a, b, respectively.
In this paper, only the ADRT tool performance for various difﬁcult to machine
alloys is presented.
The experimental set-up is shown in Fig. 6c. The tests were conducted under
dry, ﬂood coolant and MQL conditions with various tool speeds and tool incli-
nation angles. The cutting tool used for ADRT is a carbide insert with multi-layer
CVD coating of MT-Ti(C, N) ? Al2O3 ? TiN. It has 25 mm diameter with a chip
breaker and 7 clearance angle.
The workpiece materials are Waspaloy, Ti6Al4 V and Inconel 718. 45 m/min
cutting speed, 0.1 mm/rev feed and 0.2 mm depth of cut were used in the tests.
Three different tool inclination angles (0, 5, 15) and three different tool speeds
(10 m/min, 20 m/min, 45 m/min) are tested.
Tool Wear
Tool wear results of ADRT process are presented in this section for various cutting
conditions in comparison to conventional turning. In order to properly compare the
lives of the stationary turning insert and the rotating one, normalization is
Fig. 6 Types of rotary turning (a) SPRT (b) ADRT (c) ADRT tool position on the mill-turn
machine
High Performance Turning
5

necessary. This is due to the fact that when the rotating insert reaches the
maximum allowable wear all around the cutting edge its useful life is ﬁnished and
needs to be replaced whereas the stationary insert can be indexed and its unused
portions can be used until the whole cutting edge is completely worn. The number
of times the stationary insert can be used depends on its contact portion, and thus
on the width of cut. In short, the measured tool life for stationary inserts must be
multiplied by the number of indexing which is called normalization in this
analysis. Figure 7a exhibits the normalized tool life test results for different rotary
tool speeds on Waspaloy including conventional turning (Vt = 0) results. Cutting
test results for Waspaloy indicate that increasing rotary tool speed after a certain
range causes higher tool wear rate. At very low and high tool speeds, the tool life is
the worst due to thermal effects. At low speeds the contact time between the tool
and the workpiece increases whereas at higher speeds the required time for the tool
to cool down is inadequate resulting in heat accumulation at the cutting edge as
seen in Fig. 7a. For the best condition of rotary turning tool, tool life increases
43 % compared to conventional turning tool, i.e. for Vt = 0 m/min. On the other
hand, increasing rotary tool inclination angle (shown in Fig. 6 as b) improves tool
life as seen in Fig. 7b. Increasing inclination from 0 to 5 increases tool life 44 %,
while a rise from 5 to 15 causes a further increase of up to 49 % in tool life.
Similar results are obtained for Ti6Al4 V cutting tests, i.e. as the tool
inclination increases the tool wear rate decreases as shown in Fig. 8a. Figure 8b
exhibits the effect of cooling condition on the tool life. Using coolant and MQL
(Minimum Quantity Lubrication) improves tool life which can be attributed to
reduced thermal shock on the cutting insert and more effective transportation of
the cutting ﬂuid to the cutting zone. Interestingly, for AISI 1050 steel cutting tests,
dry condition gives the best result which may be explained by reduced thermal
fatigue between high temperature (in cut) and low temperature (out of cut) regions.
Inconel 718 cutting tests also indicate that as the tool inclination angle
increases, the tool life also increases as shown in Fig. 9a. Figure 9b shows the
effect of coolant on the tool life where cutting ﬂuid and MQL improves tool life
47 % and 12 % respectively, compared to dry cutting.
Fig. 7 The variation of tool life with a Tool speed. b Tool inclination angle for Vt = 10 m/min,
cutting with coolant for Waspaloy
6
U. Karagüzel et al.

For Waspaloy cutting tests, cutting inserts for different cooling conditions, dry,
coolant and MQL are examined under SEM as shown in Fig. 10. In all cases, ﬂank
wear is the dominant wear type where crater wear is not observed. High level of
workpiece adhesion to the ﬂank face is recognized, especially in dry cutting
condition. These deposited materials re-enter the cutting zone due to tool rotation
and triggers attrition of the tool material.
Fig. 8 Tool wear for Vt = 10 m/min a Different tool inclination angles for MQL cutting. b For
different cooling conditions for b = 15 for Ti6Al4 V
Fig. 9 Variation of tool life a With tool inclination angle for MQL, Vt = 10 m/min. b With
cooling types for b = 5, Vt = 20 m/min for Inconel 718
Fig. 10 SEM images of Waspaloy, Vt = 10 m/min, b = 08 a Dry b Coolant c MQL conditions
High Performance Turning
7

Surface Roughness and Circularity
Surface and form measurements were carried out in order to understand the effects
of tool inclination and cooling conditions on the surface roughness and circularity
of the workpiece, on test parts made out of AISI 1050 steel. As shown in Fig. 11,
for 5 tool inclination, cutting traces on the surface can be seen at an angle to the
feed direction due to tool spinning. 0 tool inclination provides better roughness
results in the feed direction as shown in Table 1 where coolant improves rough-
ness in the feed direction. MQL results in slightly better roughness in the
circumferential direction compared to other cooling conditions. High circularity
errors shown in Table 1 indicate that rotary turning process is suitable rough
turning of difﬁcult to cut alloys.
Conclusions
Multi-tasking machines offer opportunities to achieve higher machining produc-
tivity. Turn milling and rotary turning investigated in this study show that they can
provide higher tooling performance in turning of high temperature alloys.
Conventional turning is a continuous cutting process which produces high tem-
peratures in cutting of special high temperature alloys. On the other hand, turn
Fig. 11 Surface topography for different inclination angle and cooling conditions on AISI 1050
(a) 5, MQL (b) 5, Coolant (c) 0, Coolant
Table 1 Surface roughness and circularity measurements for various tests
5, MQL
5, Coolant
0, Coolant
Roughness in feed directory
2.66 lm
1.22 lm
0.92 lm
Roughness in circumferential directory
1.33 lm
1.39 lm
1.44 lm
Circularity
35–43 lm
69–85 lm
29–30 lm
8
U. Karagüzel et al.

milling and rotary turning are interrupted cutting operations which offer a chance
to reduce cutting tool temperatures and improve tool life.
In this study, turn-milling and rotary turning operations are studied in terms of
tool wear and machined part quality under different cutting and cooling conditions.
As the summary of the tool wear measurements given in Fig. 12 shows rotary
turning and turn milling provide much higher tool life (normalized for number of
cutting edge and indexing) compared to conventional turning of Inconel 718 and
Waspalloy.
Acknowledgments The support from Mori Seiki Corporation, Pratt and Whitney Canada and
Turkish Scientiﬁc and Technological Research Foundation (Tubitak—Project 110M522) is
appreciated by the authors.
Fig. 12 Tool wear comparisons of turn milling, rotary turning and conventional turning for
a Inconel 718 and b Waspalloy
High Performance Turning
9

Impact of Clamping Technology
on Horizontal and Vertical Process
Chain Performance
Roman Kalocsay, Thomas Bergs and Fritz Klocke
Abstract Clamping technology plays a major role in optimization of holistic
process chains, determines auxiliary process times, enables process performance
and affects workpiece quality. In this study we evaluate three different referencing
strategies in horizontal process chains and discuss the effect of ﬁxtures on work-
piece dynamics. In order to achieve an optimal process chain performance an
optimization of clamping solutions is crucial.
Keywords Clamping  Fixture design  Process chains  References  Damping
Introduction
To achieve robust and economic manufacturing, optimization is not limited to
single process steps. A holistic approach must take into account the production
process as a whole. It can be structured in two different scopes we call ‘‘vertical’’
and ‘‘horizontal process chain’’. In focus each manufacturing step can be divided
into a sequence of tool path planning and machining operations, the ‘‘vertical
process chain’’ (Fig. 1). Key factors regarding the optimization of a single oper-
ation in ‘‘vertical process chains’’ are machining parameters, tools, tool paths and
ﬁxture design amongst others. The ‘‘horizontal process chain’’ addresses the
sequence of operations in a larger scope. Horizontal optimization deals with the
efﬁcient interconnection of process steps and involves logistics and harmonization
of information transfer. Clamping technology can impact both directions of these
process chains signiﬁcantly to improve the overall production process.
R. Kalocsay  T. Bergs  F. Klocke (&)
Fraunhofer IPT, Steinbachstraße 17, 52074 Aachen, Germany
e-mail: Fritz.Klocke@ipt.fraunhofer.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_2,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
11

A ﬁrst design theory on clamping devices was given by [1]. Willy [2] con-
tributed a design method for ﬁxtures in automated industry. In [3] active ﬁxture
design is outlined and in [4] a method for setup optimization is presented.
References and Positioning in Horizontal Process Chains
The performance of horizontal process chains mainly depends on positioning
efforts. Optimization therefore requires dealing with references in clamping.
Efﬁciency aims on data consistency, providing a fast way to establish deﬁned
relative positions of machine tools and workpieces in each process step. In the
following three different approaches are presented (Fig. 2).
Clamping Device Based References
In this approach the workpiece is positioned at a predeﬁned location in the
machine tool. In this case movement is purely force driven using spring based,
hydraulic or pneumatic kinematics pressing the workpiece onto rigid locators. To
overcome jamming caused by friction before reaching the ﬁnal stop position, the
actors engage sequentially with subsequently increasing forces [5] or subsequently
in a pulsewise manner maintaining a steady base load. By this means, a high repeat
accuracy with usually less than 10 lm positioning tolerance can be achieved,
depending on surface quality and friction deviation. In a second step the achieved
workpiece position can be stabilized by attachment of additional supports.
horizontal Process chain
„
vertical
“
Process
chain
Process technology
Clamping technology
Tool path pattern (CAM)
Process control
Continuous CAx-chain
Referencing and clamping systematic
Metrology and data acquisition
Automated adaptive machining
Raw
part
Damaged
part
Finished
newpart
Repaired
component
“
„
Fig. 1 Horizontal and vertical process chain
12
R. Kalocsay et al.

In cast or forged workpieces large deviation of the form causes problems in
clamping, especially due to uneven burrs at seams. Because of poor surface quality
the classical force-driven positioning approach with rigid locators may lead to such
large displacements of the center point that, even with reasonable oversize,
geometry of the ﬁnished workpiece may exceed the boundary of material at
machining position. Consequently, the high scrap rate often needs to be reduced by
manual adaption efforts. This can be overcome by a centric positioning approach,
which uses rigid kinematics (i.e. centric threads, knee levers or gears). It is crucial
to keep the elasticity of the moving parts as low as possible. To enhance stiffness a
two-stage approach can be followed: Centric positioning is achieved in the ﬁrst
step. In a second step positions of any moving elements are locked based on
friction. Additional stability can be achieved by spring-loaded supports that are
locked by friction in a third step. Given that kinematics are clearly determined in
the positioning step, a repeat accuracy of \50 lm is achievable, depending on
stiffness and bearing play of the kinematics.
In both approaches a high repeat accuracy can be achieved, whereas absolute
accuracy of positioning might still be poor. High precision locators for exact
positioning are prone to dirt and abrasives. Starting from the resulting natural
clamped position of the workpiece and adjusting the machining by performing a
calibration procedure offers a more robust and consistent approach. To determine
the transfer matrix, the measured position of a reference workpiece relative to the
coordinate system of the clamping device is compared with the CAD data being
the basis for the CAM programming. The reference workpiece represents the
average of the clamped parts, having reference geometry attached.
Fig. 2 Three referencing strategies; left clamping based referencing by clearly determined
workpiece positioning; middle workpiece based referencing using data acquisition; right carrier
system using cast in workpieces combined with a zero point system
Impact of Clamping Technology
13

The main advantage of clamping device based references is time saving as
referencing steps for each individual workpiece are dispensable. Combination with
zero-point systems for setting up the clamping device provides high ﬂexibility in
interchanging machine tools. One possible drawback of ﬁxture based referencing
approaches is low ﬂexibility as the design of tailored ﬁxtures and manufacturing a
reference workpiece can be laborious. However, in serial production or regarding
MRO cases, frequent repetitive clamping tasks are expected to become econom-
ically efﬁcient.
Workpiece Based References
In the ﬁrst machining step reference geometry is applied to the raw part, providing
a base for subsequent machining operations. The reference is read out at the
beginning of each machining step and machining coordinates are adjusted to each
individually ﬁxed position. Usually, the reference is generated by removal of
material by drilling holes or milling orthogonal faces. Sometimes metal inserts or
optical reﬂectors are used in ﬁber-composite parts. In future applications the use of
RFID technology appears to be promising for non-metal parts as well. Application
of the reference geometry speeds up the time-consuming initial calibration pro-
cedure. However, referencing times still accrue in each process step for individual
parts. Therefore and to provide an overall efﬁcient horizontal process chain it is
important to use a fast referencing method as provided by optical or RFID based
systems. Up to now most setups are tactile based, offering robust, cheap and
accurate but also very slow solutions.
Difﬁculties with workpiece based references occur when high material removal
rates prevent obtaining a ﬁnal reference or the reference gets lost during pro-
cessing. Deviations caused by released residual stress or thermal dilatations of
large parts also pose a challenge. The combination of a continuous CAx-chain and
optical machine-integrated metrology provides a technical solution here. By
acquisition of a 3D model of the clamped workpiece and online comparison with
the database in real-time, the coordinate transformation for the machining oper-
ation can be calculated without additional reference geometry. This approach also
allows adaptive reacting to dilatations and workpiece deformations. However, this
requires demanding metrology and CAx programming as well as time consuming
scanning procedures.
Workpiece based references enable the use of ﬂexible clamping technology
with limited repeat accuracy such as construction set ﬁxtures, vices, magnetic
plates, multi piston devices (e.g. MatrixTM) or cast in systems without prior
positioning steps. Accuracy largely depends on the metrology. The main advan-
tage of this approach is high ﬂexibility, rendering its use in small batch size and
being the method of choice for individual production.
14
R. Kalocsay et al.

Carrier Systems
In this clamping approach a carrier is attached to the workpiece in the ﬁrst
operation. This not only provides the reference for all subsequent operations, but
also constitutes the physical ﬁxation regarding machining forces. The carrier
remains attached to the workpiece throughout the horizontal process chain and is
removed in the last process step, sometimes followed by an additional step to clean
the workpiece. The carrier can be mounted locked by friction (e.g. clamps), form
locked (e.g. treads) or bonded (e.g. by glue, castings in bismuth or plastic).
Connection of the carrier to the machine is usually provided by zero-point systems,
giving the advantage of fast and accurate positioning and high stiffness. Zero-point
bolts may directly be mounted into the machined workpiece as well. The repeat
accuracy of this approach is equal to zero-point systems (±5 lm); the absolute
accuracy depends largely on the ﬁrst positioning step.
The advantage of this method is the natural preservation of the reference
throughout the horizontal process chain. This permits both short positioning times
and high precision. The carrier often provides high stiffness and good resistance to
process forces and dynamic excitation, especially when bonding connections are
used in order to handle complex or thin walled geometries. Drawbacks result from
required mounting and dismounting of the carriers. Complex carriers and large
process chains can involve high investment costs. Up to now carrier approaches
are used in mass production and in cases of very complex workpiece geometry.
However, new commercially available zero-point systems with ﬂexible chuck
positions open up the opportunity to apply the carrier strategy also to medium
production rates and larger production variety.
Workpiece Dynamics Affecting Vertical Process Chains
Vertical process chain performance depends to a large part on ﬁxture design. The
most important aspect is convenient handling, inﬂuencing clamping times, scrap
rate and process quality. Other important goals in vertical process optimization
regarding clamping devices are minimizing operating errors, avoiding unwanted
workpiece deformations, shortening setup- and clamping times and lowering
ﬁxture costs. In the following workpiece dynamics will be focused on to show the
impact of ﬁxtures on process performance.
Stiffness and Eigenmodes depend on the valence of bearings and position of
supports. Increasing stiffness enables the use of higher federates with larger
process forces if static workpiece deﬂection limits the process performance.
However, regarding workpiece vibrations increasing the damping of clamping
devices is more efﬁcient than merely increasing the stiffness. Damping in clamping
devices can be obtained by using friction, viscoelastic materials (e.g. low order
polymer networks), hydraulic systems and other mechanisms. The use of
Impact of Clamping Technology
15

HIDAMETS (e.g. CuAl12.3Mn5.l) appears to be especially promising because of
its relatively high stiffness, suited to be integrated directly into the ﬂux of forces
within the ﬁxture design. Figure 3 shows the potential of damping for a cantilever
beam setup. In this simulation the resulting resonance amplitudes can be reduced
to less than 1 %, if the clamping device is viscoelastically dampened by 30 %.
This value represents the maximum achievable damping ratio using high-damp-
ening metals (HIDAMETS).
Compared to classical ﬁxture design the stiffness of dampening clamping
devices needs to be slightly reduced to obtain best dampening effects with lowest
amplitudes. In Fig. 4 an exemplary ﬁxture design based on CuAlMn is shown
having optimized stiffness properties regarding the clamped workpiece, in this case
being a 1.6 m steam turbine blade made of steel with momentum free mount at the
tip. A periodical force of 100 N excites in the middle at resonance frequency of
122 Hz. The calculated results show that even with low damping ratios resonance
amplitudes can be decreased signiﬁcantly.
ω
je
Fˆ
F
⋅
=
F
C
w
D
Sp
D
w
C
Sp
x= xW +  xSp
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Fig. 3 Effect of damping in clamping devices. Left clamped steel plate 150 9 80 9 20 mm,
cantilever plate model of clamping devices. Right frequency response, Dw = 0.1 %, F = 100 N
16
R. Kalocsay et al.

Conclusion
In this study we outline the inﬂuence of clamping technology on horizontal and
vertical process chains with a focus on referencing and also considering workpiece
dynamics. Three different approaches of referencing are discussed and the
potential of passive damping in clamping devices for optimization is demon-
strated. An optimal strategy in clamping needs to consider a variety of factors as
pointed out above and requires solutions tailored to the individual production
process. In order to achieve optimal clamping solutions an analysis of process
chains is crucial.
This publication contains results of the project ‘‘DynaMill’’, funded by the
European Commission within the 7th Framework (FoF.NMP.2012-4).
References
1. Lock, F.: Konzeption und Entwicklung von Vorrichtungssystemen für die spanende Fertigung,
PhD Thesis, RWTH Aachen, (1984)
2. Willy, A.: Vorrichtungssysteme für die ﬂexibel automatisierte Montage. PhD Thesis,
University of Stuttgart, (1993)
3. Bakker, O.J.: Control metrology and modeling of active ﬁxtures, PhD Thesis, University of
Nottingham, (2010)
4. Eichhorn, N.: Rüstoptimierung in der Zerspanung, PhD Thesis, TH Darmstadt, (2012)
5. Raghu, A., Melkote, S.: Analysis of the effects of ﬁxture clamping sequence on part location
errors. Mach. Tools Manuf. 44: 373–382 (2004)
Fig. 4 Resonance amplitudes versus material damping in a ﬁxture for large steam turbine blades
Impact of Clamping Technology
17

Simulation of the NC Milling Process
for the Prediction and Prevention
of Chatter
S. Odendahl, R. Joliet, E. Ungemach, A. Zabel, P. Kersting
and D. Biermann
Abstract The main goal in the design of milling processes for components in the
aerospace industry is the optimization of productivity while maintainig process
stability. These two goals can be conﬂicting, especially if long tools are required,
which are particularly susceptible to vibrations. In order to reduce the number of
costly experiments, simulation-based approaches can be used to evaluate gener-
ated NC programs beforehand. In this paper, a modeling approach for the detailed
simulation of engagement conditions, process forces, and dynamic tool behavior is
used to detect instable process conditions. Additionally, an algorithm is presented
to change the axial immersion in order to avoid regenerative chatter during
milling. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the simulation approach and of the
compensation strategy, a comparison is shown between experimental and simu-
lated results and between the workpiece generated by the original and the
optimized NC programs.
Introduction
The manufacturing of complex structural parts for, for example, air planes,
requires precise milling operations with high productivity. On the one hand, these
parts often include deep cavities which demand the utilization of long tools, and,
on the other hand, large axial and radial immersions are necessary to achieve the
desired material removal rates. However, this combination can lead to chatter
vibrations which may result in insufﬁcient surface quality or even tool failure [1].
Therefore, the dynamic process behavior is an important aspect of the milling
process that should be considered during the process planning phase [2].
S. Odendahl (&)  R. Joliet  E. Ungemach  A. Zabel  P. Kersting  D. Biermann
Institute of Machining Technology, TU Dortmund University,
Baroper Str. 301, 44227 Dortmund, Germany
e-mail: odendahl@isf.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_3,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
19

Analytical methods exist for the prediction of process forces and stability for
constant engagement conditions [3, 4]. By applying these approaches or by
conducting experiments, stability charts can be generated in order to describe the
stability limits of a milling process. These charts can then be used to choose a
stable combination of process parameter values. However, for the ﬁve-axis
machining of free-formed surfaces, the engagement conditions may change with
each tooth feed. Therefore, the shape of the undeformed chip has to be determined
in each simulation step to be able to calculate the machining forces and predict the
process dynamics. A simulation system, which performs this analysis, can be
applied to detect surface location errors and process instabilities in advance
without extensive experimental investigations.
In this paper, a dynamic model for ﬁve-axis NC milling processes and the
required geometric tool and workpiece models are presented that can be used for a
simulation-based chatter detection algorithm. To demonstrate the applicability of
the simulation, a local modiﬁcation algorithm for a given ﬁve-axis NC program is
applied. In order to prevent chatter, additional path segments are inserted auto-
matically without changing stable sections of the NC program and without the
need for additional equipment.
Simulation-Based Analysis of Milling Processes
The simulation-based analysis is conducted using a simulation system which
combines different techniques [5] in order to model the cutting forces, the dynamic
process behavior, and the surface location error. For the calculation of the milling
forces, the shape of the undeformed chip is determined using the Constructive
Solid Geometry (CSG) technique [6]. With this technique, simple shapes, e.g.,
sphere, cylinder, or box, are combined using Boolean operations to describe
complex objects. The chip corresponds to the intersection of the tool envelope and
the workpiece model prior to the current position in the NC program (Fig. 1a). The
latter is generated by subtracting the tool envelopes positioned at each prior tooth
feed from the raw workpiece [7]. In order to allow calculating the force
progression over the course of individual tooth feeds, each tooth feed is subdivided
into multiple simulation steps. The chip shape is scanned by rays cast from the tool
axis along the cutting edges for each of those steps (Fig. 1b). The intersections of
these rays with the chip shape can then be used to obtain the undeformed chip
thickness and calculate the process forces according to the Kienzle equation [8]. In
contrast to analytical approaches, this technique is able to model the engagement
conditions for any point in time during a ﬁve-axis NC program. Since the chip
shape is represented as a continuous model, the force calculation can be conducted
with arbitrary resolution by choosing the number of rays that are used to scan the
chip.
For modeling the dynamic process behavior, the calculated cutting forces are
fed into a dynamic model consisting of a system of uncoupled harmonic oscillators
20
S. Odendahl et al.

[7]. Their parameter values, i.e., modal mass, damping, and eigenfrequency, can be
determined by analyzing the measured frequency response function of the tool
mounted into the spindle of the machine. The tool deﬂection calculated by this
model at each simulated time step during one tooth feed is combined with the
deﬂection one tooth feed earlier for the modeling of the chip shape. Thereby, the
modulation of the undeformed chip thickness, which causes the regenerative
effect, can be simulated. The combination of process and dynamic model is, thus,
able to provide the process forces, the tool deﬂection, and an implicit represen-
tation of the workpiece at every simulated time step.
For an intuitive analysis of the process, an efﬁcient visualization of the current
workpiece is beneﬁcial, which includes a color-coding of the surface location
error. However, this requires an additional workpiece model since the direct
rendering of a non-trivial CSG model is only possible using computationally
expensive techniques, such as ray tracing [6]. The model used in the presented
simulation system consists of three perpendicular dexel boards, each of which is
comprised of a regularly arranged grid of depth elements (dexels) [9]. The cutting
operation with this model can be performed efﬁciently by calculating the inter-
section of the dexels and the tool model. Additionally, each time a dexel is cut, the
new end point of the dexel is moved along the dexel direction corresponding to the
calculated tool deﬂection. The surface location error at this point is determined by
projecting the deﬂection onto the surface normal so that it can be color-coded onto
the displayed point (cf. Fig. 3). As will be shown in the experimental validation,
this visualization technique already provides good results for 3-axis milling
processes and will be extended in the future to work for arbitrary NC programs.
Tool envelope
Cutting Edge 1
Cutting Edge 2
Rays
vf
Workpiece
Undeformed 
chip
t5
t5
t4
t4
t3
t3
t2
t2
t1
t1
(b)
(a)
Fig. 1 a CSG models of tool, workpiece, and undeformed chip. b Scanning rays of the tool
shown for two cutting edges and multiple time steps
Simulation of the NC Milling Process for the Prediction and Prevention of Chatter
21

Modifying NC Programs to Prevent Chatter
The described simulation system can be used to analyze and optimize NC pro-
grams by automatically manipulating the NC path in order to prevent chatter. As
only additional input, a stability chart, which speciﬁes the maximal axial feed ap
leading to a stable process for a given radial feed ae and spindle speed n, is
required. This can, however, also be compiled using the simulation system. The
ﬁrst step in the chatter-prevention algorithm is the determination of the sections of
the NC program that lead to an unstable cutting process. To accomplish this, a Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT) of the recent tool displacement history is carried out
during the simulation run. Chatter is assumed whenever the amplitude of a non-
harmonic of the tooth engagement frequency is higher than a threshold value times
the amplitude of the tooth engagement frequency itself. While identifying the
unstable sections of the program, the maximum effective radial immersion ae;eff
perpendicular to the feed direction and the maximum axial immersion ap are
recorded. In this context, the effective radial feed may differ from the one preset in
the CAM program, e.g., in corners of machined pockets where the increase of the
effective feed is often the cause of a temporarily instable process [10] (Fig. 2a, b).
After this simulation and analysis step, the recorded maximum effective radial
immersion over each instable section is used to lookup the maximum stable axial
feed in the precompiled stability chart. With this information, the number of
intermediate NC paths can be calculated that are required to stay below this axial
feed. Additional NC segments are generated by ﬁrst withdrawing the tool along the
tool axis and then inserting new segments parallel to the original NC path. These
parallel segments are only moved along the tool axis with a new axial feed equal to
the original one divided by the new number of paths (Fig. 2c). The same segments
are then used for the reverse movement and the process is repeated until the
original NC path is reached. This process only directly changes the axial feed and
might even decrease the maximum radial feed for some of the new segments.
fz
Tool
Current
workpiece
Net shape
Chip
ae, eff
Current
workpiece
Net shape
Tool
ae, eff
Chip
Inserted paths
Original paths
Workpiece
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 2 a Effective radial feed on linear NC segments. b Increased effective radial feed resulting
from the manufacturing of a corner. c Example for the insertion of new NC segments in the
corner of a machined pocket
22
S. Odendahl et al.

Experimental Validation
In order to validate the described simulation system and the chatter-prevention
algorithm, the machining of simple pockets in aluminum (EN AW-7075) was
analyzed. The NC program was generated with an axial feed ap = 4.5 mm and a
radial feed ae = 4 mm. The pockets were then dry machined with a toroidal end
mill with diameter D = 12 mm, corner radius rc = 1.5 mm, two cutting edges,
and a helix angle of 30 on a Deckel Maho DMU 50 eVolution 5-axis machining
center. The process was conducted using down-milling with feed per tooth
fz = 0.2 mm and spindle speed n = 15,800 min-1.
The used process parameter values generally result in a stable process, but
chatter occurs while machining the corners of the pocket. Figure 3a and c show a
corner of the workpiece generated by the simulation and the actual 3-axis milling
process, respectively. Both images clearly display surface artifacts and they
demonstrate that the simulation is able to predict the process instability and the
direction of the surface marks. The corners produced by simulating the optimized
NC program for 3-axis milling are shown in Fig. 3b and the corresponding
experimental result is depicted in Fig. 3d. The same method was applied to the
Surface 
artifacts
Surface 
artifacts
Simulated workpiece
(3-axis)
Original NC program
Optimized NC program
Machined workpiece
(3-axis)
Machined workpiece
(5-axis)
-0.3
0.3
mm
-0.03
0.03
Surface location error
(Logarithmic scale)
(a)
(c)
(e)
(b)
(d)
(f)
Fig. 3 Workpiece corners generated by the original (a, c, e) and optimized (b, d, f) NC
programs. a and b display the simulated surface location error for the 3-axis program. c and
d depict a machined corner produced by 3-axis milling. e and f show a corner produced by 5-axis
milling
Simulation of the NC Milling Process for the Prediction and Prevention of Chatter
23

5-axis NC program for the corner displayed in Fig. 3e and also resulted in an
optimized workpiece surface (Fig. 3f). This demonstrates that an automated
optimization of NC paths with respect to chatter avoidance in critical areas is
possible.
Conclusion and Outlook
In this paper, a simulation system for the ﬁve-axis milling of free-formed surfaces
was presented. The described modeling techniques with an implicit representation
of the undeformed chip shape and the computation of the dynamic interactions
between cutting edges and workpiece allow a detailed analysis and optimization of
arbitrary NC programs. In the future, the visualization model will be adapted so
that surface location errors resulting from ﬁve-axis NC programs can also be
displayed. However, the validation example demonstrates that the prediction of
chatter is possible for different engagement conditions and can be used in com-
bination with an NC path modiﬁcation algorithm to ensure process stability. By
utilizing these modeling techniques inside a CAM system, manufacturing errors
could already be prevented in the early phase of NC path generation.
Acknowledgments This work is based on investigations of the research project B2 of the
Transregional Collaborative Research Center (TR) 10 and of the research project B2 of the
Collaborative Research Center (SFB) 708, which are kindly funded by the German Research
Foundation (DFG).
References
1. Altintas, Y., Weck M.: Chatter stability of metal cutting and grinding. CIRP Ann. Manuf.
Technol. 53(2):619–642 (2004)
2. Brecher, C., Esser, M., Witt, S.: Interaction of manufacturing process and machine tool. CIRP
Ann. Manuf. Technol. 58(2):588–607 (2009)
3. Insperger, T., Stépán, G.: Semi-discretization for time-delay systems—stability and
engineering applications. Springer, New York (2011) (ISBN 978-1-4614-0334-0)
4. Eksioglu, C., Kilic, Z.M., Altintas, Y.: Discrete-time prediction of chatter stability, cutting
forces, and surface location errors in ﬂexible milling systems. J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. 134(6),
061006 (2012)
5. Zabel, A., Odendahl, S., Peuker, A.: Combining different modeling techniques to optimize
the simulation of the ﬁve-axis milling process. In: Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference and Exhibition on Design and Production of Machines and Dies/Molds,
pp. 155–160. Kusadasi, Turkey (2009)
6. Foley, J.D., van Dam, A., Feiner, S.K., Hughes, J.F. (1992): Computer graphics—principles
and practice. Addison-Wesley, Reading
7. Surmann, T., Enk, D.: Simulation of milling tool vibration trajectories along changing
engagement conditions. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 47(9), 1442–1448 (2007)
24
S. Odendahl et al.

8. Kienzle, O., Victor, H.: Die Bestimmung von Kräften und Leistungen an spanenden
Werkzeugen und Werkzeugmaschinen. VDI-Z 94(11–12), 299–305 (1952)
9. Weinert, K., Stautner, M.: An efﬁcient discrete simulation for ﬁve-axis milling of sculptured
surfaces. Prod. Eng. Res. Dev. 9(1), 47–51 (2002)
10. Ko, J.H., Shaw, K.C.: Chatter prediction algorithm in frequency domain for pocket milling.
SIMTech Tech. Rep. 12(1), 15–21 (2011)
Simulation of the NC Milling Process for the Prediction and Prevention of Chatter
25

Improved Quality of Drilled Holes
in Laminated Carbon Fiber Reinforced
Plastics via Laser-Preprocessing
F. Schneider, B. Kirsch, M. Gurka, T. Hermann, J. A. L’huiller
and J. C. Aurich
Abstract In this paper, a new hybrid process to manufacture holes in laminated
carbon ﬁber reinforced plastics is presented. It combines the advantages of con-
ventional drilling (fast and easy to control) and laser drilling (high entry and exit
quality of the holes). It is shown, that considerable improvements of the quality of
drilled holes can be achieved via laser-preprocessing.
Keywords Cutting edge  Drilling  Fiber reinforced plastics  Laser
Introduction
Carbon ﬁber reinforced plastics (cfrp) combine high stiffness with low density,
ideal properties for light-weight designs needed for aerospace applications and
automotive, ﬁrst of all for electronic vehicles [1]. Although cfrp are manufactured
near net shaped, subsequent machining is necessary [2] e.g. to obtain the holes for
rivet joints. These machining processes can damage the cfrp, resulting in weak-
ening of the workpiece structure which negatively inﬂuences the operational
behavior [3–5], or by thermal damage (micro-cracks, voids, delamination) due to
the heat, introduced by e.g. a laser machining process [7, 8].
F. Schneider (&)  B. Kirsch  J. C. Aurich
Institute for Manufacturing Technology and Production Systems, University
of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany
e-mail: schneider@cpk.uni-kl.de
URL: www.fbk-kl.de
M. Gurka
Institute for Composite Materials (IVW), University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern,
Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany
T. Hermann  J. A. L’huiller
Photonik-Zentrum Kaiserslautern e.V., Kaiserslautern, Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_4,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
27

In this paper, the quality (avoidance of delamination and burrs) of drilled holes
in laminated cfrp will be examined. More speciﬁcally, the quality of mechanically
drilled holes in cfrp will be compared with holes drilled with laser-preprocessing.
It will be shown that improved machining quality is achieved by removing one
layer at the exit of the holes via laser ablation.
Experimental Setup
The experiments were conducted on a 5-axis drilling/milling machining centre
(DMU 70 eVolution). The tool used was a common two-edged uncoated drill
according to DIN 6539 of 5 mm diameter with a drill-point angle r of r = 118.
In accordance with previous investigations [3], very sharp cutting edges were used.
Using a digital fringe projection system from GFM, the rounded cutting edge radii
rb were measured to rb = 6.5 lm. While several combinations of cutting speed vc
and feed speed f were examined, only the combination vc = 150 mm/min and
f = 0.04 mm/rev, offering the best machining quality, will be presented here.
The laser-preparation was done as a separate step using a picosecond laser
system (HYPER25 Coherent Kaiserslautern GmbH) mounted on a high precision
5-axis laser micromachining system (GL.5 GFH GmbH). The laser wavelength
used was 532 nm, the pulse repetition rate 200 kHz, the pulse duration about 10 ps
and the spot size about 10 lm.
The material investigated in this paper was a quasi-isotropic layup [A/+45/90/-
45/+45/-45/0/90/0/-45/+45/-45/90/+45/A] of 13 individual layers of a unidi-
rectional prepreg CE1007-150-38 (0.14 mm per layer), consolidated in an autoclave
for 1 h at 4 bar.
Process and Results
The quality of the drilled holes with and without laser-preprocessing was quali-
tatively evaluated by microscopy. The hybrid process is done in two separate steps.
The ﬁrst step is to preprocess either the hole entry or the hole exit with the
picosecond laser pulses in the micromachining center. The second step is the
drilling process on the 5-axis machining centre.
In Fig. 1 examples of the preprocessed hole entry and hole exit are depicted. In
each case, the laser parameters were adjusted to exactly remove one layer of the
cfrp.
In Fig. 2 the resulting quality of the hole entry with and without laser-
preprocessing is shown. It can be seen that the hole entry with the removed ﬁrst
layer (laser-preprocessing) has fewer defects than the unprepared one. The number
and size of protruding ﬁbers were reduced.
28
F. Schneider et al.

This can be explained by the fact that when the ﬁrst layer is removed corre-
sponding to the diameter of the drilling tool, the force in peripheral direction is
reduced. The actual drilling begins at the second layer. This layer is embedded
between the ﬁrst and the third layer, and hence the compound structure is more
rigid. As a consequence, less peel up delamination and protruding of ﬁbers occurs.
Fig. 1 Examples of laser-preprocessed hole entry and exit
Fig. 2 Comparison of drilled hole entry with and without laser-preprocessing
Improved Quality of Drilled Holes
29

The inﬂuence of the laser-preprocessing on the quality of the hole exit becomes
even more important, as shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that the result of the hole
exit with removed last layer is much better than the one without preprocessing.
The unprepared hole exit reveals very large ﬁber protrusion and delamination. In
contrast, the laser-preprocessed hole exit verishows no unwanted effects like
delamination or a frayed border area.
The protruded ﬁbers as well as the delamination were a result of the lower
resistance of the material against the drilling tool. The material is pushed away by
the corner of the tool and could not be cut. Laser-preprocessing can help to
overcome these disadvantages as described for the hole entry: as the last layer is
already removed, the last layer to be drilled is number twelve. This layer is
embedded between layer eleven and thirteen, resulting in a more rigid structure.
This effect is more important for the hole exit than for the hole entry (as shown in
the presented results), as there is no counterforce of the material in the hole exit.
This effect was already shown in investigations on burr formation when drilling
heat treated steel [6] (exit burrs are bigger than entry burrs).
Conclusion
In this paper, ﬁrst results of drilled holes in laminated carbon ﬁber reinforced
plastics with laser- preprocessing were presented. It could be shown that the
quality of the hole entry and especially the hole exit could be improved consid-
erably by removing the ﬁrst and the last layer of the cfrp respectively via precise
picosecond laser ablation. Advantages of this hybrid process in comparison to the
manufacturing of the holes using laser machining only is a considerably reduced
Fig. 3 Comparison of drilled hole exit with and without laser-preprocessing
30
F. Schneider et al.

process time. This encouraging ﬁrst results show the potential of this hybrid
process. In future investigations, more laser and drilling parameters as well as
different cfrp materials will be examined.
References
1. Abele, E., Kreis, M., Weigold, M.: Mit Leichtigkeit zu höherer Leistung. Trendbericht: Stand
der Zerspanungstechnik im Leichtbau. In: WB Werkstatt und Betrieb 140(7–8), 66–72 (2007)
2. Aurich, J.C., Dornfeld, D., Arrazola, P.J., Franke, V., Leitz, L., Min, S.: Burrs —Analysis,
Control and Removal (Keynote Paper). CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 58(2), 519–542 (2009)
3. Aurich, J.C., Zimmermann, M.: Zerspanen von Verbundwerkstoffen – Herausforderungen bei
der spanenden Bearbeitung. In: Biermann, D. (Hrsg.): Spanende Fertigung – Prozesse,
Innovationen, Werkstoffe. 6. Ausgabe pp. 304–312. Vulkan Verlag, Essen (2012)
4. Brinksmeier, E., Fangmann, S., Rentsch, R.: Drilling of composites and resulting surface
integrity. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 60(1), 57–60 (2011)
5. Goeke, A., Emmelmann, C.: Inﬂuence of laser cutting parameters on CFRP part quality. Phys.
Proceedia 5, 253–258 (2010)
6. Herzog, D., Jaeschke, P., Meier, O., Haferkamp, H.: Investigations on the thermal effect
caused by laser cutting with respect to static strength of CFRP. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 48,
1464–1473 (2008)
7. Hufenbach, W., Biermann, D., Seliger, G.: Serientaugliche Bearbeitung und Handhabung
moderner faserverstärkter Hochleistungswerkstoffe (sefawe)-Untersuchungen zum Fors-
chungs-und Handlungsbedarf. Institut für Leichtbau und Kunststofftechnik, Technische
Universität Dresden (2008)
8. Tsao, C.C.: Thrust force and delamination of core-saw drill during drilling of carbon ﬁber
reinforced plastics (CFRP). Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 37, 23–28 (2008)
Improved Quality of Drilled Holes
31

Flexible Production of Small Lot Sizes
by Incremental Sheet Metal Forming
with Two Moving Tools
Christian Magnus, Bolko Buff and Horst Meier
Abstract Incremental sheet metal forming processes have a high potential for
ﬂexible and cost efﬁcient production of prototypes and parts in small lot sizes.
Recent developments in this ﬁeld bring incremental sheet metal forming one step
closer to industrial application. Amongst these are improvements concerning
geometrical accuracy, part complexity and surface quality. Also solutions for
forming of advanced materials as magnesium or titanium alloys are being devel-
oped, which shows a high potential for the production of lightweight sheet metal
parts, as used in aerospace industry.
Introduction
Current trends in the requirements for modern products show an increasing
inﬂuence of individual customers on manufacturing processes. The trends of
increasing part complexity, decreasing lot sizes and shorter time to market create a
demand for a modernization of existing production processes. Especially in the
area of sheet metal prototyping and small lot size production high costs occur for
part dependent tooling, such as in stamping and for sufﬁcient storage of dies and
manufactured parts.
C. Magnus (&)  B. Buff  H. Meier
Lehrstuhl für Produktionssysteme (LPS), Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
Universitätsstraße 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany
e-mail: magnus@lps.rub.de
B. Buff
e-mail: buff@lps.rub.de
H. Meier
e-mail: meier@lps.rub.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_5,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
33

This paper describes developments in an incremental, robot-based sheet metal
forming process (‘Roboforming’) for the abovementioned demand. Roboforming
achieves a kinematic-based generation of a shape by using two industrial robots
which are interconnected to a cooperating robot system. Compared to other
incremental sheet metal forming machines, this system offers high geometrical
form ﬂexibility without the need of any part-dependent tools. Figure 1 shows the
basic Roboforming setup. On each side of the ﬁxed sheet metal one of the two
robots is positioned and ﬁtted with a universal forming tool [1]. With the help of a
CAM-software (CAMWorks) and a Postprocessor (customized) the paths for both
robots are derived from the CAD-Model of the desired part [2]. The whole part is
formed by the movement of the robots without any need for dies. This way several
different geometries can be formed with the same setup.
The industrial application of incremental sheet metal forming is still limited by
certain constraints, e.g. low geometrical accuracy, part complexity, surface quality
and the number of formable alloys. Within the last years many developments have
contributed to an improvement in these ﬁelds.
Geometrical Accuracy
The main reasons for geometrical inaccuracies are the forming strategy, elastic
deformation of the sheet and the forming machine, the positioning accuracy of the
forming machine and unwanted plastic deformation of already formed areas.
Especially in dieless incremental sheet metal forming some effort has to be taken
in order to compensate the resulting effects.
One of the main ideas in incremental sheet metal forming with two moving
tools is to have a higher ﬂexibility in forming and to give a local support within or
next to the forming zone. This way both convex and concave geometries, as shown
in Fig. 2, can be formed dieless and with higher accuracy than in Single Point
Incremental Forming (SPIF), which uses only one tool. Figure 1 shows a sche-
matic setup for Duplex Incremental Forming with a Local support (DPIF-L),
where both tools are in contact with the same forming zone.
Fig. 1 a Roboforming setup, b setup for duplex incremental forming with local support (DPIF-L)
34
C. Magnus et al.

As to be seen in Fig. 1b, a free area of the sheet between the part (in this case a
frustum) and the clamping frame exists. Without using any kind of partial die, this
area is strongly affected by unwanted plastic and elastic deformation due to the
occurring forming forces. Experiments have proven that almost the same accuracy
as with a partial die can be achieved by forming addendum stabilization structures
which reinforce this free area [3]. Thus the partial die can be substituted. Addi-
tionally the occurring forming forces can be reduced by appropriate forming
parameters or forming at elevated temperatures as it will be described later on.
Also strategies for a compensation of the robots‘ low stiffness exist. These are
based on measurements or predictions of the forming forces and multi body system
models of the robots [4]. Today this compensation can run online for one of the
robots, which guarantees for restricted workspace size almost as good accuracy as
without load. Another strategy to reduce the effects of forming forces is to form the
same part more than once. This can either be done with the same tool path or a
path which has been corrected accordingly to the measured deviation of the part.
Especially in cold incremental sheet metal forming residual stresses exist in the
formed part. In order to maintain a high geometrical accuracy even after cutting of
the part, stress relief annealing can be done after unclamping of the formed part or
even whilst the part is still ﬁxed in a clamping frame.
Part Complexity
The achievable part complexity is most of all limited by a local thinning of the sheet
in the formed areas and the unwanted plastic and elastic deformation of already
formed areas. Although incremental sheet metal forming has increased forming
limits compared to stamping [5], the maximum ﬂank angles which can be achieved
in direct forming operations are limited. Within a single forming step in SPIF
Fig. 2 Increased part complexity and ﬂank angles by stepwise forming
Flexible Production of Small Lot Sizes by Incremental Sheet Metal Forming
35

maximum ﬂank angles of about 65–70 can be formed with mild steels or alumin-
ium. The thickness distribution is similar to that in shear spinning and is theoretically
zero at 90 ﬂank angle. If using the second tool in order to improve the stress state
within the forming zone, higher formability can be achieved [6]. Furthermore it has
been shown, that a high part complexity with very high ﬂank angles can be achieved
by stepwise forming operations [3, 7], as shown in Fig. 2. With the approach of
stepwise forming, a more evenly thickness distribution can be achieved. By the
support of the second tool the inﬂuence of the forming forces on geometric accuracy
can be reduced for each forming step. Without the support of this tool very large
unwanted plastic deformation occurs, resulting in low geometrical accuracy.
Surface Quality
The surface quality of the formed part in SPIF is mainly dependent on the pitch
size of the tool path and the tool diameter. Both parameters inﬂuence the imprint
of the tool in the surface of the part [8]. By using a second tool in DPIF-L both the
inner and the outer surface quality of the part can be inﬂuenced by choosing an
appropriate position of the supporting tool relatively to the forming tool and an
appropriate contact force [6]. For each forming operation the tool diameter and the
pitch size should be ﬁtted to the geometric requirements of the part and
the required surface quality, as the needed forming time is directly dependent on
the pitch size. A small pitch size results in longer tool paths and thus in a longer
forming time. For many applications (e.g. as structural components) sheet metal
parts formed with a pitch size of 0.2 mm up to 0.5 mm and a tool radius of 6 mm
show sufﬁcient surface quality after short sandblasting.
Forming of Advanced Materials
In cold incremental sheet metal forming mostly mild steels and aluminium alloys
are formed. Currently solutions for forming of advanced materials are being
developed by several institutes. They are based on sheet metal forming at elevated
temperatures, which lead to higher formability, lower forming forces, lower
springback and higher accuracy [9]. For titanium [10–12], magnesium [13] and
mild steels [14] the beneﬁts of incremental sheet metal forming at elevated tem-
peratures have been shown. Also for Complex Phase (CP) steels an improvement
of formability occurs. Depending on the heating method (e.g. by laser, hot ﬂuids,
friction or resistance heating) either the whole part or a small area of the sheet is
heated. Especially in the latter case a high gradient of forming characteristics,
comparing those of the heated forming zone to those of the colder rest of the part,
can be achieved. But, as the forming zone and the heating zone are subject to
highly dynamic movement, temperature measurement and control is complex.
36
C. Magnus et al.

Summary and Outlook
Recent achievements in the ﬁelds of geometrical accuracy, the number of formable
alloys and part complexity show a great improvement of the applicability of this
process. The ongoing research in these ﬁelds is also focused on advanced materials
which have high potential for lightweight applications. Future work of the authors
will e.g. focus on parts of larger scale and higher complexity, geometrical accuracy
and forming of different materials at elevated temperatures.
Acknowledgments This research is funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG). The
authors are responsible for the contents of this publication.
References
1. Meier, H., Buff, B., Smukala, V.: Robot-based incremental sheet metal forming—increasing
the part accuracy in an automated, industrial forming cell. KEM 410–411, 159–166 (2009)
2. Meier, H., Zhu, J., Buff, B., Laurischkat, R.: CAx process chain for two robots based
incremental sheet metal forming. Procedia CIRP 3, 37–42 (2012)
3. Buff, B., Magnus, C., Zhu, J., Meier, H.: Robot-based incremental sheet metal forming—
increasing the geometrical complexity and accuracy. KEM 549, 149–155 (2013)
4. Meier, H., Laurischkat, R., Bertsch, C., Reese, S.: Prediction of path deviation in robot based
incremental sheet metal forming by means of an integrated ﬁnite element—multi body
system model. KEM 410–411, 365–372 (2009)
5. Allwood, J.M., Shouler, D.R., Tekkaya, A.: The increased forming limits of incremental
sheet forming processes. KEM 344, 621–628 (2007)
6. Meier, H., Magnus, C., Smukala, V.: Impact of superimposed pressure on dieless incremental
sheet metal forming with two moving tools. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 60, 327–330 (2011)
7. Tanaka, S., Hayakawa, K., Nakamura, T.: Incremental sheet forming with direction control of
path planes. In: Proceedings of the 10th ICTP, pp. 503–507 (2011)
8. Hirt, G., Junk, S., Witulski, N.: Surface quality, geometric precision and sheet thinning in
incremental sheet forming. In: Proceedings of Materials Week, pp. 1–8 (2001)
9. Neugebauer, R., Altan, T., Geiger, M., Kleiner, M., Sterzing, A.: Sheet metal forming at
elevated temperatures. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 55, 793–816 (2006)
10. Duﬂou, J., Callebaut, B., Verbert, J., Baerdemaeker, H.: Laser assisted incremental forming:
formability and accuracy improvement. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 56(1), 273–276 (2007)
11. Fan, G., Sun, F., Meng, X., Gao, L., Tong, G.: Electric hot incremental forming of Ti-6Al-
4 V titanium sheet. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. (Springer London) 49, 941–947 (2010)
12. Ambrogio, G., Filice, L., Gagliardi, F.: Formability of titanium alloys in incremental sheet
forming process with local material heating. In: Proceedings of the 10th ICTP, pp. 536–540
(2011)
13. Galdos, L., Saenz de Argandona, E., Ulacia, I., Arruebarrena, G.: Warm incremental forming
of magnesium alloys using hot ﬂuid as heating media. KEM 504–506, 815–820 (2012)
14. Meier, H., Magnus, C.: Incremental sheet metal forming with direct resistance heating using
two moving tools. KEM 554–557, 1362–1367 (2013)
Flexible Production of Small Lot Sizes by Incremental Sheet Metal Forming
37

Dedicated Machine Tool Development
for Blisk Milling
B. Bringmann, R. Bacon and B. Güntert
For modern jet engines, more and more turbine blade stages are made as one
integral part in order to reduce weight.These parts—called Blisks (‘‘Blade inte-
grated disks’’) or IBRs (‘‘Integrally bladed rotors’’)—are machined predominantly
from Titanium or Nickel-based super alloys (see e.g. [1]). From a machining point
of view, they are extremely challenging. The materials used belong to the hardest
to cut, the geometries are difﬁcult free-forms and the ﬁnished parts are ﬂimsy. Due
to the extreme requirements on these parts the machining time and the cost per
workpiece are very high today. Despite the challenges of these workpieces, usually
standard 5-axis machines are used for machining. With dedicated machine tools
the productivity could be increased tremendously. Here the process of machine
tool development especially for Blisk milling is presented, using state of the art
scientiﬁc methods.
Introduction
Blisk machining combines very high requirements in machining dynamics, surface
ﬁnish and—due to the long cycle times (between 20 and [200 h)—thermal
stability. With a machine tool designed for the purpose, the productivity and
quality of such a milling process can be improved dramatically. This approach to
ﬁnd the best possible design for this application is described here.
B. Bringmann (&)  R. Bacon  B. Güntert
Starrag AG, Seebleichestr. 61, 9404 Rorschacherberg, Switzerland
e-mail: bernhard.bringmann@starrag.com
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_6,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
39

Analysis of the Machining Process
This process starts by identifying the desired optimal machining process in a ﬁrst
step. With this knowledge the requirements for the machine can be quantiﬁed.
In this ﬁrst step the most efﬁcient milling strategies are evaluated for typical
Blisks. Typical approaches today are e.g. plunge milling, the use of big disk cutters
for slotting or the use of ceramic tools with very high cutting speeds for Nickel-
based super alloys.
The cutting parameters achievable with the tools today (and anticipated future
cutting parameters) are taken as a basis. This information can then be processed in
different ways. For the different operations spindles speed, power and cutting
forces can be computed. This computation is very straightforward. In general the
well-known basic models can be used. The machine dynamics and stability to be
able to make fully use of these performance parameters, i.e. to machine produc-
tively, must be determined with more effort.
Selection of the Kinematic Concept of the Machine
In general, the most appropriate kinematic build-up for Blisk machining process
should be selected. In addition to the usual design criteria like accessibility,
ergonomics, ﬂoor space, etc. there are characteristics that are not very straight-
forward to evaluate, especially the machine dynamics for the application to keep
ﬁnishing times as low as possible and the process stability to be able to us the
optimal roughing strategies.
Determination of Machine Dynamics with FEM
and Virtual NC Kernel
For this application machine dynamics is evaluated by the actual time that a
machine will need to do a typical Blisk ﬁnishing operation. This time is deter-
mined by many factors.
The kinematic build-up determines how the different axes of the machine must
move. Typically the compensation motions of the linear axes to follow the
movements of the rotary axes are depending on this build-up. When e.g. a trunnion
is turning, two linear axes must move just to keep the same relative position
between tool and workpiece.
In addition, this ﬁnishing time is of course depending on the axis dynamics
parameters. The maximum axis velocity can be determined easily from the
mechanical parameters. The achievable acceleration and jerk values when taking
40
B. Bringmann et al.

into account certain requirements for a dynamic path accuracy and effects like
overshoot, cross-talk or in-talk (see e.g. [2, 3, 4]) are more difﬁcult to determine.
With modern simulation programs, such as a ‘‘Virtual NC Kernel’’ [5], very
powerful tools are available to determine the effect of both kinematic build-up and
axis dynamics on total cycle time. With this different machine concepts can be
compared and very accurate machining times can be determined in a very early
design stage. It can be computed which parameters (like accelerations) have which
effect on cycle time and therefore the ideal conﬁguration can be identiﬁed. With
this different kinematic concepts and variations can be compared.
This VNCK uses the same inputs as a real control and generates the same
outputs. One drawback is that—while axis limitations like ﬁlters or max. jerk
values can easily be put in—it cannot be determined what values have to be put in
because these depend on the mechanical behaviour. Realistic values can be
determined from FEM. This approach is shown in Fig. 1.
The mechanical constraints can be anticipated by FEM simulations. Especially
important here is the behaviour of the single axis against quasi-static forces (how
much will the axis tilt due to acceleration forces, thus determining cross-talk and
in-talk) and the Eigen frequencies when excited through the axis drive (these
Eigen frequencies limit the bandwidth of the control loop and subsequently limit
the achievable gains, ﬁlter and jerk settings).
With the results from these FEM simulations (see e.g. Fig. 2) the parameters for
VNCK can be determined. With this the operation can be simulated, the time can
be determined and limitations preventing shorter times can be simulated.
Fig. 1 Simulation approach
for determining machine
dynamics using VNCK and
FEM
Dedicated Machine Tool Development for Blisk Milling
41

This ﬁrst result can then be used to overcome limitations, e.g. by changing the
kinematic build-up, by systematic mechanical improvements where beneﬁcial, by
improving the control optimization.
Determination of Process Stability with FEM and CutPro
The other factor not easy to determine is the process stability of the system. For the
Blisk machine development it is crucial that the most efﬁcient strategies and
the potential of the tools available today and tomorrow can be used. For this the
maximum stable depth of cuts must be determined.
The method of choice today are software packages such as ‘‘CutPro’’, using
the stability lobe theory as described in [6].
While this works excellent for experimental analysis when a certain tool in the
spindle is tap tested in order to determine the frequency response function, for a
machine to be built this data is of course not yet available. A good alternative is to
determine frequency response functions from FEM. To get good results, there is
some experience necessary for the assumptions of stiffnesses and damping
parameters of single components. With that prior knowledge, very good agreement
between simulation and experimental result are possible.
With the results, the most critical frequency can be determined (smallest real
part in the FRF). For the corresponding Eigen mode, the critical depth of cut will
be proportional to static stiffness and damping ratio. If the Eigen frequency of this
mode can be brought up, the critical depth of cut alim will change approximately
with square the change in frequency. So if e.g. by design changes the critical Eigen
frequency can be brought up to 120 % of the initial state, a ﬁrst estimate would be
that the critical depth of cut would increase to 144 % from the initial state. This
assumes in general unchanged damping behaviour.
Fig. 2 Example of FEM
result: Eigen mode of an
assembly
42
B. Bringmann et al.

Selected Machine Tool Concept
Initial simulations with trunnion concepts following the methods described above
showed that with such concepts, there were two constraints limiting the dynamic
of the system.
The trunnion axis carrying the second rotary axis, the pallet, the ﬁxture and the
workpiece was one limiting factor because of the limited acceleration possible due
to the high inertia. The other one were the dynamics of the linear axes because,
with a trunnion machine, rather big compensation movements are necessary to
follow the trunnion.
So to really come to signiﬁcantly shorter cycle times, both the rotary axis had to
be accelerated and the necessary compensation motion reduced.
The solution was the use of a tilted B-axis as known in machining of single
turbine blades as seen in Fig. 3. The total machine concept is shown in Fig. 4.
This concept combines two advantages:
Instead of tilting a trunnion with the very high inertia, the B-axis only has to
rotate the main spindle, drastically reducing the inertia. With that, much higher
axis accelerations are possible. Due to the stiff build-up with very high Eigen
frequencies, also very high jerk limits become possible.
Due to the tilted design, the tool center point (TCP) approximately lies in the
geometric B-axis. That means that when rotating the tool the tool center point
almost does not move (depending on tool length). Therefore no compensation
motions to follow this rotation are necessary.
Fig. 3 Side view on spindle
and B-axis with a 50 angle in
between to allow for tilt
motions around the tool
center point (TCP)
Dedicated Machine Tool Development for Blisk Milling
43

In comparison to trunnions, the simulations have shown that the compensation
motions when swivelling are usually reduced by more than 90 % and the time
required for such swivelling motions is reduced by about 80 %.
Conclusion
To design a machine, new development tools do exist that allow for very accurate
determination of the machine behaviour at a very early design stage. With this
methods, it can already be determined if e.g. roughing cuts can be performed as
foreseen. Already control parameters can be estimated and cycle times can be
anticipated in great details. Bottlenecks limiting the performance can be identiﬁed
and eliminated. Due to the concentration on such a special application as Blisk
milling, breakthroughs in performance can be achieved.
References
1. Blair, L.W., Tapparo, D.J.: Axial-centrifugal compressor program. (Department of Defense,
Department of the Army, Army Materiel Development and Readiness Command, Army
Aviation Research and Development Command), Army Air Mobility Research and Devel-
opment Laboratory, Eustis Directorate, Houston (1975)
Spindle
A-Axis
B-Axis
Workpiece
Fig. 4 Machine concept with tilted B-axis
44
B. Bringmann et al.

2. Nguyen, M., Weikert, S., Wegener, K.: Evaluation method of acceleration correlated position
errors in machine tools. Institute of Machine Tools and Manufacturing, Swiss Federal Institute
of Technology Zurich, Zurich (2012)
3. Steinlin, M., Weikert, S., Wegener, K.: Open loop inertial crosstalk compensation based on
measurement data. In: 25th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Precision
Engineering, The American Society for Precision Engineering, Raleigh, USA (2010)
4. Bringmann, B., Maglie, P.: A method for direct evaluation of the dynamic 3D path accuracy of
NC machine tools. Ann. CIRP 58(1), 343–346 (2009)
5. Siemens AG: SINUMERIK 840D VNCK Reference (FBVNCK), 9th edn. Siemens, Munich
(2007)
6. Altintas, Y., Budak, E.: Analytical prediction of stability lobes in milling. Ann. CIRP 44(1),
357–362 (1995)
Dedicated Machine Tool Development for Blisk Milling
45

Surface Characterization of Components
Subjected to Deep Rolling for Cyclic
Loading Applications
A. M. Abrão, B. Breidenstein, T. Mörke and B. Denkena
Abstract Deep rolling is mainly employed to induce compressive residual
stresses and cold work straining on cyclically loaded parts. Additionally, surface
roughness can be improved and, as a result, the fatigue strength of the component
is increased. The principal aim of this work is to investigate the inﬂuence of deep
rolling parameters (rolling pressure and number of passes) on the surface quality
and residual stresses induced on AISI 1060 high carbon steel specimens. The
results indicated that the surface roughness parameters decrease drastically after
deep rolling and lowest roughness values are obtained applying a pressure of
100 bar and 3 rolling passes. As far as the residual stress is concerned, the tensile
stress recorded on the surface of the specimens after turning shifted to compressive
stress after deep rolling. In contrast to the residual stress values, which did not
present a straightforward relationship with deep rolling parameters, the full width
at half maximum values indicated that more accentuated work hardening is
obtained when rolling pressure is elevated to 200 MPa.
Introduction
Deep rolling is a non-cutting production method which aim is to introduce work
hardening and compressive residual stresses into the surface and subsurface layers
in order to increase fatigue strength [1]. Furthermore, the surface roughness is
improved. For this purpose, the rolling tool is pressed against the part over a
A. M. Abrão (&)
Department of Mechanical of Engineering, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais,
Av. Antônio Carlos 6627, Pampulha, Belo Horizonte, MG 31270-901, Brazil
e-mail: abrao@ufmg.br
B. Breidenstein  T. Mörke  B. Denkena
Institute of Production Engineering and Machine Tools, Leibniz Universität Hannover,
An der Universität 2, 30823 Garbsen, Germany
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_7,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
47

determined number of passes to cause plastic strain and depending on the selected
parameters distinct levels of residual stress and surface ﬁnish can be obtained.
An increase in the yield stress leading to an elevation of approximately 20 % in
the fatigue strength of steels specimens subjected to deep rolling is reported by [2].
Similarly, Pengfei et al. [3] state that the ultimate tensile strength of a low carbon
steel increases by 18.6 % after deep rolling. These ﬁndings suggest an appreciable
elevation in the speciﬁc strength of deep rolled components, thus making this
process attractive for applications where low weight is relevant.
In general, the maximum hardness value resulting from plastic deformation
after deep rolling is not found on the work surface, but beneath it where the
Hertzian stress reaches its maximum during the operation. Nevertheless, an
additional increase in yield strength and hardness can be obtained by reducing
grain size (Hall–Petch effect), as reported by [3].
Applied pressure, number of passes, ball diameter, rolling speed and feed rate
are the principal factors affecting the residual stress proﬁle and surface ﬁnish. The
inﬂuence of ball diameter and applied pressure when deep rolling a cold work tool
steel with average hardness of 400 HV was reported by [4]. Lower surface
roughness values were obtained using the ball with largest diameter (Ø13 mm) and
highest pressure (400 bar).
Medium carbon steel parts subjected to deep rolling with a tungsten carbide ball
(Ø5 mm) presented a substantial decrease in roughness with the number of passes
[5]: arithmetic average height Ra equal to 4.01 lm after turning, 0.46 lm after the
ﬁrst pass, 0.10 after the second pass and 0.09 lm after the third pass (maximum
peak to valley height Rt = 14.4 lm, then 2.76 lm followed by 0.78 lm and
ﬁnally 0.60 lm, respectively).
According to [6] there is a great level of interaction between the deep rolling
parameters and the generated surface texture, therefore, in order to reduce the
roughness of deep rolled medium carbon steel (187 HV) it is recommended to
employ high values for rolling speed, pressure and number of passes and small ball
diameters.
This work is focused on the inﬂuence of deep rolling parameters (pressure and
number of passes) on the surface ﬁnish and residual stress induced on turned AISI
1060 high carbon steel specimens.
Experimental Procedure
Bars of AISI 1060 high carbon steel (Ø20.3 9 135 mm) were used as work
material. The experimental method is depicted as follows: ﬁrstly, the specimens
were rough machined with geometry in accordance with [7] but with an oversize of
2 mm in diameter. The samples were then heat treated to the annealed state
(heating to a maximum temperature of 660 C followed by furnace cooling), thus
resulting in an average hardness of 260 HV0.5. After that, ﬁnish turning was
carried out in two passes employing the following cutting conditions: pre-ﬁnishing
48
A. M. Abrão et al.

at cutting speed (vc) of 200 m/min, feed rate (f) of 0.3 mm/rev and depth of cut
(ap) of 0.25 mm and ﬁnishing at vc = 100 m/min, f = 0.1 mm/rev and maximum
ap = 0.15 mm. Coated tungsten carbide inserts grade 4,215 and geometry DNMG
110408-PM were mounted on a tool holder code DDNNN 2020 K11 and used as
cutting tools (inserts and holder supplied by Sandvik Coromant). Finally, the
specimens were subjected to deep rolling under four distinct conditions: rolling
pressures (p) of 100 and 200 bar and number of passes (n) of 1 and 3 and using
constant rolling speed and feed rate values (vr = 100 m/min and fr = 0.07 mm/
rev, respectively). Four samples were produced under each condition, thus
resulting in a total of 20 runs (including 4 samples which were not deep rolled and
used as control).
Turning and deep rolling were performed in a high stiffness Gildemeister CTX
520 CNC lathe (145 kW power and 10,000 rpm maximum rotational speed). An
Ecoroll tool connected to a HGP 1.0 hydraulic pump (maximum pressure of
400 bar) was used for deep rolling. This device possesses 3 tungsten carbide balls
(Ø6 mm) equally spaced which simultaneously deep roll the work surface when
the required pressure is applied. Therefore, n = 1 and 3 mean that the surface was
rolled 3 and 9 times, respectively.
After the manufacturing of the samples, the assessment of the generated
surfaces was conducted in accordance with [8] standard using a Nanofocus l surf
confocal microscope (sampling length of 0.8 mm) and software MountainsMap
5.1. A Zeiss EVO 60 scanning electron microscope was employed for visual
inspection of the specimens’ surface. Surface axial residual stress and the corre-
sponding full width at half maximum values were measured using a GE Inspection
Technologies X-ray diffraction system model XRD 3003 TT with 2 mm diameter
point collimator. The sin2 W method was employed using CrKa radiation on 211
planes of the ferrite phase and varying W from -45 to 45.
Results and Discussion
The inﬂuence of distinct values of pressure (p = 100 and 200 bar) and number of
passes (n = 1 and 3) on selected surface roughness parameters (arithmetic average
height Ra, root mean square roughness Rq, maximum peak to valley height in the
sampling length Rz, maximum peak to valley height in the assessment length Rt,
skewness Rsk, kurtosis Rku, reduced valley depth Rvk, core roughness depth Rk
and reduced peak height Rpk) is given in Fig. 1. The ﬁndings concerned with the
amplitude parameters Ra, Rq, Rz and Rt (Fig. 1a and b) indicate a remarkable
reduction in roughness after deep rolling, irrespectively of the parameters used,
however, lowest values are obtained applying p = 100 bar and n = 3 and the
further elevation of rolling pressure to p = 200 bar impairs the surface ﬁnish
probably due to plastic ﬂow of the work material.
As far as the hybrid parameters are concerned (Fig. 1c), Rsk is sensitive to
occasional high peaks or deep valleys [9] and a null skew would be expected for a
Surface Characterization of Components Subjected to Deep Rolling
49

surface with symmetrical height distribution (as many peaks as valleys), whereas
proﬁles with ﬁlled valleys present Rsk [ 0, which seems to be the case.
Furthermore, Rku gives an indication of the sharpness of the curve and a kurtosis
value of approximately Rku = 3 suggests a Gaussian distribution of the proﬁle
amplitude, while Rku \ 3 (turned surface, p = 0 and n = 0) denotes a surface
with relatively few high peaks and low valleys and Rku [ 3 indicates a surface
with many relatively high peaks and low valleys [9]. Finally, the results obtained
from the material ratio curve indicate a considerable reduction in the core
roughness depth (Rk) and in the reduced peak height (Rpk) after deep rolling due
to plasticization, see Fig. 1d.
Photographs of the surfaces processed under distinct deep rolling conditions
and using different magniﬁcations are presented in Fig. 2, where the feed marks
left by the cutting tool can be clearly seen in Fig. 2a. After deep rolling using
p = 100 bar and n = 1 (Fig. 2b and c), feed marks are no longer visible as
plasticization takes place. An increase in rolling pressure to p = 200 bar (Fig. 2d
and e) leads to accentuated plasticization. Finally, when the number of passes is
increased to n = 3, see Fig. 2f, surface plastic deformation becomes evident.
Surface residual stress and full width at half maximum results are presented in
Fig. 3a and b, respectively. It can be seen that the tensile residual stress induced by
turning (average of 207 MPa) shift to compressive values after deep rolling (below
Fig. 1 Effect of deep rolling pressure and number of passes on surface roughness: a Ra and Rq,
b Rz and Rt, c Rsk and Rku and d Rvk, Rk and Rpk
50
A. M. Abrão et al.

-450 MPa), however, no relationship can be drawn with regard to the inﬂuence of
the rolling parameters, probably owing to the fact that according to the Hertz
contact pressure theory the maximum equivalent stress is found beneath the surface.
Nevertheless, the full width at half maximum values suggest that distinct levels of
work hardening are induced depending on the rolling pressure, i.e., higher values
Fig. 2 Effect of deep rolling pressure and number of passes on surface texture: a p = 0, n = 0
(turned); b and c p = 100 bar, n = 1; d and e p = 200 bar, n = 1 and f p = 200 bar, n = 3
Fig. 3 Effect of deep rolling pressure and number of passes on: a surface residual stress and
b surface full width at half maximum
Surface Characterization of Components Subjected to Deep Rolling
51

were obtained applying a rolling pressure of p = 200 bar. This could be an
indication that higher dislocation density is obtained when higher rolling pressure
values are employed. Interestingly, no distinction can be made between the full
width at half maximum values with regard to the nature of the residual stress
(tensile or compressive).
Concluding Remarks
After subjecting annealed AISI 1060 high carbon steel specimens to deep rolling
under distinct rolling pressures and number of passes the following conclusions
can be drawn:
• A substantial improvement on the surface roughness amplitude parameters is
obtained after deep rolling, with lowest values being obtained applying a
pressure of p = 100 bar and number of rolling passes n = 3.
• As rolling pressure and number of passes are increased, more intense plastic
deformation and material ﬂow takes place on the work surface, thus impairing
the quality of the surface.
• The tensile residual stress induced on the surface by turning shifts to com-
pressive stress after deep rolling, however, the inﬂuence of the rolling param-
eters is not evident. In contrast, higher full width at half maximum values are
recorded after deep rolling at higher pressure (p = 200 bar).
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank the Institute of Materials Science of the
Leibniz Universität Hannover for the heat treatment of the specimens and both Ecoroll AG
Werkzeugtechnik (Celle, Germany) and Sandvik Tooling Deutschland GmbH for the provision,
respectively, of the deep rolling and cutting tools. A. M. Abrão is grateful to the CAPES
Foundation, Ministry of Education of Brazil, for funding his scholarship (grant no. 10118128).
References
1. Schultze, V.: Modern mechanical surface treatment, 368 pp. Wiley-VHC Verlag GmbH & Co.
KGaA, Weinheim (2006)
2. Berstein, G., Fuchsbauer, B.: Festwalzen und Schwingfestigkeit. Zeitschrift für Werkstoff-
technik 13, 103–109 (1982)
3. Chui, P., Sun, K., Sun, C., Chengge, Wu, Wang, H., Zhao, Y.: Effect of surface
nanocrystallization induced by fast multiple rotation rolling on mechanical properties of a
low carbon steel. Mater. Des. 35, 754–759 (2012)
4. Meyer, D., Brinksmeier, E., Hoffmann, F.: Surface hardening by cryogenic deep rolling.
Procedia Eng. 19, 258–263 (2011)
5. Morimoto, T.: Work hardening and tool surface damage in burnishing. Wear 127, 149–159
(1988)
52
A. M. Abrão et al.

6. Seemikeri, C.Y., Brahmankar, P.K., Mahagaonkar, S.B.: Investigations on surface integrity of
AISI 1045 using LPB tool. Tribol. Int. 41, 724–734 (2008)
7. DIN 50125 Test of metallic materials—Tensile test pieces (in German), 14 pp (2009)
8. DIN EN ISO 4287 geometrical product speciﬁcation (GPS)—Surface texture: proﬁle
method—terms, deﬁnitions and surface texture parameters (German version EN ISO
4287:1998+AC:2008+A1:2009), 14 pp (2009)
9. Gadelmawla, E.S., Koura, M.M., Maksoud, T.M.A., Elewa, I.M., Soliman, H.H.: Roughness
parameters. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 123, 133–145 (2002)
Surface Characterization of Components Subjected to Deep Rolling
53

Small-Scaled Modular Design
for Aircraft Wings
L. Overmeyer and A. Bentlage
Introduction
The product design already determines 70 % of the future product costs [1].
Therefore, the structural design offers a promising approach for reducing the
lifecycle costs of an airplane. An essential design parameter is the decision
between a monolithic or modular construction. The current design of aircraft
wings can be described as largely monolithic; the basic structure consists of a
small number of undivided components. For example the top cover of the Airbus
A350 wing consists of a single component with a length of 32 m [2]. For the
production of these large scaled components production machines, e.g. autoclaves,
with very huge dimensions are needed. However other aircraft parts such as the
fuselage are not one-piece components. The fuselage is composed of several
fuselage modules, which are pre-equipped and then riveted together. In this paper,
a small-scaled modular design for airplane wings is presented and the technical
feasibility is discussed. Moreover, we identiﬁed modularization factors which
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the decision between a monolithic or modular construction.
Literature Review
First modular constructions of large scaled products already exist in the industry.
In addition to the example of the aircraft fuselage also container ships [3] and
some rotor blades of wind turbines [4] are prefabricated in smaller modules and
L. Overmeyer (&)  A. Bentlage
IPH—Institute of Integrated Production Hanover gGmbH (non-proﬁt limited company),
Hanover, Germany
e-mail: bentlage@iph-hannover.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_8,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
55

then assembled. Current scientiﬁc approaches to modularization only deal with
conventional products and do not consider large-scale products such as aircraft or
components of aircrafts, e.g. [5, 6]. Therefore, the term modularity is often ‘only’
used for the speciﬁc grouping of components to subsystems as independent as
possible. There is no methodology available to decide whether a modular design is
useful and which module size leads to the lowest costs.
In order to allow a differentiation between modularization approaches for
conventional products and a new modularization approach for large-scaled prod-
ucts the term small-scaled modular design is introduced. The distinctiveness of this
approach is the possibility to separate large components. A methodical approach to
determine the ideal module size for large scaled products was developed. The
approach is divided into the steps: design of a small-scaled modular product, check
of the technical feasibility, analysis of the economic viability and development of
a tool to determine the ideal module size. In the scope of this paper, the emphasis
is laid on the design of a modular wing and the technical feasibility.
Design of a Small-Scaled Modular Wing
In the ﬁrst step a small-scaled modular product has to be developed. We selected
one of the most modern aircraft wings of a long-range, wide-body jet airline as a
reference product. While maintaining the basic wing shape, the geometric
dimensions and the material, different design concepts were developed. To support
the systematic development a morphological box was used (see Fig. 1).
The chosen set of parameters of the morphological box does not only form the
basis for the design concept but has also a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the manufac-
turing process. For example, the parameter ‘basic shape’ of the wing box deter-
mines beside design details especially in which steps the assembly of the wing box
is done, which has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the accessibility during the sub-
sequent wing equipping.
Figure 1 shows in an exemplary manner four rough design concepts of a small-
scaled modular wing. In order to identify the best design concept, all concepts
were evaluated on the basis of the following criteria: manufacturability of the
components, easy assembly with a high proportion of preassembly, the use of state
of the art technologies, the estimated weight and the comparability to the reference
wing. Using this evaluation method variant 4 was chosen, especially because this
variant shows a high level of comparability to the reference wing and is based
upon currently available production technologies.
The wing box construction of this variant is comparable to current airplane
wings. Each module consists of a front spar, a rear spar, ribs and two covers.
Because of this construction every module can be produced independently.
Moreover, the tightness and geometric shape can be tested separately. The con-
nection of the modules through riveting overlapping elements allows in addition a
compensation of production tolerances. The developed concept also allows a
56
L. Overmeyer and A. Bentlage

separation of the wing box perpendicular to the span width of a wing. For sepa-
rations of this kind doubler sheets are used to connect the parts of the wing cover.
This ensures that there is adequate assembly space available for a connection of
separated ribs. The spars of the wing box modules are already equipped with
mounting devices for the leading and trailing edge, e.g. by the use co-bonding or
co-curing in the production of the spars. This allows a preassembly of the leading
and trailing edge with very good accessibility (see Fig. 2).
Fig. 1 Morphological box to design a modular wing
Fig. 2 Comparison of conventional and modular assembly
Small-Scaled Modular Design for Aircraft Wings
57

Instead of standing under the wing to mount parts inside of the leading and
trailing edge the assembly can be done under improved agronomical conditions.
This assembly concept is comparable to the automobile industry, where e.g. the
cockpit is not equipped within the car but preequipped cockpit-modules are used.
After the leading and trailing edges are equipped and tested they are assembled to
the wing box. The mechanical connection is established by the mounting brackets,
in order to connect the electrical harness and the hydraulic pipes secured con-
nectors have to be used.
Technical Feasibility
The veriﬁcation of the structural strength of a modular wing design is based upon
an analytical bending beam model. Through a simpliﬁcation of the complex
geometry of the reference wing to a bending beam with linear decreasing height
and depth and with a ﬁxed mounting a direct calculation of the stresses within the
wing box was made possible. In contrast to the use of a Finite Element Method
(FEM) an analytical bending beam enables a review of different wing geometries,
‘cutting’ positions, materials, and loadings without creating a complete new
model. The following Fig. 3 shows the considered structural loading and geometry
of the calculation.
The net loading of an airplane wing is the difference between the lift and the
weight force of the wing multiplied with the load factor F. This equals the weight
force of the fuselage multiplied with the load factor. As a reasonable simpliﬁca-
tion, it is assumed that the lift force and the weight force are proportional to the
wing depth.
Using the Bernoulli–Euler differential equations for a beam model a calculation
of the bending moment and the bending itself is possible [7]. Because of the linear
decreasing height and depth of the analyzed wing a numerical Integration via the
trapezoidal rule is necessary. For 280 discrete spanwise locations the following
values were calculated:
Fig. 3 Structural loading and geometry
58
L. Overmeyer and A. Bentlage

Siþ1  Si ¼ qiþ1 þ qi
2
 yiþ1  yi
ð
Þ
Miþ1  Mi ¼ Siþ1 þ Si
2
 yiþ1  yi
ð
Þ
hiþ1  hi ¼
Miþ1
EIiþ1
þ Mi
EIi


 yiþ1  yi
ð
Þ
wiþ1  wi ¼ hiþ1 þ hi
2
: yiþ1  yi
ð
Þ
with: S = shear force; M = bending moment; h = bending angle; w = bending;
y = y-coordinate of segment; E = elasticity modulus; I = local moment of inertia.
With the boundary conditions, that the shear force S and the bending moment M
equals zero at the wing tip and the condition that the bending angle h and the
bending are zero at the root, the bending beam model can be solved. On the basis
of the local bending moment and the local geometry of the wing the bending
stresses within the top and bottom cover can be calculated.
For the input parameters shown in Fig. 3, a minimal sheet thickness for every
discrete element and the use of an aluminum alloy with a yield strength of 350 N/
mm2 a maximal bending moment of 26,560,000 Nm and a maximal bending of
approximately 2800 mm was calculated. In addition, the results of this analytical
calculation were compared to an FEM simulation. The comparison showed, that
the bending beam calculation and the FEM-simulation provide very similar results.
As the FEM-simulation takes nonlinear effects into account, the bending calcu-
lated with the FEM simulation is always higher than the bending calculated with
the bending beam model. For the input parameters shown in Fig. 3 the relative
error is 11.5 %. The use of a bending beam model is therefore sufﬁcient for a ﬁrst
evaluation of the technical feasibility of a small-scaled modular wing and is more
ﬂexible than a FEM-simulation.
The knowledge of the bending and the material stresses allows a rough
dimensioning of the rivet connection between the wing box modules. For example,
a connection of two wing box-modules in a distance of 10 m to the wing root
would require 2600 rivets with a diameter of 6 mm (calculation according to the
DIN 18 800-1 with the parameters shown in Fig. 3 and aluminum rivets). In order
to place this 2600 rivets on the cover and taking the minimum rivet distances into
account a connection with 5 rivet rows is necessary. The number of necessary rivet
rows determines the minimal overlapping of the individual wing box segments and
thus allows an estimate of the additional weight as a function of the number of
modules. For this example an overlapping of about 96 mm and an additional
weight of 7.87 kg was determined.
Besides an analysis of the structural strength, we identiﬁed additional factors,
which could prevent the realization of a small-scaled modular design: the neces-
sary installation space and the possibility to disconnect electrical cables. Current
aviation regulations specify a maximal number of disconnection points of
Small-Scaled Modular Design for Aircraft Wings
59

Fig. 4 Installation space leading edge (worst case)
electrical cables. The result is that for a small-scaled modular aircraft wing a
complete pre-equipping of all electrical cables is currently not possible.
Furthermore, the analysis of the application example aircraft showed that even
at the area of the wingtip there is enough installation space to mechanically
connect the trailing edge modules with each other. In contrast to the trailing edge
the position with the least installation space for the assembly of the leading edge is
not the wing tip. Because the pipes of the bleed air system and the generator cables
do not lead from the wing tip to the root the position with the least installation
space is just behind the engine mount. Figure 4 shows in an exemplary manner the
available installation space for the connection of two modules under the most
complicated circumstances.
In this exemplary assembly situation several hydraulic pipes, a bleed air pipe,
several parts of the electric harness and a mechanical drive shaft for the slat system
have to be connected with each other. The connection is done via an open segment
of the leading edge cover which will be closed after the assembly process is
ﬁnished. The left part of Fig. 4 shows the available space to connect the wing box
modules with each other and the space to connect the leading edge to the wing
box. Especially the space to assemble the leading edge to the lower right mounting
bracket is limited but sufﬁcient. The mounting of internal mounting brackets is
done via assembly and maintenance openings at the bottom of the leading edge.
The right part of Fig. 4 shows the assembly space to connect the different cables,
pipes, harness elements and drive shafts. It can also be seen in this example that
the assembly opening must not exceed a maximum size. Although a big opening
facilitates the assembly process, it reduces possible positions to secure cables
within the leading edge at the same time.
Economic Viability
For a substantial assessment of a small-scaled modular design of an airplane wing
the whole aircraft life cycle has to be considered. By an analysis of the whole
lifecycle of an aircraft and expert interviews we identiﬁed the following ‘modu-
larization factors’, which are signiﬁcantly affected by a small-scaled modular
design (see Table 1).
60
L. Overmeyer and A. Bentlage

Further modularization factors with a lower impact to the lifecycle costs, like
ergonomics, the feasibility of retroﬁtting and a larger product variety, and recy-
cling could be identiﬁed, but are not considered within the method to determine the
ideal module size. Through this focusing on the most signiﬁcant modularization
factors an application of the developed method in the preliminary design phase is
facilitated, as in the preliminary design phase only few and partly imprecise data
are available.
The modularization factors include contradictory design targets (see Fig. 5).
In order to facilitate the manufacturing and the transport a small module size
and thus a high number of modules should be realized. On the other hand, there are
other modularization factors which support a minimization of the number of
modules. For example, the fuel burn raises with an increasing number of modules
as every interface between two modules causes additional weight and aerodynamic
disruptions. Therefore, we use the predicted lifecycle costs as a measurand to
determine the ideal module size. By minimizing the total life cycle costs not only
Table 1 Modularization factors and possible effects
Modularization factor
Possible effects of small-scaled modular design
Research and development
costs
Additional development work; easier subcontracting; use of module
catalogs
Manufacturability
Different process capabilities; amount of rework; size of production
machines
Difﬁculty of assembly
Accessibility and weight of components; additional assembly
operations
Transport costs
Wider variety of usable transport systems
Fuel and maintenance costs Fuel burn due to weight and aerodynamics; different maintenance
effort
Fig. 5 Lifecycle costs as a function of the module size
Small-Scaled Modular Design for Aircraft Wings
61

one design aspect like the manufacturability is optimized, but a global optimum is
reached. In further research activities, the developed cost functions and the set of if
then rules should be optimized and described in detail.
Acknowledgments The IPH researched scientiﬁc issues and practical challenges in the pro-
duction of XXL products as part of a joint research project entitled ‘‘Innovations for the Man-
ufacture of Large Scale Products.’’ This collaborative project is funded by the Lower Saxony
Ministry of Science and Culture and by the Lower Saxony Ministry for Economic Affairs, Labor
and Transport. The project was supported by the Investment and Development Bank of Lower
Saxony NBank.
References
1. Seo, K.-K. et al.: Approximate estimation of the product life cycle cost using artiﬁcial neural
networks in conceptual design. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 19(6), 461–471 (Springer Verlag
London 2002)
2. N.N.: Intelligent airframe design. Airbus technical magazine, Issue April 2013 http://
de.slideshare.net/agromera/a350-fast-speciala350 (June 2013)
3. Bertram, V.: Modularization of Ships, Report within the Framework of Project ‘‘Intermodul’’.
http://www.cto.gda.pl/ﬁleadmin/Inne_pdfy/modular_equipment_survey_ﬁnal.pdf (2013)
4. Blade Dynamics Ltd: A new paradigm in blade technology. Longer blades. More power.
Lower cost of energy, http://www.bladedynamics.com/onshore.html (May 2013)
5. Ericsson, A., Erixon, G.: Controlling Design Variants: Modular Product Platforms. Society of
Manufacturing engineers, Dearborn (1999)
6. Koeppen, B.: Modularisierung komplexer Produkte anhand technischer und betriebswirts-
chaftlicher Komponentenkopplungen. Shaker Verlag, Aachen (2008)
7. Munz, C.-D., Westermann, T.: Numerische Behandlung gewöhnlicher und partieller Differ-
enzialgleichungen, 3rd edn. Springer Verlag, Berlin (2013)
62
L. Overmeyer and A. Bentlage

Development of Machining Strategies
for Aerospace Components, Using Virtual
Machining Tools
L. Estman, D. Merdol, K.-G. Brask, V. Kalhori and Y. Altintas
Introduction
The innovation capacity of machining industry is highly dependent on the devel-
opment of new technologies to improve the efﬁciency and accuracy in production.
It is essential to develop methods for optimal selection of cutting tools, machining
strategies and machine concepts for various components and work-piece materials
in order to reach the productivity goals. The predictability of machining process is
the key to avoid undesired fails like tool-machine collisions, and to reach shorter
operation and setup time, energy efﬁciency, and optimal part quality with respect to
dimensional accuracy and surface integrity. Virtual machining tools are built on
physics, dynamics, kinematics and control models of machining systems and are of
signiﬁcant importance to support the above activities. These with respect to
development of a competitive manufacturing economics to digitally evaluate;
• Process and operation planning, e.g., suitable machining strategies, cutting tools
and cutting data, generation of tool paths.
• Preparations for machining and quality evaluation, e.g. preparation of ﬁxturing
and clamping devices, preparation of blank, post processing or CNC program-
ming, assembly and presetting of cutting tools etc.
A current study demonstrates the developed cutting tools and strategies in ﬁve
axis machining of impellers and blades at Sandvik Coromant in partnership with
Manufacturing Automation Laboratory at the University of British Columbia. The
use of virtual machining tools during process planning is discussed and the
industrial beneﬁts are presented.
L. Estman (&)  K.-G. Brask  V. Kalhori
AB Sandvik Coromant, R&D Application Solutions, 81181 Sandviken, Sweden
e-mail: Linda.Estman@sandvik.com
D. Merdol  Y. Altintas
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing Automation Laboratory,
The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_9,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
63

Machining Strategies
Impeller and blade are among the most complex and costly aerospace parts to
machine. The requirements on high productivity and tight component tolerances
demand a very careful selection of cutting tools and parameters. High thermo
mechanical loads on cutting tools and in cutting zones, excessive distortion due to
residual stresses and tool deﬂection leading to undesired tolerance deviations need
to be avoided while reaching a better process efﬁciency, and lower production
costs.
To achieve the mentioned requirements Sandvik Coromant has developed a
number of machining strategies including cutting tools, machining methods and
machining concepts which are described as follows. The virtual machining tools
have been used both for establishing a higher understanding of the cutting process
and to verify the chosen strategies reaching extensive productivity improvements.
The development of strategies for machining of impeller has been focused gen-
erally on applying standard tool concepts such as Coromill Plura for ﬂank milling
to achieve a high axial depth of cut to produce the proﬁle in fewer passes.
Figures 1 and 2 show the terminology used within process planning for impeller
and blade.
Fig. 1 Impeller, Ti6Al4 V,
terminology
Fig. 2 Blade,
X22CrMoV12-1, terminology
64
L. Estman et al.

Flank Milling
In ﬂank milling the material is removed with the periphery of tapered ball end
mills, see Fig. 3. In order to produce a ﬂank milling tool path, two curves are
identiﬁed on the design surface. These curves then form the rails on which the tool
is rolled.
Waterline Milling of Aerofoil
In this technique, the cutting operation consists of a sequence of 2-dimensional
layers with varying depth of cut, each completed before the tool moves down to
the next as shown in Fig. 4.
Spiral Milling of Aerofoil (4–5 ax)
Semi roughing operation in which the work (as a helical gear) is given simulta-
neously a rotary motion and an endways motion, see Fig 5. Sandvik Coromant
Fig. 3 Flank milling
Fig. 4 Waterline milling of
Aerofoil
Development of Machining Strategies for Aerospace Components
65

application knowledge in combination with product development of the holding
system of CM600 has been leading the development of this methods.
Flank Milling of Hub and Shroud
The conventional method of machining hub and shroud is point milling where the
cutting is done with the bottom edge of the ball ended cutter. A 3D-proﬁle is
generated with successive and many levels of passes.
The combination of point milling and ﬂank milling has reduced the cycle time
of this operation from 20.00 to 9.15 min, see Table 1.
Optimization
Using standard commercial CAM packages to create an optimized tool path
usually results to an undesired variation of hex. In this section the use of opti-
mization platform MACHpro developed at The MAL University of British
Fig. 5 Spiral milling
Table 1 Timesaving using the machining strategies developed at Sandvik Coromant
Operation
Machining
Conventional min:sec Recommended
min:sec
Rhombus
Roughing
Face milling
07:00
Face milling
04:25
Aerofoil
Roughing
Face milling
08:50
Waterline milling
07:00
Semi-ﬁnishing
Spiral
milling
02:40
Spiral milling
02:12
Finishing
Spiral
milling
06:00
Spiral milling
05:00
Hub and shroud
Roughing
Point milling 09:20
Flank and point
milling
05:50
Finishing
Point milling 20:00
Flank and point
milling
09:15
Head and footh
Finishing
*
02:00
Face milling
02:00
Mounting slot
Roughing and
ﬁnishing
*
01:40
Slot milling
01:40
66
L. Estman et al.

Columbia is discussed. The platform is used to verify the developed strategies and
to reach among other a constant chip load (hex) optimized cutting loads, etc. The
software analyzes the NC ﬁle and then, based on the stock removal simulation
process which is integrating physics-based material models, calculates the real
amount of material to be removed for each position of the cutter along the tool
path. Along the tool path the software can optimize the machining/cutting data
with respect to:
• Cutting force
• Chip thickness
• Spindle torque/power
• Tool deﬂection
For example, it is possible to determine the required cutting forces along the
tool path, with respect to the amount of material to be removed. In areas where
there is a reduced amount of material to be removed and cutting conditions are
favorable, the software will automatically increase the feed rate and update the NC
ﬁle. The software does not rely on amount of material removed to calculate
process outputs like forces. It rather uses intersection surface between tool and
work piece to calculate actual chip distribution along helical ﬂutes and combines
this information with complex material models to determine the instantaneous load
on the tool. MACHpro can also detect the presence of chatter; feed drive loads and
allows the detailed analysis of process states at crucial states of the tool path while
considering the CNC dynamics of the machine which has great inﬂuence on chip
loads and cycle times, see Table 2.
Table 2 Optimized cycle time for Impeller machining using MACHpro
Operation
Cycle time
Productivity
improvement (%)
Application strategy
(min:sec)
NC-code Optimization
(min:sec)
Roughing 1
02:40
02:18
14
Roughing 2
01:47
01:23
22
Roughing 3
01:48
01:35
12
Roughing 4
01:10
01:00
14
Roughing 5
01:11
01:03
11
Semi ﬁnish 1 (Blade)
00:54
00:37
31
Semi ﬁnish 2 (Blade)
01:30
01:06
27
Semi ﬁnish (Hub)
02:59
01:34
47
Time Saving/blade
13:59
10:36
24
Total Time Saving
(eight blade Impeller)
111:52
84:48
24
Development of Machining Strategies for Aerospace Components
67

Conclusions
Machining strategies, cutting tools, and application methods developed at Sandvik
Coromant have led to signiﬁcant productivity improvement and component quality
assurance. The use of virtual machining software MACHpro as a natural part of
production planning process has resulted to additional cycle time reduction and
tolerance accuracy when machining costly and complex to machine parts like
impeller and aerospace blades.
68
L. Estman et al.

Inﬂuence of 5-axes-kinematics
Geometrical Accuracy in Riblet
Manufacturing Processes
Berend Denkena, Jens Köhler and Thomas Krawczyk
Abstract The effectiveness of gas turbines can be improved signiﬁcantly by
decreasing the friction losses. Compared to smooth surfaces riblet-structures have
been proven to reduce skin friction in turbulent ﬂow up to 10 %. For the technical
application on compressor blades in turbo machines, micro riblet structures with a
riblet width between 20 and 120 lm and a depth of the half width are required.
Furthermore, the structuring process must be able to generate micro patterns, which
are orientated in stream direction, on free formed surfaces. So far, riblet structures
have been ground on single curved NACA6510. In order to grind riblet structures a
5–axes-grinding process is required. However, the complex motion of the grinding
wheel results in defects on the ground geometries. This paper presents the effect of
the 5-axes-kinematics on the riblet aspect ratio and, as a consequence, general
conditions, which enable a grinding process without defects on the ground riblets.
Keywords Five axes grinding  Micro pattern  Dressing
Introduction
A major aim in turbomachinery design is the increase of efﬁciency to reduce the fuel
consumption of aircraft engines or gas turbines and hence the operating costs and
CO2-emissions. To attain an increase of efﬁciency ﬂow losses have to be reduced. A
large proportion of ﬂow losses is generated by skin friction between the blade
surfaces of the axial compressor and the working ﬂuid [1]. Hence, a decrease of skin
friction leads to an additional increase of efﬁciency. It is known that small ribs on the
B. Denkena  J. Köhler  T. Krawczyk (&)
Institute of Production Engineering and Machine Tools, Leibniz Universität Hannover,
An der Universität 2, 30823 Garbsen, Germany
e-mail: krawczyk@ifw.uni-hannover.de
URL: www.ifw.uni-hannover.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_10,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
69

surface oriented in the mean ﬂow direction can reduce skin friction in the case of
turbulent ﬂow when their geometric features are appropriate to the local ﬂow con-
ditions. Ideal riblet structures on compressor blades should have a riblet width
between 20 and 120 lm and an aspect ratio of riblet height to width of 0.5 [2, 3].
Compared to manufacturing processes such as laser machining [4], EDM, micro
milling and micro planing [5, 6] grinding with multi-proﬁled wheels has been
established as an effective method for generating riblet structures on large scale
surfaces. So far, riblet structures with an aspect ratio of 0.5 and a width of 60 lm
have been ground on single curved NACA6510 proﬁles whereby a reduction of the
near wall friction of about 4 % has been achieved [7, 8]. However, real compressor
blades have double curved or free formed surfaces. These surfaces have to be
machined with a 5-axes-grinding process. Hereby additional requirements on the
grinding process have to be considered [9, 10]. The tool paths have to be curved in
order to follow the curved stream ﬂow. Such complex tool paths were used for e.g.
belt-grinding in mould manufacturing [11]. However, this grinding belts were not
proﬁled, hence the inﬂuence of the 5-axes-kinematic on the ground riblet struc-
tures is unknown.
To close the research gap in structuring of free formed surfaces the relevant
inﬂuencing factors on the accuracy of the riblet-geometry in 5-axes-grinding of
riblet structures on double curved compressor blades are investigated. This paper
deals with the impact of the 5-axes-kinematics on the ground riblet geometries, the
resulting boundaries and strategies, which enables a shift these boundaries.
Materials and Methods
In order to investigate the inﬂuence of the 5-axes-kinematics on the riblet
geometries grinding simulations were done which the simulation system CutS.
CutS used a three-dimensional dexel model, which represents the workpiece and
calculated the material removal due to the interaction with the tool. The veriﬁ-
cations of the simulations have been carried out on a Blohm Proﬁmat 407 5-axes-
surface grinding machine. The dressing system, using a diamond proﬁle dressing
roller, is integrated into the machine. Vitriﬁed bonded wheels whit a grain sizes of
17 lm have been selected due to their good dressability and good proﬁle holding.
The grinding wheel proﬁles were dressed by the shift strategy. Here, one ﬂank of
the proﬁles is dressed by a ﬁrst plunge movement. The second plunge movement is
carried out with an axial offset of the dressing roller, whereby the other ﬂank of the
proﬁles is dressed. Due to the process kinematics it is possible to generate all of the
proﬁles within two plunge movements. In order to avoid the inﬂuence of tool wear
during the veriﬁcation Obomodulan has been choosen as workpiece material.
Obomodulan based polyurethane and has a density of 1200 kg/m3, compressive
strength of 82 MPa and a bending strength of 94 MPa.
70
B. Denkena et al.

Results and Discussion
By grinding curved riblets undercuts can emerge, which result in a damage of the
riblet structures. The undercuts are a result of the contact conditions of grinding
wheel and workpiece. When a grinding wheel moves on a curved tool path, the
target groove geometry should be equal in cross section A–A and B–B at the time
t = 0 (Fig. 1). Due to the straight contact length, a groove at the right side of the
target groove will be ground. When the grinding wheel moves forward on the
curved tool path to the time t = n an undercut results (Fig. 1, top left). As a
consequence the width of the ground groove will be enlarged and the face angle of
the groove differs to the targeted angle. To investigate the inﬂuencing factors on
the undercut and to deﬁne the geometry of curved riblet structures, which can be
ground on free formed surfaces, the divergence of target face angle and generated
face angle was calculated as a function of tool path radius for different grinding
wheel diameter.
Figure 2 illustrates the divergence of the target face angle alpha and generated
face angle for varying grinding wheel diameter RWZ. The results show that un-
dercuts can be avoided when the diameter of the grinding wheel diameter is
adjusted to the tool path radius Rpath. By applying a grinding wheel with a
diameter of RWZ = 40 mm the divergence angle decreases when the tool path
radius rise till a radius of 60 mm. For bigger tool path radii the divergence angle
does not change. The minimal tool path radius, which does not result in undercuts,
is independent of the grinding wheel diameter. For a grinding wheel diameter of
RWZ = 144 mm no difference between the target angle and the actual groove
angle from a tool path radius about 210 mm occurred.
Similar results were observed in grinding experiments. The green line in Fig. 2
shows the divergence angle of target grooves and the ground one. Here, a grinding
wheel with a V-proﬁle, a proﬁle angle of 60 and a diameter of 144 mm was applied
Fig. 1 Emergence of undercuts
Inﬂuence of 5-axes-kinematics
71

and the same divergence angle like the simulated one results (green and red line in
Fig. 2). To conclude the use of a grinding wheel diameter which is adapted on the
required tool path radius enables grinding of curved riblet structures.
In order to avoid the inﬂuence of tool wear on the riblet geometries grinding
wheels with a big diameter should be used. However, this grinding wheel cannot
realize small tool path radii without geometrical defects. Thus, a new grinding
strategy has been investigated to realize small tool path radii and big grinding
wheel diameter. Until now, the grinding wheel are normal to the workpiece sur-
face, which results in a straight contact length. By tilting of the grinding wheel
about the angle b an adjusted position of the proﬁles on the grinding wheel leeds to
more curved contact length (Fig. 3, left).
On the right part of Fig. 3 the inﬂuence of grinding wheel radius Rwz on Rcrit is
shown. Rcrit is the smallest possible tool path radius which enables grinding
without geometric defects for different tilt angles. These simulation results show
that grinding with tilted grinding wheels enables smaller critical tool path radii
and/or the use of bigger grinding wheels.
Conclusion and Outlook
Ideal riblet structures reduce the wall near friction up to 10 %. Industrial appli-
cation requires grinding of micro patterns with an aspect ratio of 0.5 on free
formed surfaces in a shape accuracy about 10 lm. The simulation and grinding
Fig. 2 Relationship of undercuts and tool diameter by circular motion Rpath
72
B. Denkena et al.

experiments show, that due to the 5-axes-kinematics defects on the ground riblet
structures can occur. However, if a grinding wheel moves on a circular path, the
ground structure are not inﬂuenced if a tool path radius above a critical tool path
radius is used. This critical radius can be decreased by applying smaller grinding
wheels. Moreover, a tilted grinding wheel with an adapted proﬁle geometry
reduces the critical tool path radius, too. As future work, these results will be
veriﬁed in grinding investigations. More over, current investigations aim to
quantify the friction reduction by riblets in a real compressor.
Acknowledgments The investigations described in this paper were undertaken with the support
of the German Research Foundation (DFG) within the project ‘‘Riblets on Compressor Blades’’
(DE 447/51-3).
References
1. Gümmer, V.: Pfeilung und V-Stellung zur Beeinﬂussung der dreidimensionalen Strömung in
Leiträdern transsonischer Axialverdichter, Fortschritt-Berichte VDI Reihe 7 Nr. 384, VDI
Verlag, Düsseldorf (2005)
2. Ninnemann, T., Ng, W.-F.: Loss Reduction Using Riblets on a Supersonic Through-ﬂow Fan
Blade Cascade. Trans. ASME, Ser. I J. Fluids Eng. 126(4), 642–649 (2004)
3. Bechert, D.-W., Bartenwerfer, M.: The viscous ﬂow on surfaces with longitudinal ribs.
J. Fluid Mech. 206, 105–129 (1989)
4. Siegel, F., Klug, U., Kling, R., Ostendorf, A.: Extensive micro-structuring of metals using
picosecond pulses - ablation behavior and industrial relevance, In: Proceedings of LPM 2008,
Fig. 3 Grinding with tilt grinding wheels
Inﬂuence of 5-axes-kinematics
73

9th International Symposium on Laser Precision Manufacturing, 17-20 Juni, Quebec,
Canada, (2008)
5. Fischer, S.: Fertigungssysteme zur spanenden Herstellung von Mikrostrukturen, PhD thesis,
RWTH, Aachen (2000)
6. Weinert, K., Blum, H., Jansen, T., Rademacher, A.: Simulation based optimization of NC-
shape grinding process with toroid grinding wheels. Prod. Eng. Res. Dev. (WGP), 1 (3),
245,252, (2007)
7. Uhlmann, E., Piltz, S., Doll, U.: Funkenerosion in der Mikrotechnik. Einsatzgebiete und
Verfahrensgrenzen. Werkstatttechnik wt-online, 12, 733–737 (2004)
8. Denkena, B., Köhler, J., Wang, B.: Manufacturing of functional riblet structures by proﬁle
grinding. CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. Technol. 3(1), 14–26 (2010)
9. Lietmeyer, C., Denkena, B., Kling, R., Krawczyk, T., Overmeyer, L., Reithmeier, E.,
Scheuer, R., Vynnyk, T., Wojakowski, B., Seume, J.R.: Recent advances in manufacturing of
riblets on compressor blades and their aerodynamic impact. J Turbomach. 135 (4), 2013
10. Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Osmer, J.: Tool path generation for ultra-precision machining of
free-form surfaces. Prod. Eng. Res. Dev. 2, 241–246 (2008)
11. Tönshoff, H.K., Denkena, B., Böß, V., Urban, B.: Automated ﬁnishing of dies and molds.
Prod. Eng. Res. Dev. 9(2), 1–4 (2002)
74
B. Denkena et al.

New Technology for High Speed Cutting
of Titanium Alloys
Eberhard Abele and Roland Hölscher
In the aviation industry the weight of an aircraft has a strong inﬂuence on the
operating costs. Less weight means on the one hand less energy consumption and
on the other hand a bigger capacity for passengers and freight. Assuming a Boeing
747 would carry 10 % less fuel, a payload of 10 tons would be feasible. Hence the
net load ratio with equal weight is drastically improved. Furthermore secondary
savings such as lowering the demand of fuel and reducing maintenance costs
would promote a general reduction of the total costs [1].
To achieve such savings, the usage of lighter materials such as carbon ﬁber
reinforced plastics (CFRP) and titanium alloys is increasing. More CFRP means
not only weight saving, but also an increase of the usage of titanium. A reason for
that is a high electrochemical potential difference between CFRP and aluminum
alloys, which enhances corrosion. The connection between CFRP and titanium
alloys reduces such potential difference by 80 %. Thus the usage of CFRP leads to
a suppression of aluminum parts in the aviation industry. Fewer metal and fewer
sandwich materials means less metal machining. The new material mix of the
Boeing 787 Dreamliner and the Airbus A350 WXB is shown in Fig. 1. The
fraction of titanium alloys in the new Boeing and Airbus tripled compared to
previous aircrafts.
Even though the metal removing volume generally decreased in the aerospace
industry—the machining time increased. A reason for that is the very low and
viable titanium removal rate. Over the last decade such a removal rate quintupled
with aluminum parts; whereas the removal rate with titanium parts doubled
(Fig. 2, left). Today a metal removal rate of 15 l/min can be attained by machining
of aluminum. In the ﬁeld of titanium machining the rate is about 0.25 l/min with
E. Abele (&)  R. Hölscher
Institute of Production Management, Technology and Machine Tools (PTW),
Technische Universität Darmstadt, Petersenstr. 30, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany
e-mail: abele@ptw.tu-darmstadt.de
R. Hölscher
e-mail: hoelscher@ptw.tu-darmstadt.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_11,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
75

solid carbide tools. In consequence the machining costs for titanium parts are
extremely high compared to aluminum parts [2].
In the following the paper presents the reasons why the metal removal rate in
titanium is still very low. The low E modulus, the high cutting forces and the very
low heat coefﬁcient are tough on the machining process (Fig. 2, right). A very low
heat conductivity of k = 7.12 W/mK of Ti6Al4V (in comparison with Ck 45 and
Al 7075), causes along with cutting speed, feed and width of cut a development of
extreme temperatures on the cutting edge.
The heat conductivity of aluminum is greater than that of titanium by a factor of
15. Another major difference lies in the heat dissipation in the chips. Over 75 % of
the process heat is dissipated in the chips during aluminum machining whereas
only 25 % goes into the chip in titanium machining. That means the tool faces an
enormous temperature load. High temperatures at the cutting edge cause adhesion
and diffusion processes, leading to high tool wear (Fig. 3).
A low E modulus also shows that titanium yields to the pressure of the cutting
material. The danger of vibration behavior with weak parts increases. This is
further supported through yield strength ratio and only partially allows plastic
deformation. Because of the compliant material, the material springs back further
under the impact of the cutting force, causing a decrease of the clearance angle in
the area of the clearance surface. Low cutting velocities and high forces combined
with a low excitation frequency may cause chatter [3].
The extremely low heat coefﬁcient causes a disability of the High Speed
Cutting (HSC)-Effect with titanium machining. The increased tensile strength of
titanium at higher cutting speed and the missing ability of the introduction of the
Metal Removal Rate
0%
200%
400%
600%
800%
1000%
1200%
1400%
1600%
1970 (100%)
1980
1990
2000
2005
2007
2010
Aluminium (z.B. 3.4394)
Titanium (z.B. 3.7164)
115-140
51,9
7,12
Heat Conductivity λ (W/mK)
862
486
520
Heat Capacity cp (J/kgK)
55-163
170
320
Hardness (HB)
12
14-17
8-15
Elongation A5 (%)
470
390
830-1030
Elastic Limit Rp0,2 (MPa)
550
630
900-1180
Tensile strength Rm (MPa)
72
210
110
Young’s Modulus (GPa)
2,8
7,78
4,43
Specific mass (g/cm3)
AL 7075
Ck45
Ti6Al4V
Properties
Fig. 2 Growing material removal rate of aluminum and titanium alloys (left). Properties of
Ti6Al4V, Ck 45 and Al7075 (right)
5
10
18
18
7
7
20
14
52
50
Airbus
Boeing
Wing Belt, Machining Volume 90%
Source: Boeing
Fig. 1 New materials mix in next aviation generation (left), aviation structure part (right)
76
E. Abele and R. Hölscher

cutting heat cannot cause a decrease in the cutting forces and also result not in
material softening. The titanium material cannot transfer the process heat through
the chips, causing heat accumulation and thermal overload at the cutting edge [4].
To use the advantages of the HSC-Effect in titanium machining the conditions
have to be artiﬁcially established. The warm machining process offers promising
starting points. In the conventional titanium machining the goal was a high cooling
efﬁciency, whereas now additional energy in form of heat is transferred into the
process. The aim is to achieve a better machining, by inﬂuencing the material
characteristics of the machining process [5].
The material properties of Ti6Al4V at growing temperatures shows that tensile
strength, shear strength, E modulus, tendency of hardening, heat conductivity and
speciﬁc heat capacity decreases. This change of the material properties means for the
machining process that the cutting forces decrease and also the wear of the cutting
tools decrease. The tool life increases and the chip formation improve (Fig. 4) [6].
The warm machining offers completely new potentials as to the changed
material characteristics. Because a multiplicity of titanium parts are structure parts
with big dimensions, the heat transfer is of crucial importance. Figure 5 gives an
overview on the available possibilities, structuring them according to ‘‘through and
partial heating’’ of the part [7].
Theoretically only the area that is going to be machined on can be heated which
can be realized through a laser beam that is nowadays relatively cheap and
applicable at different power settings. Most obvious advantages of such a heating
Fig. 3 Heat accumulation at
the cutting edge
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Temperatur [°C]
Rm [N/mm2]
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Rc [%]
Rc
Rm
Tensile strengh
Shear strengh
Material focused effects
Process focused effects
• tensile strength
decreases
• shear strength
decreases
• E modulus
decreases
• tendency of hardening
decreases
• heat conductivity
increases
• spezific heatcapacity
increases
• cutting forces
decreases
• wear of cutting tool
decreases
• tool lifetime
increases
• chip formation
improves
• milling temperature
decreases
• cutting rate 
increases
-200    -1000
400
0
500
700
100
200
300
600
Fig. 4 Material and process effects of warm machining (left). Tensile and shear strength
decreases at high temperatures (right)
New Technology for High Speed Cutting of Titanium Alloys
77

source is that it is able to be positioned and moved easily, which comes in handy
with the processing of more complex parts. During the heating process with a laser
beam only the part’s surface (max. depth 1 mm) is heated. The disadvantage of the
usage of such a device is the partial heating of the surface due to heat power loss.
The heat can only be transferred through heat conductance. A low heat coefﬁcient
of Ti6Al4V is not giving the desired support. Hence the heat dissipation is not
homogenous and the temperature drops rapidly from the surface toward the center
of the part. That is a big disadvantage when trying to realize improvements in
metal removal rate. A further analysis of the manufactured part’s surface is crucial
to ﬁgure out if the heat input caused any unwanted structural damage or induced
any internal stress [8].
Another possibility to achieve the warm machining process is the energy
feeding input through induction, which can introduce the heat into the material up
to 15 mm due to a relatively homogenous temperature proﬁle. In front of the tool/
spindle the inductor is running which is heating the work piece. The process is
relatively easy adjustable in terms of geometry and positioning of the spindle. The
depth of the inductive generated ﬁelds paired with the depth of the heat insertion
can be adjusted by the frequency. Through the feed rate of the machine process
and the desired temperature difference, along with the speciﬁc heat and the heated
mass, the demand on the heating source can be calculated. This however means
that with the power request of the generator, different temperatures in the part
which will machine can be step less adjusted.
Figure 6 shows on the left side the experimental setup. The inductor which is
arranged before the tool is heating the material. On the right side the inductor is
shown in detail. The marked area is faced to the work peace surface during
milling. This part is directly related to the preheated work surface. In this case, the
inductor geometry has to be adapted to the machining operation. With the help of
the booster material the magnetic ﬁeld is limited on a certain area on the work
piece surface.
Heating up the hole part
Heating up only the cutting area
• usage of residual heat of force
• heating in oil
• heating using electric-furnace
• heating through friction
• heating through resistance
(AC/DC-current, radiofrequencies)
• arcload
• microwaves
• plasma beam
• laser beam
• UHM Technology
• elektomagnetic induktion
Fig. 5 Options for heating
the titanium alloy
78
E. Abele and R. Hölscher

The main focus of research deals with ﬁnding of ideal cutting temperatures as
well as technological parameters to increase the productivity. Initial investigations
showed a decrease in cutting forces by about 30 %. The results show, that tool life
was the same compared to conventional machining.
Talking about preheating machining it should be mentioned, that the material
removal rate must be adapted to conventional machining. Due to the state of the art
the material removal rate shall beat the value for peripheral milling cutter (cutting
speed
vc = 70 m/min,
feed
per
tooth
fz = 0.3 mm,
ae = 0.5
*
d
mm,
ap = 10 mm, z = 5). In addition to conventional machining the tool life expected
for preheating titanium alloys shall beat 45 m with uncoated carbide cutting inserts
and 110 bar inner cooling and additional ﬂood cooling with ester oil. Regarding
the conventional machining or HPC-Strategy, the new HSC-Strategy requires
increased cutting speeds. The aim of the new technology implementation is to
achieve higher productivity. Thus the material removal rate can be raised.
Figure 7 shows the measured temperatures at different depths in the work piece.
For this purpose thermocouples were inserted laterally into the workpiece material.
They measured the temperature at various depths. (The sensors were inserted 3, 6, 9
and 12 mm in the titanium alloy work piece at a distance of 20 mm.) The induction
system produced 60 KW and a frequency of 18 kHz, which the inductor transfers in
heat at the follow step. Figure 7 (left) shows the realized temperatures from about
680 C at 3 mm depth up to 280 C in 12 mm depth, which were produced by the
induction. The measured data converge over the time, when the temperature is
allocated in the test material by conduction. During machining the milling tool
follows the inductor. Thus the preheated material is machined immediately.
Through the effective time which the inductor is heating, this can be controlled by
the feed rate or by the power of the induction system, so that the temperature can be
controlled. Figure 7 (right) shows a higher material removal with the adjusted
technology parameters (vc = 300 m/min, fz = 0.1 mm ae = 0.5 * d mm,
Fig. 6 Test setup (left) and Inductor (right)
New Technology for High Speed Cutting of Titanium Alloys
79

ap = 10 mm, z = 5) in comparison with the conventional machining. The best
machining results are reached at temperatures around 500 C.
The investigations showed that the cutting speed could be signiﬁcantly
increased with the preheating machining. In addition, the results showed that there
is a possible way to implement an HSC-Strategy in machining titanium alloys
(Fig. 8). In future, further investigations must show whether the surface of the
titanium alloys has structural changes resulting from preheating or induces
unwanted stresses. If the work piece surface does not conﬁrm the requirements or
the preheating modiﬁed the tolerances cause of thermal draft, there could be a
solution through a conventional ﬁnishing process.
Conclusively warm machining of titanium alloys at temperatures around
500 C allows lower cutting forces and less tool wear. In addition the process of
the induction assisted machining allows to reduce the process time through the
increase of technological parameters.
Hence production costs of titanium parts, which have a high removal rate, are
going be noticeably lowered.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
heating by induction
time [sec]
temperature [°C]
dT2 = 3mm
dT2 = 6mm
dT2 = 9mm
dT2 = 12mm
Fig. 7 Induced temperature distribution (left) and ideal cutting temperatures (right)
Fig. 8 Warm machining of titanium alloys require a different machining strategy
80
E. Abele and R. Hölscher

References
1. Abele, E., Hölscher, R.: Ein Leichtmetall macht’s den Zerspanern schwer, Werkstatt und
Betrieb, WB 7-8/2009, pp. 46–51. Carl Hanser Verlag, München (2009)
2. Peters, M., Leyend, C.: Titan und Titanlegierungen, pp. 259–274, 351–367. Wiley, Weinheim
(2002)
3. Narutaki, N., Murakoshi, A., Motonishi, S., Takeyama, H.: Study on machining of titanium
alloys. Ann. CIRP 32(1), 591–634 (1983)
4. Rahman, M., Wong, Y.S., Zareena, A.R.: Machinability of titanium alloys. JSME Int. J. Ser. C
46(1), 107–115 (2003)
5. Eugene, R.L.: Tooling structure: interface between cutting edge and machine tool. Keynote
papers WSUD USA. Ann. CIRP 49(2), 591–634 (2000)
6. Ginta, T.L., Nurul Amin, A.K.M., Lajis, M.A., Mustaﬁzul Karim, A.N., Mohd Radzi, H.C.D.:
Improved tool life in end milling Ti-6Al-4V through workpiece preheating. Eur. J. Sci. Res.
27(3), 384–391 (2009)
7. Ginta, L.T., Lajis, M.A., Nurul Amin, A.K.M.: The performance of uncoated tungsten carbide
insert in end milling titanium alloy Ti-6Al-4V through work piece preheating. Am. J. Eng.
Appl. Sci. 2(1), 147–153 (2009)
8. WL 3.7164-100. Werkstofﬂeistungsblatt Band 2. Luft- und Raumfahrt; Werkstoff-Handbuch
der deutschen Luftfahrt. Deutsches Institut für Normung (DIN), Berlin, Germany (1992)
New Technology for High Speed Cutting of Titanium Alloys
81

Cutting Lightweight Materials
with Surface Modiﬁed Tools
Frank Barthelmä and Heiko Frank
Abstract The processing of new and advanced high performance materials
becomes more important due to new cutting materials, adjusted tool geometries
and coating systems. For the development of innovative tools and technologies,
new approaches and procedures were used with consideration of the requirements
and parameters of the cutting material [1]. The optimization of cutting edges and
hard coating systems is one possibility to improve the process productivity and the
product quality of produced parts. Practical examples from research and devel-
opment, and the practical transfer of research results into the industrial practice
will be presented in this publication.
High Performance Materials and Fields of Applications
The demand for weight reduced parts and products in the different application ﬁelds
as aircraft or automotive industry as well as the mechanical engineering leads to the
substitution of the normally used steel or cast materials by aluminum or high per-
formance materials. In the aerospace industry titanium and titanium alloys become
more important. These functional lightweight materials often are difﬁcult to
machine. Based on these challenges, extensive investigations must be carried out.
Selected examples of difﬁcult to machine materials will be given in the next sections.
Of special interest are titanium and titanium alloys and carbon respectively glass
ﬁber reinforced plastics (CFRP/GRP) for the application in the aircraft industry.
Examples are the threading as well as the milling of titanium based alloys. A
further key aspect is the drilling and milling of CFRP/GRP with regard of
F. Barthelmä (&)  H. Frank (&)
Society for Production Engineering and Development (GFE), Schmalkalden, Germany
e-mail: f.barthelmae@gfe-net.de
H. Frank
e-mail: h.frank@gfe-net.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_12,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
83

functional adjusted cutting edge microstructure, development of new coating
systems and adapted surface post-treatment processes.
Selected Cutting Examples: Titanium and CFRP/GRP
Materials
Cutting of Titanium
At ﬁrst, systematic investigations were done to develop cutting strategies to thread
in titanium based alloys. Here the objective was the determination of the optimized
parameters for the tool macro- and micro geometry, the proper wear resistant
coating and the post-treatment process after coating deposition.
First the characteristically wear behavior of hard coating systems against tita-
nium material was determined in tribological tests at room temperature and ele-
vated temperatures. Conventional coatings like TiAlN or TiAlCN shows a strong
adhesion of titanium material, in particular at elevated temperatures. Using dia-
mond like carbon (DLC) coatings with a very low friction coefﬁcient in the tri-
bological tests, the adhesion and the abrasive wear can be reduced.
Cutting edge preparation and pre-treatment also strongly inﬂuences the cutting
process and the friction behavior. The pre- and post-treatment were done with drag
ﬁnishing process, whereby a cutting edge radius of about 5 lm shows the best
results in the cutting tests.
The combination of pre- and post-treatment and the DLC coating leads to a
signiﬁcantly increase of more than 60 % in the life time of DLC coated tapping
tools compared to the standard tools. This increase was veriﬁed with different
process parameters (Fig. 1). Furthermore the low friction coefﬁcient of the used
DLC coating can be used to reduce process temperatures and cutting forces and
moments [2].
A similar procedure was used to improve the tool life in high performance milling
of the titanium alloy TiAl6V4. Cutting edge preparation and post-treatment were
used for deburring and stabilizing the cutting edge, the optimized cutting edge was
about 5 lm. Post treatment has an effect on the friction behavior and the surface
roughness [3].
Milling of TiAl6V4 leads to a higher process temperature, therefore DLC
coating are not suitable due to an insufﬁcient thermal stability. In the investiga-
tions, a combination of oxides and nitrides in one hard oxinitride coating was used
to improve wear behavior and the thermal stability at higher process temperatures.
Milling tests with these new AlCrN-based oxinitride coatings show an increase in
the tool life primarily at a higher cutting speed (Fig. 2).
Main results of the presented solutions of titanium cutting are the choice of the
proper hard coating in combination with the optimized pre- and post-treatment.
For the practical use of the results a sharp cutting edge without burrs leads to the
84
F. Barthelmä and H. Frank

best results in tool life. Furthermore a post treatment of the coating is necessary to
remove droplets and reduce the surface roughness. The hard coating system must
be chosen according to the real cutting conditions.
Fig. 1 Number of formed threads in Tial6V4 of different coated and prepared tapping tools
Fig. 2 Tool life of milling tools with different coatings in milling of TiAl6V4
Cutting Lightweight Materials with Surface Modiﬁed Tools
85

Cutting of Fiber Reinforced Plastics
In the last years ﬁber reinforced plastics becomes more important due to the
advantageous properties. The wide application ﬁeld of these lightweight materials
requires further development of technologies, processes tools and machines to
evaluate and reduce delamination, ﬁber overlap, ﬁbers pull out or similar phe-
nomena. Investigations in cutting tools for CFRP/GRP are focused on the appli-
cation of new and improved cutting materials, tool geometries, and new coating
systems.
In cutting of ﬁber reinforced plastics, the application of an optimized cutting
edge micro geometry and a dedicated coating system is essential for a good cut of
the CFRP/GRP and a long tool life. In investigations, the combination of the new
oxinitride coating with a sharp and smooth cutting tool, leads to increase in tool
life up to 130 % and a sharp cut of the CFRP/GRP (Fig. 3). The cutting edge
preparation and the polishing of the coating were done by the drag ﬁnishing
process.
Potential of New Wear Resistant Coatings for Improved
Sustainability and Energy Efﬁciency
Developing of sustainable innovative tools and technologies for new materials
demands the application of dedicated coating systems for tools, parts and com-
ponents. Depending on the used applications, new hard coating systems can be
used to increase the tool life and the wear resistance as well as to increase tem-
perature stability or to reduce friction behavior. Such new concepts are oxinitride
coatings or DLC coatings as mentioned above. A relevant aspect of these new
coatings is the adjustment of the optimal coating architecture such as nanocom-
posites, multi- or gradient layer as well as the adapted adhesion layer systems [4].
Fig. 3 Cutting of CFRP/GRP: coating system and coating post-treatment
86
F. Barthelmä and H. Frank

The combination of oxides and nitrides in oxinitride coatings can lead to an
increase in coating properties like temperature stability or coating hardness. Fig-
ure 4 shows the higher hardness of different oxinitrides compared to nitride
coatings.
Fig. 4 Hardness of new oxinitride coating systems
Fig. 5 Friction coefﬁcient of different conventional and diamond like carbon coatings
Cutting Lightweight Materials with Surface Modiﬁed Tools
87

Different variations of DLC coatings can be used to obtain very low friction
coefﬁcients of the tool surfaces. Depending on the base coating, the DLC structure
(amorphous, tetrahedral amorphous) and the alloying elements (metal, Si) the
friction coefﬁcient in an oscillating friction test can be varied in the range between
0.43 (nitride base coating) and 0.04 (ta-C tetrahedral amorphous carbon coating)
like shown in Fig. 5.
To adjust these innovative coatings to the different cutting applications of the
new materials, an optimized pre- and post-treatment of the used tools is necessary.
In combination with the cutting process, the complete process chain of cutting tool
production must be considered. Of special interests are the aspects of cutting edge
preparation, coating deposition and surface ﬁnishing (Fig. 6).
Conclusion
In the presented contribution some issues of cutting new functional materials have
been illustrated. The presented results are key aspects of the research and devel-
opment of the GFE—society production engineering and development and of the
industrial and research partners. Conclude the necessary tools and technologies to
machine new functional materials, basic knowledge about tool construction (cut-
ting material, geometry, coating systems) is necessary as well as the exact
adjustment of the process technology on the application.
The development of new coating systems and optimized cutting edge and
surface properties (micro and macro geometry) shows a high innovation potential
for further applications.
References
1. Barthelmä, F.: Spanende Bearbeitung neuer Hochleistungs-Funktionswerkzeuge mit innovati-
ven Werkzeugkonzepten. In: Die Zukunft der Fertigungstechnik, Tagungsband Wiener
Produktionstechnik Kongress 2012, pp. 33–40. NWV Neuer Wissenschaftlicher Verlag, Wien
(2012)
Fig. 6 Necessary process chain including cutting edge preparation, coating and surface ﬁnishing
88
F. Barthelmä and H. Frank

2. Gerschwiler, K., Schifﬂer, M.: Entwicklung von Hochleistungswerkzeugen zur Gewindeher-
stellung in Titanwerkstoffe; Abschlussbericht zum FKM Vorhaben Nr. 265, Heft 316 (2012)
3. Mahr, P., Frank, H., Reich, S., Barthelmä, F.: Oxygen improved hard coatings for high
performance cutting processes. In: Procedia CIRP; Fifth CIRP Conference on High
Performance Cutting 2012, Vol 1, pp. 208–213, (2012)
4. Barthelmä, F., Frank, H., Reich, S.: Hartstoffschichten für Werkzeuge und Bauteile –
Anwendungen und Innovationen. In: Spanende Fertigung; Prozesse, Innovationen, Werkstoffe,
6. Ausgabe , S. 210-221. Vulkan Verlag, Germany (2012)
Cutting Lightweight Materials with Surface Modiﬁed Tools
89

Process Force and Stability Prediction
of End Mills with Unequal Helix Angles
R. Grabowski, B. Denkena and J. Köhler
Abstract The stability of cutting processes in end milling can be increased by an
optimization of the tool geometry. In this paper the inﬂuence of unequal helix
angles is investigated. Unequal helix angles lead to varying tooth pitches. Thus,
the cutting condition of each tooth is different. A mechanistic model is presented to
determine incremental process forces along the tool axis. Based on the proposed
model, stability charts for tools with unequal helix angles are computed and
compared with experimental investigations from literature. The presented results
show that tools with an optimized geometry can increase the stability signiﬁcantly.
Introduction
In metal cutting, the productivity of machining operations is often limited by
chatter vibrations which occur during the cutting process. The regenerative effect,
which is the main cause of chatter, is the major reason for unstable machining
behavior. In order to increase the stability of end mill operations, the inﬂuence of
the geometry of the tool is investigated by making various modiﬁcations, i.e.,
unequal tooth pitch and/or different helix angles [1]. As described by Stone, tools
with unequal helix angles inﬂuence the regenerative effect [2]. Variable helix
angles lead to changing tooth pitches along the tool axis. This affects the uncut
chip thickness modulation, caused by the regenerative effect. With a lower uncut
chip thickness modulation, the occurrence of chatter vibrations can be avoided.
The method by Yusoff and Sims to predict the stability of end mills with unequal
helix angles leads to a large discrepancy between experimental and predicted
results [3]. With the presented method, the discrepancies can be reduced.
R. Grabowski (&)  B. Denkena  J. Köhler
Institute of Production Engineering and Machine Tools (IFW), Leibniz Universität
Hannover (LUH), An der Universität 2, 30823 Garbsen, Germany
e-mail: Grabowski@ifw.uni-hannover.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_13,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
91

Mechanistic Process Force Model
Unequal tooth pitches inﬂuence the process forces. This is considered by the
presented mechanistic model. Based on this model, the process stability for tools
with unequal helix angles can be predicted.
Inﬂuence of Different Helix Angles on Process Forces
Figure 1 shows a section of an end mill with constant and varying tooth pitch. For
a constant tooth pitch, the cross-sections of the undeformed chip A1–A3 are equal
for all teeth. Changing the tooth pitch affects the cross-section of the undeformed
chip, as shown on the right side. Due to the enlargement of the pitch p1, the cross-
section of the undeformed chip of tooth t1 is increased. Simultaneously, the cross-
section of the undeformed chip of tooth t3 is decreased due to the smaller pitch p3.
Thus, the amplitude of the process force induced by tooth t1 is bigger than the one
induced by tooth t3.
For a tool with different helix angles, the pitch between the teeth is changing
along the tool axis. Figure 2 shows an end mill with four teeth and two different
helix angles d1 and d2, whereas d2 [ d1. The force vectors shown in Fig. 2 represent
the maximum value of the tangential cutting force Ft,max,j of the jth cutting teeth at
the Process force and stability prediction of end mills with unequal helix angles 3
considered axial section z. Depending on the axial position, the tooth pitches vary,
which leads to different values for the force vectors (compare A–A and B–B).
Derivation of the Process Forces
The following approach is based on the work of Lee and Altintas and is used to
derive the process forces of an end mill with a constant axial immersion angle
k(z) = 90 [4]. Due to the changing tooth pitches, it is necessary to integrate the
Gra/72754 © IFW
p1
p3
p2
t1
t3
t2
p2
Reference tool:
A1
workpiece
A2
A3
Unequal tooth pitch:
t1
t2
t3
p3
p1
Fig. 1 Inﬂuence of tooth pitch on the cross-section of the undeformed chip
92
R. Grabowski et al.

tangential force DFt(t, zi) and radial force DFr(t, zi) along the z-axis to obtain the
feed force Ff(t, zi) and feed normal force FfN(t, zi). In the following, this inte-
gration is approximated by a sum of Nz-discrete forces:
Ff t; zi
ð
Þ
FfN t; zi
ð
Þ
"
#
¼
X
Nt
j¼1
X
Nz
i¼1
cos /j t; zi
ð
Þ


 sin /j t; zi
ð
Þ


sin /j t; zi
ð
Þ


cos /j t; zi
ð
Þ


"
#
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
¼T /j t;zi
ð
Þ
ð
Þ
DFt;j t; zi
ð
Þ
DFr;j t; zi
ð
Þ
"
#
:
ð1Þ
T(/j(t, zi)) is a rotation matrix consisting of the ﬂute angle /j(t, zi) of tooth j at
the ith discrete position zi. Nt is the total number of teeth. The incremental tan-
gential and radial forces can be obtained by the following equation:
DFt;j t; zi
ð
Þ
DFr;j t; zi
ð
Þ
"
#
¼
Ktc
Krc
"
#
h /j t; zi
ð
Þ


þ Kte
Kre
"
#
 
!
Dzg /j t; zi
ð
Þ


ð2Þ
with the incremental depth of cut
Dz ¼ ap
Nz
with
Nz 2 N
ð3Þ
The step function g(/j(t, zi)) is used to determine if the current increment I of
the cutting edge j is in contact with the workpiece:
g /j t; zi
ð
Þ


¼
1
; /st  /j t; zi
ð
Þ  /eX
0
; else
(
:
ð4Þ
/st is the entry angle and /ex the exit angle. The chip thickness h(/j(t, zi)) is
separated into a stationary part hstat (/j(t, zi)), based on the approximation by
Martelotti [5], and a dynamic part hdyn (hj(zi)) for stability prediction [6]:
h /j t; zi
ð
Þ


¼ fi zi
ð Þ sin /j t; zi
ð
Þ


|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
¼hstat /j t;zi
ð
Þ
ð
Þ
þ 0 1
½
T /j t; zi
ð
Þ

1
Dx t  hj zi
ð Þ


Dy t  hj zi
ð Þ


"
#

Dx tð Þ
Dy tð Þ
"
#
 
!
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
¼hdyn hj zi
ð Þ
ð
Þ
ð5Þ
B
B
A
A
Tool with unequal helix angles:
t1
A-A
n
t2
t3
t4
F
(z )
t,max,1
A
F
(z )
t,max,4
A
F
(z )
t,max,3
A
F
(z )
t,max,2
A
B-B
t1
n
t4
F
(z )
t,max,1
B
F
(z )
t,max,4
B
F
(z )
t,max,3
B
F
(z )
t,max,2
B
z
t2
t3
Gra/72757 © IFW
Fig. 2 Inﬂuence of the tooth pitch on process forces
Process Force and Stability Prediction of End Mills with Unequal Helix Angles
93

Due to the changing tooth pitches pj(zi), the constant feed per tooth fz must be
substituted by an effective feed fj(zi) [7]:
fj zi
ð Þ ¼ fzNt
pj zi
ð Þ
2p
with pj zi
ð Þ ¼
/j1 t; zi
ð
Þ  /j t; zi
ð
Þ;
j 2 1; . . .; z  1
f
g
2p  /1 t; zi
ð
Þ  /z t; zi
ð
Þ; j ¼ z
(
ð6Þ
Hence, the tangential and radial forces are also separated as follows:
DFi;j t; zi
ð
Þ
DFr;j t; zi
ð
Þ
"
#
¼
DFt;stat;j t; zi
ð
Þ
DFr;stat;j t; zi
ð
Þ
"
#
þ
DFt;dyn;j t; zi
ð
Þ
DFr;dyn;j t; zi
ð
Þ
"
#
ð7Þ
with the static part
DFi;stat;j t; zi
ð
Þ
DFr;stat;j t; zi
ð
Þ
"
#
¼
Ktc
Krc
"
#
hstat /j t; zi
ð
Þ


þ
Kte
Kre
"
#
 
!
Dzg /j t; zi
ð
Þ


ð8Þ
and the dynamic part
DFi;dyn;j t; zi
ð
Þ
DFr;dyn;j t; zi
ð
Þ
"
#
¼ Ktc
Krc
"
#
hdyn /j zi
ð Þ


Dzg /j t; zi
ð
Þ


ð9Þ
The time delay
hj zi
ð Þ ¼ pj zi
ð Þ
2pn
ð10Þ
depends on spindle speed n and the tooth pitch, and thus, different helix angles
inﬂuence the dynamic force components. Kleckner presented a method to predict
stability charts for turning operations [8, pp. 122–124]. This method was imple-
mented for milling tools with unequal tooth pitch by Sellmeier et al. [9]. Further
extensions were made in order to take a varying tooth pitch along the z-axis, due to
different helix angles, into account. These extensions are based on the presented
mechanistic model. Figure 3 shows a three-dimensional diagram of the incre-
mental stationary tangential forces DFt,stat, j(t ,zi) for one revolution of a full-
immersion operation. The end mill consists of three teeth with different helix
angles
and
the
following
parameters
were
chosen:
Ktc ¼ 794
N
mm2 ; ap ¼
5 mm and Nz ¼ 100: At the bottom of the tool, the tooth pitch is the same for all
teeth, which leads to DFt,stat,j(t, zi) = 12 N for all teeth. For the highest incre-
mental axial position, the differences are apparent. For the incremental axial depth
of cut Dz at Nz = 100, increasing and decreasing amplitudes can be seen:
Nz = 100 (DFt,stat,1(t, z100) = 9 N, DFt,stat,2(t, z100) = 13 N and DFt,stat,3(t,
z100) = 13.5 N).
94
R. Grabowski et al.

Experimental Validation
Yusoff and Sims investigated the inﬂuence of varying helix angles on the process
stability [3]. Their experimental data is used to evaluate the proposed method. To
predict stability charts, they approximated the cutting process by a one degree of
freedom model. The modal parameters are used for the prediction of stability
charts. Figure 4 shows the experimental and predicted stability charts. On the left
diagram, the investigated tool had a constant tooth pitch and helix angle. The
experimentally determined minimum stability limit for all spindle speeds n can be
found at an axial depth of cut ap, min = 0.3 mm, which agrees well with the
-1
Spindle speed n [min ]
Machine:
Workpiece:
Tool:
Haas VF6
Al 7075-T6
End mill
Diameter:
Radial depth of cut:
Feed per tooth:
D =
a  =
e
f  =
z
16 mm
1.6 mm
0.04 mm
Axial depth of cut a  [mm]
p
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
01800
2400
3000
3600 4000
-1
Spindle speed n [min ]
p = 120°, = 30°
unstable
area
stable
area
1800
2400
3000
3600 4000
p = [84° 221° 55°], = [43° 44° 48°]
Analytical (1 DOF)
Stability limit (constant helix angle)
Stability limit (different helix angle)
elb
ats
n
u
e
nilre
d
r
o
b
elb
ats
Experimental
Gra/72755 © IFW
δ
δ
Fig. 4 Stability charts for an end mill with constant and different helix angles (experimental data
from [3])
Gra/72759 © IFW
0
90
180
270
360
0
1
2
3
4 5
0
5
10
15
Incremental stationary 
tangential force  F
[N]
t,stat,j
z
N
10
7.5
5
2.5
0
15
12 N
9 N
9 N
12 N
13 N
13 N
12 N
13.5 N
t1
t2
t3
ap
z
D = 20 mm
Radial depth of cut:
Feed per tooth
Helix angle:
a  =
e
f  =
z
δ =
 
20 mm
0.3 mm
[10° 30° 50°]
t1t1
t2t2
t3t3
z
Fig. 3 Three-dimensional representation of the incremental stationary tangential forces
Process Force and Stability Prediction of End Mills with Unequal Helix Angles
95

calculated stability chart. The right diagram shows the results for a tool with
unequal tooth pitch and different helix angles. In comparison to the reference tool,
the stability limit is increased. The minimum stability limit is ap, min = 0.7 mm for
the experimental and predicted stability chart. Thus, the minimum stability limit
could be increased by over 200 %. The discrepancies between the analytical
stability lobes and experimental results might result from the fact that only one
mode of the ﬂexible workpiece was used for the mechanistic model of the milling
process.
Conclusions
Tools with optimized geometric shapes, e.g., different helix angles, can improve
the process stability, and thus, the productivity. For a solid validation of the
presented method, further experiments must be carried out. This also includes
modeling a milling system with multiple eigenmodes and an in-depth analysis of
the experimental and predicted chatter frequencies.
Acknowledgments This work has been supported by the Ministry for Science and Culture of
Lower Saxony (MWK) within the excellence cluster ‘Pro3gression’.
References
1. Sims, N., Mann, B., Huyanan, S.: Analytical prediction of chatter stability for variable pitch
and variable helix milling tools. J. Sound Vib. 317(3–5), 664–686 (2008)
2. Stone, B.: The effect on the chatter behavior of machine tools of cutters with different helix
angles on adjacent teeth. In: Advances in Machine Tool Design and Research (Proceedings of
the 11th International MTDR Conference), University of Birmingham, vol. A, pp. 169–180
(1970)
3. Yusoff, A.R., Sims, N.D.: Optimisation of variable helix tool geometry for regenerative chatter
mitigation. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 51/2, 133–141 (2010)
4. Lee, P., Altintas, Y.: Prediction of ball-end milling forces from orthogonal cutting data. Int.
J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 36(9), 1059–1072 (1996)
5. Martelotti, M.E.: An analysis of the milling process. Transactions of the ASME 63, 667–695
(1941)
6. Sellmeier, V., Denkena, B.: Stable islands in the stability chart of milling processes due to
unequal tooth pitch. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 51(2), 152–164 (2011)
7. Engin, S., Altintas, Y.: Generalized modeling of milling mechanics and dynamics: part 1:
helical end mills. Am. Soc. Mech. Eng. Manuf. Eng. Div. (MED) 10, 345–352 (1999)
8. Kleckner, J.: Ein Beitrag zur Analyse dynamischer Interaktionen bei selbsterregungsfShigen
Drehbearbeitungsprozessen. PhD thesis, TU Darmstadt, August 2001
9. Sellmeier, V., Denkena, B., de Leon, L.: Impact of the tooth pitch on the process stability of
milling. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Conference of Process Machine Interactions
(2008)
96
R. Grabowski et al.

High Rate Production of Laminar Wing
Covers With Modular ‘‘Shoe Box’’
Tooling
Markus Kleineberg and Matthias Grote
Introduction
Lightweight design is one of the major drivers for primary airframe structures
because efﬁciency of future aircrafts is the dominating sales argument. CFRP
(Carbon Fiber Reinforced Plastic) based airframe components do have the
potential to challenge sophisticated aluminum structures but the complexity of the
production sequence, the number of production parameters that have to be opti-
mized and last not least the natural tolerances of the highly developed raw
materials are crucial challenges for the development phase. In 1983 Airbus pre-
sented the A310 with an innovative composite VTP (Vertical Tail Plane) and by
doing this Airbus set the course for today’s fully composite based aircrafts like the
Boeing 787 and the Airbus A350XWB (Fig. 1). Drag reduction is another
important enabler for future aircraft efﬁciency. To achieve this drag reduction it is
a primary goal to produce wing structure with extremely smooth and precise
surfaces in order to provide laminar ﬂow capabilities at high Mach numbers.
Design for Production Aspects for Composite Components
Even though various successful composite design and production concepts have
been developed in the last 30 years it is still worth looking at the principle idea of
the very ﬁrst composite VTP of the Airbus A310. In contrast to many differential
M. Kleineberg (&)  M. Grote
Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt e.V. (DLR), Institut für Faserverbundleichtbau
und Adaptronik, Faserverbundtechnologie, Lilienthalplatz 7, 38108 Braunschweig,
Germany
e-mail: markus.kleineberg@dlr.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_14,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
97

composite solutions (joined skin, stringer and rib components) that could be
characterized as ‘‘Black Metal’’ the highly integral A310 VTP design (skin with
integrated stringers and rib posts) was consequently tailored to utilize the CFRP
advantages and minimize joining operations. The resulting structural component
was highly competitive from a weight efﬁciency point of view but the manufac-
turing approach was optimized for a very low production rate of only 1–5 aircrafts
per month with a very high amount of manual interaction during manufacturing.
Today’s single aisle aircrafts like the Boeing 737 or the Airbus A320 are produced
with a rate of 40 and more aircrafts per month which means that the manufacturing
strategy has to ensure a production window of less than 8 h for one aircraft.
In order to limit the overall production risk for composite structures there still is
a tendency to produce large but rather simple ‘‘Black Metal’’ structures with
reduced structural integration and accept the resulting increased assembly effort
and weight penalty. What might have been underestimated in this respect is that
the geometrical precision of composite structures is heavily inﬂuenced by various
speciﬁc effects that have to be dedicated to the anisotropic nature of CFRP.
Especially laminate thickness variation due to variable ﬁber content and ‘‘Spring-
In’’ deformations at curved sections lead to increased scatter in geometrical
accuracy and subsequently to expensive and time consuming rework and shim-
ming operations during assembly.
Fig. 1 Boeing 787 with composite airframe
98
M. Kleineberg and M. Grote

The ‘‘Shoe Box’’ Wing Skin Design
Taking the above mentioned experiences into account the selected approach for a
future high rate production composite wing cover with laminar ﬂow capabilities in
the ongoing BMWI (Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Technologie) founded
LUFO (Luftfahrtforschungsprogramm) program was to go back to the very roots
of composite applications and realize a highly integral design with selected
modiﬁcations to ensure an efﬁcient production and assembly process. The major
prerequisites were maximized geometrical accuracy in all joining areas and
minimized cycle times. The high degree of structural integration in the backing
structure provides sufﬁcient global rigidity to minimize process induced defor-
mations on the aerodynamic outer surface which in turn ensures laminar ﬂow
capabilities. In order to simplify manufacturing all undercuts have been eliminated
e.g. by parallelizing stringer blades and by choosing a T-Stringer design (Fig. 2).
The ‘‘Shoe Box’’ Manufacturing Approach
A major prerequisite for the ‘‘Shoe Box’’ manufacturing approach which has been
developed in close cooperation with Airbus und Premium Aerotec was that
existing process certiﬁcation rules can be applied. Even though the ﬁnal wing
cover structure is fully integrated and based on compatible prepreg semiﬁnished
products it has been decided to choose different preparation concepts for the ﬂat
skin laminate and the bi-directional backing structure.
In case of the ﬂat skin laminate a robot based multi head ATL (Automatic Tape
Laying) concept has been chosen because this approach allows to increase the lay-
up rate without exceeding a critical lay-up speed and limits the investment costs
because highly ﬂexible standard robots and rail systems can be used (Fig. 3).
To realize the bi-directional backing structure it has been decided to wrap box
like tooling modules with prepreg fabric (Fig. 4) and combine the tooling modules
in a way that stringers and rib caps are formed. To provide the required
Fig. 2 Fully integral ‘‘Shoe
Box’’ wing skin approach
High Rate Production of Laminar Wing Covers
99

consolidation pressure for the prepreg a material mix of aluminum and Invar is
used where the thermal expansion of the aluminum compresses the prepreg stack.
To provide the required global geometrical precision each tooling module is
directly linked to an Invar base plate. In order to provide maximum precision in
the joining area the ﬁxed bearing of the tooling module is located at the surface
that forms the joining area of the rib cap. Since it is a known problem that heating
and cooling of massive tooling modules is critical for the cycle time hollow tooling
modules where applied. To further increase heat-up and cool down rates the air-
ﬂow of the autoclave was lead through the tooling modules (Fig. 5).
Skin lay-up and backing structure lay-up together with their dedicated tools are
then combined and the resulting tooling can be described as a closed autoclave
mould without the typical vacuum bag of classic open moulds (Fig. 6).
A further innovation that shall be demonstrated with the modular ‘‘Shoe Box’’
tooling is a quality assurance and logistic feature, integrated in each tooling
Fig. 3 DLR GroFi
production center in Stade
Fig. 4 Wrapping of tooling
modules
100
M. Kleineberg and M. Grote

module to monitor the process chain. With respect to the industrial production
scenario this is an approach to establish a robust and self-adjusting wing pro-
duction environment where each tooling module knows its current status from a
wear point of view, its position in the facility and all other quality relevant process
data like e.g. the dedicated lay-up sequences and ﬂat patterns. Special high tem-
perature and resin resistant RFID chips have been identiﬁed to enable this feature.
Fig. 5 Hollow aluminum
tooling module
Fig. 6 Final tooling setup
High Rate Production of Laminar Wing Covers
101

For future applications it is also planned to integrate specialized sensors and
actuators in the tooling modules in order to be able to interactively adjust the
processing conditions (e.g. airﬂow through the core) to what is exactly required in
the on-going process. Process compatible Piezoceramic elements and the dedi-
cated analyses hardware have been developed to monitor all relevant process
parameters like e.g. degree of cure and gaps between adjacent tooling components.
A constant data exchange shall ensure, that all relevant production parameters
are within their limits and that all logistic action can automatically be adjusted to
the current process status. Furthermore each ‘‘Shoe Box’’ tooling module shall
have the ability to optimize its local thermal boundary conditions by actively
adjusting the airﬂow through the hollow core. Up to a certain level variations in the
cure behaviour of the resin system and deviating ﬁber contents in the semi-ﬁnished
product shall also be detected and compensated by adapting the process
parameters.
Fig. 7 ‘‘Shoe Box’’
validation structure and gom
Atos measurement system
102
M. Kleineberg and M. Grote

Concept Validation
To validate the ‘‘Shoe Box’’ concept a ﬁrst manufacturing trial under represen-
tative boundary conditions has been carried out. To prove the technology readiness
status a typical swept angle, tapering and a skin curvature of an outer wing section
has been chosen for the large scale manufacturing trial.
For the ﬁrst manufacturing trial highest priority was given to the approval of the
basic hollow core ‘‘Shoe Box’’ strategy which means that thermal behavior of
selected representative tooling modules was analyzed in detail (Fig. 8).
The temperature plot shows that the tooling module temperature is only slightly
lagging behind the autoclave temperature even though the airﬂow through the
module may still be further improved.
Compression of the prepreg in the skin and the backing structure laminate was
sufﬁcient to ensure the required ﬁber content and also precision of joining areas is
within the addressed target. To ensure the geometrical accuracy for NLF (Natural
Laminar Flow) wings, each part was 3D measured and analyzed using the gom
Atos system (Figs. 7 and 9).
Fig. 8 Tooling module and autoclave temperature
High Rate Production of Laminar Wing Covers
103

Conclusion
The basic strategy to produce large, high precision wing cover components with
integrated stiffeners in a production window of 8 h has been validated with respect
to autoclave cycle time and geometrical component quality. Other aspects like the
addressed multi head ATL lay-up procedure, the online quality assurance and
process control features and the RFID based logistic concept are still under
development and will be validated in one of the following manufacturing trials.
The described manufacturing approach shows that it is possible to further
extend productivity of composite production scenarios even under rather con-
ventional and certiﬁed manufacturing boundary condition.
Fig. 9 Geometrical accuracy of joining areas
104
M. Kleineberg and M. Grote

Simulation of Residual Stress Related
Part Distortion
Berend Denkena and Steven Dreier
Abstract During the machining of structural components, material inherent
stresses are removed and additional residual stresses are induced into the boundary
layer of the workpiece. Both effects can result in distortions of the workpiece
which leads to shape deviations and time consuming repair processes or even
scrap. The research objective of this paper is the simulation of distortion caused by
residual stress for machined aircraft components to avoid an insufﬁcient quality.
The method, presented in this paper, is able to predict the part distortion caused by
process induced and initial residual stresses. A custom FEM pre-processing is used
which takes the actual machining strategy into account to predict the shape
deviations of the machined workpiece. An experimental veriﬁcation is given by
comparing measured part distortions caused by a manufacturing process and
predicted by the developed simulation. The Validation is done on a complex
structural part. The simulation results show good agreement between simulated
and measured part distortions.
Keywords Distortion simulation  Structural components  Process induced
residual stresses  Finite element method
Introduction
The aircraft manufacturer Airbus forecasts that the worldwide ﬂeet of civil pas-
senger and cargo aircraft will increase from 17,171 in 2011 to 35,489 in 2031 [1].
The demand for new aircrafts raises the challenge to increase productivity and
quality in all production stage. Modern aircrafts are designed in order to maximize
B. Denkena  S. Dreier (&)
Institute of Production Engineering and Machine Tools (IFW), Leibniz Universität
Hannover, An der Universität 2, 30823 Garbsen, Germany
e-mail: dreier@ifw.uni-hannover.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_15,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
105

energy efﬁciency. This denotes that low fuel consumption is in focus of the
development of new aircrafts such as the Boeing 787 or the Airbus A320neo [2]. A
decisive factor for the fuel consumption is the weight of the aircraft. In order to
maintain low weight, the supporting structure components are designed in a way
that a maximum rigidity is achieved with minimal residual material thickness. This
results in parts with a typical thickness close to 2 mm. Such components can be up
to 14 m long and additionally show complex geometries. In addition, the chosen
materials are difﬁcult to machine and result in several problems for the machining
process. Especially, part distortions occurring after machining cause time con-
suming repair processes or even scrap. During the machining process of structural
components, up to 90 % of the material is removed from the blank. Thereby,
material inherent residual stresses are removed and additional residual stresses are
induced into the boundary layer of the machined workpiece by the machining
process. Both effects cause distortions of the workpiece and lead to shape devia-
tions which cannot be repaired without damaging the aircraft component (Fig. 1).
To ensure a more efﬁcient production process, these phenomena have to be pre-
dicted and avoided in advance.
State of the Art: Process Induced Residual Stresses
and Distortions
Residual stresses can be attributed to mechanical and thermal loads, which occur
during machining process in an independent manner [3]. Various research projects
have so far dealt with the problems of process induced residual stresses for cutting
processes. Tönshoff analysed the inﬂuence of the cutting process on the generation
of residual stresses in the boundary layer of the machined workpiece. He found
out, that the process induced residual stresses depend on the chosen cutting con-
ditions [4]. Norihiko et al. examined the inﬂuence of cutting speed on residual
stresses for the machining of Ti6Al4V using diamond tools [5]. Klocke examined
the rough machining of Ti-6242 alloy, Ti-6246 and Udimet720Li, looking at the
vibration strength, the hardness proﬁle and the residual stresses of these titanium
Fig. 1 Causes for part distortions due residual stress (RS)
106
B. Denkena and S. Dreier

and nickel-based alloys. Thereby, it could be shown that occurring residual
stresses are material dependent [6]. Research shows that the process induced
residual stresses strongly depend on the process conditions. Factors of inﬂuence
are the chosen tool geometry and the material as well as the cutting and cooling
conditions [7, 8].
To be able to calculate the inﬂuence of residual stresses on the part distortion,
the global distribution of stresses in the workpiece has to be taken into account
during the machining process. By measuring the initial stress distribution and
including it in a ﬁnite element model the distortion of the machined workpiece can
be modelled [9]. Ratchev and Afazov predicted residual stress for turning of
Ti6Al4V and mapped them into an axisymmetric FE model to predict distortions
of turned parts [10]. Brinksmeier et al. developed a new method to predict the
shape deviation of machined workpieces with complex geometry with a ﬁnite
element simulations [11]. Marusich et al. reported on a ﬁnite element method
software for the prediction of part distortion. The distortion of the machined
workpiece is calculated by a simpliﬁed shell model of the workpiece [12]. Zhongyi
analyzed the effect of residual stresses on machining distortion on an aircraft
structure part. He used an FE model with static element deactivation technique to
simulate the cutting process. Furthermore he used thermal–mechanical coupling
analysis to predict initial residual stresses [13]. Bi et al. predicted the distortion of
aerospace monolithic components. They considered initial residual stress, cutting
loads, ﬁxture layout, cutting sequence, and tool path to build a FE model for the
prediction of part distortions caused by a milling process [14].
In order to avoid part distortion in machining of complex aircraft components,
the accuracy of the machining simulation must be increased. To validate the
inﬂuence of different machining strategies on the phenomenon of part distortion,
the simulation has to consider the tool path. Additionally, the inﬂuence of initial
residual stresses, e.g. from the previous manufacturing step has to be included into
the simulation [15].
Simulation of Process Induced Part Distortion
Within the process planning phase the manufacturing process is designed to
achieve an optimal workpiece quality. If quality failures occur, they will be
identiﬁed ﬁrst during the quality inspection. In order to avoid quality inaccuracies
in advance, a process simulation for the prediction of process induced distortions
was developed. Based in a simulation of the machining process, induced distor-
tions can be calculated and avoided by the adaption of the machining strategy or
the process conditions. The developed ﬁnite element simulation is based on
information from the process planning stage. Based on the workpiece and process
data from the CAD/CAM system the workpiece is prepared for the simulation. The
tool path is used to identify machined areas and to implement the loads from the
process induced residual stresses. Finally, the FE-model can be solved by a
Simulation of Residual Stress Related Part Distortion
107

commercial ﬁnite element analysis (FEA) system, delivering detailed information
about the distortion of the workpiece geometry. The subsequent Fig. 2 shows the
information structure of the developed distortion simulation:
The core of the simulation structure is a control layer which transfers the
simulation objects to the several simulation steps.
FE Meshing
In the ﬁrst step, the workpiece geometry of the ﬁnal component is transferred to
the meshing process, using standardized CAD formats. The meshing of the
workpiece and the pre-processing is controlled by a script. For the meshing of
complex geometries with variable element size a volumetric tetrahedron element is
chosen. This element ensures an automated generation of accurate meshes for
complex geometries in most cases. Regarding memory consumption the initial
mesh is coarse with a typical element size of 2 mm. In order to implement process
induced loads into the machined surfaces of the workpiece the resolution of the FE
mesh in the boundary layer has to be increased in the following step.
Pre-processing
In order to simulate the effect of machining induced distortions due to residual
stresses, the tool movement and the engagement conditions of the cutting process
have to be determined in the second step. This is done by a process simulation,
which uses the tool path and the process parameters provided by a Cutter-Loca-
tion-Source-File (CLSF) from the CAM software. The process simulation deter-
mines the machined boundary elements of the workpiece mesh for the reﬁnement
of the boundary layer. The developed algorithm for the reﬁnement of the FE mesh
on the surface layer is based on a sweep volume of the tool path (Fig. 3).
Fig. 2 Information structure of the developed distortion simulation
108
B. Denkena and S. Dreier

The reﬁnement of the surface mesh works by the orthogonal displacement of node
positions and the squeezing and generation of elements, as it can be seen in Fig. 3.
The displacement is inverse to the surface normal N.
After the mesh reﬁnement in the boundary layer, process induced residual
stresses are obtained from an empirical data base and included into the FE model.
Therefore, the directions of the tool axis and feed are determined for the trans-
formation of residual stresses to the coordinate system of the boundary mesh of the
machined workpiece. Figure 4 shows a typical residual stress distribution in the
boundary layer caused by end milling operations of aluminum.
The representation of residual stress proﬁles in the ﬁnite element model is done
by the discretization of the boundary layer into several layers with constant
residual stress. To investigate the optimal discretization of boundary layers, an
analogy was used by taking a simpliﬁed beam model with different numbers of
discretization layers into account. It was determined that a representation of
residual stress proﬁles with only one layer is not sufﬁcient. The distortion results
differ from the results with 10 regular layers by 14.4 %. Further analysis showed,
that representing the curve with two layers of irregular depth divided at the curve
minima, as it is shown in Fig. 4 right, reduces the error to 0.01 % compared to 10
regular layers. This representation minimizes the number of elements for the
Fig. 3 Algorithm for FE-mesh reﬁnement
Fig. 4 Residual stress distribution represented by boundary layers
Simulation of Residual Stress Related Part Distortion
109

reﬁned mesh. The implementation of stress proﬁles is done by the control script,
which links the local residual stress tensors to the reﬁned mesh elements. These
tensors consist of the initial and process induced residual stresses. The resulting
process induced residual stress proﬁle is determined by X-ray diffractometry. The
stress value for the two boundary layers is calculated by integrating the affected
part of the curve (Fig. 4). The stress tensors are transformed into the workpiece
coordinate system according to the feed direction and the tool axis which were
computed in the process simulation.
Solving
In this step of the simulation, the completed FE model is transferred to the FE
solver. The simulation structure enables the communication to arbitrary FEA
software. For common FEA software initial residual stresses can be deﬁned via
stress tensors for several elements. By providing the stresses for all elements and
solving the resulting ﬁnite element model by a linear static analysis, it is possible
to calculate the distortion of the workpiece resulting from the implemented loads.
By the superposition of initial residual stresses from previous processing steps and
process induced stresses from the current machining process, combined distortion
effects can be determined. The simulation results can be examined by common
post processors by rendering the simulation data for the deﬂection of the machined
workpiece.
Validation of the Simulation of Process Induced Part
Distortion
In order to verify the developed simulation approach against real part distortions,
an exemplary analogy part was designed based on an aircraft structural component
of the Airbus A240 XWB (Fig. 5). The selected workpiece material was aluminum
alloy AN EW 7075 in low-stress condition T651. The analogy part was manu-
factured from rolled plates with dimensions 70 9 330 9 480 mm. The initial
residual stress state of the plate material was determined by a reference sample
with the X-ray diffraction method of a reference sample. During manufacturing the
part is clamped so no machining related distortion could occur. After the milling
process the part was unclamped and relaxed to its distorted state.
For the production of the analogy part two tools were used. One is a double-
edged end mill with a diameter of D = 20 mm without corner radius (tool 1). This
tool was used for the planar bottom side of the part. From preliminary experiments,
it is known that this tool induces is high residual stress into the machined surface.
The top side of the component with the pocket structures was milled with a four-
110
B. Denkena and S. Dreier

edged D = 20 mm end mill with corner radius of re = 4 mm (tool 2). This tool
induces low residual stress. For both tools the residual stress depth proﬁles were
determined from reference samples with the X-ray diffraction method. The
residual stress proﬁle for tool 1 was discretised with two layers (d1 = 51 lm;
r1k = -174 N/mm2;
r1\ = -150 N/mm2/d2 = 250 lm;
r2k = -93 N/mm2;
r2\ = -57 N/mm2). Due to the low residual stress tool 2 was discretised with one
layer (d1 = 100 lm; r1k = -21 N/mm2; r1\ = -20 N/mm2).
Based on the workpiece geometry, the tool path and the cutting conditions the
distortion of the workpiece was determined by the developed simulation approach.
The generated volumetric ﬁnite element model consisted of 174.871 nodes and
750.512 elements. An elastic material model with a Young’s Modulus of 72 GPa
and a Poisson’s Ratio of 0.34 was used. To simulate a free distortion no boundary
conditions were applied.
The machined and the simulated workpiece was measured on a line in Y
direction (Fig. 5, proﬁle). The resulting proﬁle can be found in Fig. 6. In the
referenced CAD model this proﬁle is a straight edge.
The process induced residual stress led to a signiﬁcant part distortion of the
machined part with a maximum of 0.510 mm on the measured proﬁle. The
comparison of machined and simulated distortions can be seen in Fig. 6. On the
path of the measured proﬁle the predicted distortion matches the measured
distortion very accurate. The maximum distortion, computed by the FEM simu-
lation, is 0.469 mm leaving an error of 0.051 mm (9.81 %). Despite small
Fig. 5 Workpiece based on structural component
Fig. 6 Comparison of machined and simulated distortion results
Simulation of Residual Stress Related Part Distortion
111

deviation the developed simulation approach can be considered as proven for the
given test case.
Summary and Outlook
The inﬂuence of initial and process induced residual stress distribution cause
signiﬁcant part distortions after the machining of large structural components. The
simulation approach, presented in this paper, was developed to predict process
induced part distortions according to the part geometry, the cutting conditions and
the machining strategy. This provides possibilities to avoid or minimize part
distortions in advance by the adaption of machining strategies or process
conditions.
The presented simulation uses the ﬁnite element method with a volumetric
tetrahedral mesh to calculate the resulting distortion of the workpiece. To represent
the thin residual stress layers a remeshing algorithm was developed to reﬁne the
mesh structure underneath the machined surfaces. By this detailed simulation
approach it is possible to analyse the impact of local machining strategies on the
global distortion of large components. As demonstrated in Chap. 4, the developed
simulation structure achieves sufﬁciently precise predictions for aluminum com-
ponents using process induced residual stress measured by the X-ray diffraction
method.
Further research objectives will be the development of a scalable simulation
structure for the distortion simulation of large aircraft integral components with
lengths higher than 1 m. By analyzing the impact of different strategies and pro-
cess parameters on the overall part distortion a general guideline for an optimal
process layout in terms of minimized distortions will be developed. Furthermore,
the application of the developed simulation approach into industrial process
planning will reduce cost-intensive repair processes.
Acknowledgments This work has been funded by the Ministry of Economics, Labour and
Transport of Lower Saxony within the framework of research and technology projects for the
aviation industry of Niedersachsen through the project QualiTi: Method for the modeling of
effects on the workpiece quality during the milling of titanium.
References
1. Airbus GMF 2012: Airbus Global Market Forecast 2012–2031, Toulouse, Dec 2012
2. Deutsche Lufthansa AG: Nachhaltigkeitsbericht Balance, Frankfurt am Main, Mai 2012
3. Brinksmeier, E., Cammett, J.T., König, W., Leskovar, P., Peters, J., Tönshoff, H.K.: Residual
stress—measurement and causes in machining processes. Ann. CIRP 31(2), 491–510 (1982)
4. Tönshoff, H.K.: Eigenspannungen und plastische Verformungen im Werkstück durch
spanende Bearbeitung. Dr.-Ing. Diss., Techn. Hochschule Hannover, Garbsen (1966)
112
B. Denkena and S. Dreier

5. Norihiko, N., Akio, M., Suquru, M.: Study on machining of titanium alloys. CIRP Ann. 32,
65–69 (1983)
6. Klocke, F.: Bearbeiten von Titan- und Nickelbasislegierungen. Einﬂuss der spanenden
Bearbeitung auf die Bauteileigenschaften. VDI-Z Integrierte Produktion 149(3), 70–72
(2007)
7. Tönshoff, H.K., Denkena, B.: Spanen – Grundlagen. Springer, Berlin (2011)
8. de Leon, L.: Residual stress and part distortion in milled aerospace aluminium. Dr.-Ing. Diss.,
Leibniz University Hannover, Garbsen (2010)
9. Hornbach, D., Prevey, P.: Development of machining procedures to minimize distortion
during manufacture. In: Proceedings of the 17th Heat Treating Society Conference and
Exposition, pp. 13–18, ASM, Metals Park, Ohio, 1998
10. Ratchev, S.M., Afazov, S.M., Becker, A.A.: Mathematical modelling and integration of
micro-scale residual stresses into axisymmetric FE models of Ti6Al4V alloy in turning. CIRP
J. Manuf. Sci. Technol. 4, 80–89 (2011)
11. Brinksmeier, E., Sölter, J.: Prediction of shape deviations in machining. CIRP Ann. 58,
507–510 (2009)
12. Marusich, T.D., Usui, S., Terauds, K., Becker, B.V.: Finite element modelling of part
distortion. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference in Distortion Engineering,
pp. 133–142, Bremen, 17–19 Sept 2008
13. Zhongyi, M., Yunqiao, W.: Analyzing distortion of aircraft structural part in NC machining
based on FEM simulation. In: International Conference on Mechanical and Electrical
Technology ICMET (2010)
14. Bi, Y., et al.: Machining distortion prediction of aerospace monolithic components.
J. Zhejiang Univ. Sci. A 10, 661–668 (2009)
15. Denkena, B. (Hrsg.): Neue Fertigungstechnologien in der Luft- und Raumfahrt. Begleitband
zum Seminar, Hannover, 24. und 25. November 2009, Berichte aus dem IFW, Band 06/2009,
PZH Produktionstechnisches Zentrum GmbH
Simulation of Residual Stress Related Part Distortion
113

Increasing Accuracy of Industrial Robots
in Machining of Carbon Fiber Reinforced
Plastics
Martin Freising, Simon Kothe, Markus Rott, Hendrik Susemihl
and Wolfgang Hintze
Abstract Compared to conventional milling machines industrial robots (IR) using
serial kinematics bear great potential concerning cost-efﬁcient and productive
machining. However, the main disadvantage is their poor accuracy, caused by low
structural stiffness and gear backlash. A novel robust approach for accuracy
optimization of IR in edge milling is presented. This is highly relevant for
manufacturing structural components made of carbon ﬁber reinforced plastics
(CFRP). As a result of the long lever between the tool center point and the ﬁrst
rotational axis, backlash of the ﬁrst gear mainly contributes to the overall
machining accuracy of the IR. In order to eliminate this, the ﬁrst axis is preloaded
by a torque, caused by the gravitational force of the attached robot structure.
Therefore, the IR is mounted on an inclined base. The performance of this setup is
experimentally evaluated. Improvements of up to 50 % in terms of static stiffness,
deviation of circular movement and contour accuracy in edge milling have been
achieved.
Introduction
The increasing use of carbon ﬁber reinforced plastics (CFRP) in modern aircrafts
[1] requires productive and cost-efﬁcient manufacturing technologies for large
shell structures. In order to fulﬁll the high precision demands, such parts need to
be machined subsequent to the autoclave process itself. Today this is accom-
plished mainly by heavy large-volume machining centers. However, these are
expensive and suffer from low productivity. Therefore, industrial robots (IR) can
be a promising alternative. Although IR are well-established in aerospace industry
for handling automated drilling and riveting units [2], their application for milling
M. Freising (&)  S. Kothe  M. Rott  H. Susemihl  W. Hintze
Hamburg, Germany
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_16,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
115

processes is still a challenge [3], due to the required path accuracy with simul-
taneously occurring process forces [4].
As a precondition for a ﬂexible use of IR in an automated CAD/CAM process
chain, their absolute position accuracy must be signiﬁcantly improved. Suitable
methods reaching the necessary level of calibration have been developed [5].
Several authors studied the elastic deformation of IR related to the cutting force in
milling. Online control systems and ofﬂine models for compensating such
deﬂections have been developed recently [4, 6–8]. Control concepts on the output
side of the gears as well as modiﬁcations of the robot structure are possible
solutions to eliminate loss in accuracy due to backlash [9]. Additional force control
systems supporting these techniques are available on the market [10]. These
approaches are intricate and therefore contradict the concept of a low cost
machining solution using IR.
Concept of Inclined Mounted Robot
The gear of the ﬁrst rotational axis of serial IR kinematics mainly contributes to
the overall robot inaccuracy in terms of elasticity and backlash [4, 9]. Due to the
angular measurement at the drive side, this inaccuracy cannot be compensated
sufﬁciently. If the torque transmitted by a gear changes its algebraic sign the
backlash is most distinctive. Even with the use of modern high-precision gears this
backlash cannot be avoided completely. A schematic head curve of a gear [11]
revealing the relation between torque and torsion angle, is given in Fig. 1. In the
zone of high torques the curve is favorable with regard to backlash and stiffness.
Fig. 1 Schematic gear head curve with operating zones for horizontal and inclined mounting
116
M. Freising et al.

In order to use one of the favorable zones an artiﬁcial torque Madd has to be
added to the torque resulting from the acting process loads MProcess. The additional
torque always has to exceed the process torque. Because of the requirements of
robot based machining concerning precision, the range of loads applied is usually
not used to its full capacity, hence the application of the robot is not limited by this
concept. The second and third rotational axis of serial robot kinematics are subject
to the gravitational force of the attached IR structure, which causes additional
torques acting on the respective gears [12]. Since the ﬁrst axis of horizontally
mounted IR is parallel to the direction of the gravitational force no additional
torque is applied to the ﬁrst gear. To achieve this, the robot is set up on an inclined
base.
Experimental Setup
The accuracy tests were conducted using an ABB IRB6660 robot. For all exper-
iments a horizontal and an inclined (15 about y-axis) setup were compared. The
exemplary analyzed working point in this publication is shown in Fig. 2. Addi-
tionally analyzed working points showed similar results. The working plane for all
experiments was the x–y-plane.
To examine the performance of both conﬁgurations for milling, circles with
different radiuses in both rotational directions were machined (Table 1). For this
purpose, sheets of CFRP fabric with a thickness of 5 mm and polycrystalline
diamond (PCD) end mill cutters with a diameter of 8 mm and two teeth at full
engagement were used. The circularity deviation was measured using a Mitutoyo
BHN 305 coordinate measuring machine.
To distinguish the occurring effects static stiffness and dynamic circularity tests
were conducted. For analyzing the stiffness the displacement of the tool center
point (TCP) in x- and y-direction was measured with a Mitutoyo 2046F tactile
gauge. Forces, rising and falling in steps of 10 N, between 300 and -300 N were
applied to the TCP in the respective direction, by means of a manually adjusted
mechanism using a PCE-FG500 force measuring device. With the circularity test
the circular path accuracy of TCP movements without external forces was deter-
mined. A Renishaw QC-20 W Ballbar caliper was used to acquire the actual radius
Fig. 2 Analyzed working
point
Increasing Accuracy of Industrial Robots
117

continuously. Again different radiuses in both rotational directions with two feed
rates were analyzed. The exact process parameters for all experiments are shown
in Table 1.
Results and Discussion
The results of the stiffness tests are shown for acting forces in y-direction com-
paring a horizontal and an inclined robot mounting (Fig. 3a). As expected, the
horizontal assembly exhibits a distinctive backlash in the range of low forces, i.e.
between 30 and -30 N, which disappears at the inclined setting. Furthermore the
gradient of the curve is slightly reduced for the inclined mounting. In order to
compare the stiffness, the curves were evaluated at minimum and maximum load,
showing a stiffness of the inclined setting which is improved by 22 % in negative
y-direction and even 28 % in positive y-direction respectively. The described
effects derive from shifting the operating point of the ﬁrst gear to more favorable
zones of the gear head curve using the inclination of the robot, as explained above.
The measured displacements in x-direction are smaller than in y-direction for
both mountings (Fig. 3b), due to the fact that at this position a lower torque MZ is
Fig. 3 Displacement curves with force, displacement and stiffness S in a y- and, b x-direction
Table 1 Experimental process parameters (with applied forces at stiffness test and average
measured process forces at milling test)
External force
Circular movement
x (N)
y (N)
Radius r (mm)
Feeding speed vf
(mm/min)
Spindle speed
(1/min)
Stiffness test
-300 to 300
–
–
–
Circularity test
–
–
50; 100; 250
1000; 4000
–
Milling test
150
150
6; 12.5; 25; 50; 100
1000
20000
118
M. Freising et al.

applied on the ﬁrst axis. The comparison between horizontal and inclined setting
shows no signiﬁcant change.
When analyzing the radius development in the circularity test it can be
observed, that the circularity for the horizontal mounting shows distinctive out-
ward radius steps in y-direction, as well as a subsequent overshooting (Fig. 4).
This effect occurs exactly at the point where the ﬁrst axis changes the direction of
its movement. Due to the backlash in this particular gear this leads to a delay in the
reversal of direction, while axes 2 and 3 continue their movement at maximum
speed, which in total causes the observed radial steps. The reduction (elimination)
of these radius steps can be ascribed to the shifting of the gear working point of
axis 1 and thereby the reduced backlash in this gear. The reduction of overshooting
seems to show a similar behavior, especially at high feed rates.
The machined circles show a noticeable reduction in their circular shape
deviation (difference between maximum and minimum radius) for all diameters
and both circular feed directions (clockwise CW and counterclockwise CCW),
when comparing the horizontal and the inclined mounting (see Fig. 5a). The
measured process forces oscillate between approximately 150 and -150 N in x-
and y-direction, depending on the current feed direction, which leads to constant
forces in feed normal direction (65 N for horizontal and 68 N for inclined
mounting). For the investigated parameter combinations, improvements in circular
shape deviation of upto 0.25 mm could be reached. The average improvement was
about 35 % with a maximum of over 50 %.
For all measurements a well-deﬁned oval shape in 45 or 135 direction can be
observed (example in Fig. 5b). This derives from the fact that the direction of the
feed normal force changes continuously, related to x- and y-coordinates along the
circular track. In combination with the above described different IR stiffness
characteristics in x- and y-direction this results in the oval shapes. Based on the
increase of stiffness with inclined IR mounting, this effect is reduced respectively.
Fig. 4 Circularity
with
radius
steps
and
overshooting
(radius
r = 50 mm,
feed
rate
vf = 4000 mm/min, counterclockwise rotation)
Increasing Accuracy of Industrial Robots
119

Conclusions
The effectiveness of a new approach for signiﬁcantly improving the workpiece
quality in milling processes by using an inclined mounting of the IR is proven by
the conducted experiments. The following improvements could be achieved:
• displacement reduction of up to 0.15 mm (20 %) at static forces of 300 N in
y-direction
• reduction of circular shape deviation (radius steps in y-direction and over-
shooting) by up to 0.21 mm in dynamic circularity test
• reduction of circular shape deviation of up to 0.25 mm (50 %) in CFRP milling.
It was demonstrated that these improvements can be ascribed to a backlash
reduction in the gear of axis one. Current research is aiming for better methods to
calibrate the inclined mounted IR, as well as detailed measurements of the
behavior of each component in different load situations. Furthermore the effects of
different inclination angles, different robots, other workspace areas and the pos-
sible durability are under investigation.
References
1. Reinforced Plastics J: Growing demand for eco-efﬁcient aircraft. Reinf. Plast. J 56(6), 36–37
(2012)
2. DeVlieg, R., Sitton, K., Feikert, E., Inman, J.: ONCE robotic drilling system. In: Proceedings
of the 2002 Aerospace Automated Fastening Conference and Exhibition (Chester, England,
ISBN: 0768010829), pp. 9–16 (2002)
Fig. 5 a circular shape deviation of machined circles, b oval shaping for r = 25 mm, horizontal
mounting, CW
120
M. Freising et al.

3. Denkena, B., Immel, J., Schönherr, M.: Industrieroboter für spanende Bearbeitung:
Leistungssteigerung hochdynamisch angeregter serieller Strukturen durch Adaptronik. wt
Werkstattstechnik online 101(9), 617–622 (2011)
4. Weigold, M.: Kompensation der Werkzeugabdrängung bei der spanenden bearbeitung mit
Industrierobotern. Shaker, Aachen (2008)
5. Wollnack, J.: 3D/6D-Visionsysteme in der Robotik. wt Werkstattstechnik online 97(9),
718–725 (2007)
6. Abele, E., Bauer, J.: Kamerabasierte Bahnkorrektur für das Fräsen mit In-dustrierobotern. wt
Werkstattstechnik online 100(9), 705–709 (2010)
7. Puzik, A.: Genauigkeitssteigerung bei der spanenden Bearbeitung mit In-dustrierobotern
durch Fehlerkompensation mit 3D-Piezo-Ausgleichsaktorik. Jost Jetter, Heimsheim (2011)
8. Zäh, M., Rösch, O.: Steigerung der Arbeitsgenauigkeit bei der Fräsbearbeitung mit
Industrierobotern. Zeitschrift für wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetrieb 106(9), 658–662 (2011)
9. Abele, E.: Spanende Bearbeitung mit Industrierobotern: Forschungsprojekt ADVOCUT:
Entwicklungen und Industrietransfer. Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt (2007)
10. ABB: Flex ﬁnishing: force control for machining applications (2011)
11. Rosenbauer,
T.:
Getriebe
für
Industrieroboter:
Beurteilungskriterien,
Kenndaten,
Einsatzhinweise. Shaker, Aachen (1994)
12. Gerstmann,
U.:
Robotergenauigkeit:
Der
Getriebeeinﬂuss
auf
die
Arbeits-
und
Positioniergenauigkeit. VDI-Verlag, Düsseldorf (1991)
Increasing Accuracy of Industrial Robots
121

Production of Customized Hybrid
Fiber-Reinforced Thermoplastic
Composite Components Using
Laser-Assisted Tape Placement
C. Brecher, M. Emonts, J. Stimpﬂand A. Kermer-Meyer
Abstract The aim of Fraunhofer IPT is to fully exploit the potential of
ﬁber-reinforced thermoplastic composites based on prepreg technology and to
achieve at the same time a broad industrial application. Investigations at Fraun-
hofer IPT have proven that the use of laser-assisted tape placement enables high
lay-up rates of thermoplastic prepregs (tapes) with in situ consolidation regarding
the local stiffening of plastics and composites. After the optimization of this
process for the manufacture of carbon ﬁber-reinforced components Fraunhofer IPT
developed and successfully demonstrated strategies to manufacture advanced
composite components via laser-assisted tape placement that combine different
polymers and ﬁber-reinforcements. By the possibility to apply fully automated the
most beneﬁcial material in the place, orientation and quantity that’s needed, a
cross-industrial applicability of this process is ensured.
Introduction
Nowadays, most advanced aircraft structures are made of carbon ﬁber-reinforced
plastics (cfrp) based on prepreg (pre-impregnated ﬁber) materials and are con-
solidated as well as cured using autoclaves. Industrial state of the art is the
automated processing of unidirectional reinforced prepregs via tape laying of
single broad tapes (e.g. prepreg width of 300 mm) for the manufacture of 2D or
contoured structures, like wings as well as vertical and horizontal tail planes. For
applications where more complex lay-up paths are required, multiple narrow tapes
(e.g. 12 or 6 mm in width) are used. Based on the better drapeability and the
possibility of individual tape steering this method is suitable for the manufacture
C. Brecher  M. Emonts  J. Stimpﬂ A. Kermer-Meyer (&)
Fraunhofer Institute for Production Technology IPT, Aachen, Germany
e-mail: alexander.kermer-meyer@ipt.fraunhofer.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_17,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
123

of sophisticated curved structures. Such multi-tape (tow, ﬁber) placement systems
are amongst others used to produce entire fuselages or fuselage segments for
commercial and military aircrafts [1–5].
Disadvantages of the current tape laying and ﬁber placement approaches are the
high production costs based on the time and energy intensive curing process after
the lamination.
The disadvantages of the state of the art prepreg lamination approach are solved
by the automated laser-assisted processing of thermoplastic instead of thermo-
setting prepregs (tapes). Because of the possibility of an in situ consolidation
during the part production without post consolidation and curing steps, all the
resources needed for e.g. autoclaving are saved. The shape complexity is addi-
tionally enhanced by exploiting ﬂexibility in terms of fusibility (e.g. placement of
local-reinforcements, joining with other components), re-shape ability (e.g. ther-
moforming) as well as further processability (e.g. over-molding). In addition
thermoplastic composites enable higher temperature loads (e.g. PEEK, PEKK,
PES), excellent chemical properties (e.g. PPS) and in a signiﬁcant increased
damping behavior [6, 7]. The huge variety of thermoplastic matrix systems (in
addition e.g. PA, PP, HDPE, PEI) and ﬁber-reinforcements (e.g. carbon ﬁbers [cf],
glass ﬁbers [gf]) enable also other industrial branches (e.g. automotive, oil and gas,
wind energy, chemical, civil and mechanical engineering) to realize an optimal
solution in respect to the required performance to cost ratio and therefore a cost-
effective utilization of thermoplastic composites.
Over the last decade laser systems have been proven to be the most energy-
efﬁcient, precise and cost-effective heating method for tape placement in a lot of
benchmarks [8–11].
Laser-Assisted Tape Placement
During laser-assisted tape placement the thermoplastic prepregs (tapes) are
unreeled from a tape spool and fed by a feed unit into the nip point, see Fig. 1. The
surface of the fed tape as well as the one of the already laid down material get
heated up over melting temperature shortly before contact with each other using
laser radiation. Applying a compaction force using an optionally heated or cooled
consolidation roller, the melt up tape gets completely consolidated in situ with the
part to be produced without the need for subsequent curing steps. The main dif-
ference between laser-assisted tape placement and winding is the use of a rotating
mandrel in the case of tape winding, see Fig. 1.
Challenges in the development of a laser-assisted tape placement unit are the
development of suited laser optics, temperature control systems and consolidation
systems in conjunction with the individual application e.g. the to be processed
materials, part geometries, required throughput and ﬂexibility. On the process side
the main parameters are the applied temperature, process speed and pressure.
124
C. Brecher et al.

Evaluations with 3-point-bending tests according to DIN 14125 showed that
laminates produced via laser-assisted tape placement have equal mechanical
properties as compression molded panels. In experiments with prepregs using a PA
12 matrix system reinforced by AS4 carbon ﬁbers with a ﬁber volume content of
55 %, it could be proven that 96 % of the bending strength and 104 % of the
bending stiffness of the compression molded benchmark laminate can be achieved
[12].
Tailored Multi-Material Blanks Made by Laser-Assisted
Tape Placement
The exploitation and evaluation of the synergies of laser-assisted tape placement
and thermoforming is one goal of the European large scale project » Fibre-
Chain « [12, 13]. As highlighted in Fig. 3, composite sheets and parts can be
reinforced by laser-assisted tape placement efﬁciently before and after a forming
process to achieve tailored hybrid and multi-material components [14].
It has been demonstrated that in laser-assisted tape placement, composite
laminates combined with different types of ﬁbers (e.g. carbon ﬁber, glass ﬁber),
reinforcements (e.g. fabric, unidirectional [UD]), matrix systems (e.g. PA 6, PA
66, PA 12) and materials with strong varying colors or optical absorption prop-
erties can be processed using a diode laser system.
The quality of the welding zone between the base composite laminates and the
placed reinforcement tape have been evaluated by a mandrel peel test as shown in
Fig. 3. The reinforcements have been produced with a lay-up rate of 300 mm per
second.
Fig. 1 Principle of laser-assisted tape laying and winding
Production of Customized Thermoplastic Composite Components
125

Fig. 2 Tailored parts and tailored blanks via laser-assisted tape placement using a diode laser
system
Fig. 3 Overview of evaluation trials
126
C. Brecher et al.

Figure 4 summarizes the achieved results of the reinforcement trials using a
diode laser-assisted tape placement unit.
The mark ‘‘++’’ indicates a very good weld strength, that exceeded the intra-ply
properties of the tape at the tested load case. The mark ‘‘+’’ indicates good
adhesion between tape and blank. The inter-ply properties are similar to the intra-
ply properties of the used tape at the tested load case. The mark ‘‘-’’ indicates a low
joint strength. Furthermore, the critical energy needed to peel the tape is listed.
As expected, the combination of two identical materials did result in the highest
weld strength due to similarity of the chemical, thermal and optical properties of
the joining partners. When joining different matrix materials it is important to
ensure that the chosen process temperature ﬁts to both joining partners. The more
thermal stable material needs to be fused without degrading the joining partner that
is less thermal stable.
Using an optical heating method the absorption properties of the used material
in respect to the used wavelength of the used laser system is important. Different
ﬁber-reinforcements can result in different optical absorption properties. The
process can be adapted to joining two materials with different optical properties by
adjusting the laser power distribution via the setting of the laser angle.
The reason that the glass ﬁber-reinforced PA66 ðPA6=GF) blank could not be
reinforced in the given test plan is because of its low absorption degree in the near
infrared spectrum, in conjunction with high welding temperature, high lay-up rate
and limited available laser power. Welding a carbon ﬁber-reinforced PA66 tape
ðPA66=CF) onto a ðPA66=CF) blank at the same process conditions is done with
ease, since both joining partners absorb 85–90 % of the used laser radiation close
to surface.
A good joint would be achieved by reducing the lay-up rate or by using more
laser power. In addition the utilization of carbon black particles within laminate
polymer for increased absorption is an option, depending on the application.
Fig. 4 Summarized results of reinforcement trials using a diode laser system
Production of Customized Thermoplastic Composite Components
127

Within the German project » GreenGlassFiber « also the application of a
CO2-laser system for tape winding is investigated, as due to its longer wavelength,
the absorption of the laser radiation by the glass ﬁber-reinforced plastics (GFRP) is
high even without carbon black particles/ﬁbers in the material. Figure 5 shows
glass ﬁber reinforced parts with a PP matrix system made by CO2-laser-assisted
tape winding Fig. 6 shows a hybrid part consisting of a gfrp liner surrounded by a
cfrp cover with a PPS matrix produced via CO2-laser-assisted tape winding.
Conclusion
Laser-assisted tape placement with in situ consolidation is a highly productive,
automated and ﬂexible method for the lamination of continuous, unidirectional
ﬁber-reinforced thermoplastic prepregs. Since tape placement is a primary shaping
process, the production of structural parts, pipes, tanks, tailored blanks and local
reinforcement of fabric blanks, composite and plastic parts is feasible. It has been
shown that for processing carbon black materials diode laser systems are most
Fig. 5 Parts manufactured by CO2-laser-assisted tape winding (left) as well as cross sectional
preparations of raw PP-GF tape (middle) and the PP-GF pipe
Fig. 6 Hybrid CFRP/GFRP pipe sample produced using CO2-laser-assisted tape winding
128
C. Brecher et al.

efﬁcient and that for milky white materials a CO2-laser system is beneﬁcial.
Hybrid components could be produced with both laser sources with outstanding
quality. Additionally it could be demonstrated that multi-material laminates
comprising different polymer and ﬁber-reinforcements in one laminate can be
produced efﬁciently via laser-assisted tape placement with in situ consolidation.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the European Community for funding the
EU large scale project ‘‘FibreChain—Integrated Process Chain for Automated and Flexible
Production of Fibre-Reinforced Plastic Products’’ at the European Community’s Seventh
Framework Programme under grant agreement no. 263385. Furthermore, the ‘‘GreenGlassFiber’’
research and development project is funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF) within the funding action ‘‘SME—Innovative: Resources and Energy Efﬁ-
ciency’’. The authors are responsible for the contents of this publication. Moreover we want to
thank our industrial and academic partners.
References
1. N.N.: Airframers exploit composites in battle for supremacy. Reinf. Plast. 49(3), 26–32
(2005) ISSN 0034-2617
2. N.N.: Mandrel forms composite fuselage. Reinf. Plast. 49(3), 24, (2005) ISSN 0034-2617
3. N.N.: One-piece fuselage by ﬁbre placement. Reinf. Plast. 50(1), 17, (2006) ISSN 0034-2617
4. Edelmann, K., Räckers, B.: Verbundwerkstoffe im A380, Internationaler Kongress,
Kunststoffe im Automobilbau, 29.-30.03.2006 Mannheim (2006)
5. Spaeth, A.: Lighter on all sides, in: Aerotec, Ausgabe 5, Dezember 2007, pp. 34–38
6. Gao, S.: Cooling rate inﬂuences in carbon/PEEK composites, Part III: impact damage
performance. Compos. A Appl. Sci. Manuf. 32, 763–774 (2001)
7. Bai, J.-M., Leach, D., Cease, S., Pratte, J.: High performance thermoplastic polymers and
composites. In: SAMPE, Corina, CA, USA, S. 1391–1405 (2005)
8. Esche, R.V.D.: Herstellung langfaserverstärkter Thermoplastbauteile unter Zuhilfenahme
von Hochleistungslasern als Wärmequelle. Diss. RWTH Aachen (2001)
9. Brecher, C., Kermer-Meyer, A., Steyer, M., Dubratz, M., Emonts, M.: Laser-assisted
thermoplastic tape laying. JEC Compos. Mag. 47, 56, S. 71–73 (2010), ISSN 1639-965X
10. Schledjewski, R.: Thermoplastic tape placement by means of diode laser heating. In: SAMPE
- Baltimore, MD - 18–21 May 2009
11. Brecher, C., Kermer-Meyer, A., Werner, D., Stimpﬂ, J., Janssen, H., Emonts, M.: Customized
solutions for laser-assisted tape placement, JEC Compos. Mag. 76, 70–73 (2012)
12. Steyer, M.: Laserunterstütztes Tapelegeverfahren zur Fertigung endlosfaserverstärkter
Thermoplastlaminate, Diss. RWTH Aachen (2012)
13. Brecher, C., Kermer-Meyer, A., Dubratz, M., Emonts, M.: Thermoplastische Organobleche
für die Großserie, ATZ, Special Karosserie und Bleche, Oktober, S. 28–32 (2010)
14. Brecher, C., Stimpﬂ, J., Kermer-Meyer, A., Dubratz, M., Emonts, M.: Load-optimised
tailored thermoplastic FRP blanks for mass production, JEC Compos. Mag. 64, 95–97 (2011)
15. Brecher, C., Emonts, M., Kermer-Meyer, A., Janssen, H., Werner, D.: Wirtschaftliche
Prozesskette
zur
funktionsintegrierten
Herstellung
von
belastungsoptimierten
thermoplastischen Faserverbund-Bauteilen, Lightweight Design 03/2013, pp. 38–43
Production of Customized Thermoplastic Composite Components
129

Efﬁcient Production of CFRP Lightweight
Structures on the Basis of Manufacturing
Considerations at an Early Design Stage
B. Denkena, P. Horst, C. Schmidt, M. Behr and J. Krieglsteiner
Introduction
Success in development of lightweight structures is determined by the three dis-
ciplines of design, materials, and manufacturing. Focusing on design leads to
expensive lightweight structures while overrating production makes it hard to
reach structural performance goals. The global optimum of structural performance
and cost can only be reached if all three disciplines are equally taken into account.
It can be observed that this optimum gets increasingly important for major stra-
tegic decisions in lightweight construction industry, e.g. the material concept in
future aircraft structures: carbon ﬁber-reinforced plastics (CFRP) versus aluminum
[2, 6].
While development of metallic structures is industrially performed and broadly
researched, ﬁber-reinforced plastics do present new challenges. Design work with
homogeneous and isotropic metallic structures is mainly done on a level of part
shape and sizing. For composites, the inner heterogeneous and orthotropic struc-
ture has to be engineered as well. Therefore, structure development usually has to
deal with a higher number of design parameters, raising the need for simulation
tools and optimization algorithms. In addition to more sophisticated design pro-
cedures, production planning for composite structures gets more challenging as
well. For metallic structures, manufacturing usually starts with semi-ﬁnished parts
having material properties mostly set as in the ﬁnal product. The material
B. Denkena  C. Schmidt  M. Behr (&)
IFW—Institute of Production Engineering and Machine Tools, Leibniz Universität
Hannover, Garbsen, Germany
e-mail: behr@ifw.uni-hannover.de
B. Denkena
e-mail: denkena@ifw.uni-hannover.de
P. Horst  J. Krieglsteiner
IFL—Institute of Aircraft Design and Lightweight Structures, Technische Universität
Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_18,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
131

properties of composites are mainly determined by the manufacturing processes.
Properties such as ﬁber volume fraction or ﬁber orientation and imperfections like
ﬁber undulations or inclusions are highly dependent on manufacturing. Therefore
process stability has a large impact on structural characteristics. Design mostly
accounts for the resulting uncertainties with high knock-down factors for assumed
material properties, i.e. decreased lightweight potential [5, 8].
Motivation
Whereas development objectives are commonly measured as a combination of
structural performance and cost (e.g. weight savings/production cost), the applied
methodologies do not fully serve this goal. State of the art practice is mostly
sequential planning, starting with design and then considering processes. Depen-
dencies between both, arising from lay-up, geometry, subdivision of structures,
tolerances, and process limits, are not particularly addressed. Interaction is limited
to iterations in late design phases when conﬂicts in production planning get
obvious. Since design changes in late phases are disproportionally more expensive
than in early phases, the current practice can be considered as inefﬁcient [6].
It is obvious to see that the above mentioned arguments claim a careful
attention of design, materials and manufacturing in equal importance right from
the start of development. Concerning this, different approaches for multidisci-
plinary development are available and state of the art. The V-Model for instance
deﬁnes the cooperation of different disciplines, but focusses only on the product
development phase [10]. Simultaneous Engineering suggests increased interaction
and parallelization of formerly sequential processes; however, it does not specify
detailed procedures [3]. There are more detailed procedures available, but they still
do not satisfy the needs of developing composite structures [4, 7].
HP CFK Approach
The new procedure is based on the classical approach described in VDI 2221 [10]
(see Fig. 1 and in detail Fig. 2). In a ﬁrst step, the requirements are deﬁned for the
design and the production scenario. After that, the development of a conceptual
design follows conventionally.
For the following demonstration, it is assumed that an omega-type section (see
Fig. 3) turns out to be most promising in the conceptual design considerations. The
phase of embodiment design is split up. First of all, a simpliﬁed model is created
(see Fig. 3b). This model is dimensioned according to the requirements deﬁned
without considering manufacturing aspects. Best available material quality, as it
can be found in prepreg tapes without any further imperfections, is used in this
stage. The resulting preliminary, so far very rough, design can optionally be split
132
B. Denkena et al.

Fig. 3 HP CFK panel and stiffener modeling a panel, b preliminary design model, c possible
manufacturing-speciﬁc design model
Fig. 2 HP CFK approach in detail
Fig. 1 Development processes: Conventional and HP CFK approach
Efﬁcient Production of CFRP Lightweight Structures
133

into sets of easier-to-manufacture substructures. The basic criteria for this are
deﬁned in a system of substructuring rules using features of the preliminary design
such as furcations, hollow sections, laminate properties, or the occurrence of
potential common parts. Some are symbolized in Fig. 2 and their application to the
sample structure is shown in Fig. 4.
To manufacture each set, in the rough planning phase, different sub-process
chains are found and assigned. Each solution contains the four elementary pro-
cedural steps to manufacture a ﬁber-reinforced plastic component in common
order of impregnation, forming, consolidation, and curing. In case of sets of
multiple substructures, an additional joining process follows. Based on this
information, the entire number of sub-process chains and possible joining tech-
nologies are combined in a full-factorial pattern.
Processes models were built in advance and production costs of the structures
are rated. The weight impact coming with the respective changes in material
properties compared to the optimistic preliminary design and the additional mass
of joints are estimated. Based on this information the most promising solutions are
extracted as visualized in Fig. 5a.
In the next step of embodiment design, models are built based on the process
chains found in the last step. The modeling is done in more detail than in the
preliminary step (see Fig. 3c). Each model is optimized with respect to the deﬁned
requirements and the manufacturing restrictions coming with the respective pro-
cesses. Finally, the created solutions can be compared by structural performance
and cost and the best one is worked out in detail phases. These speciﬁc phases are
part of ongoing research and will be presented in further contributions. In this
regard, a ﬁrst approach for structural optimization considering interactions of part
geometry and draping effects is presented in [1].
Fig. 4 Substructuring of the preliminary design model
134
B. Denkena et al.

Conclusion
The presented novel procedure implements a structured way to integrate manu-
facturing considerations at an early design stage in product development. It gen-
erates design solutions, each optimized for a potential process chain, guaranteeing
stability and efﬁciency in manufacturing. The overall solutions of design and
production are rated by an evaluation scheme giving the best compromise between
cost and structural performance according to given preferences. The material
aspect is dealt with in process selection where material types, e.g. fabric, non-
crimped-ﬁbers, etc., to be used in speciﬁc design are determined.
Bringing design and process chain into agreement, costly, late iterations
between production planning and design, well-known from classical development
procedures, can be reduced.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank the federal state of Lower Saxony and the
European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) for ﬁnancial and organizational support of this
project.
References
1. Deniz, O., Horst, P. et al.: Simulation based design optimization of a CFRP fuselage panel
according to draping process of carbon ﬁber textiles using evolutionary algorithms and
response surface methods. In: Conference Article, SAMPE, 6–9 May 2013, Long Beach, CA,
pp. 1110–1124
2. Eikötter, M.: Synchronisation der Produkt-, Technologie- und Fabrikplanung durch
integratives roadmapping. Dissertation, Universität Hannover (2011)
Fig. 5 Estimated cost and weight impact of different solutions and two sample process chains
Efﬁcient Production of CFRP Lightweight Structures
135

3. Eversheim, W., Schuh, G.: Integrierte Produkt-und Prozessgestaltung. Springer, Berlin
(2005)
4. Fallböhmer,
M.:
Generieren
alternativer
Technologieketten
in
frühen
Phasen
der
produktentwicklung. Dissertation, RWTH Aachen (2000)
5. Klammer, J.: Strukturmechanik und Vibroakustik von CFK-Flugzeugrümpfen. Dissertation,
TU München (2009)
6. Mazumdar, S.: Composites manufacturing: materials, product, and process engineering. CRC
Press, Boca Raton (2001)
7. Müller, S.: Methodik für die entwicklungs und planungsbegleitende Generierung und
Bewertung von Produktionsalternative, Dissertation, TU München (2007)
8. Reim, A.: Optimierung von Flugzeugstrukturen mit unsicheren Parametern, Dissertation, TU
Braunschweig (2011)
9. Systematic approach to the development and design of technical systems and products, VDI
(1993)
10. Design methodology for mechatronic systems, VDI (2004)
136
B. Denkena et al.

Inﬂuence of the Fiber Cutting Angle
on Work Piece Temperature in Drilling
of Unidirectional CFRP
Wolfgang Hintze, Christoph Schütte and Stefan Steinbach
Abstract The increasing use of carbon ﬁber reinforced plastics (CFRP) for
structural components in modern aircrafts also increases the need for their reliable
assembly. This is usually accomplished by rivets, which require a large number of
precision holes. Drilling is difﬁcult due to contrasting ﬁber and resin properties and
for non-crimp fabrics in particular due to their unidirectional plies. Thermal
damage of CFRP components in the vicinity of bore holes should be avoided.
Therefore, temperature distributions at the cutting surface of the workpiece as well
as in the vicinity of the bore hole have been investigated experimentally while
drilling of unidirectional CFRP and conﬁrmed by numerical methods. Temperature
changes with ﬁber cutting angle and heat mainly dissipates in ﬁber direction.
Keywords CFRP  Drilling  Cutting temperature  Fiber cutting angle  Cutting
torque
Introduction
Because of the high speciﬁc strength and stiffness, carbon ﬁber reinforced plastics
(CFRP) are important for structural components in aeronautic industry. Assembly
of these components is often done by riveting, which requires a large number of
holes with high quality in terms of precision and surface integrity. Due to the
contrasting thermo-mechanical properties of ﬁbers and resin as well as the
orthotropic laminates of CFRP, forces, temperature and tool wear must be con-
trolled in order to avoid decomposition of matrix material or disruption of the
surface. These ﬂaws can be very critical in case of non-crimp fabric (NCF)
W. Hintze (&)  C. Schütte  S. Steinbach
Institute of Production Management and Technology, Hamburg University of Technology,
Denickestraße 17, 21071 Hamburg, Germany
e-mail: w.hintze@tuhh.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_19,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
137

consisting of unidirectional (UD-) laminate layers. Depending on the ﬁber cutting
angle h between ﬁber and cutting velocity directions and on the type of drill
different modes of damage were found by experiments [1]. Dynamically changing
forces and torques have been investigated for UD-laminates during drill rotation
[2–4]. The according temperatures are not known up to now.
Highly dynamic measurement of cutting tool temperatures has been done by
Ueda et al. [5] using a two-color pyrometer. König et al. [6] used infrared ther-
mography to detect temperatures during CFRP drilling processes. Tool tempera-
ture investigations in drilling of ﬁber reinforced plastics containing woven layers
by using thermocouples with an inverted drilling kinematic, i.e. a ﬁxed tool and a
rotating specimen were carried out by Weinert et al. [7].
Methods
The temperature distribution at the cutting surface of the component was measured
while drilling with a sampling rate of fs = 100 kHz by using a two-color ﬁber
pyrometer Type FIRE-3. The temperatures were detected as the pyrometer optical
ﬁber was put through the coolant channel of the drill. In addition the cutting torque
was recorded by a rotating Kistler Type 9123C multi-component dynamometer
with a cutoff frequency of fs = 1 kHz, which provides a zero reference mark for
synchronization to the cutting temperature. Disc-like UD-CFRP work pieces with
an outer diameter of ds = 16 mm were rotating while the drill was kept at rest on
the machining table. The setup is shown in Fig. 1.
Optical fiber
Tool
UD-CFRP
disc
Tool diameter
Track of
optical fiber
0°
= 90°
45°
135°
vc
n
f
Chuck
n
Fig. 1 Experimental setup for measuring cutting surface temperatures
138
W. Hintze et al.

The temperature distribution all around the bore hole was measured using a
rotating drill and ﬁxed work pieces with a mantle thermocouple (Type K, diameter
d = 0.75 mm) in blind holes (depth t = 2 mm) at different ﬁber orientations and
distances a to the hole surface. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 2.
Two different TiAlN-coated carbide drills with a tool diameter of d = 8.5 mm,
side rake angles of cf = 0 or 25 and a point angle of r = 140 were tested.
Cutting edge radii were measured by a confocal microscope Alicona Inﬁnite
Focus.
Unidirectional CFRP consisting of CYCOM 977-2 epoxy resin [8] and
Tenax IMS60 ﬁbers [9] with a ﬁber volume ratio of 60 % and a thickness of
h = 4 mm was used. Three spindle speeds of n = 2,000, 6,000 and 10,000 rpm
and feeds of f = 0.03 and 0.05 mm were investigated. The lowest spindle speed
leads to an angular resolution of the torque Dh = 12. The cutting temperature
signal was smoothed with the software National Instruments DIAdem 2011 by
calculating the central moving average along time intervals Dt = 0.5 ms.
Work piece temperature distributions all around the bore hole have been
numerically calculated using the FEM software ABAQUS. The heat generated at the
major cutting edge is assumed to distribute in the plane of a single UD laminate
ply. Heat exchange between adjacent layers was neglected. A single ply laminate
plate of 30 9 30 mm2 was modeled by its orthotropic properties taken from
[8–11] and automatically meshed by 4-node linear heat transfer tetrahedron ele-
ments (Type DC3D4) with 36 elements at the hole periphery. The measured
cutting surface temperatures during a drill rotation have been represented by an
empirical equation and used as boundary condition. Heat dissipation was assumed
by surface radiation to the ambient at the peripheral front faces of the plate.
Results of Temperature Measurements and Discussion
First of all, temperature at the cutting surface 0cs and torque Mc has been recorded.
It is known that the torque varies along the ﬁber cutting angle h [2, 3]. Hence, this is
also expected for the cutting temperature. The results conﬁrm a big inﬂuence of h,
Tool
Blind hole
a
Thermocouple
Heat-conductive
paste
Q·
Blind hole
UD-CFRP
plate
Hole wall
Thermocouple
a1
a2
a3
= 0°
= 135°
= 90°
= 45°
θ
θ
θ
θ
Fig. 2 Experimental setup for measuring work piece temperature distribution
Inﬂuence of the Fiber Cutting Angle on Work Piece Temperature
139

Fig. 3. The lowest temperature 0cs_min is found at a cutting angle of about h = 45,
the highest 0cs_max at an angle of about h = 135. Temperature and cutting torque
distributions are in phase as illustrated in Fig. 4a.
Different cutting parameters have been tested to investigate the inﬂuence of tool
geometry, spindle speed and feed on the cutting surface temperature 0cs and torque
Mc. As shown in Table 1, spindle speed n and feed f have only little inﬂuence on
cutting surface temperatures 0cs_min and 0cs_max.
However, the cutting surface temperature 0cs is strongly affected by tool
geometry and wear. A worn tool with a cutting edge radius of rb = 35 lm and a
rake angle of cf = 0 produces much higher temperatures than a sharp one with
rb = 12 lm and cf = 25. The radial distance of the coolant channels to the center
of the drills was nearly similar, so the inﬂuence of different cutting speeds vc at the
analyzed cutting surface can be neglected.
200
250
300
350
150
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Smoothed cutting
surface temp.
Zero reference mark (
)
90° Fiber cutting angle
135°
45°
180°/0°
135°
90°
45°
180°/0°
90°
Fiber cutting angle
45°
Temperature in °C
Cutting torque in Nm
Cutting
torque
Fig. 3 Cutting surface temperature and torque for drilling UD-CFRP (n = 2,000 rpm,
f = 0.05 mm, d = 8.5 mm, r = 140, cf = 0, rb = 35 lm)
Cutting torque
Smoothed cutting
surface temperature
vc
180°/0°
45°
135°
= 90°
45°
135°
90°
vc
vc
0°
vc
wp/°C
= 90°
90°
180/0°
0°
135°
135°
45°
45°
0
40
80
120
160
a1 = 2 mm
a2 = 3 mm
a3 = 4 mm
θ
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4 a Cutting surface temperatures and torque, b work piece temperature at various distance
a for different ﬁber cutting angles h (n = 2,000 rpm, f = 0.05 mm, d = 8.5 mm, r = 140,
cf = 0, rb = 35 lm)
140
W. Hintze et al.

Temperature measurements in the vicinity of the bore hole indicate, that the
maximum work piece temperature 0wp_max occurs at about h = 90, the minimum
0wp_min at about h = 0/180, Fig. 4b. With respect to the heat generation at the
cutting surface (Fig. 4a), the heat ﬂow is twisted towards the direction of ﬁbers at
distances a C 2 mm. Because of the thermal conductivities of ﬁbers and resin UD-
CFRP exhibits the maximum thermal conductivity in ﬁber direction and the lowest
perpendicular to them [10, 11]. Due to that, the temperature decrease along the
distance a at h = 0/180, i.e. perpendicular to the ﬁbers is steeper.
Results of Temperature Calculations by FEM
and Discussion
The temperature distribution in the vicinity of the bore hole caused by a heat ﬂow
from the cutting edge was calculated assuming that the measured cutting surface
temperatures are also present at the corner of the drill and therefore, directly at the
bore hole surface: 0cs = 0wp (a = 0). This assumption is reasonable because of
the inferior inﬂuence of the spindle speed n on 0cs, which accordingly applies for
the radial distance of the corner to the center of the drill, see Table 1.
The measured distribution of cutting surface temperatures (see Fig. 3) was
approximated as the absolute value of a sine-function with its minimum at h = 45
and its maximum at h = 135. These temperatures were set as boundary condition
of the hole surface temperatures. The simulation time tsim was deﬁned in such a
way, that the mean values of measured and simulated temperatures 0wp (a, h)
coincide. The calculated time was tsim = 5.93 s indicating, that the hole surface
was exposed to the temperature not only during cutting but for a longer time due to
subsequent friction at the drill periphery. According to a former investigation [3]
such friction easily generates a dynamic torque of similar phase and amplitude as
the major cutting edges heating up the bore hole surface.
The result is shown in Fig. 5. With increasing distance to the bore hole the
isothermals of the temperature ﬁeld twist towards the ﬁber orientation which
corresponds to h = 90. Thus, the FEM analysis conﬁrms the experimental results.
Table 1 Inﬂuence of tool, spindle speed and feed on cutting surface temperature and torque
(d = 8.5 mm, r = 140)
Tool
Spindle speed n
Feed f
0cs_max
0cs_min
Mc_max
Mc_min
rpm
mm
C
C
Nm
Nm
cf = 0, rb = 35 lm
6,000
0.03
370
200
0.6
0.15
cf = 0, rb = 35 lm
6,000
0.05
350
170
0.86
0.29
cf = 25, rb = 12 lm
6,000
0.05
270
100
0.43
0.13
cf = 0, rb = 35 lm
10,000
0.03
350
180
0.6
0.15
Inﬂuence of the Fiber Cutting Angle on Work Piece Temperature
141

Summary and Outlook
In drilling of UD-CFRP, work piece temperature at the bore hole surface peri-
odically changes with ﬁber cutting angle. Temperatures mainly depend on tool
geometry and wear, reaching values up to 370 C at the major cutting edge.
Generated heat mostly dissipates in direction of ﬁber orientation in the laminate
ply.
The results are useful for industrial drilling of non-crimp CFRP fabrics, because
potential thermal damage of bore holes and dynamics of thermo-mechanical tool
load can be assessed.
References
1. Hintze, W., Dose, F., Hartmann, D., Schütte, C.: Assessment of surface integrity of machined
CFRP—methods and results. In: Proceedings of the 5rd International Conference ‘‘Supply on
the Wings’’ (AIRTEC 2010), Frankfurt (Main) (2010)
2. DiPaolo, G., Kapoor, S.G., DeVor, R.E.: An experimental investigation of the crack growth
phenomenon for drilling of ﬁber-reinforced composite materials. J. Eng. Ind. ASME Trans.
118, 104–110 (1996)
3. Hintze, W., Clausen, R., Hartmann, D. et al.: Precision of machined CFRP: The challenge of
dimensional accuracy. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Aircraft System
Technologies (AST 2007). Shaker Verlag, Aachen, pp. 361–374 (2007)
4. Silberschmidt, et al.: Drilling in carbon/epoxy composites: Experimental investigations and
ﬁnite element implementation. Compos. A Appl. Sci. Manuf. 47, 41–51 (2012). doi:10.1016/
j.compositesa.2012.11.020
5. Ueda, T., et al.: Temperature on ﬂank face of cutting tool in high speed milling. Ann. CIRP
50(1), 37–40 (2001)
6. König,
W.,
Graß,
P.,
Willerscheid,
H.:
Mechanische
Bearbeitung
faserverstärkter
Kunststoffe. Industrieanzeiger 98, 25–27 (1985)
wp/°C
+1.987e+01
+4.738e+01
+7.489e+01
+1.024e+02
+1.299e+02
+1.574e+02
+1.849e+02
+2.124e+02
+2.400e+02
+2.675e+02
+2.950e+02
+3.225e+02
+3.500e+02
X
Y
Z
Fig. 5 FE-Analysis (UD-CFRP Layer, n = 2,000 rpm, f = 0.05 mm, d = 8.5 mm, r = 140,
cf = 0, rb = 35 lm, tsim = 5.93 s)
142
W. Hintze et al.

7. Weinert, K., Kempmann, C.: Cutting temperatures and their effects on the machining
behaviour in drilling reinforced plastic composites. Adv. Eng. Mater. 6, 684–689 (2004).
doi:10.1002/adem.200400025
8. Cytec
(2012)
CYCOM
977-2
Epoxy
resin
system—technical
data
sheet.
http://
www.cemselectorguide.com/pdf/CYCOM_977-2_031912.pdf. Accessed 28 Jun 2013
9. Toho Tenax (2008) Produktprogramm und Eigenschaften für Tenax IMS Filamentgarn.
http://www.tohotenax-eu.com/ﬁleadmin/tohotenax/downloads/Produkte/Technische%20Da-
tenblaetter/IMS60_dt.pdf Accessed 28 Jun 2013
10. Schürmann, H.: Konstruieren mit Faser-Kunststoff-Verbunden. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg
(2007)
11. Sheik-Ahmad, J.Y.: Machining of Polymer Composites. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg (2009)
Inﬂuence of the Fiber Cutting Angle on Work Piece Temperature
143

Increase of Process Stability
with Innovative Spindle Drives
W. Bickel, K. M. Litwinski and B. Denkena
Abstract Especially in High Speed Cutting (HSC), the potential of machine tools
often cannot be exploited as vibrations at the main spindle limit the productivity.
At the Institute of Production Engineering and Machine Tools (IFW) and the
Institute for Drive Systems and Power Electronics (IAL) of the Leibniz Universität
Hannover, a new active method to increase the process stability is being resear-
ched. With the help of an electromagnetic actuator, which was integrated into the
drive of a milling spindle, highly dynamic damping forces can be applied to the
spindle shaft. Especially with stiff tool/tool holder combinations, the process
productivity can be increased signiﬁcantly hereby. This article describes the
implemented concept and shows ﬁrst promising experimental results of the pro-
posed method.
Introduction
On the one hand, the developments and improvements in cutting material and
technology lead to steady rising process parameters in machining. On the other
hand, the potential, which is made available by the progress, can often not be
exploited as vibration effects at the main spindle tend to destabilize the process and
therefore limit the productivity. The literature shows numerous different approa-
ches to this phenomenon. A conventional method to avoid instable cutting pro-
cesses (e.g. chatter) is the reduction of the machining parameters (spindle speed or
depth of cut).
In some cases, different strategies for the variation of the spindle speed showed
positive effects on the process stability [1]. Furthermore, approaches to increase
W. Bickel (&)  K. M. Litwinski  B. Denkena
Institute of Production Engineering and Machine Tools (IFW), Leibniz Universität
Hannover, Hannover, Germany
e-mail: bickel@ifw.uni-hannover.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_20,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
145

the systems damping are on the rise. Passive methods with a hydrostatic damper at
the main spindle [2] or adjusted mass dampers [3] showed good results in stabi-
lizing drilling and turning operations. Active approaches were pursued in [4–6].
Here, actuators were positioned at the main spindle or the workpiece to inﬂuence
the process dynamics towards stable cutting conditions. The use of a magnetic
bearing, positioned next to the conventional ball bearing on the tool side, in [7]
also could increase the process stability through damping.
In the project ‘‘Method of drive integrated damping of spindle vibrations’’ a
new method to increase the process stability is proposed. It is based on the inte-
gration of an electromagnetic actuator into the drive part of a milling spindle. For
this purpose, an existing motor spindle concept has been modiﬁed to minimize the
power losses due to the required space for the actuator. The permanent magnets of
the spindle shaft have been replaced by a laminated core in the area of the actuator.
Eddy current sensors have been aligned next to the actuator to measure the spindle
vibrations. In machining, the actuator can apply highly dynamic damping forces
(fmax = 1500 Hz) to the spindle shaft and hence reduce undesired vibration
effects. An illustration of the concept is shown in Fig. 1. The placement of the
actuator between the conventional bearings offers advantages concerning the
system dynamics as no external parts have to be mounted to the spindle. Moreover,
the overhanging part of the shaft is left unchanged so that the compliance at the
tool center point (TCP) is also not reduced in comparison to the original spindle.
Design and Construction of the Damped Motor Spindle
In order to design the method, a ﬁnite-element model of a milling spindle has been
set up. For this purpose, the dynamics of several spindle components have been
measured and unknown parameters of the corresponding FE models were identi-
ﬁed on the base of the measurements. The ﬁnal FE model has been assembled from
the component models and further unknown parameters such as damping were
estimated. The resulting spindle model showed good correlation with the mea-
surements. This is very important as the efﬁciency of the method strongly depends
on the positioning of the actuator for which detailed knowledge of the system
dynamics is necessary. The designed model and a comparison of the measured and
Fig. 1 Principle of the
integrated spindle damping
146
W. Bickel et al.

simulated Frequency Response Functions (FRF) at the TCP for the spindle with a
tool of 25 mm diameter and a protruding length of 89 mm are shown in Fig. 2.
Based on dynamic simulations where the damping effect of the actuator at
different positions has been considered, an actuator system was developed which
can be integrated into the spindle drive at the adequate position. Figure 3 displays
the design of the novel spindle drive with some technical speciﬁcations.
For the integration, the active component of the spindle has been axially divided
into two parts. The actuator was placed into the resulting gap. To prevent additional
end windings which would result from a separation, the persistent stator windings
are guided through the outer diameter of the actuator within a duct system. On the
inner diameter, the actuator contains six teeth where two subsequent teeth are
connected by one winding. Hence, three separately controlled sub actuators are
aligned in sectors of 120 around the circumference. The displacement sensors have
been placed in a plastic ring bound to the actuator whereas every sub actuator
contains one sensor. The entire ring is positioned beneath the bending radius of the
stator windings so that only slight additional loss in space resulted from the sensors.
Opposed, a measurement ring made of aluminum has been placed on the shaft to
prevent electrical saturation effects and therefore enable precise vibration mea-
surements even in high magnetic ﬁelds. For the assembly of the drive, the stator
Fig. 2 Finite-element Model of the spindle and comparison of FRFs
Fig. 3 Design and construction of the spindle prototype
Increase of Process Stability with Innovative Spindle Drives
147

yoke has been as well designed radially divisible. This enables the winding of the
stator from the outer radius before assembly of the yoke.
Integration into a Machine Tool
For machining tests, the spindle was integrated into a Heller machining center,
whereas the control of the spindle was independent from the machine control. The
according measurement setup is shown in the left part of Fig. 4.
For the measurement of the FRFs in ﬁrst place, eddy current sensors have been
aligned in two perpendicular directions at the tip of the engaged tungsten carbide
tool dummy. The system was excited with an impulse hammer at the measurement
position at different rotational speeds. In the right part of Fig. 4, the recorded FRFs
for the tool with a diameter of 25 mm are shown in two orthogonal directions. As
the presented FRFs were measured at a rotational speed of n = 3000 min-1,
especially in the lower frequency range up to 400 Hz effects from the tool
roundness and concentricity are seen. In the range of the ﬁrst spindle eigenfre-
quency ([500 Hz), these effects are negligible and do not distort the measurements.
In addition to the undamped reference signal (blue), the measured signals for
different damping parameters are plotted in gray color. In the y direction a decrease
of the amplitude in the spindle eigenfrequency is observed with increasing damp-
ing. Exceeding the red plotted minimum leads to instability in the actuator con-
troller so that no higher reduction of the amplitude was possible. In total, a
reduction of 55 % in the amplitude of the resonance was achieved with the
damping. Regarding the orthogonal direction, several resonances were found in the
corresponding frequency range. Nevertheless, the amplitude in the dominating
compliant mode could be reduced by 35 % in the optimum (red). Here effects were
found which were also observed in the prior simulations. With exceeding of the
optimal damping, the dominant resonance shifts towards a higher frequency and the
amplitude rises again (plotted in green). Here the optimal damping constant was
found to be 35 Ns/mm which is very similar to the simulated results. Additionally,
an eigenfrequency at approximately 350 Hz is visible in the measurements in both
Fig. 4 Measurement setup in the machine tool and measured undamped/damped FRFs
148
W. Bickel et al.

directions. This resonance contains a mode shape, where the entire spindle vibrates
in the spindle base so that only a slight damping effect of the actuator is possible.
Experimental Validation of the Damping Characteristics
in Machining
The experimental validation of the damped spindle was carried out in extensive
milling tests with the aluminum alloy AA7075 and different tool geometries. First
of all, the developed damping strategy was evaluated in stable milling conditions.
Here, velocity dependent damping forces were applied especially to the separately
excited vibrations from the tooth engagements. No signiﬁcant inﬂuence either on
the process signals or on the machined surface was found. Considering the process
stability, the efﬁciency of the method was estimated at different instable cutting
conditions. Figure 5 exemplarily displays a recorded acceleration signal at the
spindle base in time domain as well as the measured displacement signal of the
spindle shaft at the actuator in time–frequency domain in x direction for unstable
cutting conditions in slotting. Furthermore, the respective machined ﬂank surface
is shown.
In the process, the feed was disrupted after approximately 4.5 s and the
damping was activated for the rest of the time. Especially in the frequency domain,
the signal of the undamped phase is dominated by an eigenfrequency of the system
in the x direction at approximately 900 Hz. Furthermore a resonance from the y
direction can be found at 700 Hz. With the activation of the damping, a signiﬁcant
decrease of the amplitude in the domination eigenfrequency as well as in the other
occurring resonances was achieved, whereas the amplitude in the tooth engage-
ment frequency did not change. As a result, the cutting process became stable.
Fig. 5 Stabilizing of an instable slotting process
Increase of Process Stability with Innovative Spindle Drives
149

Similar effects were found in the machined ﬂanks. While the instable process left
chatter marks, the surface in the stabilized process was only created by the regular
tooth engagements and improved clearly. To summarize, stability lobes have been
recorded for the described process and are plotted in Fig. 6.
In addition to the experiments with the undamped system (green/red circles),
blue circles present the experimentally stable damped cutting limits. Furthermore,
solid lines show the calculated stability lobes on the base of FRF measurements in
undamped and damped states (red/blue). Although there are differences between
the calculated and measured cutting limits, the tendencies can clearly be seen. In
speciﬁc areas, the stable cutting depth could be increased by 50 % with the
introduced damping method.
Summary and Outlook
This paper presents the construction and design of an innovate spindle to increase
process stability in milling. An electromagnetic actuator was integrated into the
spindle drive to apply highly dynamic radial damping forces to the spindle shaft.
First experiments showed a signiﬁcant decrease in the amplitude of the chatter
frequencies in instable cutting conditions due to the damping method. Conse-
quently the stable cutting depth could be increased by up to 50 %.
However, the dynamic system changed its characteristics with the use of dif-
ferent tools or due to the cutting process in the milling tests. The change of the
dominating spindle resonance in particular, demands steady adjustments of the
damping control in order to keep the system stable. So far, the necessary steps
(setting the damping constants or the ﬁlter design) were performed manually and
were therefore not optimized and prone to errors. In future work, these operations
Fig. 6 Experimental and calculated stability lobes for undamped and damped processes
150
W. Bickel et al.

will be automated by the spindle controller. This will also enable the autonomous
in-process adjustment of the spindle to the situation. Moreover, the constructed
prototype was only a demonstrator for the efﬁciency of the method. On the way to
a fully integrated damped spindle without external parts in the drive, ongoing
research will focus on the development of the corresponding new drive part.
References
1. Al-Regib, E., Ni, J., Lee, S.-H.: Programming spindle speed variation for machine tool chatter
suppression. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf 43, 1229–1240 (2003)
2. Weinert, K., Hennes, N., Krell, M.: Spindle and toolsystems with high damping. CIRP Ann.
Manuf. Technol 48(1), S. 297–302 (1999)
3. Yang, Y., Muñoa, J., Altintas, Y.: Optimization of multiple tuned mass dampers to suppress
machine tool chatter. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf 50, 834–842 (2010)
4. Rashid, A., Nicolescu, C.N.: Active vibration control in palletised workholding system for
milling. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf 46, 1626–1636 (2006)
5. Ast, A., Braun, S., Eberhard, P., Heisel, U.: Adaptronic vibration damping for machine tools.
Ann. CIRP 56(1), S. 379–382 (2007)
6. Denkena, B., Will, C.: Schwingungsregelung einer adaptronischen Frässpindel mit Piezo-
aktoren. wt Werkstattstechnik online 11/12 (2007)
Increase of Process Stability with Innovative Spindle Drives
151

Towards a Cax-Framework for Adaptive
Programming Using Generic Process
Blocks for Manufacturing
Gunter Spöcker, Thomas Bobek, Lothar Glasmacher
and Fritz Klocke
Abstract Over the last years the aerospace industry demands for increasingly
complex process chains, as worn, high-value parts have to be repaired and
resources have to be used more efﬁciently. To cope with this growing complexity,
tool support ist required for different reasons. The process chains have to be layed
out, the knowledge of the processes has to be captured and should be easily
available. Furthermore, process chains evolve over time and it should be possible
to use the research results to optimize in-use process chains. In this paper it is
shown how the function block approach can be extended by ‘‘Generic Process
Blocks for Manufacturing’’ (GPBM) in order to meet these requirements for ofﬂine
adaptive process chains. For this, GPBM introduces a new placeholder function
block which supports the reuse and exchange of already modeled process chains.
In addition, a case study discusses how this approach can help to transfer a process
chain originally designed for tip repair of a single gas-turbine airfoil to a blade
integrated disk (BLISK) and how the corresponding process chain knowledge can
be stored in a common place.
G. Spöcker (&)  T. Bobek  L. Glasmacher  F. Klocke
Department CAx-Technologies, Fraunhofer Institute for Production Technology IPT,
Steinbachstrasse 17, 52074 Aachen, Germany
e-mail: gunter.spoecker@ipt.fraunhofer.de
T. Bobek
e-mail: thomas.bobek@ipt.fraunhofer.de
L. Glasmacher
e-mail: lothar.glasmacher@ipt.fraunhofer.de
F. Klocke
e-mail: fritz.klocke@ipt.fraunhofer.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_21,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
153

Introduction
In the last years process chains in aerospace industry have become increasingly
complex and are expected to achieve higher quality at the same time. Reasons for
this are the demand to repair high-value parts (e.g. blade integrated disks—
BLISKs), the request for resource efﬁciency and new approaches such as indi-
vidual manufacturing—in Germany known as ‘‘Industry 4.0’’. Modeling and
planning these process chains requires detailed process knowledge and experi-
enced personnel, since this is still mostly done manually. Current CAD/CAM
applications used in industry are operating on the nominal geometry and mainly
using tree-based structures that describe the manufacturing sequence of the
workpiece. This hinders the design of adaptive processes with varying process
ﬂows since dependencies between process steps are not directly apparent in this
kind of structure. Furthermore, knowledge is not centrally gathered, as the process
chains are usually stored in the part or assembly ﬁle.
This paper introduces ‘‘Generic Process Blocks for Manufacturing’’ (GPBM) by
extending a function block approach with parameterized types in order to support
programming ofﬂine adaptive process chains, capturing the relevant knowledge
and making it easily available for future programming jobs.
This approach allows deﬁning subgroups of manufacturing process chains with
placeholders, which can be instantiated and used as modules to form speciﬁc
process-chain blocks. Therefore, knowledge can even be captured across various
process technologies in these partially-deﬁned process templates and leveraged for
new products as it will be shown in the case study of this paper. This approach was
studied and successfully tested based on a software platform called ‘‘CAx-
Framework’’ developed by the CAx department of Fraunhofer IPT within the
Fraunhofer Cluster of Innovation ‘‘TurPro’’ (Integrative Production Technology
for Energy-efﬁcient Turbomachinery) [1].
State of the Art
Modeling and planning of process chains has already been addressed in research
work in the context of computer-aided process planning (CAPP). CAPP tackles the
problem of ﬁnding and selecting an ordered combination of available manufac-
turing processes to enable the successful manufacturing of the desired product.
Different approaches have been studied to design complex process chains such as
object-orientation, petri-nets, feature recognition and knowledge-based approaches
[2]. In any of these approaches a modeling language was used to express the
process chain and two major approaches have been proposed: STEP-NC and
function blocks.
154
G. Spöcker et al.

STEP-NC is a machine tool control language based on the STEP standard for
the exchange of products (ISO 10303) and contains all information for manu-
facturing, through the description of machining entities, workingsteps, workplan,
tools, machining strategies, etc. [3]. Each of this data is described by a corre-
sponding application protocol which itself is deﬁned in the data modeling language
EXPRESS. STEP-NC describes data structures and does not include any intelli-
gent functionality itself [4]. Typically, STEP-NC forwards meta information
through the whole process chain. The idea behind this approach is that the CNC
controller at the machine tool is expected to know best how to produce a speciﬁc
feature, since it can leverage its detailed information of the kinematics. The future
goal of STEP-NC is to support online adaptive CNC controllers, which can
optimize machining parameters and tool-paths in real time [5]. However,
STEP-NC is limited to feature-based approaches as it is only descriptive.
The second commonly proposed approach to program process chains is by
leveraging function blocks (IEC 61499) [6]. Function blocks were originally
designed for distributed industrial-process measurement and control systems but
have also been applied to process planning, scheduling and execution [7]. Each
function block deﬁnes sets of events, data in- and outputs and an execution control
chart (ECC—an extended form of a state machine). On receiving an event, the
ECC potentially changes its current state, may start the execution of a speciﬁc
algorithm and is able to emit an output event, which in turn can trigger the ECC of
another function block. In contrast to STEP-NC this approach is not limited to
feature-based manufacturing since a function block can contain any type of logic.
Recently, a combination of the two previously described approaches was pro-
posed, using function blocks to implement a STEP-NC processor on the CNC [8]
and function blocks with STEP-NC as data model to facilitate data exchange
among heterogeneous systems [9].
Function Block Approach
As this paper aims towards ofﬂine programming of adaptive process chains and the
preservation of the involved knowledge, the function block approach is used as a
basis. This decision was made due to the features the function block approach
provides: (i) Algorithms, applications or resources can be integrated abstractly in
the function block design, helping to interconnect the various systems used in the
heterogenous environment of adaptive process chains. For example this option
might be required to extract deviations of measurement results from nominal CAD
geometries with a specialized software and feed them to the next process step
automatically. (ii) It enables an easy integration of user interactions in an event-
driven architecture, e.g. for machine tool changes or veriﬁcation steps. (iii) It is
also appropriate for industries which do not want to reveal their intellectual
property since binary distribution is possible [10].
Towards a Cax-Framework for Adaptive Programming
155

IEC 61499 deﬁnes three types of function blocks: The basic function block can
contain internal variables and algorithms, which can be triggered by the ECC to
operate on given input data. The second type—composite function block—consists
of other function blocks. The third—service interface function block—is ignored
in this paper as it used for direct hardware communication.
Figure 1 gives an example of a composite function block for calculating x2. On
receiving the event ‘‘Run’’ the data of the input port ‘‘In’’ is read from the input
buffer (visualized by the vertical line and the connection squares, also called
WITH construct) [10] and forwarded to the ports ‘‘In1’’ and ‘‘In2’’ of its child
block. This basic function block implements the ECC shown in Fig. 2. The event
forces the ECC to transit to state ‘‘Run’’, trigger the multiplying algorithm, send
the output event ‘‘Finished’’ afterwards and then return to the original state.
However, there is a drawback in the function block approach: It can only
describe completely deﬁned and ﬁxed composite function blocks. Together with
the deﬁnition of a composite function block each of its children has to be deﬁned,
all control paths of the event logic and data interfaces have to be fully known as
well. This characteristic is not a limitation in the standard use cases of IEC 61499.
In adaptive CAx process chains the possibility to exchange parts of a process chain
Run
Finished
In
Out
X
Run
Finished
In1
Out
In2
Multiply
Fig. 1 Composite function
block implementing x2 by
using a basic function block
for multiplying two input
values
Start
Run
Mult
Finished
Run
1
Fig. 2 Example ECC for
calling the multiplying
algorithm
156
G. Spöcker et al.

is very useful for the centralization of knowledge because many process chains are
partially similar to each other in terms of the working steps involved. For example,
most manufacturing process chains start to determine the position of the raw part
in a machine tool but the steps after that will vary depending on the speciﬁc
process plan. This approach requires manual copying of constant function blocks
by the operator and manual adaption of varying parts of the process chain. Sub-
sequently, changes in the different copied versions will result in an unmanageable
database of function blocks. The same argument applies to avoiding duplicates of
code bases [11].
Alternatively, the composite block can include all options and allows a selec-
tion based on input data or the state of internal variables [12]. A growing number
of options makes this alternative less applicable, especially if there are chains of
such alternative sets. Another problem with this approach can be noticed if the
alternatives are constantly growing (e.g. if a new manufacturing process gets
available).
This problem will become especially eminent in complex composite function
blocks as they occur in adaptive process chains. Furthermore, those will be con-
stantly enhanced and the corresponding evolving knowledge is important to gather.
Information about the revision history of a process is important later on and is
much easier visible if changes can be reduced to the minimum in one function
block.
The GPBM
To overcome these problems, the GPBM approach proposed in this paper intro-
duces a new type of function block ‘‘placeholder’’, which can be used in composite
function blocks. The basic idea is to provide exchangeable function blocks with
compatible interfaces. It requires already deﬁned event interfaces and data in- and
outputs. An example of such placeholders is shown as gray function blocks in the
example process chain in Fig. 3. The details of this process chain will be discussed
in the case study. So far it is important to notice that the placeholder function block
can be used like any other function block type but without the requirement to
deﬁne what is happening internally. Although, specifying an execution control
chart and sub function blocks is possible and will be replaced by the actually
placed function block. Such a ‘‘default implementation’’ might simplify debugging
and developing of the composite function block itself. This concept is very similar
to parameterized types and generics [13]. As the main advantage process-related
changes in the GPBM will automatically update all dependent processes without
further user interaction.
Placeholder function blocks can be instantiated by specifying a function block
which should be put in the position of the placeholder function block. This
instantiation is illustrated in Fig. 4 by the gray shapes in the form of a function
Towards a Cax-Framework for Adaptive Programming
157

block. In order to allow a function block to be placed in a placeholder, it has to
meet two conditions:
1. The event and data inputs of the placeholder function block must be a superset
of those of the placed one (including the WITH constructs)
2. The event and data outputs of the placed function block must be a superset of
those of the placeholder one (including the WITH constructs).
If one of the two conditions is not met, the underlying tool chain shall report an
error, as behavior would be undeﬁned. A single composite function block is
allowed to contain multiple placeholder function blocks. Furthermore, there is no
limitation in respect to the type of function block to be placed in such a placeholder
function block. In particular even a placeholder function block of the parent
composite function block is allowed, resulting in nested generics.
This approach is quasi-compatible with the existing IEC 61499 standard since
an instantiated placeholder function block can be converted to one of the standard
function block types. This can be done with a preprocessor either integrated into
the function block framework/tool chain or implemented as a standalone software
tool. The proposed GPBM are compatible with distributed systems, as the
placeholder can be expanded to the corresponding fully deﬁned function block net.
RUN
FIN
NOM CLOUD
POS
Laser Scanning
RUN
FIN
CLOUD
DEV
NOM
POS
POS
Analyzer
CHECK
OK
ERROR
DEV
CON
NOM
RUN
FIN
POS
NOM
CAD/Feature
Coordinate System
Start Process
Finished
Process Placeholder
Check Constraints Placeholder
Fig. 3 Generic blade process step using the newly introduced GPBM
RUN
FIN
NOM
POS
Generic Blade Process
CAD/Feature
Coordinate System
Start Process
Finished
Milling
Constraints
Milling
Process
RUN
FIN
NOM
POS
Generic Blade Process
Deposition
Constraints
Deposition
Process
RUN
FIN
NOM
POS
Generic Blade Process
Recontour
Constraints
Recontour
Process
Fig. 4 Blade tip repair process chain using instantiated generic function blocks
158
G. Spöcker et al.

A Case Study
To demonstrate the beneﬁt of the proposed extension compared to standard IEC
61499, a simpliﬁed adaptive process chain for tip repair of a BLISK will be
discussed in this case study. For simplicity, the example ignores steps like cooling
and calibration which might be needed in a real process chain.
It is based on the results of the Cluster of Innovation ‘‘TurPro’’ [14] for tip
repair of gas-turbine airfoils. A laser material deposition machine tool and a
milling machine tool with an integrated laser-scanning device were used to repair
the tip. This setup allowed to scan, mill and recontour on a single machine tool. A
unity reference coordinate system was guaranteed by a speciﬁcally developed
clamping system for turbine blades.
The activity diagram in Fig. 5 shows by repeating the four main process steps,
laser scanning, milling, laser material deposition and recontouring, for each blade
of the BLISK. One option would be to directly transfer this process chain to a
BLISK and executing it on each blade. However, this process chain would be
highly inefﬁcient since a BLISK with n blades requires 2n ? 1 manual clamp and
unclamp operations and 2n scan/milling tool changes.
Execution of a single process type for all blades of the BLISK at a time
followed by switching to another machine tool shows an increased efﬁciency. This
Milling Machine
Deposition Machine
Operator
clamp
scan
mill
unclamp, 
transport, 
clamp
deposit
unclamp, 
transport, 
clamp
scan
unclamp
[all blades]
[otherwise]
scan
recontour
Fig. 5 Naive adaption of
blade process to BLISK
Towards a Cax-Framework for Adaptive Programming
159

approach as it is illustrated in Fig. 6 reduces the amount of manual clamp and
unclamp operations to a total of just 3 and 2 scan/mill tool changes.
This shows that the process chain for repairing the tip of a single blade can not
directly be reused to repair the tips of multiple blades on a BLISK. It is necessary
to insert loops in order to repeat process steps individually. Instead of copying the
whole function block net of the original process chain and manually adjusting it,
the GPBM and its additional abstraction level is used. With this method each of the
three main process steps for one blade can be modeled in a simpliﬁed way as a
‘‘Generic blade process step’’, as shown in Fig. 4.
The ‘‘Laser Scanning’’ function block requires the nominal blade geometry and
the coordinate system of the current blade. On receiving the RUN event, this
function block scans the blade and calculates a point cloud representing the worn
blade geometry, upon ﬁnishing the FIN event will be triggered. Next is the
‘‘Analyzer’’ function block, which determines the deviations and the actual posi-
tion of the blade relative to the nominal geometry. Afterwards the ‘‘Check Con-
straints Placeholder’’ function block is expected to check if the previously
determined deviation is not exceeding the maximum tolerances for the actual
process. Deﬁning constraint checking by using a placeholder is required since the
type of check may vary depending on the process, the machine tool or the used
material. On a successful check the ‘‘Process Placeholder’’ function block and
therewith the actual process will be triggered.
Milling Machine
Deposition Machine
Operator
clamp
scan
mill
unclamp, 
transport, 
clamp
deposit
unclamp, 
transport, 
clamp
scan
unclamp
[all blades]
[otherwise]
[all blades]
[otherwise]
[otherwise]
[all blades]
scan
recontour
Fig. 6 Optimized process
layout with less time
consuming activities
160
G. Spöcker et al.

In Fig. 4 the generic blade process step is shown as a composite function block
and instantiated three times to model the process chain for blade tip repair. Each of
the steps is instantiated with one of the processes and its corresponding constraints
function block.
The complete process chain for BLISK tip repair is shown in Fig. 7. By nesting
the generic blade process into another GPBM, the previously mentioned loop for a
BLISK is implemented. Therefore this block requires the nominal CAD model of
the BLISK and its coordinate system as input. Either by user interaction, feature
recognition or mathematical function, this function block will iterate over all
blades of the BLISK, executing the nested generic blade process with the appro-
priate data. Identically to the generic single blade process step, this generic loop
function block is used and instantiated with the actual milling, laser material
deposition and recontouring function blocks and their corresponding constraints
check function blocks.
The similarity between the modeled single blade and the BLISK process chain
in Figs. 4 and 7 shows how process knowledge can be shared across different parts
and thus conﬁrms the potential of the GPBM.
Conclusion
This paper has proposed the new approach of ‘‘Generic Process Blocks for
Manufacturing’’ (GPBM) by adding generics to IEC 61499. This concept enables
programming of ofﬂine adaptive process-chains due to the characteristics of the
function block standard and introduces another level of abstraction from which the
user can beneﬁt in multiple ways. Stored GPBMs can be reused in different sce-
narios and therefore help to preserve knowledge at a centralized place and by this
simplifying the legibility of the model. Furthermore, process-related changes in the
GPBM will automatically update and optimize all dependent processes without
further user interaction.
RUN
FIN
NOM
POS
Generic BLISK Process
CAD of BLISK
Coordinate System
Start Process
Finished
Milling
Constraints
Milling
Process
RUN
FIN
NOM
POS
Generic BLISK Process
Deposition
Constraints
Deposition
Process
RUN
FIN
NOM
POS
Generic BLISK Process
Recontour
Constraints
Recontour
Process
Fig. 7 BLISK tip repair process chain using instantiated generic function blocks
Towards a Cax-Framework for Adaptive Programming
161

References
1. TurPro: CAx-Framework—Fraunhofer-Innovationscluster TurPro. http://www.turpro.de/de/
projekt/cax (2013). Accessed 28 April 2013
2. Shen, W., Wang, L., Hao, Q.: Agent-based distributed manufacturing process planning and
scheduling: a state-of-the-art survey. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part C Appl. Rev. 36(4),
563–577 (2006)
3. Laguionie, R., Rauch, M., Hascoët, J.Y., et al.: Toolpaths programming in an intelligent step-
nc manufacturing context. J. Machine Eng. 8(1), 33–43 (2008)
4. Brecher, C., Vitr, M., Wolf, J.: Closed-loop capp/cam/cnc process chain based on step and
step-nc inspection tasks. Int. J. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 19(6), 570–580 (2006)
5. Rauch, M., Laguionie, R., Hascoet, J.Y., Suh, S.H.: An advanced step-nc controller for
intelligent machining processes. Robot. Comput.-Integr. Manuf. 28(3), 375–384 (2012)
6. International
Electrotechnical
Commission:
Iec
61499-1:
Function
blocks—Part
1
architecture. International Electrotechnical Commission, Geneva (2005)
7. Xia, F., Wang, Z., Sun, Y.: Function block based design pattern for ﬂexible manufacturing
control system. In: IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics 2003,
vol. 5, pp. 4922–4927. IEEE (2003)
8. Minhat, M., Vyatkin, V., Xu, X., Wong, S., Al-Bayaa, Z.: A novel open cnc architecture
based on step-nc data model and iec 61499 function blocks. Robot. Comput.-Integr. Manuf.
25(3), 560–569 (2009)
9. Wang, X.V., Xu, X.W.: Dimp: an interoperable solution for software integration and product
data exchange. Enterp. Inf. Syst. 6(3), 291–314 (2012)
10. Vyatkin, V.: Iec 61499 as enabler of distributed and intelligent automation: state-of-the-art
review. IEEE Trans. Industr. Inf. 7(4), 768–781 (2011)
11. Brown,
W.H.,
Malveau,
R.C.,
Mowbray,
T.J.:
AntiPatterns:
refactoring
software,
architectures, and projects in crisis. Wiley, New York (1998)
12. Vyatkin, V.: Iec 61499 Function blocks for embedded and distributed control systems design.
ISA, USA (2011)
13. Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R., Vlissides, J.: Design patterns: abstraction and reuse of
object-oriented design. Springer (2001)
14. Altmüller, S., Bergs, T., Börsch, W., Jelich, C., Klocke, F., Kriegl, B., Murtezaoglu, Y.,
Siebenwurst, C., Witty, M.: Beherrschung adaptiver prozessketten. In: Wettbewerbsfaktor
Produktionstechnik, Aachener Perspektiven, pp. 405–422. Aachener Werkzeugmaschinen-
Kolloquium, Shaker, Aachen (2011)
162
G. Spöcker et al.

The Initial Analysis of Ethernet Bus
for Monitoring HSM Process
in Aerospace Industry
Piotr Szulewski
Abstract The monitoring of machining process seems to be the crucial for
effectiveness and accuracy. The precise monitoring needs fast, efﬁcient, easy and
open communication standard for data interchange or data acquisition. The use a
popular, inexpensive and ordinary network system instead complicated and
valuable professional/industrial ﬁeld-bus is really attractive. The paper presents
some conception of the ofﬁce Ethernet implementation as data transmission
structure for monitoring. The basic, laboratory tests with different protocols and
conﬁguration were done. As a conclusion several rules were formulated to help
potential users.
Keywords Ethernet  Network  Monitoring  Data acquisition  Information
integration
Introduction
During the machining materials with high cutting speed several problem occurs.
For example: chatter vibration in all axis, high temperature (tool and work piece),
ﬂexible cutting condition, work piece deformation, etc. [1]. All these parameters
affects on work piece quality. Because it seems that the tool condition is the most
crucial and determining factor for quality—the online tool condition monitoring is
of great industrial interest. It is incredibly important, especially in aerospace
industry, where expensive combination alloys are machining and quality is crucial.
Therefore a sophisticated process monitoring system is strictly required to identify
the actual cutting conditions. Usually, the basic monitor system for multi-modal
P. Szulewski (&)
Faculty of Production Engineering, Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: maxer@cim.pw.edu.pl
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_22,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
163

sensing consists of several nodes like: force sensor, vibration sensor, acoustic
emission sensor, feed rate and cutting speed sensor, temperature sensor [2]. From
the informatics point of view—plenty of generated data coming from many sen-
sors should be transferred directly from their source to supervising system
(computer). But how to ﬁnd a good communication solution which will be really
effective, open, scalable, inexpensive and easy to use?
Thesis
The main goal of realized experiment, was testing the inﬂuence of network
topology and network load on data real delivery time. Proposed (working) thesis
was: In case, when transmission in real time in not absolutely necessary the
normal, traditional Ethernet should be fully used. It can be use as effective bus for
process monitoring instead complicated and expensive industrial ﬁeld buses. As a
traditional Ethernet is characterized ofﬁce installation and standard TCP/IP stack.
All tests were done with artiﬁcial network transmission which was prepared to
imitates the real communication between sensors and computer.
Background
In today’s really competitive world, where market determines success and prin-
ciples, all manufactures have realized that they absolutely need a ‘‘total automa-
tion’’ as their mantra to triumph. It should be stated that the factory automation has
been lately developed worldwide into very large research area. In fact, it presently
incorporates and analyze completely different knowledge disciplines including
control, sensor, actuators, communication, real time adjustment, software pro-
gramming, etc. However we can observe that the main impact of automation
system (especially in machine tools) is focused on high effectiveness of process
monitoring or control. The possibility of precise (close loop) supervisory system
which integrates individual process characteristics will result in really higher
productivity, machine tool effectiveness, better ﬁnal product quality and expected
near-zero breakdown [3]. The modern manufacturing systems (like machine tools,
robots, technological equipment, assembling lines, etc.) are controlled by pro-
grammable numeric controllers (PLC, NC, CNC) or industrial computers. Some-
times the embedded, dedicated microcontrollers should be used to run control
algorithm. The computation and processing of digital information is the basement
for present control and monitoring. This situation is sometimes called as infor-
mation cloud or information distribution. To realize the right communication
between all nodes—the electronic data interchange system should be used. Many
different network types have been promoted and recommended for use on a shop
ﬂoor. Over the past 20 years several ﬁeld bus network types were introduced in
164
P. Szulewski

factory automation. But in fact, many years of standardization effort have com-
pletely failed to achieve one, good, universal, single standard. On the other side,
there is Ethernet which has been around for many years and it is predominant in
ofﬁce computer systems with more than 85 % of the LAN market [4]. Cheap, easy
to manage, compatible components for Ethernet-base networking are really
attractive for everybody. Nowadays, a considerable number of factory and control
automation applications adopted Ethernet as its industrial communication solu-
tions [5]. Ethernet has been originally developed by Xerox and is known more than
40 years. But in fact, this standard was commercially introduced in early 1980. It
is fully compatible with ISO/OSI regulations and belongs to the local area network
(LAN). As a main advantages should be enumerated: compatibility, higher
bandwidth, media access control, different physical media, reducing installation
costs, increase reliability, improve management, practically no limit distance,
reduction of electrical noise problems, provides electrical isolation, etc. Ethernet
uses a communication concept called datagram to get messages across the net-
work. The stream of data is divided into shorter pieces called frames. Every frame
contains source and destination addresses and error-checking data so that any
damaged data can be easy detected and re-transmitted. The data ﬁeld in each
package can contain up to 1500 bytes of user information. All over the world the
Ethernet is qualiﬁed as a synonym of really open network standard which is deﬁne
with attributes: interconnectivity, interoperability and interchangeability. It is also
the most popular network standard in ofﬁce and home environment. Mainly, the
Ethernet is precisely described by norm signed as IEEE 802.3x where ‘‘x’’ indi-
cates following standards. The main difference between standards respects the
throughput, topology, distance range, medium type. Historically Ethernet tech-
nology was established as a standard for ofﬁce communication to provide effective
communications between the different nodes like PCs, printers, data servers etc. In
was thus no surprise that industry sector was looking carefully to Ethernet for a
really low cost networking solution. The main problem in simple adoption this
conception into industrial requirements was the non shared and non dedicated
network bandwidth. The transmission collision could occur at any time and it was
impossible to predict message delays. The (ofﬁce) Ethernet is in fact non deter-
ministic. For these reasons, as a result for the constant development, the special
variety called industrial Ethernet has been created and implemented into auto-
mation systems [6]. The main differences between Industrial and ofﬁce Ethernet
are: support for real-time application, redundancy, accommodate multiple service
quality levels, time synchronization, fault tolerance, ready for work with high
humidity (condensing), strong vibration, hot temperature, corrosive environments,
etc. Presently, many products dedicated for industry are available on the market.
Most popular could be enumerated: EtherNet/IP, Proﬁnet, ModbusTCP, Power-
link, EtherCat. Unfortunately these standards are completely incompatible each-
other. On the other hand they are extremely expensive due to the necessity of
purchase only dedicated equipment (hardware) and specialized software.
Of course it is possible to use a special, dedicated equipment for translation data
stream from one standard to another. As an example of such a transfer method the
The Initial Analysis of Ethernet Bus for Monitoring HSM Process
165

AnyBus bridge can be use. But, translation process needs time (effective
throughput decreases) and is not cheap. So, the traditional Ethernet technology is
still needed, useful and attractive for industrial use—especially if it will be little
tailored for monitoring processes. It should be emphasized that traditional Ethernet
makes process data and diagnostic functions device-independent and all equipment
in a plant should be linked with just one bus technology (fast and inexpensive) [7].
On the other hand, there is a signiﬁcant difference between industrial and ofﬁce
operational reliability. The equipment MTBF-value may be important for pro-
fessional installation, but for laboratory use is not pivotal.
Installation—Hardware
The laboratory test structure installation is presented in Fig. 1. It consists of:
notebook (PC 3) with operational system Win XP (32-bit, Hewlett-Packard
Compaq 6710 s), network Ethernet terminal (Beckhoff, modul BK9050—Bus
Couplers connect Ethernet with the modular, extendable electronic terminal
blocks—KL2408.), stationary personal computer with Linux Slackware (ver. 13),
Ethernet switch Cisco (Catalyst 2900XL with ﬁrmware C2900XL-c3h2 s-ms.120-
5.WC3b) and power supply NDN DF (24VDC/5A). The TwinCat (ver. 2.11.1553,
Beckhoff) software is installed and conﬁgured on the notebook. This computer
works as a ordinary PLC under control of software ‘‘PLC Control’’ made by
Beckhoff. For the maximum computer performance all not necessary system
functions were in switch off mode to move computational power only into useful
tasks. The stationary computer works like a substitute of simple data acquisition
server which collects measured data from different sensors. Three different net-
work structures has been chosen to check the network trafﬁc for possible process
monitoring conﬁguration during the real machining in HSM. All network com-
ponents are connect using unshielded twisted pair cables (cat. 5e) ready for
100 Mbit/s bandwidth. The standard (in fact ‘‘stationary’’) packet delivery time
was checked using the ‘‘ping’’ tool. The received result was not surprised—1 ms,
which is absolutely proper response time for such structure.
Installation—Diagnostic Software
As a measurement device some sophisticated software tools were used. On the
stationary computer the ‘‘Wireshark’’ software was installed. It is a specialized
data monitor and performance meter for network application. Also, for general
trafﬁc monitor the ‘‘iptraf’’ tool was applied. The graphic presentation of indicated
data transmission were done using the standard windows network monitor tool.
The intercepted network data were analyzing using the Excell spreadsheet and
presented in graphic form for useful perception.
166
P. Szulewski

Methodology
The really important difference between industrial and ofﬁce application is the data
sent frame size [8]. The typical industrial communication data size is rather short
and usually does not exceed 1–8 bytes. For the test—64 bytes was approved. This
is the minimum Ethernet frame size. This is no proﬁtable situation for real data
acquisition but test should be done in the worst applicable case. The Fig. 2 pre-
sents the ﬁrst 10 captured packets during the initial conversation between PC2 and
BK9050. It is signiﬁcant the RTT is really short and not exceeds the value 7.8 ms.
The data was captured using the ‘‘wireshark’’ network tool. For example, the main
computer collects information from several vibration sensors mounted on machine
tools—data are transferred together in one packet. In fact the protocol reduces
slightly the data transmission efﬁciency. As a important transmission parameter the
round trip time (RTT) was accepted. This concept identify the time for short data
transmission from one network node to another (PLC to PC or sensor to PC). It is
described by simple formula: T1–T0 = RTT (where T1—response receive time
indicated by ‘‘Wireshark’’, T0—demand time indicated by ‘‘Wireshark’’). Trans-
mission times were observed and reported for TCP protocol and UDP protocol
separately. Differences between these protocols are considerable and should be
noticed. UDP is connectionless protocol. It uses a simple transmission model with
a minimum of protocol mechanism. It is suitable for purposes where error
checking and correction are either not necessary or performed in the application,
PC 3
Switch CISCO
PC 2
UTP cat.5
PC with TwinCat
master
BK9050
UTP cat.5
UTP cat.5
UTP cat.5
Fig. 1 The main installation structure
The Initial Analysis of Ethernet Bus for Monitoring HSM Process
167

avoiding the overhead of such processing at the network interface level. On the
other hand, TCP is connection-oriented protocol. It means that TCP provides
reliable, ordered, error-checked delivery of a data stream. TCP is optimized for
accurate delivery rather than timely delivery.
Research Work
The data broadcast storm is presented in Fig. 3. It occurs when network is wrong
conﬁgured, viruses are working, DoS attack, etc. The stationary PC 2 has sent
2100 ICMP packets per second. It is estimated to the 25 Mb/s network throughput.
In such a worst situation the real useful transmission between BK9050 and PC3 is
stable and acceptable. The outgoing rates 24757.7 kbit/s is marked by dark rect-
angle in ﬁgure. During the research work, the several scenarios were prepared,
simulated, tested and analyzed. As an example, some main tasks will be
Fig. 2 The RTT for initial conversation—‘‘Wireshark’’ print screen
Fig. 3 The broadcast storm in network—‘‘iptraf’’ print screen
168
P. Szulewski

enumerated to show the complexity of transmission problems: (a) The commu-
nication in simple (peer-to peer), network structure, (b) The communication in
complicated architecture when the switch works as a transmission mediator,
(c) The difference in data encapsulation in TCP and UDP protocol, (d) The double
transmission in data-pair on demand, (e) The communication behavior in separate
collision domain, (f) The communication in broadcast and unicast mode, (g) The
simulation of packet collision, (h) The software redundancy for stability of data
transmission, (i) The virtual private network segmentation as solution for reducing
the trafﬁc storm, (j) The implementation of QoS (Quality of Service) at the media
access control (MAC) level to divide data stream into referred priority to minimize
the time delivery. The Fig. 4 indicates the graphic presentation of network use
during the transmission storm. The average network load was 60 Mb/s. It can be
easy observed when packet collision appeared—so utilization is signiﬁcantly
decreased. The reason for storm was false Vlan conﬁguration. Simple division into
separate independent Vlan solved that problem completely. The Fig. 5 presents the
RTT for transmission of 10.000 packet (5000 pairs) between PC3 and BK9050
using TCP protocool. answers The minimum RTT was 7.63 ms and the maximum
23.49 ms. The standard deviation was 1.7 ms. It seems that use of TCP in that case
is acceptable.
Fig. 4 The network throughput in storm—‘‘network monitor’’ print screen
Fig. 5 The RTT (min 7.63 ms, max. 23.49 ms) for 10,000 transmissions by TCP protocol
The Initial Analysis of Ethernet Bus for Monitoring HSM Process
169

Conclusion of Research
According to the achieved results of realized tests and research work, some gen-
eral, useful conclusions should be formulated and presented. They will be bene-
ﬁcial for constructing the modern, effective acquisition system for machine tool
and process monitoring. Please note that:
• Some basic security regulation should be introduced into Ethernet network
structure to prevent trafﬁc jam (data storm) and to acquire the solid stability of
transmission.
• The conception and Ethernet components make possible to achieve real scala-
bility of network architecture and topology. Also, the implementation and
conﬁguration process is shorten to minimum time and obligate effort. Well
known arrangement and intuitive interface reduces the required training for
personnel.
• The multitude of different available protocols help to ﬁnd the best (may be tailor
made) solution for every transmission task.
• If the most important for slave-master communication is reliability without
necessity of short time delivery, the TCP/IP protocol should be recommended.
On the other hand, if really important is short time and more predictive behavior
of transmission, the UDP/IP protocol should be rather use.
• In critical situation when effectiveness of transmission is the main goal—the
software redundancy should be implemented. For example, the simple STP will
be enough for many application. Every producer of the network Ethernet
hardware has his own mechanism but it should be in a work mode (just ﬁnd and
run it).
• It is strictly recommended not to engaged the main computer into unimportant
tasks during the data acquisition process. All, not necessary tasks (www, mail,
etc.) should be closed or cancelled. If it is not possible to restrict the commu-
nication with other computers, the software priority of network datagrams
should be implemented.
• In case of large, complex data acquisition network, to reduce the possibility of
unexpected attacks (DoS-Denial of Service, broadcast storm, data overload or
useful bandwidth reduction) the virtual structures (v-lan) should be created. It is
the best solution to separate trafﬁc between different measurement structures.
Referring to the thesis proposed at the beginning of the paper, it is justify that if
some rules and limits are accept, the performance of traditional Ethernet is
absolutely applicable for data transmission bus to enhance ﬂexibility and reduce
ﬁnal costs. But from the practical point of view, the test with real data coming
from sensors is strictly necessary to check the stability and network load. Such a
work will be done in nearest future. An extra advantage of Ethernet implemen-
tation is simplicity cooperation with CNC controllers. Many current CNC are
equipped with Ethernet interface as a standard so double-way communication with
monitoring equipment will be easy. It is important that monitoring mechanism
170
P. Szulewski

should has a real inﬂuence on monitored process to change wrong parameters or
correct variables.
Acknowledgements Financial support of Structural Funds in the Operational Programme—
Innovative Economy (IE OP) ﬁnanced from the European Regional Development Fund—Project
‘‘Modern material technologies in aerospace industry’’, Nr POIG.01.01.02-00-015/08-00 is
gratefully acknowledged.
References
1. List, G., Sutter, G., Bi, X.F.: Investigation of tool wear in high speed machining by using a
ballistic set-up. Wear 267(9–10), 1673–1679 (2009)
2. Zeng, H., Thoe, T.B., Li, X.: Multi-modal sensing for machine health monitoring in high speed
machining. In: 2006 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Informatics, http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=04053566
3. Ridwan, F., Xu, X.: Advanced CNC system with in-process feed-rate optimisation. In: 2013,
Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 29, pp. 12–20. Elsevier
4. Xavier Desforges, X., Habbadi, A., Archimède, B.: Design methodology for smart actuator
services for machine tool and machining control and monitoring. Robotics Comput. Integr.
Manufact. 27(6), 963–976 (2011)
5. Rostan, M.: Industrial ethernet technologies overview. EtherCAT Technology Group (2011)
6. Ferraz, F., Coelho, R.T.: Data acquisition and monitoring in machine tools with CNC of open
architecture using internet. Adv. Manufact. Technol. 26, 90–97 (2005)
7. Samaranayake, L., Leksell, M.: Ethernet ready sensor acutator module for distributed control
application. Eurocon 2005, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, pp. 342–345. University of
Belgrade (2005)
8. Tan, K.K., Huang, S.N., LEE, T.H.: Distributed fault detection in industrial system based on
sensor wireless network. Comput. Stand. Interface 31, 573–578 (2009)
The Initial Analysis of Ethernet Bus for Monitoring HSM Process
171

Producing Better Turbines by Using
Process Monitoring and Documentation
Technologies
Jan Brinkhaus, Martin Eckstein and Joachim Imiela
Introduction
Modern aircrafts are designed under aspects of passenger safety, weight as well as
running, purchasing and maintenance costs. These aspects conﬂict with each other
at several points. Especially limiting the aircraft costs and weight conﬂicts with the
most important aspect—the passenger safety. KOMET Brinkhaus and MTU
Munich established in compliance with FAA rules a whole production strategy
which allows a reduction of safety factors in the design of turbines without
reducing the aircraft safety. The new turbines are light weighted and thus fuel
efﬁcient. The primary enabler was a strict real time process monitoring with
complete process documentation while producing safety critical elements.
Today propulsion systems for planes have to meet increasingly more chal-
lenging requirements in terms of performance, cost-effectiveness, operational
safety and environmental compatibility. To be able to compete in the international
marketplace, engine manufacturers must develop innovative solutions for the
design, manufacturing and quality assurance of highly stressed jet-engine com-
ponents to satisfy the requirements of airlines and safety regulations [1–4].
Jet-engines clearly differ from other propulsion systems used in general
mechanical engineering and vehicle construction above all by the materials used
and the extreme stresses occurring in operation. Highly-stressed jet-engine
J. Brinkhaus (&)  J. Imiela
KOMET Group, Besigheim, Germany
e-mail: Jan.Brinkhaus@kometgroup.com
M. Eckstein
MTU, Munich, Germany
J. Imiela
University of Applied Sciences and Arts in Hanover, Hanover, Germany
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_23,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
173

components have to meet the highest requirements in terms of reliability and
component service life. Therefore very speciﬁc solutions are required [2, 5–7].
Bolt holes in rotating turbine and compressor disks belong to the most highly-
stressed geometric features of jet-engines. Their in-ﬂight-failure may result in the
loss of the aircraft and endanger human lives. For this reason, the quality and
reliability of hole making are of utmost importance. For manufacturers of jet-
engine components it is important to assess the quality of these holes at an early
stage in the manufacture of the product and not as late as at ﬁnal inspection. In the
event of apparent deviations, it must be possible to interfere with the manufac-
turing process in time, to make sure that component properties are within the
speciﬁed limits, deﬁned at the design stage and validated and certiﬁed in engine
test runs [1, 6].
Among other manufacturing methods, the machining of holes in jet-engine
parts is especially sensitive, because a lot of them are situated in highly stressed
areas. In the past, improper hole-making has already caused damage or inﬂight-
shutdown of engines. The most popular of these engine failures is the so called
‘‘Pensacola-Incident’’, which caused the death of two passengers in 1996 [8]. The
reason for this undiscovered failure was the misjudgment of a tool breakage during
pre-drilling of a compressor disk. Figure 1 gives an impression of the enormous
energy which was set free.
The tool breakage itself was caused by a lack of coolant during drilling. The
component did not fail immediately but after approximately 10 years in use. This
was caused by debris of the broken tool which remained in the component and
which was not detected by inspections [8].
All of the above aspects suggest the production of mechanically stable and
heavy turbine components. Nevertheless it has to be considered, that constantly
increasing standards for environmental protection e.g. for noise, NOx- and CO2
emissions do not automatically support the increase in robustness of aero-engines.
These limitations impose additional pressure on engine designers to reduce weight,
improve aerodynamics, increase process temperatures and enhance operational
Fig. 1 Pensacola-incident
174
J. Brinkhaus et al.

loads. This challenge can only be mastered with an improved control of the quality
of the manufacturing processes.
The purpose of monitoring the production processes is to reliably identify
deviations or anomalies during machining immediately and take appropriate action
[9, 10]. This protects the machine-tool and/or work piece against damage [11, 12],
saves related costs, secures or even improves product quality [13–15] and enables
unmanned production.
Beneath the general argument of better process control, a second motivation for
monitoring has gained importance for the safe life concept of aero-engine design.
FAA-AC 33.3 [16] describes, that within the design process of highly stressed
aero-engine parts—in addition to stress calculation—a special risk assessment has
to be performed [17]. This is called damage tolerance assessment. If the result of
this assessment does not provide enough evidence that the target life of a com-
ponent or it’s life-limiting features can be achieved, a risk mitigation is necessary.
By choosing creditable means to improve production quality, the output of the risk
assessment can be updated. These credits may save a product redesign, a change in
material or additional in-service inspections [17]. Creditable means are for
example the introduction of a post ﬁnish process, an advanced component
inspection or statistical data for a high process capability. By far, the highest credit
is granted for process monitoring.
Monitoring the Production
MTU and KOMET Brinkhaus have applied a very strict strategic combination of
process monitoring and process documentation for the production of holes at the
MTU plant in Munich. The KOMET product ToolScope was enhanced and
embedded into a consequent strategy that targets a complete production process
control. The whole strategy was developed and implemented during a 5-years
R&D effort.
As prerequisite the MTU started a research project several years ago, which
targeted the basics of the needed monitoring strategies. It was evaluated, which
monitoring strategies where needed to fulﬁll the FAA rules as best as possible.
Therefore it was determined, which effects disturb a constant drilling and how they
could be measured in which sensor data. Details of these aspects will be published
in other publications.
Based on this research, a very deep strategy of monitoring the production
process was developed and implemented. Parts of this strategy are the following
aspects:
(1) Monitoring the coolant ﬂow and pressure:
By monitoring the coolant ﬂow and pressure, two big requirements for a
constant drill process are assured. The correct ﬂow is a precondition for a
Producing Better Turbines by Using Process Monitoring
175

deﬁned temperature at the tool tip as well as the correct inprocess-removal of
machined material out of the hole.
(2) Monitoring the spindle and feed axis power:
Deﬁned conditions for spindle and feed axis power are also preconditions for a
constant drill process. They guarantee primarily a constant force and tem-
perature foot print at the tool tip. Together with the simple values of the
powers, some attributes of the signals are extracted and monitored separately.
These attributes were found and validated in the mentioned MTU research
program.
(3) Assuring that the machine personnel does not disable or work around the
process monitoring devices:
During production ramp up it was seen, that the machine personnel has also to
be monitored not to modify the process. Because the monitoring of many
production values was very tight, it was primarily needed to assure, that the
machine doesn’t produce, if the monitoring system is brought in a condition
where it would not work. This was done by a close handshake between PLC
and the monitoring system.
(4) Documenting information like part numbers, NC program versions, used tool
names etc.:
To let the monitoring system do the main part of the documentation, it was
needed to transfer a big amount of data from the production machine to the
monitoring system. To avoid that the user has to do too much manual input at
the machine before each process, as much information as possible was hard
coded as variables within the NC program. Some parts of the information are
then asked from the user during production. Before each single hole, all data is
transferred by special NC cycles from the NC of the machine to the monitoring
system. For this, untypical features of a process monitoring system were
needed. An example is that the monitoring system needed the ability to
exchange strings (like ‘‘program name’’) with the control.
(5) Creating measurement protocols and preserve the relevant part information’s
and sensor data for each hole:
Much work was spend in a good and practicable scheme of documenting the
monitoring results. It was seen during tests, that many schemes exist which
have for each their pro’s and con’s. The ﬁrst documentation variants were
implemented as Excel readable ASCII ﬁles, together with screenshots of the
monitoring. One step forward was the generation of nicely formatted PDFs
which gave all needed information in a printable paper. A next step will be the
integration of the monitoring system into a central measuring data store of the
MTU. This store—of course—has special data formats too. Many of the
interim results are still present in the current implementation of the production
monitoring, because every of the mentioned documentation formats has its
own advantages.
(6) Archiving this information safely at external long time data stores:
The aspect of long time data storages was a big topic at the end of the project.
The monitoring system was extended by the ability of handing out its protocol
176
J. Brinkhaus et al.

data within windows networks. For getting a clean data ﬂow design, hand-
shakes had to be established between the control, the monitoring system and
the documentation system. To achieve a clear network design, the monitoring
system offers two network ports, which can be conﬁgured for separate IP
address ranges. The system can thus be connected to the machine internal
network and an external factory network, without needing a direct connection
of both networks with a switch or router.
The structure of the monitoring engine is shown in Fig. 2.
Outlook
MTU Munich and KOMET Brinkhaus could achieve the—apparent currently
highest—credit value from the FAA for hole making by applying the above
described strategy. The whole system is currently implemented on four CNC
machines in Munich and two CNC machines at a supplier plant in Israel. This
structure will perhaps be extended in short time by four additional machines in
Munich. Current works are dealing with the user interface, the exchange of
monitoring limits between machines and the integration into other MTU data
stores.
Fig. 2 Setup of the described strict monitoring and documentation engine
Producing Better Turbines by Using Process Monitoring
177

Authors
Dr. Jan Brinkhaus founded a process monitoring company which is now part of
the KOMET group. He is CEO of KOMET Brinkhaus, specialist for process
monitoring and the integration of monitoring systems in Siemens and Heidenhain
controls.
Dipl.-Ing. Martin Eckstein managed several MTU technology projects process
monitoring, process control and coolant application. He is auditor for the pro-
duction of security of highly-stressed turbine components. The audits include the
MTU facility in Munich as well as suppliers all over the world.
178
J. Brinkhaus et al.

Prof.-Dr. Dipl.-Kfm. Joachim Imiela managed several process and condition
monitoring projects at the Leibniz University Hanover. He is currently professor at
the University of Applied Sciences and Arts in Hanover and manages the world
wide costumer consulting at KOMET Brinkhaus.
References
1. Adam, P. Fertigungsverfahren von Turboﬂugtriebwerken, 1st issue, Birkhäuser Verlag (1998)
2. Bräunling, W.J.G. Flugzeugtriebwerke, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2009)
3. Burin, J.: Down time. AeroSafety World. Issue February 2012, pp 29–32 (2012)
4. Gunston, B.: Jane’s Aero Engines, Jane’s Information Group, ISBN 0710614055,
9780710614056 (1996)
5. Buergel, R.: Handbuch Hochtemperaturwerkstoffe, 3rd Issue, Vieweg-Verlag, Wiesbaden
(2006)
6. Rossmann, A.: Die Sicherheit von Turbo-Flugtriebwerken-Band 3, Turbo Consult, Karlsfeld
(2006)
7. Sims, C.T., Stolofff, N.S., Hagel, N.S.: Superalloys II, Wiley, New York (1986)
8. N.N.: Aircraft Accident—Uncontained Engine Failure Delta Airlines ﬂight 1288. National
Transportation Safety Board, Washington, D. C. (1996)
9. Kluft, W.: Zerspanprozess-Überwachung und mehr. Werkstattstechnik, 91, 357–359 (2001)
10. Golz, H.U., Schillo, E., Wolf, A., Kaufeld, M., Sprengel, P., Johannsen, P., Heinek, D.:
Bewertung von Werkzeugüberwachungs-systemen aus der Sicht der Anwender. VDI Berichte
1179, Düsseldorf, 309 ff (1995)
11. Brinkhaus,
J.:
Statistische
Verfahren
zur
selbstlernenden
Überwachung
spanender
Bearbeitungen in Werkzeugmaschinen; Promotion zum Dr.-Ing., ISBN 978-3-941416-31-4,
PZH-Verlag, Hannover (2009)
12. Kaever,
M.:
Steuerungsintegrierte
Prozessüberwachung
bei
spanender
Bearbeitung,
Dissertation, RWTH Aachen (2004)
13. Adam, P., Eckstein, M.: Zeitfestigkeit und Randschicht-Eigenschaften durch Zerspanung bei
Nickellegierungen. Materialwissenschaft u. Werkstofftechnik, 27, 272–279 (1992)
14. Brinkhaus, J.: Qualitätssicherung in der Fertigung hochbelasteter Bauteile; Proceedings:
Sichere und zuverlässige Fertigung durch Prozessüberwachung 2009, Verlag WZL Forum
GmbH, Aachen (2009)
Producing Better Turbines by Using Process Monitoring
179

15. Eckstein, M.: Process Monitoring-ein innovativer Ansatz zur Steigerung der Zuverlässigkeit
höchstbelasteter Bauteile der Fluggasturbine, Deutscher Luft- u. Raumfahrtkongress,
Jahrbuch (2004)
16. N.N.:
DIN
EN
ISO
3059-Zerstörungsfreie
Prüfung—Eindringprüfung
und
Magnetpulverprüfung—Betrachtungsbedingungen, Beuth Verlag GmbH (2013)
17. N.N.: FAA AC33-2B, FAA Airworthiness Directives and Advisory Circulars, Appendix, US
Department of Transportation. http://www.faa.gov (2006)
180
J. Brinkhaus et al.

From Fuzzy Maintenance, Repair
and Overhaul Data to Reliable
Capacity Planning
Steffen C. Eickemeyer, Simon Steinkamp, Bernhardt Schuster
and Sebastian Schäfer
Abstract To increase the logistical performance of regeneration processes, the
Institute of Production Systems and Logistics has developed methods for efﬁcient
capacity planning in spite of fuzzy load information. The methods were validated
using real data and an analysis of the methodology for its sociocultural conformity
and adaptability in a global company are being carried out.
Introduction
The topic of capacity planning is a partial project (D1) of the Collaborative
Research Centres (CRC) 871 ‘‘Regeneration of Complex Investment Goods’’.
Regeneration is the restoration, respective of the condition, of a complex invest-
ment good. Regeneration in this context is also known as ‘‘Maintenance, Repair
and Overhaul’’ (MRO). Complex investment goods, in the sense of this CRC, are
investment goods in which a high number of components stand in diverse,
S. C. Eickemeyer (&)
Scientiﬁc Assistant in the Production Management Research Group, Institute of Production
Systems and Logistics, Leibniz University of Hannover, Hannover, Germany
e-mail: eickemeyer@ifa.uni-hannover.de
S. Steinkamp
Temporary Scientiﬁc Assistant at the Institute of Production Systems and Logistics (IFA),
Production Engineering Center Hannover (PZH), Leibniz University of Hannover,
Hannover, Germany
B. Schuster
Director of Engineering and Technical Support at MTU, Maintenance Canada Ltd,
Hannover, Germany
S. Schäfer
Production Planning Senior Manager at MTU, Maintenance Hannover GmbH,
Hannover, Germany
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_24,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
181

functional relations. For example, complex investment goods are machine tools,
wind energy equipment, aircraft engines, diesel locomotives, or stationary gas
turbines [1].
Motivation and Bases
Creating value through the regeneration of goods is only achieved when the
revenues earned through additional service life exceed the costs of all the regen-
eration work required [2]. However, planning regeneration maintenance suffers
from uncertainties about the future (Fig. 1) [3]. Because of their complexity, not
all repairs to goods can be precisely planned in advance. Furthermore, there is
uncertainty regarding the necessity for the replacement of excessively damaged
goods. The only information available is vague, which leads to challenges when
planning the regeneration capacity [4]. Consequently, in order to guarantee efﬁ-
cient planning of capacities [5] with high on-time delivery and short turnaround
times, a forecast of the regeneration work required for complex capital goods
needs to be as precise as possible [6]. Combining a workload forecast with
capacity planning in the ﬁeld of complex goods for regeneration has hardly been
studied scientiﬁcally and there are no approaches relevant to practice [5, 7]. That is
why a method for capacity planning and adjustment for regeneration processes has
been developed, which allows the maximization of target parameters despite fuzzy
information. The entire project was designated for a four-year duration and will be
completed in December of 2013 [8].
Generic Process Model
In the ﬁrst step, a generic process model of regeneration regarding the corre-
sponding information localization was developed. On one hand, the required as
well as the available data and information in the corresponding process steps have
been identiﬁed. On the other hand, information that already contributes to the
Information about
regeneration process
100%
Time
Information content (database support)
Information content (regular)
Workload 
information
Fig. 1 Increasing accuracy
of information in the
Regeneration process [1]
182
S. C. Eickemeyer et al.

localization or determination of speciﬁc damages was considered in early phases
of regeneration and therefore gives considerable input for prompt capacity control.
It is assumed that at a later point of regeneration, concrete information replaces
information from earlier phases. In addition, the usage phase before the regener-
ation process was scrutinized concerning exploitable information [1].
Damage Library and Data Mining
The starting point for developing forecasts was a damage library in order to
concretize information for capacity planning [1, 8, 9]. Within the data mining
project, the damage library is used as a database. Bayesian Networks (Fig. 2) were
identiﬁed as the most suitable method to forecast expenditures for regenerating
complex investment goods despite uncertain load information [8, 9].
Whereas on one hand the information relating to the actual status of the
components is constantly increasing, on the other hand we see a decrease in the
capacity coordination options. Accordingly, capacity planning is carried out for
different time periods; we distinguish between long-, medium-, and short-term
planning. A Bayesian Network was developed for each planning horizon that takes
into account the subdivisions. Implementing Bayesian Networks in actual test
cases demonstrated that the generated forecasts for different levels could be pos-
itively evaluated (Table 1) [8, 9]. The forecasts of the Bayesian Networks have a
distinct advantage over the rigid comparative values of the industrial partner,
especially on the long- and short-term planning levels because current environ-
mental inﬂuences are taken into account quicker.
Regeneration workload
0 – 0.75
20%
0.75 – 1
30%
1 – 1.25
40%
> 1.25
10%
1.08 ± 0.45
Customer type
Type A
0%
Type B 
100%
30%
35%
24%
11%
0.8 ± 0.2
Other
0%
Customer type
Type A
12%
Type B 
78%
Other
10%
Capital goods version
Version 1
76%
Version 2
12%
Other
12%
Deployment region
Asia
55%
Europe
30%
Other
15%
Cost estimate 
0 – 0.5
21%
0.5 – 1
36%
1 – 1.5
43%
Input parameters
Output parameters
Change to para-
meters through 
knowledge input
Node
Edge
Fig. 2 Example of a
Bayesian Network
From Fuzzy Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul Data
183

The networks allow valid statements regarding the anticipated regeneration
expenditures to be drawn and can thus provide considerable support in planning
capacities. In addition, the forecasts can make previous estimates about regener-
ation expenditures more precise [8, 9].
Capacity Planning and Results
Using the forecasts as a guide, three mathematical models were developed to
determine the optimum labor force. The Long Term Model is a linear model,
which determines the optimum labor force for each month. In order to plan
appropriately for each month, the combination of in house and outside vendor
labor equals or exceeds the forecasted labor hours obtained from the Bayesian
Networks. The model maximized the target parameter, which in this case was
proﬁt. Utilizing IBM’s ILOG CPLEX in conjunction with Microsoft Excel, a long-
term plant capacity model was created and the results are shown below in Fig. 3.
The output data shows the optimal number of in house and outside vendor labor
hours for each month in order to maximize proﬁt over the course of a year. After
the results were calculated, they were tested in real time with an industry partner.
Table 1 Assessment and validation results of Bayesian Networks (BN) and planned values of
Industrial Partner (IP)
Planning
Long-term planning Medium-term planning Short-term planning
Forecast
BN
IP
BN
IP
BN
IP
Absolute deviation [h]
540
840
570
600
174
295
Standard deviation [h]
420
720
390
480
124
173
More accurate forecast (%) 63.8
31.0
58.6
39.7
91.7
8.3
0
5.000
10.000
15.000
20.000
25.000
30.000
35.000
Hours per Month
Months
OpƟmal Labor Mix
Max Labor Hours
OpƟmal in House Labor Hours
Forecasted Human Labor hours
Outside Vendor Labor hours
Labor Hours Equivalent Holding Units
Labor Hours Equivalent Penalty Units
Fig. 3 The optimal labor
mix for each month
184
S. C. Eickemeyer et al.

Validation and Outlook
At the moment, logistical performance parameters such as the throughput times
and the adherence to schedules of a regeneration area still need to be modelled and
established in simulation experiments so they can be validated using real data with
a cooperating partner. As the results of the past validations are very promising, it
has to be determined whether these results are transferable to other applications
and industrial plants in different countries with different products and cultures. To
accomplish this goal, a second evaluation is taking place in a subsidiary of the
cooperating partner in a different market environment.
Numerous studies show that the national cultures of a large number of nations
have an impact on the transferability of capacity planning with regard to the effects
on economics. For instance, both the study of Geert Hofstede [10] and the later
approached
GLOBE
(Global
Leadership
and
Organizational
Effectiveness
Research Program) study [11] identify cultural dimensions which are differently
shaped in cultural areas and which are able to explain differing leadership concepts
or the quality awareness of employees [12].
In addition to the national culture, both the size and age of a plant can inﬂuence
its receptiveness to changes. For example, employees at a plant that is part of a
new acquisition will probably react more suspiciously towards new processes and
changes than the employees of a newly founded joint venture with a local com-
pany [13].
Although there are efforts to establish process standards in multinational
companies to provide the same quality and products from every plant, there are
always variances, especially in the MRO business of complex capital goods. They
can be caused by a various number of reasons such as differences in plant size,
products, customer composition or repair capacities. All of these factors have to be
taken into account when transferring the regeneration workload forecast meth-
odology and the functional model for capacity planning. They inﬂuence input
parameters as well as considered limitations and bottlenecks. At the same time it is
important to achieve the objective with as little effort as possible.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank the DFG research organization for pro-
viding funding for this research project within the scope of the CRC 871 program. The authors
would also like to thank the Graduiertenakademie of the Leibniz Universität Hannover for
providing funding for the validation of the theoretical results in the global industry.
References
1. Eickemeyer, S.C., Nyhuis, P.: Capacity planning and coordination with fuzzy load
information. Bus. Rev. 16(1), 259–264 (2010)
2. Freund, C.: Die Instandhaltung im Wandel. In: Schenk, M. (ed.) Instandhaltung technischer
Systeme: Methoden und Werkzeuge zur Gewährleistung eines sicheren und wirtschaftlichen
Anlagenbetriebes, 1st edn, p. 17. Springer, Berlin (2010)
From Fuzzy Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul Data
185

3. Reményi, C., Staudacher, S.: Systematic simulation based approach for the identiﬁcation and
implementation of a scheduling rule in the aircraft engine maintenance. Int. J. Prod. Econ.
(2012). doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2012.10.022 (Accepted for publication)
4. Reményi, C., Staudacher, S., Becker, H., Dinc, S., Manejev, R., Fichtelmann R.:
Decentralized job-shop control for the maintenance of aircraft engines. In: Spath, D. (ed.)
Proceedings of the 21st ICPR International Conference on Production Research, Stuttgart
July 31–Aug 4, (2011)
5. Guide, V.D.R. Jr, Spencer, M.S.: Rough-cut capacity planning for remanufacturing ﬁrms.
Prod Plan and Control 8(3), 237–244 (1997)
6. Reményi, C., Staudacher, S., Holzheimer, N., Schulz, S.: Simulation of the maintenance
process in an Aircraft Engine Maintenance Company. In: Dufﬁe, N.A., DeVries, M.F. (eds.)
Proceedings of the 44th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems, June 1–3, Madison,
(2011)
7. Wagner, M.: Modellbasierte Arbeitskräfteplanung für stochastische Instandhaltungsereignisse
in der zivilen Luftfahrt. Dissertation, Technical University of Berlin (2009)
8. Eickemeyer, S.C., Borcherding, T., Schäfer, S., Nyhuis, P.: Validation of data fusion as a
method for forecasting the regeneration workload for complex capital goods. Int. J. Prod.
Eng. Res. Dev. (2013). doi:10.1007/s11740-013-0444-8
9. Eickemeyer, S.C., Borcherding, T., Nyhuis, P.: Information fusion as a means of forecasting
expenditures for regenerating complex investment goods. Int. J. Mech. Ind. Eng. 6, 179–182
(2012)
10. Hofstede, G.: The business of international business is culture. Int. Bus. Rev. 3(1), 1–14
(1994)
11. House, R. J., Hanges, P. J., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P. W., Gupta, V.:.Culture, leadership, and
organizations. Sage (2004)
12. Töpfer, A., Duchmann, C.: Der Einﬂuss der Landeskultur auf die Qualitätsorientierung der
Mitarbeiter und Wettbewerbsvorteile in der internationalen Produktpolitik-Empirische Basis
und
kulturpsychologische
Fundierung.
In
Herausforderungen
der
internationalen
marktorientierten Unternehmensführung (pp. 43–75). Gabler (2011)
13. Kutschker, M., Schmid, S.: Internationales management. Oldenbourg Verlag (2008)
186
S. C. Eickemeyer et al.

Machine Tool Thermal Errors Reduction
for 5-axis Machining of Aircraft Parts
Jerzy Jedrzejewski and Wojciech Kwasny
Abstract Problems connected with the reduction of thermal errors in the
controllable axes of 5-axis machining centres are discussed. A strategy for
improving machine tool thermal properties is proposed. The conditions for the
accurate holistic modelling, simulation and compensation of thermal errors in
controllable rotary axes for aircraft parts machining purposes are described.
Keywords Machine tool  Thermal error  Reduction  Compensation
Introduction
The aerospace industry needs highly efﬁcient 5-axis machine tools for precise
machining. One of the major components of this efﬁciency is volumetric accuracy,
which is mainly determined by the thermal error. The reduction and compensation
of this error is intensively investigated by both research centres and the machine
tool producers themselves [1–3].
The primary role in improving machine tool thermal properties and reducing
errors is played by error identiﬁcation through measurements [4, 5] and especially
through the accurate modelling and numerical simulation of error behaviour in the
normal machine tool operating conditions [6], taking into detailed account all the
interactions.
J. Jedrzejewski (&)  W. Kwasny
Institute of Production Engineering and Automation, Wroclaw University of Technology,
Wybrzeze Wyspianskiego Str. 27, 50370 Wroclaw, Poland
e-mail: jerzy.jedrzejewski@pwr.wroc.pl
W. Kwasny
e-mail: wojciech.kwasny@pwr.wroc.pl
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_25,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
187

Therefore the authors have focused their research on acquiring knowledge to
enable the holistic (integrated) modelling of the heat sources in the machine tool
structure to most faithfully render the actual power loss generation and heat
transfer processes taking place in the real machine tool and in its assemblies. Only
then the temperatures, deformations and thermal errors predicted by the holistic
model can be consistent with the ones occurring during machine tool operation,
especially in nonstationary states, and can be used to effectively improve the
thermal properties of machine tools, including 5-axis machining centres.
In order to achieve the highest possible effectiveness of improvement in thermal
properties one should use a strategy and the latest experimental and theoretical
knowledge, which is the focus of this paper. The presented models relating to
controllable axes are the result of research conducted by the authors and their team
for many years.
Strategy for Improving Thermal Properties of Machine
Tools
The consistent improvement of machine tools is vital for the effective reduction of
their thermal errors. The strategy for this improvement requires the latest theo-
retical and experimental knowledge. The latter should be based on possibly most
precise measurements of temperature, power losses, deformations and thermal
displacements. Also the effects of the machining environment and process, taking
into account their complexity, should be studied.
This is needed in order to create accurate calculation and error models and to
predict errors and precisely compensate them.
Some machine tool manufacturers (e.g. OKUMA) develop their own machine
tool thermal improvement strategies and achieve good results. The more complex
the machine tool structure, the more vital its consistent and comprehensive
improvement based on a proper strategy.
Modelling of Thermal Errors
In the holistic thermal model of the 5-axis HSC centre shown in Fig. 1, it is
particularly important to accurately model the bearing assemblies of the spindle
and of the whole electrospindle since it is in these assemblies that the largest and
highly variable heat sources are located. The contribution of this heat to the total
thermal error occurring between the table and the spindle tip may exceed 75 %.
For this purpose a mathematical model of power loss generation in the bearings,
taking into account all the interdependences between changes in temperature,
thermal changes in the dimensions of the spindle/electrospindle assembly
188
J. Jedrzejewski and W. Kwasny

components and the variable natural and forced heat transfer conditions, was
developed and validated [7, 8]. Figure 1 shows, besides the thermal errors gen-
erated in the drives of rotary controllable axes Z, C and A, also the errors in linear
axes X, Y and Z and the errors generated by the cutting process (the latter errors
are not discussed in the present paper). In the case of the 5-axis machining of
slender parts, e.g. aircraft engines, also the errors introduced by the production jig
in the process of positioning, supporting and ﬁxing the parts should be included in
Fig. 1 Major heat sources in 5-axis vertical machining centre
Machine Tool Thermal Errors Reduction
189

the proposed holistic error model. These are both thermal errors and errors gen-
erated by the forces exerted by the actuators.
A set of relations used in the modelling of power losses in controllable axes was
presented in [6]. For the 5-axis HSC centre this model has been signiﬁcantly
reﬁned in order to take into account the power loss generation and the heat transfer
speciﬁc for the rotational spindle speeds as high as 50,000 rpm. For this purpose it
was necessary to develop a shift model [9] for doing calculations on the basis of
the predicted (for a given spindle speed) high-speed bearing contact angles which
determine the forces acting on the rolling elements of the bearings. System SATO
(Fig. 2), previously used to model mainly machine tool assemblies and simple
structures of whole machine tools [10], has been developed by the authors for the
purposes of the efﬁcient holistic modelling of machine tool spindle assemblies and
headstocks. The system is used to implement the holistic model shown in Fig. 1, in
the part relating to the generation of power loss variation, taking into account the
interdependences within the headstock structure and other rotational axes.
Fig. 2 General structure of SATO system
190
J. Jedrzejewski and W. Kwasny

SATO includes detailed algorithms for determining power losses in spindle
bearings, rolling, toothed and belt transmissions, motors and guides. It also
comprises accurate heat transmission models and models of spindle and its bearing
set behaviour under great centrifugal forces which occur at rotational speeds as
high as 50,000 rpm.
The SATO structure incorporates the hybrid FEM and FDM modelling of
spindle assemblies, mathematical models of the natural generation of power losses
in heat sources of different kind, and detailed procedures specifying heat transfer
depending on the geometric structures. As a result, the system enables the holistic
modelling of the particular machine tool modules.
Also the tilting table motion drives are considerable sources of thermal errors in
the 5-axis machining centre.
A general thermal model and an algorithm for computing temperatures and
displacements in rotation axis A and C of the centre’s tilting table are shown in
Fig. 3 [11]. The algorithm is based on the catalogue speciﬁcations relating to
Fig. 3 Algorithm computing power losses and temperature in torque motors for temperature
resolution and displacement estimation
Machine Tool Thermal Errors Reduction
191

direct high-torque motors, winding resistance–temperature dependencies, motor
coolant heat transfer coefﬁcients and the heat capacity and surface area of the table
components transferring heat to the environment. Thermal errors are reduced
mainly by reducing power losses and through the forced cooling of the closed
spaces (within the range of heat source action) in housings and through the
thermosymmetric machine tool design.
Power losses in high-speed (rolling bearing) friction nodes are reduced by
maintaining a minimum lubricant ﬁlm thickness enabling elastohydrodynamic
lubrication using air-oil lubrication systems and the latest lubrication systems:
MQGS (Minimum Quantity of Grease Supply) and MQCJ (Minimum Quantity
and Cooling Jet) [12, 13]. The latter system combines lean lubrication of the
bearing with its intensive cooling whereby very high high-speed coefﬁcients, as
high as DmN = 5 9 106, can be used, which is unachievable in the case of other
bearing lubrication methods.
A signiﬁcant reduction in thermal errors can also be achieved by reducing to
minimum the running time of the drives in accordance with the JIT rule quoted
above. It is also essential to insulate the machine tool’s load-bearing components
from the heat generated in the drives in the course of machining. Undoubtedly
numerical analyses based on accurate heat generation, distribution and exchange
models can help to reduce machine tool thermal errors.
Scientiﬁc Result
The work on the holistic model led to the forecasting of the thermal error (spindle
tip displacement relative to the table) made up of the errors arising in the head-
stock and in tilting table axes A and C, and the thermal elongations of the load-
bearing structure. In order to compare the predicted thermal error values with the
measured ones it was necessary to add the abrupt change in spindle position caused
Fig. 4 Results of thermal deformation 5 axis machining centre and spindle shift calculations for
50,000 rpm (a), experimental veriﬁcation of total spindle displacement relative to table in
thermally steady states against displacements for other spindle rotational speeds (b)
192
J. Jedrzejewski and W. Kwasny

by shift, predicted by the model described in [9], to the thermal error. For the
example shown in Fig. 4 the error in direction Z, determined from the measure-
ment curve amounts to about 116 lm after 3 h of work at 50,000 rpm while the
one predicted using the holistic model amounts to 113 lm.
This means that the model satisﬁes the accuracy requirements for the simula-
tion, analysis and improvement of the thermal properties of the precision 5-axis
machining centres used in the aerospace industry.
Compensation of Thermal Errors
The compensation of thermal errors is undoubtedly the cheapest way of reducing
their effect on machining precision. Hence it is the subject of intensive research
focusing on the identiﬁcation of the errors through measurements, and their
modelling. In the case of spindle assemblies, axial thermal errors and shift add up.
At a rotational speed of 50,000 rpm shift may exceed 35 % of the total spindle
displacement. It is always the sum of the errors, one being the function of the
machine tool thermal state (temperature) and the other being the function of the
spindle rotational speed, which is measured. In order to develop an accurate
compensation function the measured quantities need to be separated and the
Fig. 5 Experimentally identiﬁed and predicted high-speed machining centre spindle displace-
ments and theoretical compensation results
Machine Tool Thermal Errors Reduction
193

correction should be conditioned on two parameters: the thermal state and rota-
tional speed of the spindle. An example of such compensation is shown in Fig. 5.
Figure 5 shows predictions of compensation in axis Z for a 5-axis centre with
the maximum rotational spindle speed of 45,000 rpm. Each of the curves repre-
sents the sum of thermal displacement and shift, but because of the high rotational
spindle speeds, the character of the curves is not exclusively thermal. The error
after compensation does not exceed 20 % of the value measured before com-
pensation (about 20 lm). At low rotational speeds (\20,000 rpm) the percentage
of shift is small whereby the displacement curves have a character of typical
thermal curves.
In order to obtain very small spindle displacement errors (\10 %) without
compensation the machine tool assemblies need to be intensively cooled. It is also
possible to take into account the thermal error component resulting from changes
in ambient temperature, as an additional component of the compensation functions
discussed above or through a separate compensation function (the leading machine
tool manufacturers have already adopted the latter solution).
Conclusions
The modelling of thermal errors signiﬁcantly contributes to the knowledge of their
behaviour in the machine tool operating conditions. Errors in spindle rotation axis
Z and tilting table axis C can be effectively modelled. Modelling errors in the
whole machine tool workspace and the accurate experimental veriﬁcation of such
models are still difﬁcult.
In the case of highly efﬁcient high-speed milling centres, the accurate com-
pensation of thermal errors still needs to be improved.
This paper has shown that it makes sense to holistically model the thermal
errors of 5-axis HSC centres which in order to machine aircraft parts must meet
rigorous precision requirements. The holistic model needs to be ﬁne-tuned and
extended to cover all the components of the HSC centre thermal error.
Acknowledgments This research is supported by Ministry of Science and Education of Poland,
Ministry of Knowledge Economy—Republic of Korea and NCBiR (Project: INNOTECH—K1/
IN1/75/155671/NCBR/13).
References
1. Abele, E., Altintas, Y., Brecher, C.: Machine tool spindle units. CIRP Ann. Manufact.
Technol. 59(2), 781–802 (2010)
2. Mayr, J., Jedrzejewski, J., Uhlmann, E., et al.: Thermal issues in machine tools. CIRP Ann.
Manufact. Technol. 61(2), 771–791 (2012)
194
J. Jedrzejewski and W. Kwasny

3. Turek, P., Jedrzejewski, J., Modrzycki, W.: Methods of machine tool error compensation.
J. Mach. Eng. 10(4), 5–26 (2010)
4. Kwasny, W., Turek, P., Jedrzejewski, J.: Survey of machine tool error measuring methods.
J. Mach. Eng. 11(4), 7–38 (2011)
5. Schwenke, H., Knapp, W., Haitjema, H., et al.: Geometric error measurement and
compensation of machines—an update. Ann. CIRP Ann. Manufact. Technol. 57(2),
660–675 (2008)
6. Jedrzejewski, J., Kwasny, W.: Knowledge base and assumptions for holistic modelling aimed
at reducing axial errors of complex machine tools. J. Mach. Eng. 13(2), 7–25 (2013)
7. Jedrzejewski, J.: Thermal problems in machine tools design and operation. In: Mekid, S. (ed.)
Introduction to precision machine design and error assessment, pp. 75–127. CRC Press,
(2009)
8. Jedrzejewski, J., Kowal, Z., Kwasny, W., Modrzycki, W.: Hybrid model of high speed
machining centre headstock. CIRP Ann. Manufact. Technol. 53(1), 285–288 (2004)
9. Jedrzejewski, J., Kwasny, W.: Modelling of angular contact ball bearings and axial
displacements for high-speed spindles. CIRP Ann. Manufact. Technol. 59(1), 377–382
(2010)
10. Winiarski, Z., Kowal, Z., Kwasny, W., Ha, J.-Y.: Thermal model of the spindle drive
structure. J. Mach. Eng. 10(4), 41–52 (2010)
11. Blazejewski, A., Kwasny, W., Jedrzejewski, J., Gim, T.-W.: Modelling thermal deformation
of tilting rotary table with direct drive system. J. Mach. Eng. 10(4), 26–40 (2010)
12. Koyama, M.: Minimum quantity and cooling jet lubricated angular contact ball bearings for
machine tool. NTN Tech. Rev. 74, 24–27 (2006)
13. Lee, S.-W., Maeda, T.: Angular contact ball bearings that require a minimum quantity of
grease supply for lubrication. NTN Tech. Rev. 75, 90–95 (2008)
Machine Tool Thermal Errors Reduction
195

Recycling of Aluminum Chips
by Hot Extrusion
Matthias Haase, Andreas Jäger and A. Erman Tekkaya
Introduction
The production of primary aluminum by processing bauxite is one of the most
energy intense processes of metal production. The energy required for the pro-
duction of one ton of aluminum (168 GJ/t) requires almost ten times the energy
required for the production of one ton of steel (20 GJ/t) [5, 6]. By using secondary
aluminum, produced by recycling aluminum scrap, the energy requirement can be
reduced by up to 94 % [2]. Considering the development of the global aluminum
production (see Table 1), the use of secondary aluminum has a high potential for
saving energy and therefore energy costs.
One approach of further reducing the energy demand for the production of
aluminum products is the direct recycling of aluminum scrap by forming pro-
cesses. Here, the energy intense melting process for the production of secondary
aluminum can be avoided. One example of this approach is the direct hot extrusion
of aluminum machining chips.
Hot Extrusion of Aluminum Machining Chips
The conventional process of hot extrusion is used for the production of semi-
ﬁnished aluminum proﬁles (extrudates). The shape of the extrudates can reach
from simple bars to complex multi-hollow geometries [1]. The basic process
principle of hot extrusion is shown in Fig. 1.
In conventional hot extrusion, a preheated billet (350–550 C) is inserted into
the container of the extrusion press and pushed by a moving ram through the die
M. Haase (&)  A. Jäger  A. E. Tekkaya
Technische Universität Dortmund, Institut für Umformtechnik und Leichtbau,
Baroper Straße 301, 44227 Dortmund, Germany
e-mail: Matthias.Haase@iul.tu-dortmund.de
B. Denkena (ed.), New Production Technologies in Aerospace Industry,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-01964-2_26,
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
197

oriﬁce, which determines the geometry of the extrudate. For the extrusion of
aluminum machining chips, the basic process principle is extended by the pro-
cessing of the chips, as shown in Fig. 2.
In the ﬁrst step, the machining chips are cleaned from remaining lubricants by
thermal or chemical treatment. In the second step, the chips are compacted on a
hydraulic press to chip-based billets usable for hot extrusion. To homogenize the
material, the chip-based billets are preheated in a third step prior to extrusion.
Finally, the chip-based billets are hot extruded to produce chip-based extrudates.
Results
To evaluate the mechanical properties of chip-based extrudates, lubricant-free
AA6060 aluminum alloy machining chips were compacted and hot extruded. As a
reference, conventional cast billets of the same alloy were also extruded. The chips
Fig. 1 Process principle of hot extrusion
Table 1 Development of the global aluminum production [3, 7]
Aluminum production
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Est. 2030
Primary (in Mio t)
10.3
16.1
19.4
24.5
41.2
26–28
Secondary (in Mio t)
2.3
3.7
6.1
8.4
8.4
22–24
Fig. 2 Process principle of hot extrudates [4]
198
M. Haase et al.

were compacted with a force of 500 kN in a steel tube with an inner diameter of
60 mm to chip-based billets. The density of the chip-based billets was 80 %
compared to the density of cast aluminum. The chip-based and the cast billets were
homogenized for 6 h at 550 C in an electrical furnace prior to the extrusion.
Figure 3 shows the resulting microstructure and the measured hardness values of
the billets before and after homogenization.
The microstructure of the cast billets did not signiﬁcantly change due to the
homogenization. However, the microstructure of the chip-based billet changes
from severely deformed grains to homogeneous ﬁne grains after homogenization.
This can be related to recrystallization processes initiated by the high amount of
strain imposed on the material during machining. As the microstructure strongly
inﬂuences the mechanical properties of the material, the Vickers hardness was
measured before and after homogenization of the billets. Before homogenization,
the hardness of chip-based extrudates is higher compared to the hardness of the
cast billets, which can be related to the work hardening of the chips during
machining. After homogenization, the hardness of the chip-based billets remains
higher compared to the hardness of the cast billets, which is due to the smaller
average grain size of the chip-based billet.
After homogenization, the chip-based and cast billets were extruded on a
2.5 MN direct extrusion press (Collin LPA250t) at 550 C to solid rectangular
proﬁles with a 20 mm 9 5 mm geometry. The extrusion ratio, the ratio between
the cross section of the extrudate and the cross section of the container of the
extrusion press, was R = 34. The ram speed was kept constant at 1 mm/s. Three
different dies were used for the extrusion trials. The ﬁrst die is a ﬂat-face die
conventionally used for the extrusion of solid section proﬁles. The second die is a
porthole die, which is conventionally used to produce hollow proﬁles. By
removing the mandrel, the die can be used for the production of solid sections. The
third die is an experimental extrusion die based on a concept of Estrin et al. [2],
which integrates the process of ECAP into the process of hot extrusion. In this
integrated extrusion and ECAP die (iECAP die), the material is pressed around
deﬁned angles inside the die. The last two die concepts aim on increasing the shear
Fig. 3 Microstructure
and
hardness
of
chip-based
and
cast
billets
before
and
after
homogenization
Recycling of Aluminum Chips by Hot Extrusion
199

and pressure affecting the chip-based billets and therefore to increase the welding
quality between the individual chips. The three tools are shown in Fig. 4.
Independent of the die concept, the extrusion of chip-based billets led in all
cases to proﬁles without visible surface defects. To investigate the mechanical
properties of chip-based extrudates and extruded cast billets depending on the
extrusion die, tensile tests were conducted (see Fig. 5).
Four tensile tests for each alignment were conducted in accordance with EN
ISO
6892-1:2009
at
room
temperature
with
a
constant
strain
rate
of
2.5 9 10-3 s-1. The standard deviation for chip-based and cast billets was in all
cases below 12 and 7 MPa for the ultimate tensile strength and below 4 and 2 %
for the uniform elongation, respectively. The results show that the tensile strength
of extruded cast billets is, depending on the extrusion die, up to 12 % higher
compared to the tensile strength of chip-based extrudates. For the chip-based
extrudates, the highest tensile strength is achieved by using the iECAP die. It is
evident that the ductility of the extrudates depends more signiﬁcantly on the die
used for the extrusion compared to the tensile strength. For the extruded cast
billets, an increase in uniform elongation of 75 and 99 % was achieved by
changing the extrusion die from the ﬂat-face die to the porthole die and to the
iECAP die, respectively. For the chip-based extrudates, the increase in uniform
elongation was 97 and 131 %, respectively.
Fig. 4 Three different die concepts for chip extrusion
Fig. 5 Tensile test results for
different extrusion dies
200
M. Haase et al.

Conclusion and Outlook
The direct recycling of aluminum machining chips by hot extrusion is a promising
approach to increase the energy efﬁciency of aluminum recycling. With an
appropriate die design, it is possible to produce chip-based extrudates with
mechanical properties comparable to extruded cast billets. The ductility of the
extrudates depends on the extrusion die design, while their strength was not sig-
niﬁcantly affected. In future works, the production of ﬁnished products by cold
extrusion of the chip-based extrudates is investigated.
Acknowledgments The authors thank the Graduate School of Energy Efﬁcient Production and
Logistics at the Technische Universität Dortmund for the support of this research.
References
1. Bauser, M.: Metallkundliche Grundlagen. In: Strangpressen. 2. Auﬂage, Aluminium-Verlag,
Düsseldorf (2001)
2. Estrin,
Y.,
Ferkel,
H.,
Hellmig,
R.J.,
Lamark,
T.,
Popov,
M.V.:
German
Patent
DE102005049369 (2008)
3. GDA.: Gesamtverband der Aluminiumindustrie e.V. http://www.aluinfo.de (2013). Stand: 4
Jun 2013
4. Haase, M., Ben Khalifa, N., Tekkaya, A.E., Misiolek, W.Z.: Improving mechanical properties
of chip-based aluminium extrutes by integrated extrusion and equal channel angular pressing
(iECAO). Mater. Sci. Eng., A. 539, 194–204 (2012)
5. Price, L., Sinton, J., Worrell, E., Phylipsen, D., Hu, X., Li, J.: Energy use and carbon dioxide
emissions from steel production in China. Energy 27, 429–446 (2002)
6. Schmitz, C.: Handbook of Aluminum Recycling, pp. 27–30. Vulkan Verlag, Essen (2006)
7. Schwarz, H.G.: Aluminium production and energy. Encyclopedia of Energy 1, 81–95
Recycling of Aluminum Chips by Hot Extrusion
201

