
NEW SLAVERY
A Reference Handbook
Second Edition

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Antisematism, Jerome A. Chanes
Civil Liberties in America, Samuel Walker
Counterterrorism, Graeme C. S. Steven and Rohan Gunaratna
Cybercrime, Bernadette H. Schell and Clemens Martin
Defendant Rights, Hamid R. Kusha
Drug Use, Richard Isralowitz
Global AIDS Crisis, Richard G. Marlink and Alison G. Kotin
Healthcare Reform in America, Jennie Jacobs Kronenfeld and
Michael R. Kronenfeld
Media and American Courts, S. L. Alexander
Nation-Building, Cynthia A. Watson
Proﬁling and Criminal Justice in America, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
The USA Patriot Act, Howard Ball
Voting in America, Robert E. DiClerico
World Poverty, Geoffrey Gilbert

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up to date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series 
will ﬁnd the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


NEW SLAVERY
A Reference Handbook
Second Edition
Kevin Bales
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2004 by Kevin Bales
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bales, Kevin.
New slavery : a reference handbook / Kevin Bales. – 2nd ed.
p.
cm.— (ABC-CLIO's contemporary world issues series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-85109-815-1 (hardback : alk. paper)
ISBN 1-85109-816-X (ebook)
1. Slavery—History—20th century. 2. Slavery—History. I. Title.
II. Series:  Contemporary world issues.
HT867B37 2005
306.3'62'0904—dc22
2005015943
07
06
05
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
Visit abc-clio.com for details.
Production Team
Acquisitions Editor: Mim Vasan
Production Editor: Laura Esterman
Editorial Assistant: Alisha Martinez
Production Manager: Don Schmidt
Manufacturing Coordinator: George Smyser
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
.
Manufactured in the United States of America.

To Ernst Borinski


Contents
Preface, xiii
Acknowledgments, xix
1
Background and History, 1
What Makes a Slave?, 2
Slavery Deﬁned, 3
How Many Slaves?, 4
The Nature of Contemporary Slavery, 5
How Slavery Changed into its Modern Form, 5
Old and New Slavery Compared, 8
The Question of Race, 11
References, 13
Note, 13
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 15
The Forms of Contemporary Slavery, 15
Examples of Contemporary Slavery, 18
Lives Up in Smoke, 18
Slavery in the City of Lights, 20
Controversies, 23
Controversy 1—Are We All Responsible for 
Global Slavery?, 23
Controversy 2—Is It Right to Buy Slaves?, 24
Controversy 3—Is Prostitution Slavery?, 27
Solutions, 30
The Role of the State and the UN: International 
Law and Slavery, 30
Groups and Strategies Working against Slavery, 32
Examples at the International Level, 32
An Example at the National Level: Rugmark, 34
ix

An Example at the Local Level: The Break
the Chain Campaign in Washington, DC, 34
What Can We Do?, 36
References, 37
3
Slavery in America, 39 
What Do We Know about Human Trafﬁcking 
in the United States?, 44
Stopping Slavery in America, 47
What Can Be Done?, 49
Increasing Law Enforcement, 50
Supporting the Victims and Survivors 
of Trafﬁcking and Slavery, 51
Public Awareness, 52
References, 54
Note, 54
4
Chronology, 55
References, 68
5
Biographical Sketches, 71
Swami Agnivesh (1939–), 71
Jean-Robert Cadet (1955–), 73
Thomas Clarkson (1760–1846), 74
Lou DeBaca (1967–), 75
Frederick Douglass (1817–1895), 76
Given Kachepa (1986–), 77
Cheikh Saad Bouh Kamara (1944–), 79
Craig Kielburger (1982–), 80
Dona Pureza Lopez Loyola (1943–), 81
Iqbal Masih (1982–1995), 82
Keshav Nankar (1961–), 83
Vivek (1957–) and Vidyullata (1957–) Pandit, 84
Father Edwin Paraison (1962–), 86
Shakil Patan (1956–1998), 87
Father Ricardo Rizende (1952–), 88
Salma Mint Saloum (1956–), 88
Amar Saran (1954–), 89
Suman (1961–), 91
Moctar Teyeb (1959–), 92
Harriet Tubman (1820–1913), 93
x
Contents

John Woolman (1720–1772), 94
References, 95
6
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony 
about Contemporary Slavery, 97
Facts and Figures, 98
The Spread of Slavery, 99
Key International Laws and Conventions on Slavery, 101
Slavery Convention of the League of Nations (1926), 103
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), 104
Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, 
the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar to
Slavery (1956), 104
Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989) 
(Excerpts), 107
ILO Convention Concerning the Prohibition and
Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst
Forms of Child Labor (1999) (Excerpts), 108
United States Trafﬁcking Victims Protection Act (2000), 108
United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized
Crime (2000), 114
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony about the Different Types
of Slavery, 116
Bonded Labor, 116
Contract Slavery, 121
Chattel Slavery, 123
War Slavery, 128
Slavery Linked to Religious Practice, 133
Forced Labor, 137
Enslavement for Commercial Sexual Exploitation, 142
Domestic Slavery, 152
Child Labor and Slavery, 157
References, 159
7
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies, 161
Global Antislavery Groups, 161
Intergovernmental Organizations, 164
Governmental Organizations, 168
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region, 168
Africa, 168
Asia, 170
Contents
xi

Europe, 172
North America, 182
South America, 191
South Asia and Southeast Asia, 193
8
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources, 201
Print Resources, 202
Books, 202
Articles, 219
Teaching Packs, 221
Brieﬁngs and Reports, 221
Newsletters and Periodicals, 225
Selected Nonprint Resources, 226
CD-ROMs, 226
Exhibitions, 229
Pamphlets, Photographs and Digital Images, Posters, 
Press Kits, and Information Packs, 230
Videotapes, 232
Web Sites, 248
Glossary, 251
Index, 257
About the Author, 273
xii
Contents

Preface
T
his book is about the newest forms of one of the oldest insti-
tutions on earth. Slavery has been part of human existence
since the dawn of history. Slaves have tilled the soil, swept
the floors, prepared the food, and worked and worked and
worked in any number of ways from the very beginnings of civi-
lization. In almost every culture and society there has been, at
one time or another, slavery. In all of those societies, slavery has
reﬂected the ideas, the economy, and the power relationships of
the moment. At times slavery has been about legal ownership of
one person by another. At other times it has been about control-
ling people, but not about owning them as property. Though it
has taken many forms through history, slavery has always been a
kind of relationship between people. It is a personal as well as a
social relationship, and it is almost always an economic relation-
ship, for slavery is about making a proﬁt from the work of oth-
ers. Sometimes it has also been a legal relationship. The impor-
tant point is that slavery is dynamic, reﬂecting local customs and
practices, but also changing over time.
We live in a world that is changing rapidly, and slavery is
changing rapidly as well. For example, slavery has always been
part of war. In the past, slaves might be taken on the battleﬁeld
or captured in raids. In the Crusades of the Middle Ages, enslav-
ing the enemy was part of the strategy for victory, as well as a
way to ﬁnance the war effort. In the twentieth century, mass slav-
ery became part of the mass warfare of 1939–1945. The German
war effort relied on millions of enslaved men, women, and chil-
dren. Many of these slaves worked to construct the very
weapons that would be used to enslave others. Since World War
II, the pace of social and technological change has accelerated. As
the twentieth century turned into the twenty-first, very rapid
xiii

change was sweeping the world. Some of the most important
changes have been the end of colonialism, the population explo-
sion, and the end of the Cold War, followed quickly by the global-
ization of technology, culture, and the economy. These changes
have also brought the evolution of new forms of slavery. The
most important change concerns the price of slaves.
Today slaves are cheaper than they have ever been in human
history. The population explosion has created a vast supply of
potential workers, and the rapid economic changes of the past
ﬁfty years have ensured that many of these people are desperate
and vulnerable and easily enslaved. Because they are so cheap,
slaves today fulﬁll a new role in the economy. They are no longer
thought of as major investments; they are used and disposed of
according to the whims of their slaveholders. But the proﬁts they
generate are remarkably high even though they are normally
used in only the most basic kinds of work. Today slavery is a very
proﬁtable business.
Slaves are found in almost every country. Altogether, there
are millions of slaves in the world—concentrated in the develop-
ing countries, but exploited in the United States, Europe, and Ja-
pan as well. The rapid change in the way slavery operates means
that governments, other organizations, and the public are still try-
ing to understand today’s slavery. In the United States, many
people still think of slavery in terms of the slavery of the Ameri-
can South before the Civil War. The reality is much more ﬂuid and
more difﬁcult to see. As part of the criminal economy, slavery is
hidden from view. But as part of the global trafﬁc in human beings
and their exploitation, we know that it is growing. This book aims
to illuminate the slavery of today and to show how it is changing.
It has to be recognized that there is still a great deal to learn
about slavery. Since many people believe that slavery was abol-
ished long ago, only a few people are researching it or campaign-
ing against it. Governments and other organizations are only re-
cently coming to grips with the volume and extent of slavery in
the economy. So this book is just a beginning, a starting point for
people who want to be part of the quest to understand slavery.
Reading and using it should help to clarify what we now know
(and what we still need to learn) about slavery. It points to the
sources, organizations, and people that will carry the reader still
further. The aim of this book is not to have all the answers but to
be a tool that will help you ﬁnd the answers to your own unique
questions about slavery.
xiv
Preface

Chapter 1 deﬁnes slavery and gives examples of slavery to-
day. It gives estimates of the number of slaves in the world and
describes their conditions. The process of change that has created
new forms of slavery is traced, and the key factors that comprise
slavery are discussed. In order to clarify the nature of slavery, the
slavery of the American South in 1850 is compared and con-
trasted to the slavery of today. Since the notion of “race” or eth-
nicity is much less important to an understanding of contempo-
rary slavery, this shift from slavery based in racism to slavery
centered on vulnerability is explained.
Chapter 2 looks at slavery around the world. Case studies
provide examples of these forms. The process of globalization is
linked to changes in the nature of slavery, and this process and
those changes are examined. Once a picture of contemporary
slavery has been drawn, this question is addressed: Who is re-
sponsible for global slavery? Since many people look to the
United Nations to take the lead on the issue of slavery, the role of
the UN and its work are examined. One of the areas that the UN
is especially concerned with is the transport, and often enslave-
ment, of illegal migrants. This is called human trafﬁcking, and it
is a growing problem.
Other groups and organizations are involved in the work
against slavery. Examples of these organizations and descriptions
of their work are given for the international, national, and local
levels. Many of these groups are concerned with directly liberat-
ing slaves and then helping them through rehabilitation, and that
process is examined. Chapter 2 concludes by considering the im-
portant question: What can we do?
Chapter 3 looks at slavery in America. Human trafficking
brings people from all over the world to be slaves in the United
States. They are trapped in sweatshops, worked in the ﬁelds, held
as servants in the homes of the economically privileged, and
forced into prostitution. It is a large and complex criminal enter-
prise and happens, often, right under our noses.
Chapter 4 presents a chronology of slavery worldwide, with
emphasis on key events in the last ﬁfty years; Chapter 5 contains
a selection of biographical sketches of modern abolitionists and a
few historical ﬁgures as well. Most of the individuals included in
the biographical sketches will be unfamiliar to readers. The ones
listed here are just a sample, some suggested by antislavery ac-
tivists and some from my own experience of researching slavery
around the world. Young antislavery workers have been singled
Preface
xv

out for inclusion. Of course, many people around the world work
to combat slavery in near anonymity. In the developing world, as
you will read in these sketches, working against slavery can be a
dangerous business, and researchers and campaigners have been
killed trying to free slaves. Those who work at the more danger-
ous grassroots level often prefer to keep their identities secret to
protect their families. For that reason, the names of some real he-
roes in the struggle against slavery may never be known.
Chapter 6 presents facts, data, evidence, and ﬁrsthand testi-
mony about modern slavery. After some basic statistics about
slavery are identiﬁed, the key international laws and conventions
on slavery are reviewed. Relevant excerpts from these laws and
conventions are reproduced here with brief introductions. Most
of Chapter 6 is given over to reports, evidence, and testimony
about different forms of slavery. These may be press reports, ra-
dio transcripts, interviews, statements to the United Nations
(UN), or the personal accounts of being a slave. Evidence is given
for each of the following types of contemporary slavery: bonded
labor, contract slavery, chattel slavery, war slavery, slavery linked
to religious practice, forced labor, commercial sex slavery and
trafﬁcking, domestic slavery, and slavery linked to child labor.
Chapter 7 lists and describes those organizations concerned
with ﬁghting slavery. These include international, national, local,
and overseas groups, but with a special emphasis on the key
American antislavery organization, Free the Slaves. A special ef-
fort has been made to provide links, mostly through the Internet,
with organizations in the developing world that are so often ig-
nored in Western media. The information about all these organi-
zations was current at the time of writing, but since these are
ﬂuid and dynamic collections of human beings, they are continu-
ally changing, reorganizing, restructuring, and expanding or con-
tracting like all human groups.
Chapter 8 lists all sorts of resources. Slavery receives rela-
tively little attention, and the number of printed works is not
large. In an area concerned with a human rights violation like
slavery, much of what is written is produced by campaigning
groups rather than academics or professional writers, and conse-
quently many of the listed works are brieﬁng papers or reports.
In many ways, the nonprint resources listed in Chapter 8 are
more rich and varied than the print resources. Many ﬁlmmakers
have worked to open the subject of slavery and have produced
investigative programs exploring the issue and depicting the
xvi
Preface

lives of slaves. These are listed along with other resources, such
as exhibitions, posters, press kits, and digital images that can be
downloaded from the Internet.
Preface to the Revised Edition
There has been great and rapid change since New Slavery was ﬁrst
published, change that seems to be growing in its momentum
and reach. New laws have been passed, a new UN Convention
has come into force, and, especially, a new awareness of slavery
has grown in the American public. As this awareness of modern
slavery expanded, other books, ﬁlms, scripts, poems, articles, law
reviews, photo essays, theses and dissertations, songs, even a
dance program, expressed people’s deeply felt desire both to un-
derstand and to end slavery. For me personally, the growth in in-
terest led to hundreds of interviews on television, radio, and in
magazines and newspapers. It is an explosion of concern that is
being felt at the local, national, and international level.
One of the most exciting changes is the establishment of Free
the Slaves, the ﬁrst broadbased antislavery organization in mod-
ern America. Set up in late 2000, just after New Slavery was ﬁn-
ished, Free the Slaves is based in Washington, DC, and has been
joined by thousands of Americans who seek to end slavery. In its
very short life, Free the Slaves has achieved breakthrough after
breakthrough: forging an agreement with the chocolate compa-
nies to take slavery out of their product chain, playing an instru-
mental role in getting new antitrafﬁcking laws passed at both the
state and federal level, supporting the liberation of child slaves in
India and West Africa, educating the public, and bringing to-
gether clubs, churches, schools, universities, and individuals to
ﬁght slavery. It works against human trafﬁcking and slavery in
the United States and across the globe. Sometimes it does so by
advising governments, but most importantly by backing up those
grassroots groups that are literally kicking in doors and bringing
slaves to freedom. Imagine my joy when I get an e-mail like this
one from India:
We had a rescue operation and rescued seven children
from a carpet loom in Allahabad. All seven children are
aged between 10–12 years. Two of them are very sick,
suffering from jaundice, and the others look malnour-
Preface
xvii

ished . . . after medical check ups they will be sent to Bal
Vikas Ashram for rehabilitation. Their parents have
been contacted.
Slave children in the carpet looms are often kidnapped at the
age of seven or eight. Their desperate parents won’t see them for
years. Americans help bring these children out of slavery by join-
ing and supporting Free the Slaves, which, in turn, helps fund
rescue and rehabilitation in India and other countries. As a father
and a son, my heart swells when I think about how these lost
children are found and returned to their families.
I hope that this revised edition of New Slavery speaks to you.
I’ve been helped by the many people who have read this book
and talked to me about it. There are likely to still be errors, and
these are all mine.
Kevin Bales
Oxford, Mississippi
xviii
Preface

Acknowledgments
T
his book beneﬁted from the help, guidance, and hard work of
a number of people. Foremost among these is Sally Ramsden,
a London-based journalist well known for her work in devel-
opment and human rights. She provided the research behind
much of this book. Catherine Prior helped to construct the data-
base used in Chapter 6. In the United States, Jenni Trovillion,
Caroline Tendall, and Jacob Patton did a superlative job on Web-
based searches and editing. The London-based organization
Anti-Slavery International holds one of the best archives and in-
formation centers on contemporary slavery; without access to
that resource, this book could not have been written. Mary Math-
eson, Mike Dottridge, David Ould, Becky Smaga, Jen Escher, Jeff
Howarth, and Beth Herzfeld, all Anti-Slavery International staff,
guided me through their library and checked my work to make
sure I and my associates had not missed anything. Much of the
work on the ﬁrst edition of this book was done while I was on a
sabbatical leave from my post at the School of Sociology and So-
cial Policy at Roehampton University in London, England. The
support of the Roehampton University, and especially Professor
Graham Fennell, was very important. The writing was made
much easier by the hospitality, support, and stimulating com-
pany provided by the Croft Institute for International Studies at
the University of Mississippi and its director, Professor Michael
Metcalf.
For the Revised Edition, Eden Hegwood was a most able
and punctilious research assistant who deserves much credit for
her excellent work. Lauren Welford, a student at the Croft Insti-
tute, provided essential help just as it was needed. The errors
and omissions in this book, of course, all belong to the author.
Gabriel Bales provided diversions, riddles, and jokes.
xix


1
Background and History
M
ost of us think that slavery ended a long time ago—or that
if it does exist, it only happens in poor countries far away.
Maybe that is one reason why Hilda Dos Santos stayed in
slavery for so long in the afﬂuent suburbs outside Washington,
DC. Hilda had worked as a domestic servant in her native Brazil
for many years, and when her employers, Rene and Margarida
Bonnetti, asked her to move with them to the United States in
1979, she agreed. Once in the United States, the Bonnettis
stopped paying Hilda and locked her into a life of slavery. She
cleaned the house, did the yardwork, cooked the meals, cared for
the pets, and even shoveled snow without gloves, boots, or a
coat. Her bed was a mattress in the basement, and she was not al-
lowed to use the showers or bathtubs in the house. Her food was
scraps and leftovers, and when Hilda made mistakes in her
work, she was beaten. Mrs. Bonnetti once poured hot soup over
her face and chest when she didn’t like the way it tasted. When a
cut on Hilda’s leg became infected, the Bonnettis refused to pro-
vide medical care. A stomach tumor grew to the size of a soccer
ball without any help from the Bonnettis; a neighbor ﬁnally took
her to the hospital. It was there that social workers were alerted
to her situation and the law stepped in. She had been in slavery
for twenty years.
Hilda Dos Santos is typical of many slaves in the world to-
day—poor, vulnerable people who are tricked into slavery. Her
case demonstrates that slavery is alive and well. If her case was
unique it would be shocking enough, but Hilda is one of thou-
sands of slaves in the United Sates, and one of millions of slaves
in the world. The slavery she suffered is much the same as the
1

old kinds of slavery we learn about in history. Slavery is still
about one person controlling another, taking away an individ-
ual’s free will and abusing and stealing his or her life and liveli-
hood. But slavery today is also different, for slavery has evolved
into new—and in some ways more destructive—forms that
stretch through our global economy to touch us wherever we are.
What Makes a Slave?
Slavery has been with us since the beginning of human history.
When the first Stone Age people begin to congregate in
Mesopotamia and make the first towns around 6800 BC, they
built strong external walls around their towns suggesting a sit-
uation of raiding and war. Drawings in clay that survive from
4000 BC show captives taken in battle being tied, whipped, and
forced to work by ancient Sumerians. Papyrus records from
2100 BC record the ownership of slaves by private citizens in
Egypt. Slavery has been with us so long that it came before both
laws and money. After slavery had been around for about 2,000
years, we find the first record of the price of a slave: eleven sil-
ver shekels. Not long afterwards, slavery as a business enter-
prise takes off, and records show slave raiding expeditions
from Egypt capturing 1,554 slaves in Syria. About one hundred
years after that, around 1790 BC, the very first written laws in-
troduced the legal status and worth of slaves. The basic idea in
these Babylonian laws, that slaves are worth less than “real”
people, is repeated off and on through human history for the
next 4,000 years. The ancient Babylonian code is gruesomely
clear: a physician making a fatal mistake on a patient, for exam-
ple, is ordered to have his hands cut off, unless the patient is a
slave, in which case he only has to replace the slave. For most of
human history, the right to inflict violence on a slave was en-
shrined in law.
Unfortunately, when the legal ownership of slaves ended, as
it did in the United States in 1865, many people thought that
slavery ended as well. They were confusing ownership with con-
trol. This is not to diminish the great achievements of the aboli-
tionists and the slaves who fought for their freedom—if there are
thousands of slaves in the United States today, it is worth re-
membering that there were once millions. Even with legal aboli-
2
Background and History

tion, slavery never stopped; and as it has done for thousands of
years, control over slaves today means violence. But if people are
not legally recorded as being slaves, how can we really call them
slaves? A good place to start is to look at someone’s life and ask,
“Can this person walk away from the situation they are in with-
out fear of violence?” If the answer is “no” or the reality is that if
they try to leave they will be beaten, then you have the begin-
nings of slavery. You might also ask, “Are they paid nothing, or
does their pay just keep them alive from one day to the next?”
This is another good indicator of slavery. Look again at Hilda
Dos Santos, her free will was taken from her, she couldn’t leave
under a threat of violence, she was paid nothing and was given
only enough food to keep her alive, and she was economically
exploited. She was a slave.
Slavery Deﬁned
Since the abolition of legal slavery in the nineteenth century, the
word “slavery” has been used to describe many different things:
prostitution, prison labor, even the sale of human organs. More
than 300 international slavery treaties have been signed since
1815, but they rarely used the same deﬁnition. Before we can de-
ﬁne “slavery,” we need to recognize the characteristics and con-
ditions that make it what it is. Slavery is a relationship between
two people. It is both a social and economic relationship and, like
all relationships, it has certain characteristics and rules. The key
characteristics of slavery are not about ownership but about how
people are controlled. Throughout history, the core characteristic
of slavery, whether it was legal or not, is violence. The slave mas-
ter or slaveholder controls a slave by using or threatening vio-
lence. Slavery is about no choices at all, no control over your life,
and a constant fear of violence. This is the key to slavery. Vio-
lence brings a person into slavery. Many people who become
slaves are tricked into it. Many people, following a trail of lies,
walk into enslavement, but what keeps them there is violence.
Once enslaved, there are all sorts of ways that slaves are held in
slavery—sometimes it is the way the slave gives up and gives in
to slavery, sometimes it is about the personal relationships that
develop between slaves and slaveholders—but the essential in-
gredient is violence.
Slavery Deﬁned
3

The second key characteristic of slavery is loss of free will;
slaves are under the complete control of someone else. There is
no other person, authority, or government the slave can turn to
for protection. Slaves must do as they are told or they will suffer.
The third characteristic is that slavery is normally used to exploit
someone in some kind of economic activity. No one enslaves an-
other person just to be mean; people are enslaved to make a
proﬁt. Most slaveholders see themselves as normal businesspeo-
ple. They have little interest in hurting anyone, in being cruel, or
torturing people; it is just part of the job. Slavery is about money.
If we put these characteristics together we can deﬁne slavery in
this way: Slavery is a social and economic relationship in which a per-
son is controlled through violence or its threat, paid nothing, and eco-
nomically exploited.
In some ways this is a narrow deﬁnition. It excludes many
things that people have called “slavery” (like the selling of hu-
man organs), but it includes all those relationships that most
people agree are slavery, and it is broad enough to include many
kinds of slavery around the world.
A deﬁnition that works for many different types of slavery is
important because slavery, like all human relationships, changes
over time. The main characteristic of slavery is control through vi-
olence, but that can take many forms. In those few places where
old styles of slavery are still practiced, like Mauritania, there are
long-term, often lifelong relationships between slave and master.
In most countries, slavery is more short term and dangerous.
How Many Slaves?
No one knows exactly how many slaves are in the world. Slavery
is illegal in virtually every country, and that means it is usually
hidden from view. But if we carefully review all the information
available about slaves around the world, we can estimate that
there are perhaps 27 million slaves alive today. Where are all
these slaves? The biggest part of that 27 million, perhaps 15 to 20
million, is in India, Pakistan, and Nepal. Slavery is also concen-
trated in Southeast Asia, Northern and Western Africa, and parts
of South America, but there are some slaves in almost every
country in the world, including the United States, Japan, and
many European countries. To put it in perspective, today’s slave
4
Background and History

population is greater than the population of Canada and six
times greater than the population of Israel.
Slaves tend to be used in simple, nontechnological, tradi-
tional work that feeds into local economies. The largest propor-
tion works in agriculture. Other kinds of work include brick
making, mining and quarrying, textiles, leather working, prosti-
tution, gem working and jewelry making, cloth and carpet mak-
ing, domestic service, forest clearing, charcoal making, and
working in shops. Much of this work is aimed at local sale and
consumption, but slave-made goods ﬁlter throughout the global
economy. Carpets, ﬁreworks, jewelry, metal goods, steel (made
with slave-produced charcoal), and foods like grains, rice, cocoa,
and sugar are imported directly to North America and Europe
after being produced using slave labor.
The Nature of Contemporary Slavery
As a human relationship, slavery has changed over time. Of
course, slavery remains the same in that one person has complete
control of another person, but exactly how that can occur changes
from time to time and place to place. Slavery today is different from
slavery in the past in three important ways. First, slaves today are
cheaper than they have ever been. The cost of slaves has fallen to a
historical low, and they can be acquired in some parts of the world
for as little as $10. Second, the length of time that slaves are held
has also fallen. In the past, slavery was usually a lifelong condition;
today it is often temporary, lasting just a few years or even months.
Third, slavery is globalized. This means that the forms of slavery in
different parts of the world are becoming more alike. The way
slaves are used and the part they play in the world economy is in-
creasingly similar wherever they are. These changes have come
about very quickly, occurring, for the most part, in the past ﬁfty
years. What has made these new forms of slavery possible?
How Slavery Changed into Its Modern Form
There are three key factors in the emergence of this new kind of
slavery. The ﬁrst is the dramatic increase in world population since
How Slavery Changed into Its Modern Form
5

World War II, which has increased the supply of potential slaves.
In a classic example of supply and demand, the increase in popu-
lation has also driven down their price. Since 1945, the world
population has tripled from about 2 billion people to over 6 bil-
lion. The greatest part of that increase has been in those countries
where slavery is most prevalent today. In some of these coun-
tries, over half the population is under the age of ﬁfteen. In coun-
tries that were already poor, the sheer weight of numbers some-
times overwhelms resources. Especially in those parts of the
world where slavery still existed or had been practiced in the
past, the population explosion increased the number of people
who could be enslaved.
The second key factor is rapid social and economic change. This
has been caused in part by the population explosion that created
global conditions that make new forms of slavery possible. In
many developing countries, the postcolonial period brought im-
mense wealth to the elite and continued or increased the poverty
of the majority of the population. Throughout Africa, Asia, and
much of South America, the past ﬁfty years have been scarred by
civil war and the wholesale looting of resources by dictators,
who were often supported by the powerful nations of Europe
and North America. Countries with little to sell on the world
market have been put deeply into debt to pay for the weapons
the dictators needed in order to hold on to power. Meanwhile,
traditional ways of agricultural life and farming were sacriﬁced
to concentrate on cash crops needed to pay off those foreign
debts. As the world economy grew and became more global, it
had a profound impact on people in the Global South and the
small-scale farming that supported them. The shift from small-
scale farming to cash-crop agriculture, the loss of common land
shared by all the people in a village, and government policies
that pushed down farm income in favor of cheap food for city
workers have all helped to bankrupt millions of peasants and
drive them from their land. All across the Global South, the
slums and shantytowns that surround big cities hold millions of
these displaced people. They come to the cities in search of jobs
but find they are competing with thousands of other people.
With little income and no job security, they are powerless and
very vulnerable.
Some national and global policies and trends also threaten
these vulnerable and displaced people. The United States gov-
ernment pays $19 billion annually to subsidize American farm-
6
Background and History

ers. For example, it hands over $4 billion each year to cotton
farmers in return for a crop that is valued at only $3 billion. This
hits cotton farmers in Benin, Mali, Burkina Faso, and Togo—all
countries with high levels of slavery and human trafﬁcking. The
European countries also pump money into the pockets of their
own farmers, creating an unfair advantage on the world market.
All this money pushes down the price of crops, leaving the farm-
ers in the Global South unable to compete and locked in poverty.
Although economic modernization may have good effects as
well, particularly in improvements to health care and education,
many developing countries concentrate on economic growth
rather than on sustainable livelihoods for their people. While the
rich people of the Global South grow richer, the poor have fewer
and fewer options, and in the disruption that comes with rapid
social change, slavery can become one of those options.
The end of the Cold War and the ending of state control of
the economy in the former Soviet Union also served to widen the
opportunities for slavery. William Greider explained it well:
One of the striking qualities of the post–Cold War glob-
alization is how easily business and government in the
capitalist democracies have abandoned the values they
putatively espoused for forty years during the struggle
against communism—individual liberties and political
legitimacy based on free elections. Concern for human
rights, including freedom of assembly for workers
wishing to speak for themselves, has been pushed aside
by commercial opportunity. Multinationals plunge con-
fidently into new markets, from Vietnam to China,
where governments routinely control and abuse their
own citizens. (Greider 1997, 37)
Government corruption is the third key factor that supports
this new form of slavery. Just having large numbers of vulnera-
ble people doesn’t automatically make them slaves. In order to
turn vulnerable people into slaves on any scale, violence must be
used. One of the basic ideas about democratic government is that
it should have a monopoly on the means of violence. The mili-
tary and the police are generally the only ones who can use
weapons and commit violence legally, doing so to protect citi-
zens from crime. But if anyone in a society can use violence for
their own ends, without fear of being arrested and imprisoned,
How Slavery Changed into Its Modern Form
7

then they can force others into slavery. To do that on any scale re-
quires government corruption, and especially police corruption.
In some countries, the police act as slave catchers, pursuing and
punishing escaped slaves. Often police require that people hold-
ing slaves pay them weekly for police “protection.” For many
slave-using businesspeople, payments to the police are just a
normal part of making a living. When laws against kidnapping
are not enforced, those who have the means of violence (often
the police themselves) can harvest slaves.
Old and New Slavery Compared
The population explosion, the vulnerability of poor people in the
Global South, and government corruption has led to new forms
of slavery. For the ﬁrst time in human history, there is an absolute
glut of potential slaves. It is a dramatic example of supply and
demand. There are so many possible slaves that their value has
fallen and fallen. Slaves are now so cheap that they have become
cost-effective in many new kinds of work. Their value is so low
that it has dramatically changed the basic economic equation of
slavery. Slaves are no longer major investments. This fact has
changed the nature of the relationship between slaves and slave-
holders. It has also increased the amount of profit to be made
from a slave and decreased the length of time a person might be
enslaved. And it has also made the question of legal ownership
less important. When slaves were expensive, it was important to
safeguard that investment by having clear and legally docu-
mented ownership. Slaves of the past were worth stealing and
worth chasing down if they escaped. The fact that ownership of
slaves is now illegal is not really a problem for slaveholders;
slaves are disposable.
Disposability means that the new forms of slavery are less
permanent. Across the world, the length of time a slave spends
in bondage varies enormously. It is simply not proﬁtable to keep
slaves when they are not immediately useful. Although most are
enslaved for years, some are held for only a few months. In coun-
tries where sugarcane is grown, for example, people are often en-
slaved for a single harvest. Since they are used only for a short
time, there is no reason to invest heavily in their upkeep. There is
also little reason to ensure that they survive their enslavement.
8
Background and History

Although slaves in the American South in the nineteenth century
were often horribly treated, there was still a strong incentive to
keep them alive as long as possible. Slaves were like valuable
livestock; the owner needed a return on his investment. There
was also pressure to breed them and produce more slaves, since
it was usually cheaper to raise new slaves than to buy adults.
Today no slaveholder wants to spend money supporting useless
infants.
Table 1.1 lists key differences between old and new forms of
slavery. This makes more sense when we look at an example.
Perhaps the best studied and understood form of old slavery was
the system of slavery in the American South before 1860, particu-
larly the use of slaves in cotton cultivation (see, for example,
Ransom 1989). Slaves were at a premium. The demand for slaves
was reﬂected in their price. By 1850, an average ﬁeld laborer was
selling for $1,000 to $1,200. This was three to six times the aver-
age yearly wage of an American worker at the time; in today’s
money it would equal around $40,000. Despite their high cost,
slaves generated, on average, proﬁts of only about 5 percent each
year. If the cotton market went up, a plantation owner could
make a very good proﬁt on his slaves, but if the price of cotton
fell, he might be forced to sell slaves to stay in business. Owner-
ship was clearly demonstrated by bills of sale and titles of own-
ership, and slaves could be used as collateral for loans or to pay
off debts. Slaves were often brutalized to keep them under con-
trol, but they were also maintained as befitted their sizable in-
vestment. And there was, of course, extreme racial differentiation
between slaveholder and slave. The racist element was so strong
that a very small genetic difference—being one-eighth “black”
and seven-eighths “white”—could mean lifelong enslavement
(Genovese 1976, 416, 420).
Old and New Slavery Compared
9
TABLE 1.1
Old and New Forms of Slavery Compared
Old Forms of Slavery
New Forms of Slavery
Legal ownership asserted
Legal ownership avoided
High purchase cost
Very low purchase cost
Low proﬁts
Very high proﬁts
Shortage of potential slaves
Surplus of potential slaves
Long-term relationship
Short-term relationship
Slaves maintained
Slaves disposable
Ethnic differences important
Ethnic differences less important

Now compare the old slavery of the American South with
the agricultural slave in modern India. In India today, land
rather than labor is at a premium; the country currently has three
times the population of the United States in one-third the space.
The glut of potential workers means that free labor must regu-
larly compete with slave labor, and the resulting pressure on
agricultural wages pushes free laborers toward bondage. When
free farmers run out of money, when a crop fails or a member of
the family becomes ill and needs medicine, they have few
choices. In a perilous situation, they borrow enough money from
a local landowner to meet the crisis but, having no other posses-
sions, they have to use their own lives as collateral. The debt
against which a person is bonded, that is, the price of a laborer,
might be as high as 5,000 to 10,000 rupees (about $100 to $200),
but it may be as low as 1,000 rupees (about $20). The bond is
completely open-ended; the slave must work for the slaveholder
until the slaveholder decides the debt is repaid. The debt might
be carried into a second and third generation, growing under
fraudulent accounting by the slaveholder, who may also seize
and sell the children of the bonded laborer against the debt. The
functional reality is one of slavery.
Agricultural debt bondage in India still has some character-
istics of older forms of slavery, such as slaves being held for long
periods of time. A better example of new forms of slavery is the
young women put to work in prostitution in Thailand. A popula-
tion explosion in Thailand has resulted in a surplus of potential
slaves. Rapid economic change has led to new poverty and des-
peration. Young Thai women and girls are often initially lured
from rural areas with the promise of work in restaurants or facto-
ries. There is little ethnic difference; if anything, the key differ-
ence is rural (slaves) versus urban (slaveholders). The girls might
be sold by their parents to a broker or be tricked by an agent.
Away from their homes, they are brutalized and enslaved and
sold to a brothel owner. The brothel owners place the girls in
debt bondage and tell them they must pay back their purchase
price plus interest through prostitution. The calculation of the
debt and the interest is, of course, completely in the hands of the
brothel owners. Manipulating the figures to their advantage,
they can keep the girls as long as they want, and they don’t need
to show any legal ownership. The brothels do have to feed the
girls and keep them presentable, but if they become ill or injured
or too old, they are disposed of. In Thailand today, this often
10
Background and History

happens when a girl tests positive for HIV. This form of “con-
tract” debt bondage is extremely proﬁtable. A girl aged twelve to
ﬁfteen can be purchased for $800 to $2,000, and the costs of run-
ning a brothel and feeding the girls are relatively low. The proﬁt
is often as high as 800 percent a year. This kind of return can be
made on a girl for ﬁve to ten years. After that, especially if she
becomes ill or HIV positive, the girl will be dumped.
The Question of Race
In the new forms of slavery, race means little. In the past, ethnic
and racial differences were used to explain and excuse slavery.
These differences allowed slaveholders to invent reasons why
slavery was not only acceptable, it even beneﬁted the slaves. The
otherness of the slaves made it easier to use the violence and the
cruelty necessary for total control. This otherness could be de-
fined in almost any way—a different religion, tribe, skin color,
language, customs, or economic class. Any of these could be
used to separate the slaves from the slaveholders. Maintaining
these differences required tremendous investment in some very
irrational ideas, and the crazier the justifying idea, the more
strongly it was insisted upon. The “Founding Fathers” of the
United States of America had to go through moral, linguistic,
and political contortions to explain why the “land of the free”
only applied to white people (Quarles 1975). Many of them knew
they were lying, that they were betraying their most cherished
ideals. They were driven to it because slavery was worth a lot of
money to a lot of people in Colonial America. They still went to
the trouble of legal and political justification because, at that
time, they felt they had to make moral excuses for their economic
decisions.
Today the morality of money overrides most others. Most
slaveholders feel no need to explain or defend their choice to use
slavery. Slavery is a very proﬁtable business, and a good proﬁt is
reason enough. Freed of ideas that restrict the status of slave to
“other” and of ideas that say you can’t enslave your own people,
modern slaveholders use other criteria to choose slaves. When
you can enslave people from your own country, your costs are
low. Slaves in the American South were very expensive, in part
because the ﬁrst generation of them had to be shipped thousands
The Question of Race
11

of miles from Africa. When you can go to the next town or region
for slaves, transport costs fall to a minimum. The question isn’t
“Are they the right color to be slaves?” but “Are they vulnerable
enough to be enslaved?” The criteria of enslavement are not
about color, tribe, or religion; it is about weakness, gullibility,
and vulnerability.
It is true that in some countries there are ethnic or religious
differences between slaves and slaveholders. In Pakistan, for ex-
ample, many enslaved brick makers are Christians, and the
slaveholders are Muslim. In India, slave and slaveholder may be
of different castes. In Thailand, they might come from different
regions of the country. But in Pakistan, there are Christians who
are not slaves, and in India some members of a caste are free
while others are enslaved. Their caste or religion simply reﬂects
their vulnerability to enslavement; it doesn’t cause it. Only in
one country, Mauritania, does the racism of old slavery persist.
There, black slaves are held by Arab slaveholders and race is a
key division, but this is the last and fading survival of old slav-
ery. Of course, some cultures are more divisive than others. Cul-
tural ideas in Japan strongly separate Japanese people from
everyone else, and so enslaved prostitutes in Japan are more
likely to be Thai or Philippine women, though they may also be
Japanese. The key difference is that Japanese women are not
nearly so vulnerable and desperate as Thais or Filipinas. And
the Thai women are available for shipment to Japan because
Thais are enslaving Thais. The same pattern occurs in the oil-
rich states of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, where Muslim Arabs
might enslave Sri Lankan Hindus, Filipino Christians, or Niger-
ian Muslims. The common denominator is poverty, not color.
Behind every assertion of ethnic difference is the reality of eco-
nomic disparity. If every left-handed person in the world were
made destitute tomorrow, there would soon be slaveholders ar-
guing that slavery was perhaps the best thing for them. Modern
slaveholders are color blind, but they are predators acutely per-
ceptive to weakness. Although slavery has been around for
thousands of years, these predators are rapidly adapting it to
the new global economy.
Cheap to buy, easy to dispose of, extremely profitable—
these are the attributes of the modern slave. If the emergence of
the global market has helped to develop new forms of slavery,
what does this mean for the slaves themselves and for our lives?
In the next chapter we explore how slavery touches the life of al-
12
Background and History

most every person on Earth, and what the United Nations, gov-
ernments, and people just like you are doing about it.
References
Davis, David Brion. The Problem of Slavery in the Age of Revolution
1770–1823. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975.
Genovese, Eugene. Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made. New
York: Vintage, 1976.
Greider, William. One World Ready or Not: The Manic Logic of Global Capi-
talism. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997.
Quarles, Benjamin. The Negro in the American Revolution. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1961, reprint edition 1996.
Ransom, Roger L. Conﬂict and Compromise: The Political Economy of Slav-
ery, Emancipation, and the American Civil War. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1989.
Note
Parts of this chapter have been adapted or excerpted from my book Dis-
posable People: New Slavery in the Global Economy (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1999) by permission of the publisher.
References
13


2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
T
o best understand the problem of contemporary slavery, it is
necessary to look at the forms it takes and real examples of
the suffering it causes. Then, it is important to take up some
of the controversies that are linked to slavery. It may seem hard
to imagine that anything could be controversial about slavery—
after all, isn’t almost everyone opposed to it? But while virtually
everyone agrees that slavery must end, there are strong disagree-
ments over how to end slavery. In particular, there is vigorous de-
bate about how slavery and prostitution ﬁt together, and another
controversy about whether is it right to buy slaves their freedom,
also known as redemption. Finally, this chapter will introduce
groups that are working to ﬁght slavery and explore how we can
solve this global problem. Here there is some good news: even
though 27 million people are in slavery, this is a problem that can
be solved.
The Forms of Contemporary Slavery
Slavery has never existed in a single form. In some ways, every
relationship of slavery that links two people might be unique,
but there are patterns in these relationships. There are several
forms of slavery common enough to have their own names. The
three main types given here are not an exhaustive list, but they
do represent the experience of most modern slaves:
15

Chattel slavery is the form closest to old slavery. A person is
captured, born, or sold into permanent servitude, and ownership
is sometimes asserted. The slave’s children are normally treated
as property as well and can be sold by the slaveholder. Occasion-
ally, these slaves are kept as items of conspicuous consumption.
This form is most often found in Northern and Western Africa
and in some Arab countries, but it represents a small proportion
of slaves in the modern world.
Debt bondage is the most common form of slavery in the
world. A person pledges him/herself against a loan of money,
but the length and nature of the service is not deﬁned, nor does
his or her labor diminish the original debt. The debt can be
passed down to subsequent generations, thus enslaving off-
spring, or “defaulting,” can be punished by seizing or selling
children into further debt bonds. Ownership is not normally as-
serted, but there is complete physical control of the bonded la-
borer. Debt bondage is most common in South Asia.
There are, in fact, two distinct forms of debt bondage. In
many cases of debt bondage, the slaves’ work (and indeed their
very lives) becomes collateral for the debt. This means that all of
their work belongs to the moneylender until the debt is repaid.
This establishes the trap of bondage—since all their work is the
property of the lender until the debt is repaid, debtors are unable
to ever earn enough to repay the debt by their own labor. This
arrangement is the most common form of debt bondage in India.
In other places, the work of the debtor may, supposedly, be used
to pay off the debt, but through false accounting or charging very
high interest, repayment remains forever out of reach. In the ﬁrst
form, the agreement that changes the debtor and all his or her
work into collateral essentially means the debtor will never be
able to repay his or her debt. In the second form, it is a violation
of the loan agreement when the value of the work is not really
used to pay off the loan that traps the debtor.
Contract slavery shows how new forms of slavery are hidden.
Contracts are offered that guarantee employment, perhaps in a
workshop or factory, but when workers are taken to their place
of work, they ﬁnd they are enslaved. The contract is used as an
enticement to trick persons into slavery; it is also a way to make
the slavery look legitimate if necessary. Ownership is not as-
serted, and if legal questions are raised the contract is produced,
but the slave is under threat of violence, has no freedom of
movement, and is paid nothing. This is the most rapidly growing
16
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

form of slavery, and it is probably the second largest form today.
Contract slavery is most often found in Southeast Asia, Brazil,
some Arab states, and some parts of the Indian subcontinent.
These types are not mutually exclusive. Contracts may be is-
sued to chattel slaves in order to conceal their enslavement. Girls
trapped into prostitution by debt bondage will sometimes have
contracts that specify their obligations, but not always. The im-
portant thing to remember is that people are enslaved by violence
and held against their wills for exploitation. The labels we apply to
the types of slavery are useful to help us keep track of the pat-
terns of enslavement and for what they might suggest about how
slavery might be attacked. The labels reﬂect the nature of the re-
lationship between the slave and the slaveholder, but these rela-
tionships are ﬂuid and changeable.
In addition to these three main types of slavery, several
other kinds account for a small part of the total number of
slaves. Most of these tend to be restricted to speciﬁc geographi-
cal regions or political situations. A good example of slavery
linked to politics is what is often called war slavery, and includes
government-sponsored slavery. In Burma (also known as Myan-
mar) today there is widespread capture and enslavement of
civilians by the government and the army. Tens of thousands of
men, women, and children are used as laborers or bearers in
military campaigns against indigenous peoples or on govern-
ment construction projects. The Burmese military dictatorship
doesn’t suggest that they own the people they have enslaved—
in fact, they deny that they enslave anyone—but the Interna-
tional Labor Organization (ILO), U.S. State Department, and hu-
man rights organizations conﬁrm that violence is used to hold a
large number of Burmese people in bondage. War slavery was
also a feature of the recent civil war in Sudan, as well as the on-
going civil war in Uganda, where children are enslaved and
forced to be soldiers.
In some parts of the Caribbean and in Western Africa, chil-
dren are given or sold into domestic service. They are sometimes
called restavecs. Ownership is not asserted, but strict control, en-
forced by violence, is maintained over the child. The ﬁnancial re-
turn on the enslaved child is not in terms of proﬁts generated but
in the domestic services provided. It is sometimes seen as a cul-
turally approved way of dealing with “extra” children, and some
are treated well, but for most of these children it is a kind of slav-
ery that lasts until adulthood.
The Forms of Contemporary Slavery
17

Slavery can also be linked to religion, as with the devadasi
women in India, or the children who are ritual “Trokosi” slaves in
Ghana (Australian Anti-Slavery Society 1996). Each year, several
thousand girls and young women are given by their families as
slaves to local fetish priests in southeastern Ghana, Togo, Benin,
and southwestern Nigeria. The girls are given to the priests in or-
der to atone for sins committed by members of their families, of-
ten rape. The girls may, in fact, be the products of rape, and their
slavery is seen as a way of appeasing the gods for the crimes com-
mitted by their male relatives. The girls are given to a local priest
as a slave when they are about ten years old, and it is required
that they be virgins. The girl then stays with the priest, cooking
and cleaning, farming, and being sexually exploited by the priest
until he frees her, usually after she has borne several children. At
that point, the slave’s family must provide another young girl to
replace her. Ghana’s Constitution forbids slavery, and a law was
recently passed banning Trokosi, but the practice is justiﬁed by
villagers and priests as a religious requirement.
As can be seen by the preceding cases, slavery comes in
many forms and can be found in virtually all countries. A recent
investigation found hundreds of men and women enslaved as
agricultural workers in Florida (Bowe 2003). Enslaved domestic
workers have been found and freed in Washington, DC (Cas-
taneda 2003). In the United States, textile workers have been
found locked inside a factory and working under armed guards.
Enslaved Mexican, Thai, and Philippine women have been freed
from brothels in New York, Seattle, Los Angeles, and many other
cities (Landesman 2004). This list could go on and on. Almost all
of the countries where slavery “cannot” exist have slaves inside
their borders. Altogether, slaves constitute a vast workforce that
supports the world economy we all share.
Examples of Contemporary Slavery
Lives Up in Smoke
In a recent survey, around a third of all American high school
students said that they used tobacco at least once in the last
month. That students should be doing something so stupid is
alarming, but what is even worse is that many of them were sup-
porting slavery as they smoked. Thousands of students said that
18
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

they had been smoking beedis—small, flavored cigarettes from
India. Would they have done so if they knew that most beedis
are made by slave children?
In the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu, outside the big
city of Madras, are small towns where millions of beedis are
made. On the outskirts of one of these towns lives an eleven-
year-old boy named Vikram. He and many of the other children
in his town are slaves. When Vikram was nine, his younger
brother became very ill. His family is very poor, and the only
way his parents could buy medicine was to borrow money from
a local man. This man controls the production of beedis in their
village. This moneylender used the loan as a way to take Vikram
into debt bondage. Since Vikram’s parents had nothing else to
give as collateral, the moneylender said they must pledge
Vikram against the debt. His parents’ choice was a terrible one:
to save the life of their youngest son, they must put their oldest
son into bondage. For the moneylender, it was business as usual,
and he had obtained another slave for just a few dollars. Today
none of the work that Vikram does pays off the debt. He is basi-
cally the property of the moneylender until his parents can ﬁnd
the money for repayment. Two years after it was ﬁrst made, the
debt has grown with extra charges to about $65.
Vikram works from six in the morning until nine at night,
with breaks for breakfast and lunch. Each day he rolls about
1,500 beedi cigarettes by hand. Each beedi is smaller than a nor-
mal cigarette, and instead of paper, the tobacco is wrapped in a
leaf from the kendu tree. Since no glue is used, each beedi must
be tied shut with a thread and a tiny knot. Sitting cross-legged on
the floor with a tray of tobacco and kendu leaves on his lap,
Vikram’s hands fly through the motions of wrapping, rolling,
and tying the beedis. He has to work very quickly, like a ma-
chine, if he is to make the number required of him everyday. If he
is sick, he still has to work, and if he fails to deliver the full num-
ber, his debt will be increased. He can watch the world, or a very
small piece of it, from the porch where he sits rolling the beedis,
but he cannot be part of it. Some of the local children go off to
school in the mornings; he sees them go as he rolls beedi. In the
afternoon, other children play around the village, and Vikram
watches but cannot join in. His childhood has been taken by the
moneylender to provide virtually free labor and high proﬁts.
In some ways, Vikram’s slavery could be worse. At night he
is allowed to go home for supper and to sleep with his family. Of
Examples of Contemporary Slavery
19

course, this is very clever of the moneylender, since it means that
he doesn’t have to provide food or lodging for his slave. Vikram,
like so many modern slaves, was very cheap to buy and is also
very cheap to maintain. Until recently, a boy in Vikram’s position
would have little to look forward to except years spent rolling
beedis. Many children have had their whole childhood taken by
beedi rolling. When they become young adults the moneylender
will often turn them to other kinds of work, since their larger
hands are not as nimble for rolling beedis. When they ﬁnally stop
rolling beedis, they are young men with no education and little
experience of the world. Their job prospects, if they can get away
from the moneylender, are dismal.
Slavery in the City of Lights
In France I interviewed an animated twenty-two-year-old
woman who told me of her life as a slave in Paris:
I was raised by my grandmother in Mali, and when I
was still a little girl a woman my family knew came and
asked her if she could take me to Paris to care for her
children. She told my grandmother that she would put
me in school and that I would learn French. But when I
came to Paris I was not sent to school, I had to work
every day. In their house I did all the work, I cleaned
the house, cooked the meals, cared for the children, and
washed and fed the baby. Every day I started work be-
fore 7 AM and ﬁnished about 11 PM; I never had a day
off. My mistress did nothing—she slept late and then
watched television or went out.
One day I told her that I wanted to go to school. She
replied that she had not brought me to France to go to
school but to take care of her children. I was so tired
and run down. I had problems with my teeth; some-
times my cheek would swell and the pain would be ter-
rible. Sometimes I had stomachaches, but when I was ill
I still had to work. Sometimes when I was in pain I
would cry, but my mistress would shout at me.
I slept on the ﬂoor in one of the children’s bedrooms;
my food was their leftovers. I was not allowed to take
food from the refrigerator like the children. If I took
food she would beat me. She often beat me. She would
20
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

slap me all the time. She beat me with the broom, with
kitchen tools, or whipped me with an electric cable.
Sometimes I would bleed. I still have marks on my
body.
Once in 1992 I was late going to get the children from
school. My mistress and her husband were furious with
me and beat and then threw me out on the street. I had
nowhere to go, I didn’t understand anything, and I
wandered on the streets. After some time her husband
found me and took me back to their house. Then they
beat me again with a wire attached to a broomstick until
I lost consciousness.
Sometime later one of the children came and untied
me. I lay on the ﬂoor where they had left me for several
days. The pain was terrible but no one treated my
wounds. When I was able to stand I had to start work
again, but after this I was always locked in the apart-
ment. They continued to beat me.
Seba was finally freed when a neighbor, after hearing the
sounds of abuse and beating, managed to talk to her. Seeing her
scars and wounds, the neighbor called the police and the French
Committee Against Modern Slavery (CCEM), which brought a
case against Seba’s abusers and took Seba into care. Medical ex-
aminations conﬁrmed that she had been tortured. Today Seba is
well cared for, living with a volunteer family. She is receiving
counseling and learning to read and write. Recovery will take
years, but she is a remarkably strong young woman. What
amazed me was how far Seba still needs to go. As we talked, I re-
alized that though she was twenty-two and intelligent, her un-
derstanding of the world was less developed than that of an av-
erage five-year-old. For example, until she was freed, she had
little understanding of time—no knowledge of weeks, months,
or years. For Seba, there was only the endless round of work and
sleep. She knew that there were hot days and cold days, but she
never learned that the seasons follow a pattern. If she had once
known her birthday she had since forgotten it, and she did not
know her age. She is bafﬂed by the idea of “choice.” Her volun-
teer family tries to help her make choices, but she still can’t grasp
the concept. I asked Seba to draw the best picture of a person she
could. She told me it was the ﬁrst time she had ever tried to draw
a person, and this is the result:
Examples of Contemporary Slavery
21

If Seba’s case were unique it would be shocking enough, but
Seba is one of perhaps three thousand household slaves in Paris.
Nor is this slavery unique to Paris. In London, New York,
Zurich, Los Angeles, and across the world children are brutal-
ized as household slaves. And they are just one small group of
the world’s slaves. We are beginning to understand the extent of
slavery around the world and the suffering it causes. Interest-
ingly, while slaveholders commit this horrible crime, they may
not be the biggest challenge that we face in bringing an end to
slavery. The problem is that slaveholders are able to enslave their
victims without being noticed; there is a basic lack of awareness
of the problem. While it is true that awareness is growing, most
people in most countries still find it hard to understand that
slavery is around them. In part, this is due to the fact that while
27 million slaves is the largest number of slaves in human his-
tory, it is the smallest proportion of the world’s population to ever
22
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

be in slavery due to the growth in the world’s population. When
slavery grew rapidly after World War II, it did so behind the cur-
tain of crime, and few people noticed. Following from that lack
of awareness is a lack of resources devoted to ending slavery. If
you take all the money spent to ﬁght slavery around the world
and add it together, it is about the cost of a bomber, certainly less
than an aircraft carrier, and a tiny fraction of the money spent on
the “war on drugs.” Awareness drives the public to push the
politicians to spend money on problems the public is worried
about. Not enough of the public is aware of slavery, so politi-
cians don’t make it a high priority. A well-resourced global cam-
paign could end slavery, but for the time being, we are still try-
ing to ﬁgure out the best ways to ﬁght it with few resources and
less experience. It is not always clear how best to combat slavery,
and given that any mistake or confusion can lead to greater suf-
fering, there are strong debates about the best way to bring
slaves to freedom.
Controversies
Controversy 1—Are We All Responsible 
for Global Slavery?
The people who enslaved Vikram and Seba are clearly criminals,
but if responsibility for slaveholding is extended to those who
proﬁt from it, we have to confront a shocking ethical problem.
Those who proﬁt from slavery might include you or me or any-
one. Pension funds or mutual funds may be buying stock (which
is, after all, part-ownership) in companies that own companies
that subcontract slave labor. Some key questions are: How many
links have to stand between a slave and an “owner” for them to
be held responsible? Is ignorance an excuse? If your job were to
depend on the availability of slave-produced raw materials,
where would you stand? There are, in fact, several layers of re-
sponsibility. But how much responsibility does the average per-
son carry for the eradication of slavery? William Greider points
out that:
The deepest meaning of the global industrial revolution
is that people no longer have free choice in the matter of
identity. Ready or not, they are already of the world. As
Controversies
23

producers or consumers, as workers or merchants or in-
vestors, they are now bound to distant others through
the complex strands of commerce and ﬁnance reorgan-
ising the globe as a uniﬁed marketplace. The prosperity
of South Carolina or Scotland is deeply linked to
Stuttgart’s or Kuala Lumpur’s. The true social values of
Californians or Swedes will be determined by what is
tolerated in the factories of Thailand or Bangladesh.
(Greider 1997, 333)
If people do not participate in slavery through investment,
they almost certainly do through consumption. Slave-produced
goods and services ﬂow into the global market, making up a tiny
but signiﬁcant part of what we buy. But the sheer volume of our
consumption overwhelms our ability to make responsible
choices. We don’t have time to research the living conditions of
the people who produced everything we buy. And if we could ask
these questions, how would we go about it? Is it the responsibil-
ity of the local supermarket to investigate labor relations around
the world, or is it to get you the best food at the lowest price? We
also have to think about what happens when we get answers we
don’t like. For example, Haitian men, women, and children have
been enslaved to harvest sugarcane in the Dominican Republic—
sugar exported to the United States and other countries. Is the
average consumer ready to pay $5 for a candy bar if that is what
it takes to ensure that the producers are not enslaved and that
they receive a decent wage? When enough research reveals
where and how slave-made goods enter our lives, there will be
an even bigger question to face: How much is the average person
willing to pay to end slavery? Meanwhile, most people assume
that the problem should be dealt with by governments and the
United Nations, yet the power of the UN turns out to be less than
that of consumers.
Controversy 2—Is It Right to Buy Slaves?
In Southern Sudan, a western charity pays $50 per person to free
Dinka people. They have been enslaved after their villages were
raided by militia linked to the Sudanese government. In North-
ern India, a group of women band together to form a small credit
union; over a period of months they save enough to repay the
debt that holds one of their members in bondage, then they be-
24
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

gin to save to buy another woman’s freedom. Today, with 27 mil-
lion slaves in the world, redemption (making a payment to free a
slave) can and does happen anywhere. But why is this happen-
ing? Is this the right way to free slaves?
While there has been controversy over slave redemption in
the United States in the past few years, it actually has an exten-
sive history. Long before there was slavery in the United States,
slaves were being redeemed. In Greece, Rome, and other ancient
societies, slaves were sometimes purchased from their owners
and freed. During the Crusades, enslavement and ransom were
central components of war ﬁnances and strategy. The ﬁrst orga-
nizations that can be thought of as charities were set up in the
Middle Ages in order to purchase the freedom of Europeans cap-
tured and enslaved by North African and Middle Eastern pirates
and slave raiders. Indeed, one verse in the U.S. Marine’s Hymn—
“to the shores of Tripoli”—refers to an early nineteenth-century
raid on these Barbary pirates to stop their slave raiding and ran-
soming of Europeans and Americans. Frederick Douglass, the fa-
mous nineteenth-century abolitionist and escaped slave, was
himself redeemed after supporters of slavery had mounted a se-
ries of attempts to kidnap him.
The simple economic exchange of money for the freedom of
a slave that is redemption has to be seen within its cultural con-
text. Before slavery was illegal in most countries, redemption
was an act of charity, in itself perfectly legal. Many cultures have
a tradition of redemption, including those in Northern African
countries such as Sudan. Today, however, within the context of
the general illegality of slavery, the buying of slaves, even in or-
der to free them, is seen by many people as complicity in a crime.
The complexity of the civil war and the preexisting role of slave
trading in Sudanese society are often overlooked. Redemption is
presented as a moral imperative by some, while others see it as
fuel to the ﬁre of further enslavement.
While redemption can go on around the world wherever
slavery exists, it came to the attention of most Americans when
groups like Christian Solidarity International began to buy back
slaves in Sudan. Slave raiding in Sudan was part of the govern-
ment’s strategy to destroy the resistance of the Southern groups
that are fighting for independence. While slavery existed for
hundreds of years in Sudan, it almost disappeared in the twenti-
eth century but was reestablished as an act of terror in the civil
war there. Controversy arose when European and American
Controversies
25

groups began to buy back slaves in 1995. Some international
agencies expressed the criticism that buying back slaves would
create an expanding market for slaves, feed resources to the
slaveholders, lead to fraud in the process, and would not ulti-
mately end slavery.
Not long after these criticisms emerged, I spoke with a man
from Southern Sudan who answered them in this way: “Of
course we understand that the money paid to buy back our rela-
tives may go to buy arms to be used against us in the future, but
when it is your family, your children at stake, you pay.” Like-
wise, a man involved in redemption pointed out to me that there
may have been fraud (the “buying back” of people who had
never been enslaved), but he asserted that “it is better to buy
back some people who have never been slaves, than to fail to res-
cue the many who are suffering in slavery.” On the question of
whether redemption in Sudan has brought a greater risk of slave
raids, there is insufﬁcient evidence to make a clear judgment.
The process of redemption must also be seen in its cultural
context. The civil war has been marked by recurrent truces be-
tween the Dinka and the Baggara tribesmen who comprise the
majority of the militia, truces that have provided the opportunity
to recover, usually at a price, family members as well as live-
stock. Equally, the Nuer and Dinka tribes of Southern Sudan,
while now allied against the Muslim North, have long been in a
conﬂict that includes raiding between the two tribes. In early Oc-
tober 1999, their leaders met to discuss “the return of women,
children, and cattle captured in raids or abducted during the
years of hostility between the tribes” (Sudan Democratic Gazette
1999). The fact that the victims of slave raiding have themselves
raided other tribes has rarely been mentioned in the Western
press.
If there is good news about the controversy over redemption
in Sudan, it is that the civil war there has entered a new stage
and fewer raids are taking place while peace talks continue. The
U.S. government has become involved and has exerted signiﬁ-
cant pressure on the Northern government to end the raids and
come to an agreement with the Southern provisional govern-
ment. However, the hoped-for ending of the need for redemp-
tion in Sudan will not resolve the questions that surround re-
demption. On the other hand, this change may allow us to
enlarge the discussion to include how redemption ﬁts into anti-
slavery work around the world.
26
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

In India, for example, redemption is actually illegal. The law
against debt bondage forbids that “debts” are repaid to bring
slaves into freedom. The reason is that, since these debts were of-
fered and manipulated illegally in the ﬁrst place, they have no
standing. Further, there is a resistance to “rewarding” any slave-
holder. Since slavery itself is universally illegal, slaveholders
should no more be recompensed for giving up slaves than a bur-
glar should be paid to return the television he stole from your
house. That said, in India there are situations where, primarily
because the police are slow to respond to the crime of slavery, re-
demption is the only immediate and effective way to remove a
person from danger.
The lesson to be drawn from these examples is this: redeem-
ing slaves has a role in the antislavery movement, but only when
other actions have failed or are impossible. In one way, it is the
lesser of several evils. The greatest evil is enslavement. Paying a
slaveholder or a middleman to free a slave is a regrettable, lesser
evil since freedom is a basic human right and shouldn’t need to
be purchased. Yet, when the authorities will not take action,
where the opportunity for freedom is available only through re-
demption, and where enslaved people are suffering and threat-
ened, then redemption may be the only immediate answer. A
good case can be made both for and against redemption; a key
criterion has to be that it be used only when it won’t make things
worse. It is a tactic in an overall movement against slavery, one
to be used when other actions won’t serve. Sadly, the controversy
over redemption has been bitter, and some groups and organiza-
tions have stated that they will not work with anyone who dis-
agrees with their view on redemption. Ultimately, it is the slaves
that suffer when the abolitionists ﬁght. The same waste of energy
and suffering has been caused by another controversy as well—
the ﬁght over prostitution.
Controversy 3—Is Prostitution Slavery?
There is no doubt that women around the world are enslaved
and forced to be prostitutes. What is more controversial is how
many prostitutes should be considered slaves and what should
be done about it. On the one hand, there are those who believe
that all prostitution is a form of slavery and that the exploitation
of individuals through prostitution should be eliminated and the
perpetrators punished (Barry 1995). On the other is the view that
Controversies
27

only forced or nonconsensual prostitution should be prevented
by international standards and criminal law (CSEH 1998). Advo-
cates of the first view argue that all prostitution is forced, ex-
plaining that women are “forced” to become prostitutes through
violence or because of lack of money or other ﬁnancial pressures.
This point of view widens the meaning of “forced” beyond the
threats of violence, intimidation, or coercion normally linked to
slavery—although it is clear that the threat of starvation is a
powerful coercion, especially when a society systematically de-
nies opportunity to women. It was proposed by the Council of
Europe that “forced prostitution” be deﬁned as the “act, for ﬁ-
nancial gain, of inducing a person by any form of constraint to
supply sexual services to another person” (Hirsch 1996). Con-
straint would include the more obvious forms of violence, such
as beatings, rape, torture, and threats. It was suggested, however,
that “any form of constraint” should be interpreted more widely
to include the act of obtaining sexual services from a person “by
taking advantage of his/her vulnerability resulting either from
his/her precarious or illegal situation, or of his/her position of
economic dependence.” If this definition is used, practically
every prostitute in the world could be considered “forced,” and
therefore enslaved.
On the other side of the argument are those who feel that
prostitutes have an “outcast status” that “denies them whatever
international, national or customary protection from abuse is
available to others as citizens, women or workers. This social ex-
clusion renders the prostitute vulnerable to exploitation” (Bind-
man 1997). They admit that prostitution can occur in situations
of terrible exploitation, even slavery, but that it can also occur in
situations where the prostitutes have some control over their
lives and “work.” This viewpoint argues that if prostitution is il-
legal, then the human rights of prostitutes will never be re-
spected, and the cycle of their outcast status and exploitation will
continue.
This controversy intensifies when solutions are being de-
bated. Essentially, if all prostitution is slavery, then all prostitu-
tion should be illegal and the people (usually men) who use or
exploit prostitutes should be punished. On the other hand, if
women are stigmatized and marginalized because prostitution is
illegal, then their “sex work” should be made legal and given
health and safety protections. Also, if prostitution is illegal, then,
in many countries, the women themselves will be the main target
28
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

for prosecution and harassment by police. For example, a group
based in Calcutta, India, has found that, on average, approxi-
mately nine out of ten arrests made under the “Immoral Trafﬁc
Protection Act” were of women caught in prostitution. There
were few arrests and fewer penalties for trafﬁckers or the men
that used prostitutes (U.S. State Department 2002). On both sides
of the issue people agree that organized crime gets involved in
prostitution, even when it is legalized, and criminals have little
interest in caring for their “workers.”
Meanwhile, Swedish lawmakers have taken a novel ap-
proach. In 1999, Sweden passed a law that criminalized the pur-
chase, but not the sale, of sex. According to the Swedish law, the
economic and social relationship between a woman selling sex
and a man buying sex is not a relationship that even approaches
equality. The rationale behind the law is that as long as society
remains male dominated, women selling sex will be in a more
vulnerable position than men buying sex. Men’s ability to buy
women’s bodies is seen as a form of male dominance to be re-
sisted and controlled. This law leaves the sale of sex as legal; it is
the purchase that is made illegal, thus attempting to redress the
imbalance of power between men and women. An ofﬁcial report
by the Swedish government concerning the law explained:
The proposal by the Prostitution Report to criminalize
both buyer and seller has been subjected to extensive
criticism by almost all referral bodies. The government
also deems that, even if prostitution in itself is not a de-
sirable social activity, it is not reasonable to prosecute
the party that, at least in most cases, is the weaker party,
exploited by others to satisfy their sexual drive. This is
also important if prostitutes are to be encouraged to get
help to leave prostitution and can feel they will not
have to worry about the consequences of having been
prostitutes. (Boethius 1999)
This approach is unique and runs counter to recent laws in
Germany and Holland that attempt to reduce prostitution by le-
galizing and inspecting brothels. Sweden is trying to extinguish
demand for prostitution at the point of consumption. Which of
these approaches work? At this point, no one knows for certain.
Criticism has been leveled at the Swedish law that it has simply
pushed prostitution underground, but no evidence has been
Controversies
29

forthcoming. Likewise, the government has stated that the law is
reducing the number of women exploited in prostitution, but
again, little evidence is available. In another country, the legaliz-
ing of brothels in one state in Australia has been interpreted as
both decreasing trafﬁcking by some commentators and increas-
ing it by others.
It is important to remember that this debate is taking place
in the midst of a world AIDS epidemic. The fear of AIDS means
that some men are demanding younger and younger children as
prostitutes in the belief that they are unlikely to catch HIV from a
child. We need to understand how poverty and the lack of other
opportunities make people vulnerable to prostitution. Given that
demand for prostitution is often answered with women (and
children) who have been trafﬁcked and enslaved, it is critical that
detailed and unbiased research is carried out as quickly as possi-
ble. Such research should focus on the constraints and force used
to put women into prostitution, and to look for what they need
to get out of prostitution. For example, research carried out by
Supriya Awasthi, the Regional Coordinator in India of the Free
the Slaves organization, found that if prostitutes could achieve
an alternate income of 2,500 rupees a month (about $55) in work
that didn’t put them in contact with people that would try to
exploit or stigmatize them, then they would leave prostitution
for good.
Solutions
The Role of the State and the UN:
International Law and Slavery
When the now-defunct League of Nations was set up after World
War I, one of its ﬁrst major statements was a convention against
slavery (a convention is an agreement made between countries
that is less formal than a treaty). Commonly known as the 1926
Slavery Convention, it called upon every country that signed
(and most countries have done so) to “prevent and suppress the
slave trade; and to bring about . . . the complete abolition of slav-
ery in all its forms.” When the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights was published in 1948 by the newly formed United Na-
tions, freedom from slavery was seen as one of the most funda-
30
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

mental of human rights. Article 4 reads, “No one shall be held in
slavery or servitude; slavery and the slave trade shall be prohib-
ited in all their forms.” In 1956, a Supplementary Convention
was added to the UN’s deﬁnition of slavery that included debt
bondage, serfdom, and unfree forms of marriage.
It is important to remember that only one arm of the UN, the
Security Council, has the power to punish countries or mobilize
armed forces. It is the Security Council that decided, for example,
to send troops into Kuwait, East Timor, and Kosovo. And even
the Security Council has to rely upon voluntary support from
member countries. Most of the other UN organizations are pri-
marily “talking shops.” They investigate, review, discuss, pre-
sent resolutions and conventions, but they cannot require any
country to act in a certain way. Slavery is an important concern
within the UN, but it must compete with many other concerns.
The UN is a large bureaucracy; slavery comes under a number of
its different divisions, particularly the Economic and Social
Council. Within the Economic and Social Council is the Commis-
sion on Human Rights, and within that commission is the Sub-
commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities. The commission and subcommission meet every year
to consider human rights issues. Prior to these meetings, a num-
ber of working groups get together to focus on particular issues;
one of these is the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of
Slavery. It calls for reports from groups like Anti-Slavery Interna-
tional on slavery around the world, and it passes resolutions call-
ing on countries to enforce their own laws and the treaties they
have signed. But like other parts of the UN, the working group
cannot require or force countries to take action against slavery.
Sometimes the Commission on Human Rights also appoints
people to be special reporters or investigators on particular is-
sues, like torture or the rights of women. In 2004, the Commis-
sion agreed to appoint a Special Rapporteur (Reporter) on human
trafﬁcking, a very important step in bringing the issue to the fore.
Other parts of the UN are also very concerned with slavery,
especially the International Labor Organization. The ILO, for ex-
ample, runs the International Program on the Elimination of
Child Labor (IPEC), which is responsible for raising awareness
and combating child labor. IPEC focuses on preventing child la-
bor and searching for alternative solutions such as decent em-
ployment for the parents of child workers, and rehabilitation, ed-
ucation, or vocational training for children.
Solutions
31

Child labor has emerged as one of the most important global
issues of our time, and international cooperation on the issue has
been strengthened over the past few years. Children who are en-
slaved, perhaps through debt bondage, are a special concern in
the ﬁght against child labor. One nongovernmental organization,
the Global March Against Child Labor, with key support from
IPEC, has developed a worldwide network of political leaders
and activists in many countries, raising the awareness and un-
derstanding of the issue. When child laborers from around the
world marched on the UN in Geneva in 1998, their voices and ex-
ample pushed politicians to enact much stronger rules in the
new Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, which includes
child slavery.
Another UN body that confronts slavery is the International
Organization for Migration (IOM). For years, trafficking rings
have thrived on the exploitation of women from developing
countries. Recently, countries of the former Soviet Union have
become their latest targets. In Ukraine, women have become
more economically vulnerable, and trafﬁcking in women has be-
come a dangerously booming “business.” Lured by false
promises and misled by false information on migration regula-
tions, many women fall prey to unscrupulous trafﬁckers, allow-
ing their dream for a better life to be exploited. To stem the rising
tide of trafﬁcking in women, the IOM set up an information cam-
paign that educated and warned women about the truth of traf-
ﬁcking. The result was a signiﬁcant reduction in the number of
women tricked in this way.
Groups and Strategies 
Working against Slavery
Examples at the International Level
A number of organizations around the world are working to stop
the trafficking in people and to bring slaves to freedom. The
most important of these are Anti-Slavery International and Free
the Slaves. Founded in 1839, Anti-Slavery International is the
oldest human rights organization in the world. It grew from an
organization led by Thomas Clarkson (read more about him in
32
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Chapter 5) that campaigned for the abolition of the slave trade in
the British Empire in 1807. Free the Slaves is the American sister-
organization of Anti-Slavery International. Together these orga-
nizations campaign, research, work with governments, raise
awareness, and work with people in countries around the world
who are ﬁghting slavery.
In the United States, Free the Slaves has ﬁve main parts to its
work:
• Working with partner organizations—this involves as-
sisting groups around the world that are liberating slaves
and helping them to build new lives.
• Raising awareness—one of the biggest challenges in the
ﬁght against slavery is that the public doesn’t even know
it exists, so a great deal of effort goes into working with
television, magazines, public events, and anything that
gets the message out. On its website is a “get active” sec-
tion for students.
• Promoting slave-free trade—slave-made goods are in our
homes, so Free the Slaves works with businesses and
other organizations to eradicate slavery from product
supply chains and build a consumer movement that
chooses slave-free goods.
• Educating policymakers—this consists of working with
governments to enforce effective antislavery and anti-
trafﬁcking laws and, where necessary, to draft new
legislation.
• Researching slavery—modern slavery is taking new
forms and presenting new challenges, all of which needs
to be understood if effective action is to be made. 
In the past few years, Free the Slaves has investigated the
enslavement of children in West Africa and the plight of young
men and women enslaved in agricultural work in the United
States. It helped to get an important antitrafﬁcking law through
Congress in 2000, and helped build a coalition of businesses,
government, and human rights groups that is taking slavery out
of cocoa production. Most importantly, it has supported the free-
ing of many enslaved people, especially children, in India. Many
of these children were enslaved to make carpets, and their rescue
is also the aim of Rugmark, a key national organization.
Groups and Strategies Working against Slavery
33

An Example at the National Level: Rugmark
One of the worst industries in India for the abuse of child slaves
has been rug and carpet making. If you have an oriental rug on
your floor right now, there is a good chance it was woven by
slave children. For many years, campaigners in India tried to free
and rehabilitate these child slaves, with only partial success. But
a few years ago, the Rugmark campaign set out to put the pres-
sure not on the makers but on the buyers of carpets. Working
from a tiny ofﬁce with very little funding, Rugmark organizers
proposed that people should look for a special tag on handmade
rugs that guaranteed that they were not made by slaves. To earn
this “Rugmark,” producers had to agree to only three things: not
to exploit children, to cooperate with independent monitoring,
and to turn over one percent of the carpet price to a welfare fund
for child workers. Special effort was put into building up a so-
phisticated monitoring team that can detect fake labels, that
knows carpet making inside and out, and can’t be corrupted. To-
day the German, Canadian, and U.S. governments recognize the
Rugmark. The biggest mail-order company in the world as well
as major retailers in the United States, Germany, and the Nether-
lands now import only Rugmark carpets. In the United States,
you can find the stores selling Rugmark rugs on the organiza-
tion’s website, www.rugmark.org.
The most important aspect of the Rugmark campaign is its
impact on the lives of enslaved children. Since 1995, the one-
percent contribution from producers has provided an education
to more than 2,300 children freed from the looms. They have also
built six schools and a vocational training center in India, three
schools in Nepal, and three schools in Pakistan.
An Example at the Local Level: The Break the
Chain Campaign in Washington, DC
This book began with the story of Hilda Dos Santos, a woman
held against her will and forced to work as a servant for a family
near Washington, DC. Unfortunately, her story is not unique.
Other women, from Cameroon, Ghana, and many other parts of
the developing world are being brought into the U.S. capital on
permits (called A-3 or G-5 visas) that allow foreigners to bring
their servants with them to the United States. Some of these
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

workers are then enslaved, and several legal cases have been
brought by the government against the employers. Few of these
cases would have ever come about, however, except for the work
of the staff and volunteers of the Break the Chain campaign. The
campaign is a coalition of legal and social service agencies, ethni-
cally based organizations, social action groups, and individuals
devoted to protecting the rights of migrant domestic workers.
Speciﬁcally, they focus on those domestic workers carrying A-3
or G-5 visas. The most common countries of origin currently in-
clude the Philippines, Indonesia, Peru, India, Brazil, Sri Lanka,
Mexico, Morocco, Chile, and Colombia.
Social service professionals and religious leaders have en-
countered numerous cases of abuse and exploitation of these do-
mestic workers within the Washington, DC, area, and estimate
that the problem is widespread. Abuse and exploitation range
from wage abuse and contract violation to physical and even
sexual abuse. Incredibly, though it is an organization fighting
slavery in the nation’s capital, the campaign has to run on a shoe-
string budget. Joy Zarembka, the young woman who coordi-
nates the campaign, explained:
Most Americans want to believe that slavery no longer
exists, that it is just a racist vestige of the past. But, slav-
ery is both colorblind and current. Americans need to
be more vigilant and that is especially easier for young
people who, by and large, are more observant and have
better access to information. Before I began working on
this issue, my own younger brother discovered a situa-
tion of domestic worker abuse right down the street
from us and I didn’t even know it was occurring. We
need to learn to question situations that don’t seem
quite right: Is there someone in your neighborhood that
you have seen go into a house and never come back
out? Have you seen cleaning ladies and maids that
don’t seem to be allowed to go outside? Some people
should even question themselves and ask if they treat
their own housekeeper with dignity and respect.
The campaign has been able to serve over 150 clients and
has coordinated public education events, media coverage, legal
and training workshops, strategy meetings, and research on do-
mestic workers. A roster of pro bono lawyers provide legal ad-
Groups and Strategies Working against Slavery
35

vice and research for the campaign, while others handle individ-
ual civil and criminal cases involving domestic worker abuse, ex-
ploitation, slavery, or trafﬁcking.
What Can We Do?
Around the world, people—especially young people—are ﬁght-
ing against slavery. Many of these people have to invent the
strategies and actions that they will take because the modern
abolitionist movement is only just beginning. We have wonder-
ful examples, such as Free the Children, where a group of
twelve-year-olds has built a powerful international organization
(see Craig Kielburger’s story in Chapter 5). Even more inspiring
are the lives of children liberated from slavery, children who
have suffered terrible abuse and are not only rebuilding their
lives, but also becoming leaders in the ﬁght against slavery.
One of the things we know about slavery today is that it
spans the globe and reaches into our lives. Whether we like it or
not, we are now global people. We have to ask ourselves: Are we
willing to live in a world with slaves? If not, we have to work to
understand the links that tie us to slavery and then take action to
break those links. If we don’t do that, we are puppets, subject to
forces we can’t or won’t control. If we don’t take action, we are
just surrendering and letting other people jerk the strings that tie
us to slavery. Of course, there are many kinds of exploitation in
the world, many kinds of injustice and violence to be concerned
about. But slavery is important because it is exploitation, vio-
lence, and injustice all rolled together. There is no more potent
combination of these three crimes. If there is one fundamental vi-
olation of our humanity we cannot allow, it is slavery. If there is
one basic truth that virtually every human being can agree on, it
is that slavery must end. What good is all our economic and po-
litical power if we can’t use it to free slaves? If we can’t stop slav-
ery, how can we really say we are free?
One of the best ways to take action is to contact one or more
of the organizations listed in this book to learn more about con-
temporary slavery and how you might contribute to eradicating
it. Student groups and local organizations all across the United
States are emerging that educate, lobby, raise funds, and cam-
paign on slavery. All of them need volunteers.
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

References
Australian Anti-Slavery Society. The Forgotten Slaves: Report on a Mission
to Investigate the Girl-Child Slaves of West Africa, 1996. Also see French,
Howard W., “The Ritual Slaves of Ghana: Young and Female.” New York
Times January 20, 1997, pp. A1, A5.
Barry, Kathleen. The Prostitution of Sexuality. New York: New York Uni-
versity Press, 1995.
Bindman, Jo. Redefining Prostitution as Sex Work. London: Network of
Sex Work Projects, 1997.
Boethius, Maria-Pia. “The End of Prostitution in Sweden?” Swedish
Institute, October 1999, http://www.sweden.se/templates/Article–
2295.asp.
Bona Malwal, Editorial, Sudan Democratic Gazette, N. 114, November
1999: 2 (published in London, UK). Bowe, John. “Slavery in America.”
New Yorker April 21, 2003, pp. 106–133.
Castaneda, Ruben. “Ghanaian Woman Tells of Life of Unpaid Labor:
Takoma Park Couple Accused of Enslaving Her.” Washington Post May
24, 2003, p. B07.
Center on Speech, Equality and Harm, University of Minnesota Law
School. Creating an International Framework for Legislation to Protect
Women and Children from Commercial Sexual Exploitation. Preliminary Re-
port, January 1998.
Greider, William. One World Ready or Not: The Manic Logic of Global Capi-
talism. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997.
Hirsch, Michele. Plan of Action against Women and Forced Prostitution.
Council of Europe EG(96), April 9, 1996, p. 23.
Landesman, Peter. “Sex Slaves on Main Street.” New York Times, January
25, 2004, pp. 30–39, 66, 67, 72, 75.
U.S. State Department. Human Rights Report 2002, Washington DC.
References
37


3
Slavery in America
T
he size of the modern slave trade is very difﬁcult to measure.
The victims of human trafﬁcking are mixed with smuggled
illegal immigrants, forced migration, and criminal networks.
The United Nations estimates that, around the world, 600,000 to
800,000 people are trafﬁcked against their will into some form of
slavery or servitude each year. In the Global South, many people
and families are poor and desperate and will do almost anything
to improve their life. “Recruiters” take advantage of them,
promising transportation and jobs in a new country. Once the re-
cruiters have lured people away from their homes, they then use
violence to take control of their lives. The U.S. State Department
estimates that as many as 17,500 people are trafficked into the
United States each year to be forced into agricultural work, pros-
titution, domestic service, or as bonded labor in factories and
sweatshops.
The following recent cases show the nature of the trade (Hid-
den Slaves 2004):
The Case against Lakireddy Bali Reddy: Sexual Exploitation
in California
Lakireddy Bali Reddy, a local businessman, sexually
exploited several young girls from his native village 
in India. Uncovered in January 2000, his sex and labor
exploitation ring spanned fifteen years and operated 
in India and California. He repeatedly raped and sexu-
ally abused his victims and forced them to work in his
businesses in Berkeley, California, including a well-
established Indian restaurant. Reddy pleaded guilty to
39

criminal charges related to immigration fraud and ille-
gal sexual activity and agreed to pay US $2 million in
restitution to several of his victims.
The Case against R&A Harvesting: Forced Farm Labor in
Florida
Florida citrus pickers endured abuse by R&A Har-
vesting, a farm labor contractor, between January 2000
and June 2001. The company used threats of violence to
force as many as seven hundred Mexican and
Guatemalan workers to labor for little or no pay. After
R&A Harvesting employees attacked a van driver sus-
pected of assisting the workers, the Coalition of
Immokalee Workers (see Chapter 7 for their Web site), a
local community organization, pressured prosecutors to
investigate the allegations of forced labor. The owners of
R&A Harvesting, the three Ramos brothers and a
cousin, were tried and convicted of forced labor charges
in 2002.
The Case against the Cadena Family: Forced Prostitution in
Florida and South Carolina
Based in Mexico, the Cadena family members lured
young girls and women to come to the United States os-
tensibly to work as waitresses and domestic workers.
Between August 1996 and February 1998, the Cadena
family brought between twenty-five and forty unsus-
pecting victims to Florida and South Carolina and
forced them to work as prostitutes to service primarily
Mexican migrant farm workers. In March 1998 several
Cadena family members and their associates were
brought to justice, receiving criminal sentences ranging
from two to ﬁfteen years imprisonment.
The Case against Supawan Veerapool: Enslavement of a Do-
mestic Service Worker in California
In 1989 a Thai woman by the name of Supawan Veer-
apool, the common law wife of Thailand’s ambassador
to Sweden, brought a domestic worker to Los Angeles to
provide household support in her home. On arrival in
the United States the domestic worker’s passport was
confiscated and she was then forced to work twenty-
40
Slavery in America

hour days, six days a week until she escaped in 1998.
Convicted on criminal charges in 1999, Veerapool was
sentenced to eight years in prison.
The Case against the Satia Family: Forced Domestic Servi-
tude in Washington, DC
The Satias, two Cameroonian sisters and their hus-
bands, recruited young Cameroonian girls, aged four-
teen and seventeen, to work as domestics in their Wash-
ington, DC, homes. The girls were recruited with the
promise of studying in the U.S. in exchange for provid-
ing childcare and domestic help. Once in the U.S., the
domestic servants were confined to the Satias’ homes,
working in excess of fourteen hours a day without re-
muneration and under threat of violence and deporta-
tion. The younger survivor escaped in 1999 after two
years of captivity. A year later the older survivor ﬂed, af-
ter having been exploited for ﬁve years. In 2001, the Sa-
tia sisters and their husbands were charged with forced
labor. Found guilty, they received criminal sentences
ranging from ﬁve to nine years and were ordered to pay
their victims over $100,000 in restitution.
Slavery exists in the United States because factors in the U.S.
economy, legal system, and immigration policy support it. Hu-
man trafﬁcking and enslavement are problems that are driven by
a growing “informal economy” in the United States. The Interna-
tional Labor Organization defines an informal economy as “all
remunerative work—both self employed and wage employ-
ment—that is not recognized, regulated, or protected by existing
legal or regulatory frameworks and non-remunerative work un-
dertaken in an income-producing enterprise” (ILO 2002, 12).
Slavery exists in both legal and illegal industries that are poorly
regulated and fail to comply with U.S. labor laws. “Employers”
in such industries are often criminal entrepreneurs for whom
forced labor may be one of a number of illegal activities. Over
time, such employers have found that forced labor can be a lucra-
tive business made possible through the ready availability of free
labor, better and more varied transport, new methods of secure
communications, and the increased permeability of borders.
Slavery is most prevalent in ﬁve sectors of the U.S. economy:
prostitution and sex services, domestic service, agriculture,
Slavery in America
41

sweatshop/factory work, and restaurant and hotel work, though
it can be found in many other types of work. This type of forced
labor persists in these sectors because of low wages, lack of regu-
lation and monitoring of working conditions, and a high demand
for cheap labor. These conditions enable unscrupulous employers
and criminal networks to gain virtually complete control over
workers’ lives. It is not clear what part slavery plays in our na-
tional economy, though the total is likely to be small. This is be-
cause slaves tend to be used on the lower end of the economic
ladder—in manual labor such as fruit picking—not in high value
manufacturing. However, using slave labor can mean very large
proﬁts for criminals.
While promises of good jobs with high wages are used to
lure the poor into forced labor, in part due to a lack of legal possi-
bilities for people to emigrate for work, it is not sufficient to
blame external economic factors for human trafficking into the
United States. Demand for trafﬁcked labor exists in the American
economy. There are citizens and others in the United States who
are willing to exploit other human beings in this way. Also, it has
not been the practice of most U.S. businesses to ask questions
about the labor conditions of the companies that supply their raw
materials or do their piece-work. Given the large and relatively
unregulated informal sectors of the economy, this lack of ques-
tioning helps to create a context in which trafﬁcked people can be
exploited. This, in addition to an overt willingness to exploit by
some criminals and informal sector businesses, results in a grow-
ing demand for trafﬁcked workers.
It is also important to understand that those who supply
workers for forced labor and the “employers” and “consumers”
of forced labor are not necessarily the same individuals. The sup-
pliers are the recruiters and transporters who entrap and move
people into the human trafficking streams. They convert free
people into victims of forced labor by taking control of their lives,
brutalizing them, taking their passports and documents, and re-
stricting their movement. There are certain attributes they seek in
the “product” they will sell to those “employers” who use slave
labor: gullibility, physical health, and, the most important at-
tribute, profitability. Profitability, in turn, is determined by the
demand the “employer” of enslaved labor has for certain skills
and attributes in the people they will exploit. These attributes
vary according to the jobs or economic sectors in which the “em-
ployer” intends to use slaves. Different attributes will be needed
42
Slavery in America

for prostitution or agricultural work or domestic service, though
there will be overlap as well.
Most importantly, the suppliers and users of forced labor are
themselves meeting a demand within the overall economy.
American citizens are using the products and services of traf-
ﬁcked workers. In the case of prostitution, they are personally ex-
ploiting the women and children who are trafficking victims.
Whether American consumers who beneﬁt from trafﬁcking know
they are doing so, or whether they are ignorant of the suffering
that supports their purchases, they are still driving the demand
that supports human trafﬁcking.
Victims of slavery in America come from numerous ethnic
and racial groups. Recent research showed people trafﬁcked from
thirty-ﬁve or more countries and, through force, fraud, or coer-
cion, were laboring against their will in the United States (Hidden
Slaves 2004). This study found that the largest number of victims
are Chinese people, followed by Mexicans and Vietnamese. Some
of these victims are born and raised in the United States and ﬁnd
themselves pressed into servitude by fraudulent or deceptive
means. Between 1999 and 2004, documented slavery cases have
been reported in at least ninety U.S. cities. The criminal opera-
tions using slave labor tend to thrive in states with large popula-
tions and sizable immigrant communities such as California,
Florida, New York, and Texas—all of which are transit routes for
international travelers.
Those who survive slavery in the United States are at signiﬁ-
cant risk of developing health-related problems. Most survivors
come from impoverished areas of the world where access to ade-
quate health care is limited or nonexistent. Because slavery vic-
tims are rarely given the formal medical screenings for migrants,
many arrive in the United States without proper immunizations
and bearing communicable diseases. Once trafficked people
reach their destination in the United States, they continue to face
a variety of health risks as they begin working in dangerous and
unregulated work environments. Those who work in the sex
trade are especially at risk of contracting AIDS or other sexually
transmitted diseases. Criminals using slave labor frequently use
violence or the withholding of food as a means of “breaking,”
controlling, and punishing their workers.
Victims of forced labor often suffer psychological assaults
designed to keep them submissive. Cut off from contact with the
outside world, they can lose their sense of personal efﬁcacy and
Slavery in America
43

control, attributes that mental health professionals have long con-
sidered essential to good mental and physical health. In such sit-
uations, many victims of slavery become increasingly dependent
on their captors, if merely to survive. While little is known about
the psychological impact of slavery, survivors often report feel-
ings of depression, reoccurring nightmares, and panic attacks.
What Do We Know about 
Human Trafﬁcking in the United States?
Human trafﬁcking into the United States is only beginning to be
understood. Major studies of this crime were only completed in
2003 and 2004. One study was commissioned by the National In-
stitute of Justice (NIJ), the research arm of the Department of Jus-
tice, the agency with responsibility for prosecuting trafficking
cases at the federal level. Since human trafﬁcking and slavery are
hidden crimes, our knowledge is still piecemeal, but certain
themes are emerging. The NIJ-supported study noted these key
facts from an in-depth study of trafﬁcking cases (Bales and Lize
2004):
• Trafﬁcking victims are most likely to be young and rea-
sonably healthy people from poor, but not necessarily the
poorest, backgrounds. Often, trafﬁcking victims have a
level of education that  is inversely proportional to the
likelihood of their enslavement. That is, case studies have
found that those with the least education were most eas-
ily manipulated. Both the lack of, and desire for, educa-
tion is also a strong predictor of susceptibility to being
trafﬁcked.
• Recruitment is particularly effective when trafﬁckers rely
on victims whom they have turned into loyal enforcers or
recruiters. Recruitment is also effective when the poten-
tial victim’s family members are involved.
• One-third of our case studies involved foreign-national
victims who were recruited within the United States.
• In half of the cases, the trafﬁcking operations were simple
links between single individuals or agencies providing a sin-
gle service—smuggling migrants across a border in order
to exploit them in the destination country. One quarter of
44
Slavery in America

the cases were segmented businesses involving a criminal
network and a legitimate transportation or labor recruit-
ment company. The ﬁnal quarter of the cases were rela-
tively sophisticated and complex networks spanning both
long periods of time and large geographical distances.
• The principal methods trafﬁckers use to control victims
include taking away victims’ travel and identity docu-
ments; repeatedly telling victims local police or immigra-
tion authorities will arrest, brutalize, or even kill them if
they are found; sexual abuse; physical violence; threats of
physical violence or death; isolation; and debt bondage.
In cases with groups of victims, trafﬁckers used victims
as enforcers to intimidate and control the victims.
• The types of work that trafﬁcking victims were forced to
do in our case studies were prostitution, domestic service,
agricultural work, entertainment, factory work, restau-
rant service, and street peddling. In every case, the period
of exploitation lasted much longer than that of being traf-
ﬁcked. The length of captivity ranged from one month to
ﬁve-and-a-half years. Once in their situation of forced la-
bor, none of the victims in the case studies were sold on
to different exploiters or forced into different types of
work.
• Human trafﬁcking operations in the United States are
carefully planned and orchestrated to make victims vul-
nerable and maintain their vulnerability and dependence.
Systematic isolation and disorientation of victims oc-
curred in every case. Threats of violence or the use of ac-
tual violence were used to create a climate of fear. The
premeditation and organization needed suggests that
most instances of human trafﬁcking and forced labor
should be considered organized crime, not simply the op-
portunistic exploitation or coincidental negligence of an
employer.
• In one-third of cases, the trafﬁcking victims came to free-
dom on their own initiative by escaping their exploiters.
In one-third of our case studies, private citizen interven-
ers (sometimes called “good Samaritans”) took an interest
and helped secure liberation of the trafﬁcking victim.
• Trafﬁcking victims often have contact with local law en-
forcement authorities. But because they lack sufﬁcient
training, local law enforcement agents failed to notice the
Human Trafﬁcking in the United States
45

victims and take appropriate action to bring them to
safety. Law enforcement played a role in the exposure
and discovery of trafﬁcking victims in only one of the
cases studied.
• Not every federal arrest and search warrant execution
was successful in the cases studied. Case study analysis
showed that local nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) and service providers have a role to play in
mounting successful arrests of trafﬁckers. NGOs may
provide needed intelligence facilitating the arrest. They
also provide assistance in stabilizing victims to be able to
cooperate with law enforcement.
• Fear of reprisals against themselves, and against their
families in the origin countries, prevents many trafﬁcking
victims from effectively participating in prosecutions.
• The wide diversity of social, cultural, and linguistic back-
grounds of victims of trafﬁcking are a signiﬁcant chal-
lenge to both gaining their cooperation and building suc-
cessful cases.
• Commercial and other records are the “Achilles’ heel” of
trafﬁckers and exploiters of forced labor; this is especially
the case with those involved in trafﬁcking into forced
prostitution.
• Even though trafﬁcked persons who cooperate with fed-
eral law enforcement agencies are eligible for beneﬁts and
protection, some cooperative trafﬁcking victim-witnesses
have not received the support to which they are entitled.
• Human trafﬁckers are engaged in a wide range of crimes
both against their victims (including rape, assault, extor-
tion, homicide, and forced abortion) and against the state
(for example, money laundering, tax evasion, document
fraud, and corruption of ofﬁcials).
• It is the nature of trafﬁcking as a crime that when differ-
ent ofﬁcial and civil society agencies work together, they
are most likely to achieve successful interventions and
prosecutions—the reverse is also true.
The themes emerging from new research tell us that the
United States faces a great challenge in ridding itself of slavery. A
key obstacle is the relative ignorance of the general public, which
means they fail to realize or perceive slavery in their communi-
ties. In fact, young American women have been enslaved in their
46
Slavery in America

own communities; see the case of the teenage prostitution ring in
Detroit given in Chapter 6.
Stopping Slavery in America
Legal slavery was ended in America at a terrible cost. The death
toll of the Civil War, the devastation of the South, and then the
botched emancipation of the slaves continue to haunt the United
States today. Dumping 4 million slaves into the economy in 1865
without any recompense for the lives stolen from them, without
giving them a chance at education, real citizenship, or the tools to
build new lives, meant that subsequent generations were
blighted by slavery’s impact. Today the number of slaves in the
United States is much smaller, probably around 50,000, but they
are much more difﬁcult to ﬁnd and free because they are hidden
away and exploited by criminals.
An example demonstrates the difficulty of measuring this
hidden criminal economic activity. The State Department esti-
mates that around 17,500 people a year are trafficked into the
United States (U.S. Dept. of State 2004, 23); in 2003 federal prose-
cutions of this crime had increased 50 percent from the year be-
fore, to 111. The discrepancy between these two ﬁgures is what
criminologists sometimes call the dark ﬁgure of crime statistics—
that is, the difference between the actual number of crimes and
the number of crimes that are reported to the authorities. The rule
of dark ﬁgures is that the gap between actual crimes and reported
crimes decreases as the severity of the crime increases. Normally,
the crime with the smallest dark ﬁgure is murder (almost every
murder gets reported); bicycle theft, on the other hand, has one of
the largest dark ﬁgures (people just don’t bother to report a stolen
bike). What is sobering is that slavery and human trafﬁcking are
crimes of extreme severity, but they have the large dark ﬁgures
normally associated with lesser crimes. The more reliable mea-
sures of criminal activity are the representative population
sample victim surveys that are regularly carried out in the United
States and Europe. These have proven to be the best way to
achieve estimates of the dark figures of crime. But even in the
United States, slaves are normally invisible, unreachable, unsur-
veyable victims, hidden away because the criminal has total con-
trol over them.
Stopping Slavery in America
47

The realization of the growth of human trafﬁcking and slav-
ery in the United States has brought about a signiﬁcant increase
in effort at all levels. The U.S. government has been a leader in
recognizing and combating slavery worldwide, and has been
rapidly expanding its work inside the United States, though there
is a long way to go. The 2000 Trafﬁcking Victims Protection Act
(see Chapter 6 for excerpts and a description of this law) embod-
ies an aggressive, proactive approach to the problem of human
trafﬁcking and forced labor. It
• Criminalizes procuring and subjecting another human be-
ing to peonage, involuntary sex trafﬁcking, slavery, invol-
untary servitude, or forced labor
• Provides social services and legal beneﬁts to survivors of
these crimes, including authorization to remain in the
country
• Provides funding to support protection programs for sur-
vivors in the United States as well as abroad
• Includes provisions to monitor and eliminate trafﬁcking in
countries outside the United States
Despite these considerable advancements, the Trafficking
Victims Protection Act has some shortcomings. The law only al-
lows help with immigration and social services if a foreigner res-
cued from slavery in the United States cooperates with law en-
forcement in prosecuting trafﬁckers. This creates the perception
that survivors of slavery are primarily instruments of law en-
forcement rather than individuals who are, in and of themselves,
deserving of protection and restoration of their human rights.
Furthermore, much more action is needed to train law enforce-
ment officers, particularly at the local level, to identify victims
and slavery operations; improve cooperation and information
sharing on trafficking and slavery between federal and state
agencies; improve procedures for the handling of survivors; and
provide survivors with protection, beneﬁts, and compensation.
Many victims of slavery in the United States are reluctant to
report their situation to law enforcement because they fear retri-
bution from their trafﬁckers. Often, victims have an inherent fear
of police based on their past experience with corrupt authorities
in their home countries. To overcome these obstacles there is an
urgent need to train law enforcement personnel at all levels to
recognize and assist trafﬁcking victims. Trafﬁcking is deﬁned al-
48
Slavery in America

most exclusively as a federal crime to be handled by federal au-
thorities. This limited mandate has hindered coordination be-
tween federal and state law enforcement agencies that, in turn,
has allowed perpetrators of slavery to go undetected. Moreover,
federal law enforcement personnel are often unable to protect
survivors and their families from trafﬁckers because authorities
lack the necessary legal tools, assistance, and funds to provide
them with secure and safe refuge. Taken together, these obstacles
can impede a survivor’s willingness to cooperate in criminal in-
vestigations.
The Trafﬁcking Victims Protection Act greatly ampliﬁed the
federal government’s role in investigating and prosecuting slav-
ery cases in the United States, but the job of providing basic social
and legal services to survivors has fallen squarely on the shoul-
ders of NGOs and social service agencies. Yet fewer than half of
these agencies are able to meet these needs. Social service agen-
cies, such as shelters for the homeless or women suffering domes-
tic violence, report that ﬁnding appropriate housing for survivors
has been one of their greatest challenges. Housing that is safe and
secure can protect survivors from their former captors. Yet hous-
ing of any kind can be costly for social service agencies. Much
would be gained if these agencies were provided with greater ﬁ-
nancial support so that they can provide survivors of forced labor
with safe and adequate housing and other basic legal and social
services.
What Can Be Done?
Ignorance of the crime, lack of sensitivity to victims, lack of train-
ing and familiarity with the crime on the part of law enforcement,
and the demand by the public for cheap goods and services all
contribute to the continuation of trafﬁcking and forced labor in
the United States. This is an ongoing, underground, and brutal
exploitation of men, women, and children. It is a hidden crime
that preys on the most vulnerable—the poor, the uneducated,
children, and especially the impoverished immigrant seeking a
better life. It is a profound violation of human rights being perpe-
trated in the cities, suburbs, and rural areas of the United States.
Yet for all its severity and breadth, trafﬁcking can be stopped. The
criminal enterprises that exploit forced labor are small and frag-
What Can Be Done?
49

mented. The general public, when they understand the problem
of human trafﬁcking, are outraged and willing to see resources
devoted to its eradication. Demand for forced labor in many sec-
tors can be extinguished by increasing the cost of its use, in part
by increasing both the likelihood and severity of penalties for this
crime. The likelihood of apprehension can also be increased if all
levels of law enforcement are trained and brought to bear on the
problem. These actions can be taken within the United States and,
if they are combined with raising public awareness in countries
of origin, enabling safe and legal immigration, and the improve-
ment of economic opportunities in the developing world, the
supply of people vulnerable to human trafﬁcking can be reduced
as well. The United States does not suffer from the internal cor-
ruption and lack of resources faced by many countries that are
ﬁghting trafﬁcking. With commitment and resources, trafﬁcking
and forced labor in the United States could be eradicated.
Increasing Law Enforcement
One of the greatest barriers to the eradication of human trafﬁck-
ing and forced labor in the United States is the lack of criminal in-
telligence on trafficking. While the routes and flows of illegal
drugs have been studied, the emergence of the trafﬁc in human
beings is requiring a new effort in information gathering. While it
is known that many of the same criminals trafﬁc in drugs, guns,
and people, law enforcement personnel have found it more difﬁ-
cult to identify a trafﬁcked person when they are found. “If I ﬁnd
a bag of cocaine, I know what to do,” one law enforcement ofﬁ-
cial explained, “but if I open the back of a truck and find ten
people, are they smuggled? Are they trafﬁcked? Which one is the
perpetrator and which are the victims? And the chances are that
they will speak a language that I don’t know, and the important
first minutes of investigation will be blocked” (Bales and Lize
2004, 137). Often, cases of trafficking come to law enforcement
from social service agencies, but these two groups may have dif-
fering, even opposing, goals for the forced labor survivors. There
is a tension between encouraging law enforcement to crack down
and prosecute and punish perpetrators and at the same time ask-
ing for an increased concentration on the appropriate treatment
for victims and survivors. While law enforcement needs wit-
50
Slavery in America

nesses to clearly recount their victimization, social service agen-
cies seek to help the survivor recover and move on from their ex-
perience. Likewise, social service providers sometimes feel that
law enforcement takes over control of the victim in order to best
serve the prosecution of perpetrators, but not always in the best
interest of the survivor. This contrast in organizational goals and
approaches to the survivor points to the need for increased col-
laboration.
Supporting the Victims and Survivors of
Trafﬁcking and Slavery
Across the United States, social service providers are trying to
meet the needs of trafﬁcked and enslaved people. For the most
part, these are agencies that were established to serve another
client base, such as survivors of domestic violence. Because their
services were not designed to serve survivors of trafficking or
forced labor, they are addressing this group without speciﬁc pro-
cedures or expertise. This is due, in part, to a lack of training and
information about trafﬁcking and slavery. Without such informa-
tion and training, several problems occur. One is an inability to
identify slavery and trafﬁcking cases when they are met. A sec-
ond difficulty, based on a low understanding of the issue, is a
possible lack of sensitivity to victims and survivors, both to their
unique cultural backgrounds and to their shared experiences of
forced labor.
Cases are often complex, adding to the burden of supporting
survivors. The crime of trafﬁcking and slavery normally encom-
passes a host of other crimes, from falsifying documents and im-
migration violations, to crimes of extreme violence such as tor-
ture and rape. Each of these crimes has a set of needed
responses—some minor, others that will be intensive and long
lasting. Mental health issues, physical health concerns, legal
problems and challenges, cultural differences, the basic require-
ments of food, clothing, and shelter, and the ongoing threat of vi-
olence, sometimes to the survivor and sometimes to their loved
ones in the country of origin, must all be balanced and coordi-
nated in the way that best serves the survivor.
Creating a context in which the survivor of trafﬁcking and
slavery can be reintegrated successfully into society is a signiﬁ-
Supporting the Victims and Survivors
51

cant challenge. It is not unusual for a trafﬁcking victim to escape
with nothing but the clothes on his or her back. Their immediate
needs for medical care, safety, food, clothing, housing, and other
forms of support are acute. Once acute needs are met, the require-
ments of participating in prosecution, as well as the need to re-
construct a coherent, autonomous life, are extremely demanding.
These demands can be intensiﬁed because of the barriers of cul-
ture and language that often exist. Despite this challenge, proper
response and care is crucial in preventing revictimization.
In addition to the actual trafﬁcking victims themselves, the
people who helped them escape and bring the trafﬁckers to jus-
tice can face threats in the United States or abroad from criminals.
Trafﬁcking victims’ families can also face considerable threat in
their home countries, where U.S. law enforcement has no juris-
diction and where the traffickers or their associates can reach
them. Repatriation to the country of origin is a path chosen by
some survivors, or it is chosen for them by ofﬁcial agencies. Cre-
ating further problems through the “solution” of repatriation
must be avoided. In their country of origin, the forced labor sur-
vivor can face stigmatization, rejection by their community, the
threat of revictimization, physical assault, continued suffering of
post-traumatic stress, lack of needed medical care, and the threat
of violence to their families.
Public Awareness
A critical need within the United States is for an increase in public
awareness of the crime of trafficking and slavery. This is espe-
cially true given the hidden nature of this crime. Since many law
enforcement personnel have difficulty identifying slavery, it is
not surprising that the general public also fails to recognize it.
That said, private citizens have identiﬁed many cases of forced
labor and reported them to the authorities. Often, this identiﬁca-
tion has not been precise; it has not been a realization that human
trafﬁcking and slavery is occurring, simply that a private citizen
feels “something is not right” and reports his or her concern.
Given the propensity of the American public to participate in
crime reduction schemes like “Neighborhood Watch,” helping
the public to recognize forced labor could only increase the num-
ber of cases uncovered.
52
Slavery in America

Public awareness work has commenced in the United States,
but in a fairly uncoordinated manner. The issue has been ad-
dressed in newspapers and magazines as both news reports on
individual cases and as feature articles. In 2003, several national
wide-circulation magazines took up the issue (some of the best of
these articles are listed in Chapter 8). Additionally, as a topic, hu-
man trafﬁcking and slavery has been explored in a number of ra-
dio and television programs. It has been presented both within
factual, discussion-format programs as well as included in the
plots of ﬁctional drama programs. Shorter, informational materi-
als have also been aired, primarily in the form of public service
announcements. Within the total volume of media information
ﬂow within the United States, however, the amount of program-
ming and coverage linked to forced labor has been negligible.
The “noise-to-content ratio” of American media is so large that,
unless there is a very well-resourced, long-term, and coordinated
public awareness campaign, the issue of forced labor will remain
outside of public consideration. While existing public awareness
efforts have helped raise a general public understanding of the is-
sue, there has been no research to determine how far and how
deeply such ideas have reached into the public consciousness.
Whether American consumers who beneﬁt from forced labor
know they are doing so or are ignorant of the suffering that sup-
ports their purchases, they are still driving the demand for forced
labor. However, when educated through effective public aware-
ness campaigns, consumers and consumer advocacy groups can
play a role in reducing or even eliminating forced labor from the
production and supply chains of the products they consume. The
role of American consumers in eliminating forced labor cannot be
underestimated. Consumers can pressure companies and indus-
tries to take responsibility for the treatment of workers in the pro-
duction of components or ingredients in the products they sell in
the United States. Consumers can also join and support antislavery
and antitrafﬁcking organizations that are working to end forced la-
bor in the United States and abroad. American consumers can play
an inﬂuential role in ending forced labor in the United States, but
they have yet to be mobilized by public awareness.
If you are interested in knowing more about human traf-
ficking in the United States, a good place to start is the Traffick-
ing in Persons section of the U.S. Department of Justice
(www.usdoj.gov/trafficking.htm), which includes fact sheets, a
hotline number, and other resources.
Public Awareness
53

References
Bales, Kevin, and Steven Lize. “Trafficking in Persons in the United
States: A Report to the National Institute of Justice.” Croft Institute for
International Studies, University of Mississippi, 2004. 
Hidden Slaves: Forced Labor in the United States. Berkeley, CA: Free the
Slaves and the Human Rights Center, September 2004. 
International Labor Organization, Employment Sector. Women and Men
in the Informal Economy: A Statistical Picture. Geneva, 2002.
Richard, Amy O’Neill. “International Trafficking in Women to the
United States: A Contemporary Manifestation of Slavery and Organized
Crime.” Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency,
November 1999. Available at usinfo.state.gov/topical/global/traffic/
report/homepage.htm. 
U.S. Department of State. Trafﬁcking in Persons Report, June 2004. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Department of State Publication 11150, 2004.
Note
Parts of this chapter are adapted from Hidden Slaves: Forced Labor in the
United States (Berkeley, CA: Free the Slaves and the Human Rights Cen-
ter, September 2004). 
54
Slavery in America

4
Chronology
A
lthough this chronology concentrates on the past century, it
begins with the ancient world in order to illustrate the age-
old nature of slavery.
c. 6800 BC
The world’s first city grows in Mesopotamia. With
the ownership of land and the beginnings of tech-
nology comes warfare in which enemies are cap-
tured and forced to work: slavery.
c. 2575 BC
Egyptians send expeditions down the Nile River to
capture slaves. Temple art celebrates the capture of
slaves in battle.
c. 550 BC
The mighty Greek city-state of Athens uses up to
30,000 slaves in the silver mines it controls.
c. 120
Slaves are taken by the thousands in Roman military
campaigns; some estimates put the slave population
of Rome at more than half of the total population.
c. 500
In England, the native Britons are enslaved after in-
vasion by Anglo-Saxons.
c. 1000
Slavery is normal practice in England’s rural econ-
omy, as destitute agricultural workers place them-
selves and their families in a form of debt bondage
to landowners.
55

c. 1250 The trans-Saharan slave trade carries between 5,000 and
25,000 slaves each year from West Africa to the Mediter-
ranean. From there, they are sold into Europe and the
Middle East.
c. 1380 In the aftermath of the Black Plague, Europe’s slave trade
revives in response to the labor shortage. The slaves
come from all over Europe, the Middle East, and North
Africa.
c. 1444 Portuguese traders bring the first cargo of slaves from
West Africa to Europe by sea, thus beginning the Atlantic
slave trade. With the “discovery” of the Americas, it will
greatly expand; by the time it ends around 1870, some 13
million slaves will have been taken from Africa.
c. 1550 Renaissance art is peopled with slaves displayed as ob-
jects of conspicuous consumption.
1619
A Dutch ship delivers twenty Africans to the English set-
tlement at Jamestown, Virginia; they become the first
African Americans, and slavery begins in the American
colonies.
1781
Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II abolishes serfdom, a
form of slavery tied to land ownership, in the Austrian
Habsburg dominions.
1789
On August 26, during the French Revolution, the French
National Assembly adopts the Declaration of the Rights
of Man, one of the fundamental charters of human liber-
ties. The ﬁrst of seventeen articles states, “Men are born
and remain free and equal in rights.”
1803
Denmark becomes the ﬁrst country in Europe to ban the
African slave trade. A law passed in 1792 takes effect in
1803 to forbid trading in slaves by Danish subjects and to
end the importation of slaves into Danish dominions.
1804
After a slave revolt expels the French from the island of
Saint Domingue, the island is declared independent un-
der its original Arawak name, “Haiti.”
56
Chronology

1807
After prolonged lobbying by abolitionists in Britain, led
by William Wilberforce and Thomas Clarkson, the British
Parliament makes it illegal for British ships to transport
slaves and for British colonies to import them.
1808
The United States bans further importation of Africans as
slaves. At this point, there are about one million slaves in
the United States.
1811–
Operating off the Atlantic coast of Africa, the British
1867
Navy’s Anti-Slavery Squadron liberates 160,000 slaves.
Freed from captured slave ships, they are returned to ar-
eas under British protection on the African coast, particu-
larly Sierra Leone.
1813
Sweden, a nation that has never authorized slave trafﬁc,
consents to ban the African slave trade.
1814
The government of the Netherlands ofﬁcially terminates
Dutch participation in the African slave trade.
During the Congress of Vienna, largely through the ef-
forts of Britain, the assembled powers proclaim that the
slave trade should be abolished as soon as possible. The
congress leaves the actual effective date of abolition to
negotiation among the various nations.
1820
The government of Spain, pursuant to a treaty with
Britain, abolishes the slave trade south of the Equator.
Slave trade in Cuba continues until 1888.
1825
Argentina, Peru, Chile, and Bolivia abolish legal slavery.
1833
The British Parliament’s Factory Act of 1833 establishes a
normal working day in textile manufacture. The act bans
the employment of children under the age of nine and
limits the workday of children between the ages of thir-
teen and eighteen to twelve hours. The law also provides
for government inspection of working conditions.
1834
In Britain, the Abolition Act of 1833 abolishes slavery
throughout the British Empire, including its colonies in
Chronology
57

North America. The bill emancipates the slaves in all
British colonies and appropriates a sum equivalent to
nearly $100 million to compensate slave owners for their
losses.
1837
Thomas F. Buxton begins a campaign to abolish coolie
labor in India. After the abolition of slavery, coolies (un-
skilled Far Eastern laborers) have become a preferred
source of cheap labor. Buxton argues that coolie labor
amounts to slavery, with workers often kidnapped,
transported to the Caribbean, and forced to toil in ap-
palling conditions.
1840
The new British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society calls
the first World Anti-Slavery Convention in London to
mobilize reformers to monitor and assist abolition and
postemancipation efforts throughout the world. A group
of abolitionists from the United States travels to London
to attend the convention, but Elizabeth Cady Stanton and
Lucretia Mott, as well as several male supporters, leave
the meeting in protest when women are excluded from
seating on the convention ﬂoor.
1845
Thirty-six British Navy ships are assigned to the Anti-
Slavery Squadron, making it one of the largest ﬂeets in
the world.
1848
After the revolution of 1848 in France, the new govern-
ment abolishes slavery in all French colonies.
1850
The government of Brazil adopts the Queirós Law, end-
ing the country’s participation in the slave trade. The law
declares slave traffic to be a form of piracy and it pro-
hibits Brazilian citizens from taking part in the trade.
1861
By decree Alexander II, czar of Russia, emancipates all
Russian serfs, who number around 50 million. The act
begins the time of the Great Reform in Russia and earns
Alexander II the title of “Czar Liberator.”
1863
During the American Civil War, President Abraham Lin-
coln’s Emancipation Proclamation takes effect, freeing all
58
Chronology
1834
(cont’d)

slaves in the Confederate States. Lincoln also announces
that African Americans can be recruited into the military.
The government of the Netherlands takes ofﬁcial action
to abolish slavery in all Dutch colonies.
1888
Slavery ends in South America when the legislature of
Brazil frees the country’s 725,000 slaves by enacting the
Lei Aurea (Golden Law).
1909
The campaign of the Congo Reform Association (CRA)
to end forced labor in the Congo Free State succeeds. Set
up in Great Britain in 1904 by E. D. Morel, the CRA’s
main objective is the end of forced labor in the Congo
Free State (later known as Zaire). King Leopold II of
Belgium had undertaken personal administration of
this huge territory and forced local people to produce
rubber for sale in Europe, where an increasing number
of cars and bicycles intensify demand for rubber tires.
Workers who refused to labor for King Leopold’s offi-
cials had their hands cut off and their houses burnt and
pillaged.
1910
The International Convention for the Suppression of the
White Slave Trade, signed in Paris on May 4, is the first
of its kind. The convention obligates parties to punish
anyone who recruits a woman below the age of majority
into prostitution, even if she consents.
1913
Peoples’ petition to the British Parliament shuts down
the Peruvian Amazon Company. In 1909, W. E. Harden-
burg, an American civil engineer, had arrived in Lon-
don with accounts of the inhuman exploitation of in-
digenous Indians in Peru by the Peruvian Amazon
Company, a British entity. In the ensuing four years, the
Indians had been trapped by debt and forced to work
for the company, which exploited and tortured the na-
tives. When journalists take up the story, there is a pub-
lic outcry in Britain. The House of Commons mandates
reports from both the company and the British Consul
and establishes a Select Committee to investigate the al-
legations.
Chronology
59

1915
The colonial government of Malaya officially abolishes
slavery.
1918
It is estimated that most households in Hong Kong that
can afford one keep a young child as a household slave.
1919
The League of Nations is founded. Its existence contin-
ues until the formation of the United Nations in 1946.
The International Labor Organization (ILO) is founded to
establish a code of international labor standards. Head-
quartered in Geneva, Switzerland, the ILO brings to-
gether government, labor, and management to solve
problems and to make recommendations concerning pay,
working conditions, trade union rights, safety, woman
and child labor, and social security. The ILO will be
brought into relationship with the UN in 1946.
1920
Buxton’s campaign against coolie labor (see 1837) suc-
ceeds when the British colonial government bans the ex-
port of bonded Indian workers.
1923
The government in Hong Kong passes a law banning the
selling of young girls as domestic slaves.
1926
The League of Nations approves the Slavery Convention,
and more than thirty governments sign the document,
deﬁning slavery as “status or condition of a person over
whom any or all of the powers attaching to the right of
ownership are exercised.” The convention charges mem-
ber nations to work to suppress all forms of slavery.
Burma (later known as Myanmar) abolishes legal slavery.
1927
Slavery is legally abolished in Sierra Leone, a country
founded as a colony by the British in the eighteenth cen-
tury to serve as a homeland for freed slaves.
1929
To achieve the abolition of slavery, Burma begins to com-
pensate slaveholders for their “losses.”
60
Chronology

1930
The Forced Labor Convention, a combined effort of the
League of Nations and the International Labor Organiza-
tion, meets to discuss how to protect the rights of colonial
laborers.
1936
As part of an international treaty, King Ibn Sa’ud of Saudi
Arabia issues a decree ending the importation of new
slaves into his country, regulating the condition of exist-
ing slaves, and providing for manumission under some
conditions (slavery is not abolished).
1938
The Japanese military establishes “comfort stations”
(brothels) for Japanese troops. Thousands of Korean and
Chinese women are forced into sexual slavery during
World War II as “military comfort women.”
1939–
The German Nazi government uses slave labor through-
1945
out the war in farming and industry. Up to 9 million
people are forced to work until they are worn out, at
which time they are sent to concentration camps.
1941
The campaign to protect children in Ceylon (Sri Lanka)
from “adoption” succeeds with the passage of the Adop-
tion of Children Ordinance Law, which ensures the regis-
tration of all children who are adopted and requires reg-
ular inspections to prevent adopted children from
working as slaves.
1948
The UN produces the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Article 4 provides, “No one shall be held in slav-
ery or servitude; slavery and the slave trade shall be pro-
hibited in all their forms.”
1949
The Convention for the Suppression of the Trafﬁc in Per-
sons and Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others pro-
hibits any person from procuring, enticing, or leading
away another person for the purposes of prostitution,
even with the other person’s consent. The convention
consolidates earlier laws and will form the legal basis for
the international protection against trafﬁc in people until
the present day.
Chronology
61

1952
It is estimated that 40,000 Japanese children are sold into
slavery for prostitution in this year alone. Brothel owners
pay between $25 and $100 per child.
1954
China passes the State Regulation on Reform through La-
bor, allowing prisoners to be used as laborers in the laogai
prison camps.
1956
The Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slav-
ery, the Slave Trade and Institutions and Practices Similar
to Slavery regulates practices involving the sale of wives,
serfdom, debt bondage, and child servitude.
1957
The British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society changes its
name to the Anti-Slavery Society for the Protection of
Human Rights. (In the 1990s, the name will be changed
to Anti-Slavery International.)
1960
Harry Wu is sentenced to serve nineteen years in the lao-
gai slave labor camp system.
1962
Slavery is legally abolished in Saudi Arabia and Yemen.
1964
The sixth World Muslim Congress pledges global sup-
port for all antislavery movements. Founded in 1926, the
World Muslim Congress has consultative status with the
UN and observer status with the Organization of Islamic
Countries.
1973
The UN General Assembly adopts the International Con-
vention on the Suppression and Punishment of the
Crime of Apartheid. The convention outlaws a number
of inhuman acts committed for the purposes of establish-
ing and maintaining domination by one racial group
over another, including exploitation of the labor of mem-
bers of a racial group or groups by submitting them to
forced labor.
1974
Mauritania’s emancipated slaves form the El Hor (free-
dom) movement to oppose slavery. Leaders of El Hor in-
sist that emancipation is impossible without realistic
means of enforcing the antislavery laws and providing
62
Chronology

former slaves with the means of achieving economic in-
dependence. The movement demands land reform and
encourages the formation of agricultural cooperatives.
(The inﬂuence of El Hor was strongest between 1978 to
1982, though the organization still exists today.)
1975
The UN Working Group on Contemporary Forms of
Slavery is formed to collect information and make rec-
ommendations on slavery and slavery-like practices
around the world.
1976
India passes a law banning bonded labor.
1977
The ILO adopts the Tripartite Declaration of Principles
Concerning Multinational Enterprises and Social Policy,
a set of recommended standards with no means of en-
forcement.
1980
Slavery is abolished for the fourth time in the Islamic re-
public of Mauritania, but the situation is not fundamen-
tally changed. Although the law decrees that “slavery”
no longer exists, the ban does not address how masters
are to be compensated or how slaves are to gain property.
1983
The civil war in Sudan erupts again, pitting the Muslim
north of the country against the Christian and Animist
southern tribes.
1989
The National Islamic Front takes over the government of
Sudan and begins to arm Baggara tribesmen to ﬁght the
Dinka and Nuer tribes in the south of the country. These
new “militias” raid villages, capturing and enslaving the
inhabitants.
1990
The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child seeks to
promote the basic health care and education of the
young, as well as their protection from abuse, exploita-
tion, or neglect at home, work, and in armed conﬂicts.
The Clean Clothes Campaign is begun in the Nether-
lands. The organization, which puts pressure on clothing
retailers to take responsibility for the conditions in which
Chronology
63

their merchandise is manufactured, has since spread to
nine other countries in Western Europe. 
1992
The Pakistan National Assembly enacts the Bonded La-
bor Act, abolishing indentured servitude and the peshgi
(bonded money) system. However, the government fails
to provide for the implementation and enforcement of
the law’s provisions.
1994
Anti-Slavery International presents extensive evidence of
slavery in Nepal to the UN.
1995
The U.S. government issues the Model Business Princi-
ples, a voluntary model business code (apparently to
pacify human rights and labor activists in the United
States who protest the renewal of China’s trade status).
The principles urge all businesses to adopt and imple-
ment voluntary codes of conduct, including the avoid-
ance of child and forced labor as well as discrimination
based on race, gender, national origin, or religious beliefs.
The principles also promote respect for the right of associ-
ation and the right to organize and bargain collectively.
The organization Free the Children is begun by Craig
Kielburger and classmates and begins its work to rescue
children from exploitation.
1996
The International Organization of Employers, a sub-
sidiary of the ILO, calls on employers and employers’ or-
ganizations to immediately end slavelike, bonded, and
dangerous forms of child labor and simultaneously to
develop formal policies with a view toward the eventual
elimination of child labor in all sectors. The resolution
notes, however, that “attempts to link the issue of work-
ing children with international trade and to use it to im-
pose trade sanctions on countries where the problem of
child labor exists are counter-productive and jeopardize
the welfare of children” (International Organization of
Employers 1996).
The Rugmark campaign is established in Germany to en-
sure that handwoven rugs are not made with illegal
64
Chronology
1990
(cont’d)

(slave) labor. The Rugmark seal guarantees that the en-
tire production of the rug was accomplished without
slave or child labor.
The World Congress Against Commercial Sexual Ex-
ploitation of Children is held.
1997
The UN establishes a commission of inquiry to investi-
gate reports of widespread enslavement of people by the
Myanmar (Burmese) government.
A bill entitled the International Child Labor Elimination
Act (H.R. 2678) is introduced in the U.S. House of Repre-
sentatives to prohibit U.S. assistance, except for humani-
tarian aid, to countries that utilize child labor. It dies in
committee.
Imported goods made by child-bonded laborers are
banned by the United States.
1998
The Myanmar (Burmese) government refuses to allow
the UN Commission of Inquiry to enter its borders.
The Global March Against Child Labor is established.
This organization plans and coordinates demonstrations
against child labor worldwide. One aim is a new Con-
vention in the UN on the Worst Forms of Child Labor.
1999
A consortium of nongovernmental agencies calls for in-
ternational aid and a cease-ﬁre in Sudan to help end slav-
ery there.
Despite being barred from entering Myanmar (Burma),
the UN collects sufficient evidence to condemn
government-sponsored slavery there. The ofﬁcial report
states that the Myanmar government “treats the civilian
population as an unlimited pool of unpaid forced labor-
ers and servants at their disposal as part of a political sys-
tem built on the use of force and intimidation to deny the
people of Myanmar democracy and the rule of law” (In-
ternational Labor Organization 1999, 35).
Chronology
65

The ILO passes the Worst Forms of Child Labor Conven-
tion. This convention establishes widely recognized in-
ternational standards protecting children against forced
or indentured labor, child prostitution/pornography, use
of children in drug trafﬁcking, and other work harmful
to the health, safety, and morals of children.
The book Disposable People by Kevin Bales receives histor-
ical acknowledgment for its part in bringing attention to
contemporary slavery in all regions of the world and is
translated into ten languages.
It is estimated that 15 million child laborers are exploited
in Pakistan.
The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafﬁck-
ing in Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supple-
menting the United Nations Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime is signed with the pur-
pose of combating trafﬁcking in women and children, as-
sisting trafficking victims, and promoting cooperation
between countries for the purpose of accomplishing anti-
trafﬁcking goals.
2000
The government of Nepal bans all forms of debt bondage
after a lengthy campaign by human rights organizations
and freed bonded laborers.
The Trafﬁcking Victims Protection Act (TVPA) is passed
by the U.S. Congress for the purpose of combating the
trafﬁcking in persons as a modern form of human slav-
ery and punishment of trafﬁckers and protection of traf-
ﬁcking victims.
Free the Slaves, the American sister organization of Anti-
Slavery International, is launched in the United States.
2001
The documentary film Slavery: A Global Investigation is
broadcast in the United States and Europe, breaking the
story of slavery and forced child labor in the cocoa and
chocolate industry leading to immediate action by large
66
Chronology
1999
(cont’d)

numbers of students. It receives a Peabody Award and
two Emmy Awards.
The Child Soldiers Protocol is adopted by the UN Gen-
eral Assembly, establishing eighteen as the minimum age
for engagement in armed conﬂict or compulsory recruit-
ment into armed groups. As of spring 2004, the United
States and Somalia are the only nations not to have rati-
ﬁed the protocol.
2002
The countries of the Economic Community of Western
African States (ECOWAS) agree on an action plan to con-
front slavery and human trafﬁcking in the region.
The Cocoa Protocol is signed by chocolate manufacturers
and NGOs to ensure the elimination of slavery and child
labor from the cocoa supply chain.
The Optional Protocol on the Convention of the Rights of
the Child is promulgated with speciﬁc attention paid to
the sale of children and child prostitution. The protocol is
ratiﬁed in the United States in 2003.
The International Cocoa Initiative commits large choco-
late manufacturers to cooperate with NGOs and local
governments in establishing standards for cocoa manu-
facturing and monitoring production in order to ensure
that child and slave labor is eliminated from the process.
By this time, more than 3 million carpets bearing the
Rugmark label have been exported from Nepal, India,
and Pakistan to North America and Europe.
Between 2002 and 2003, a dramatic upswing occurs in the
reporting on contemporary slavery in major publications.
2003
The year that the Pakistani government has assured the
United Nations that “all bonded labor will stop” in its
country. It does not.
In November, the U.S. Congress issues the Reauthoriza-
tion Bill approving continued funding for the Trafﬁcking
Chronology
67

Victims Protection Act of 2000. This bill also enhanced
TVPA by facilitating closer contact between foreign gov-
ernments on the topic and providing assistance for fam-
ily members of victims of trafﬁcking.
The Protect Act is passed, enhancing the tools used to
protect children from sex offenders and sex trafﬁckers, as
well as strengthening laws punishing those who travel
abroad as sex tourists exploiting children.
In September, National Geographic magazine publishes a
major article on contemporary slavery; it registers the
second highest amount of positive feedback the maga-
zine has received.
The U.S. government enacts economic sanctions against
Myanmar for their use of forced labor.
Mauritania passes a law that makes slaveholding punish-
able by ﬁnes and prison.
2004
February 27 is declared National Anti-Slavery Day in the
United States.
A significant number of universities begin offering un-
dergraduate courses in modern slavery.
Government actions lead to the freeing of enslaved chil-
dren and workers in Brazil and Bangladesh.
The UN appoints a Special Rapporteur (Reporter) on Hu-
man Trafﬁcking.
No prosecutions of any slaveholder in Mauritania had
occurred by December 2004.
References
International Organization of Employers. “Policy Statement on the So-
cial Clause” (Press Release). Geneva: IOE, June 3, 1996.
68
Chronology
2003
(cont’d)

Report of the Director-General to the members of the Governing Body
on measures taken by the government of Myanmar following the recom-
mendations of the Commission of Inquiry, which was established to ex-
amine its observance of the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29). In-
ternational Labor Organization, Geneva, May 21, 1999.
References
69


5
Biographical Sketches
W
ho are the new abolitionists? Around the world men,
women, and children are actively ﬁghting slavery, liberat-
ing slaves, pressing governments for action, studying
bondage, rehabilitating freed slaves, and developing strategies to
end slavery. Most of these people are little known outside their
own organizations and the networks that join these groups to-
gether. Many of them have ﬁrsthand knowledge of slavery, and
many have faced and suffered threats, physical violence, political
pressure, and defamation in their fight against slavery. Today
most of us only know about the great antislavery ﬁgures of the
past: everyone remembers Abraham Lincoln, and most know
about Frederick Douglass and Harriet Tubman. Many of the
great antislavery workers of the past inspire the abolitionists of
today. For that reason, included here are the stories of just four of
these historical ﬁgures whose lives are especially worth know-
ing, but most are the abolitionists of today. Some are old, and
some are very young. Some are widely known, and others are
known only in their local areas. All are working to bring slaves
into freedom.
Swami Agnivesh (1939–)
Coming from a well-off Hindu family in India, the young man
named Shyam Vepa Rao—who would become Swami (Holy
Man or Teacher) Agnivesh—studied in Calcutta and earned de-
grees in law and economics. He then renounced his family status
and became a “priest” (taking vows of chastity and poverty) in a
Hindu group dedicated to social justice. He began his career as a
71

college teacher but, in 1977, was elected as a representative to his
state legislature. In 1979, he was made the state Minister for Edu-
cation. In that year, police shot down workers protesting bonded
labor, and he felt compelled to meet the workers and came to
support their plight. When he confronted the state government
about the terrible suffering of the bonded workers, he was told to
“shut up and stick to education.” Faced with government inac-
tion, he resigned his post and went to work on the problem of
debt bondage.
Angering powerful interests, he was soon arrested and im-
prisoned as a “subversive.” At the time the Bonded Labor Law
was being passed in the Indian Congress, Agnivesh was in jail,
reading the works of Ghandi and contemplating his role in the
struggle for freedom. Upon his release, he decided to devote
himself to the poorest of the poor. Turning his attention to work-
ers enslaved in stone quarries, he found extensive debt bondage
and violence used against workers. Soon he was again perse-
cuted for his work; a false charge of murder was made against
him and he spent eight months in hiding before being acquitted.
In 1981, he founded the Bonded Labor Liberation Front (BLLF)
of India. The BLLF has liberated thousands of bonded laborers,
including children, and trained hundreds of activists. It works
through direct action as well as the courts. After liberation, the
freed workers are given basic education, skill training, and social
and legal support.
In his saffron-colored robes, Swami Agnivesh is now a well-
known representative for the poorest workers in debt bondage.
He personiﬁes an active religion that seeks to afﬁrm human dig-
nity for everyone. “I have never been able to compartmentalize
religion, politics, and social action,” he says. “They all exist to-
gether in the web of social realities” (Hallegren 1996, 5). This so-
cial reality has included two assassination attempts on his life,
but Agnivesh does not give up. He has been given numerous hu-
man rights awards and is now the chair of the United Nations
Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery. A tireless traveler,
he has led mass campaigns against bonded labor, child labor,
consumerism, ecological destruction, and racial and religious dis-
crimination. Agnivesh is especially critical of religions that ignore
human suffering. “What good,” he once wrote, “is all of this great
talk about simplicity, love, meekness, sharing and cooperation, if
it cannot be applied in daily life because of an economic ideology
that puts proﬁt before human happiness?” (Hallegren 1996, 6).
72
Biographical Sketches

Jean-Robert Cadet (1955–)
Jean-Robert Cadet was born in Haiti, the son of a wealthy white
businessman and a black mother who died when Cadet was only
four. His father sent the young Cadet to a former mistress to be-
come a restavec, a child slave. Restavec is a French term that means
“staying with,” a term that disguises the reality of slavery. Under
his master’s control, Cadet was forced to perform a range of me-
nial tasks; if he made any mistake, he was beaten severely. Unfor-
tunately, this incident of slavery is not unique—there are more
than 250,000 restavec child slaves in Haiti. For the most part,
these are children of the very poor who are given to well-off fam-
ilies in the hope that they will be given an education and a chance
at a better life. Once handed over, most of the children lose all
contact with their families and, like the slaves of the past, are
sometimes given new names. In many ways, the restavec chil-
dren are treated worse than the slaves of the past since they cost
nothing and their supply is inexhaustible. They receive very little
food or food of poor quality. Their health is usually poor and
their growth stunted. Girl restavecs are worse off because they
are sometimes forced to have sex with the teenage sons of their
owners. If they become pregnant, they are thrown into the street.
At maturity, most restavec children are thrown out and have to
make a living any way they can—shining shoes, gardening, or as
prostitutes.
As a restavec, Cadet served the family but was not part of it.
He slept under the kitchen table or on the back porch. Though a
small child, he received no affection or care from his owner. His
sole possessions were a tin cup, an aluminum plate, a spoon, and
the rags he was given to wear. In the stress and abuse of his situa-
tion, Cadet became a regular bed-wetter, which only increased
the punishments he was given. Once Cadet’s only friend, another
restavec child named Rene, stole two dollars and bought food
that he then shared with Cadet. When he was caught, he was
whipped severely and then forced to kneel on hot rocks so that he
would confess with whom he shared the food. When he did not
implicate Cadet, he was sent to the police station for a beating; he
returned terribly injured and then disappeared.
Cadet’s salvation was the occasional chances he had to at-
tend a charity school. Showing a native intelligence, he learned to
read and write quickly, even in the small amount of time he had
managed to keep up with schoolwork. His life changed dramati-
Biographical Sketches
73

cally at the age of fourteen when he was taken to the United
States to continue serving his owner there. Upon arrival in the
United States, his owner discovered that minors had to attend
school, so Cadet was sent to junior high even though he spoke no
English. Before and after school, he was still a full-time servant
and cleaner. By the age of sixteen, he was required to work at
cleaning jobs before and after school. Finally, he was thrown out,
but with the help of the school guidance counselor, Cadet at-
tained welfare beneﬁts and was able to ﬁnish high school. After
graduation, he joined the army, and while he was there he be-
came a U.S. citizen.
In the army and afterward, as he pursued a college degree,
he had to confront the racism of the United States. When he re-
ceived his bachelor’s degree, he confronted the woman who had
enslaved him, showing her his degree and what he had made of
his life. This confrontation was the ﬁrst of many steps in the re-
covery of his conﬁdence and self-esteem. With more study, he be-
came a teacher and met the woman he would marry. But the psy-
chological burden of his childhood in slavery still had a
damaging impact on his life and relationships. In 1993, he began
to write a letter to his newborn son explaining his past. This letter
turned into the book Restavec: From Haitian Slave Child to Middle-
Class American; the book deeply moved many readers, generating
several television reports about slavery in Haiti. In 2000, he left
his job as a teacher to devote himself full-time to the cause of
restavec slave children.
Thomas Clarkson (1760–1846)
If there was one person most responsible for the abolition of legal
slavery in the West, it was Thomas Clarkson. Abraham Lincoln,
William Wilberforce, and others followed the lead of the man the
poet Samuel Coleridge called “the moral steam engine—a Giant
with one idea” (Hochschild 2005, 89). Clarkson’s “one idea” was
to end slavery. In the 1780s, Great Britain was the world’s preem-
inent slave trader. Its empire was held together by slavery, and
vast fortunes were being made from slaves and slave products
such as sugar and cotton. The British government received a
large part of its taxes from slave owners and slave-made prod-
ucts. Even those who thought slavery to be wrong tended to be-
lieve that it was too important for the national economy to be
abolished.
74
Biographical Sketches

While at university, Clarkson entered an essay contest; the
question to be answered was, “Is it lawful to make slaves of others
against their will?” As the young student researched the subject, he
was shocked and absorbed by what he learned. After winning ﬁrst
prize, he developed the work further, publishing it as a book in
1786. Though trained to be a minister, Clarkson, aged twenty-ﬁve,
decided to devote his life to ending slavery. Through this work he
came into contact with a committee set up by the Quakers in 1783
to seek abolition of the slave trade. Joining this committee and
gaining the promise of William Wilberforce to bring the matter to
Parliament, Clarkson became the campaigner who rallied people
to the cause. Traveling by horseback, he covered 35,000 miles in the
next seven years. He studied the slave trade ﬁrsthand in ports like
Liverpool, England, and organized antislavery groups wherever
he went. Within a few years, the government was being bom-
barded by petitions and letters urging an end to slavery.
When Parliament defeated a law in 1791 that would abolish
the slave trade, Clarkson increased his efforts, crisscrossing the
country again and again to speak publicly and organize local
groups. A national boycott of slave-made sugar was mounted, re-
sulting in a reduction of sugar consumption in some parts of the
country by up to one-half. In 1794, Clarkson, exhausted by the
work, retired temporarily from his campaign and spent the next
few years living in the countryside and writing a book about the
Quakers. He returned to the ﬁght in 1804, supplying evidence to the
government and organizing support for abolition. In February
1807, after many delays, Parliament passed a law abolishing the
slave trade throughout the British Empire. This law stopped the
trade in slaves, but not slavery itself, so Clarkson turned his atten-
tion to full emancipation. By the 1820s, a full antislavery campaign
was underway. Now in his sixties, Clarkson embarked on another
grueling tour of speaking and organizing, and thousands of peti-
tions rained down on the government. In 1833, slavery itself was
abolished in the British Empire. In the 1840s, the now grand old
man of the antislavery movement presided over the ﬁrst world an-
tislavery convention and pressed for an end to slavery in the United
States. He continued campaigning until days before his death.
Lou DeBaca (1967–)
Lou DeBaca didn’t think he was going to ﬁght slavery when he
was growing up in Iowa. His father taught animal science, and
Biographical Sketches
75

Lou was especially interested in international agricultural devel-
opment: “I thought I was going to do cattle work” he says. Being
in Iowa as a boy meant adjustments. “We were the only Hispanic
family in the entire state, for a while” (Basu 2003). While he was
studying at Iowa State University, the farm crisis struck the Mid-
west and Lou decided to go to law school. For a while he worked
as an intern in the ofﬁce of Senator Tom Harkin, a congressional
champion in the ﬁght against child labor and slavery, afterwards
feeling that the right move for him was to be a lawyer serving the
public.
Soon after, DeBaca joined the Justice Department, working
on civil rights cases. These are tough crimes and sometimes con-
troversial: police brutality, hate crimes, and cases involving the
far-right militias. After building up experience, he began to pros-
ecute cases of human trafficking and forced labor, and helped
found the U.S. government’s Worker Exploitation Task Force.
Soon his cases set the pattern for antislavery legal work and
helped lead to the passing of the Trafﬁcking Victims Protection
Act in 2000. His cases brought many human trafﬁckers to justice
and helped build new lives for many victims: teenage girls from
Mexico who were tricked into coming to the United States only to
be enslaved and forced into prostitution; hundreds of young
women who were abused and harassed in American factories on
the island of Samoa; deaf Mexicans who were forced to peddle
trinkets on the streets of New York; men from Central America
who were enslaved as agricultural workers in Florida—all of
these cases, prosecuted by DeBaca, helped to deﬁne the way U.S.
law attacks slavery today. Currently, DeBaca is the United States’
leading expert in prosecuting human trafficking cases and has
been given awards from the Attorney General and the Justice De-
partment. In addition to his law enforcement efforts, he is assist-
ing other countries in setting up antitrafﬁcking efforts using the
victim-centered approach that he himself pioneered.
Frederick Douglass (1817–1895)
Born a slave in Maryland, Douglass spent his childhood as a do-
mestic servant in Baltimore. In spite of the laws against slave lit-
eracy, he began to secretly teach himself to read using old news-
papers and any other printed matter he could ﬁnd. At about the
age of thirteen, he found a discarded book on rhetoric (public
speaking) and carefully worked through all of the exercises, be-
76
Biographical Sketches

coming a skilled speaker in the process. When he was ﬁfteen, he
was sent to work on a plantation. There he organized a secret
slave school that was discovered by slaveholders; he was pun-
ished and sent to another plantation. Upon returning to Balti-
more, he escaped from slavery at the age of twenty using the pa-
pers of a free black sailor. He settled in Massachusetts, changing
his last name to Douglass from Bailey, his master’s name, to con-
ceal his background and confuse slave catchers.
Soon after coming to Massachusetts, he became involved
with the emerging antislavery movement. His speech at an Aboli-
tionist convention in 1841 impressed the Abolitionist organiza-
tion so much that he was hired to be a traveling lecturer. From
that point forward, he gave hundreds of speeches around the
country, though he was often met with assaults, rotten vegeta-
bles, and mob violence. His public proﬁle meant he was in con-
stant danger of recapture. At age twenty-six, he wrote the story of
his life, Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, which sold more
than 30,000 copies and was translated into several other lan-
guages. Narrative made him the most famous black person in the
world and increased his danger of being caught. After he toured
Great Britain, antislavery activists purchased his freedom from
his original owners, giving him more security. He started his own
antislavery journal, and then began to drift away from many of
the more conservative abolitionists with his calls for public resis-
tance and slave revolts. With the imminence of the Civil War, he
greatly encouraged blacks to be armed and included in the mili-
tary. After the war, he campaigned for equal treatment and citi-
zenship for ex-slaves and worked with select politicians to carry
forward civil rights. Shortly after the death of his wife, he mar-
ried his white former secretary, alienating some blacks and
whites but not lessening his influence. The most influential
African American of the nineteenth century, Douglass spent his
life confronting the public conscience with the facts of slavery
and discrimination. Less than a month before his death, when a
young black man asked his advice on how to move ahead, he
replied “Agitate, agitate, agitate!” (Ryan 1997).
Given Kachepa (1986–)
Given Kachepa was born in Kalingalinga, Zambia, one of six chil-
dren. His mother died when he was six and his father died when
he was eight; with his brothers and sisters he moved in with his
Biographical Sketches
77

aunt, who also had six children. As a ten-year-old, Given began
to sing in his local church choir and, strangely, it was this that led
to his enslavement.
A charity group from Texas called Teaching Teachers to
Teach (TTT) had begun to help build schools in Zambia. When
some of the TTT staff heard the boys choir, they were impressed
with the beauty of their voices and the rich sound they made
singing a cappella, that is, without any instrumental accompani-
ment. One couple from TTT decided to bring a choir to the
United States and produce concerts in order to raise funds for
school building in Zambia. They were right about the choir; in
America, people were willing to pay a lot of money for concerts
and to make large donations. Sadly, the money proved too great a
temptation: instead of sending money back to the boys’ families
and building schools, the couple began to keep the money and to
demand more and more work from the boys.
Given, aged eleven, was the youngest member of a choir that
came to the United States in 1998. The rosy promises made to the
choirboys before they left home turned into a nightmare in Amer-
ica. For nineteen months, the boys were made to sing in three to
five concerts a day. If they were tired or sick, they would be
threatened. When not singing, they were made to dig a swim-
ming pool hole by hand. Housed in a trailer, if they complained
their “boss” would cut off the gas so they couldn’t cook. Denied
any medical care, several of the boys become seriously ill, and
when they were subsequently freed and given checkups, three of
the boys tested positive for tuberculosis.
The boys kept singing in the hope that some of the funds col-
lected were being sent home to ease the poverty of their families.
After more than a year of bad treatment, the boys realized that no
money had been sent home to their families and they began to re-
sist their “boss,” who quickly moved to deport the three oldest
boys. His crime unraveled when the U.S. immigration officials
began to question the boys and discovered what had happened.
At ﬁrst, it was difﬁcult for ofﬁcials to believe that a choir had been
caught up in human trafﬁcking and exploitation, but as the facts
mounted, the boys were cared for and given a chance to stay in
the United States. Given now lives with his foster-family in Texas,
attends high school, and speaks out against human trafficking
whenever he can. When I asked him how he had made it through
his enslavement, he explained, “I had to stay focused and know
what I believed in. There will always be people that will try to
78
Biographical Sketches

make you feel you are not worth anything, so you have to know
your own worth. Having to sing like that many times, and miss-
ing my family, I had to stick it out and I knew that God would be
there for me in the end. I was eleven when I came over. It was
hard. Before I left, my brothers were trying to take care of me,
they said they didn’t want me to come, but I was thinking I could
help my family and help myself and other people back home too,
those that didn’t have the opportunity to go to school” (Interview
with author, April 2004). Today Given Kachepa does just that,
raising funds to help build schools in his native Zambia.
Cheikh Saad Bouh Kamara (1944–)
Born in the West African country of Mauritania in 1944 and edu-
cated there and in France, Kamara is a leading human rights and
antislavery activist. For standing up for human rights, this
teacher was put into prison by his own government. Slavery ex-
ists across Mauritania on a very large scale. One of the last places
on earth where chattel slavery is practiced, slaves can be inher-
ited, hired, or lent out. Slavery is often passed down through gen-
erations of a family. In Mauritania, ethnic differences are also im-
portant in slavery, most slaveholders being Arab Berbers and
most slaves being the descendants of black Africans. Slavery has
been legally abolished several times—the latest in 1981—but no
law has been put in place for the prosecution of slaveholders, for
the rehabilitation of freed slaves, or for setting up the law en-
forcement necessary in order to free slaves.
Kamara, a professor of sociology at the main university in
Mauritania, was a founding member of the Mauritanian Human
Rights Association (MHRA). This association was established in
the wake of mass killings and the expulsion of thousands of black
Mauritanians from the country in the early 1990s. At ﬁrst, the as-
sociation had to operate in secret and, when it went public, most
of its initiatives were blocked by the government—especially re-
search into secret executions and the “disappearance” of political
prisoners. Though never allowed to be a legal association in Mau-
ritania, the MHRA was recognized by outside bodies such as the
Organization of African Unity. Speaking out around the world
about the slavery in Mauritania, Kamara was asked to join the
United Nations Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery.
In 1998, the president of an antislavery organization in Mau-
ritania gave an interview to a French television program. The bad
Biographical Sketches
79

publicity angered the Mauritanian government, which re-
sponded by arresting several human rights workers, including
Kamara, even though he had nothing to do with the interview.
Charged with running an unlawful organization (the MHRA), he
was held in jail for two months and put on trial. All of the ac-
tivists were convicted and sentenced to thirteen months in
prison. A few days later, they were set free on the orders of the
Mauritanian president, but their convictions were still in place,
which meant that not only could they be rearrested at any time,
but their organizations were permanently banned from operating
or doing any more human rights activity. Upon his release, Ka-
mara left Mauritania, and he continues to work for human rights.
In late 1998, he was presented with Anti-Slavery International’s
Anti-Slavery Award.
Craig Kielburger (1982–)
Craig Kielburger was just twelve years old when he and other
students founded Free the Children (FTC), an international chil-
dren’s organization now active in more than twenty countries,
whose mission is to free children from poverty and exploitation
and to empower young people to become leaders in their com-
munities. Kielburger first became an advocate for children’s
rights when he read about the murder of child labor activist Iqbal
Masih in April 1995 (see Masih’s biography later in this chapter).
Moved by Masih’s story, he worked with fellow students to start
the campaign that became Free the Children. At ﬁrst they found
that no one, especially adults, would take a group of twelve-year-
olds seriously, but they learned that by assembling the facts and
making clear presentations, they could gain the attention of the
public. Since then, Kielburger has traveled to more than thirty
countries around the world visiting street children and child la-
borers and speaking out in defense of children’s rights. He
gained international recognition from his appearances on televi-
sion in North and South America and Europe. His efforts on be-
half of working, poor, and marginalized youth have been fea-
tured in many newspapers, and he has received many awards for
his work. Kielburger’s ﬁrst book, Free the Children, written with
Kevin Major, was published in 1998.
Free the Children has initiated projects all over the world, in-
cluding the opening of schools and rehabilitation centers for chil-
dren, the creation of alternative sources of revenue for poor fami-
80
Biographical Sketches

lies to free children from hazardous work, leadership programs
for youth, and projects linking children on an international level.
Young people afﬁliated with the organization have helped to con-
vince members of business communities to adopt codes of con-
duct with regard to child labor, and governments to change laws
to better protect children from sexual exploitation. Free the Chil-
dren also initiated a “Friendship Schools Campaign.” To date,
students taking part in this campaign have raised funds to build
twenty schools in Latin America. They have put together and
shipped more than 5,000 school kits to South Africa, the Philip-
pines, Latin America, and India. Believing that education is the
key to breaking the cycle of poverty and eliminating child labor,
they have built more than 400 schools and shipped 200,000 school
and health kits around the world.
Young people from FTC have also raised money to set up a
pipe-and-reservoir system to bring clean water from the moun-
tains into two villages in Nicaragua and to build a medical clinic.
FTC raised over $100,000 to build a rehabilitation and education
center for freed bonded child laborers in India. The center, which
accommodates up to 100 children at any given time, provides
counseling, education, medical aid, and vocational training and
thereby facilitates the reintegration of these children into society.
The rehabilitation center was completed in the fall of 1998. Dur-
ing the Kosovo crisis, students in more than 100 schools put to-
gether 10,000 health care and hygiene kits, 8,000 stuffed animals,
2,000 baby kits, 50,000 items of clothes, and thousands of other
items for the Balkan refugees. The health kits and other necessi-
ties were distributed to children in camps in Kosovo, Belgrade,
and North America. In 2000, FTC joined with international devel-
opment agencies representing 180 countries to launch the Cam-
paign for Education. This campaign aims to have basic education
provided for all children by 2015 and to get western governments
to forgive the heavy international debt that prevents poor coun-
tries from spending more on education.
Dona Pureza Lopez Loyola (1943–)
When her son disappeared in 1993, Pureza Lopez Loyola set off
to find him. She left her youngest daughter at home to go in
search of her youngest son, Abel, who had disappeared after go-
ing to work on an estate in Para state, Brazil. “No matter how
many children there are,” she said, “the mother’s heart is so big
Biographical Sketches
81

and her love so strong that she goes looking for the one that is
lost, no matter where he or she may be.” A poor woman with rel-
atively little education, she sold most of her possessions to fund
her trip, and with a camera and a tape recorder she traveled thou-
sands of miles, often risking her life, but sustained by her faith.
“When I was in the middle of the jungle, I used to say, ‘Jesus,
hold that jaguar so that I can pass.’ And he did it. No animals did
me harm, and even the gunmen let me go” (Interview with au-
thor, November 1998).
She sought out isolated and heavily guarded estates where
she found hundreds of enslaved workers but not her son. “Many
were beaten or starved,” she said, “and on one estate I heard how
workers who were too exhausted to work further were hung up
on trees and used by gunmen for target practice.” Despite her ef-
forts, she had to return home without Abel. But in May 1996, she
suddenly received a telephone call from her son, and shortly af-
terward Abel escaped from his forced labor and returned to her.
“I had encountered hundreds of slave laborers, hidden away
from prying eyes. Many were beaten or starved,” she said. As-
sisted by the Pastoral Land Commission (an agency of the
Catholic Church), she began registering ofﬁcial complaints, lead-
ing to the release of many enslaved laborers. After her son was lo-
cated and freed from slavery, she also began to confront politi-
cians over the lack of enforcement of antislavery laws. “After two
years on the road, I had already seen enough suffering. I had seen
how my son would have died. I was desperate and I began to cry
out in newspapers, radio, and TV stations so that the problem
was widely publicized. I have no doubts that the majority of
Brazilians know about it nowadays . . . There is labor and human
rights legislation, but they don’t use it.” Now in her ﬁfties, she
has become a fearless advocate for the enslaved and, in 1997, was
given Anti-Slavery International’s Anti-Slavery Award.
Iqbal Masih (1982–1995)
At the age of four, Iqbal Masih was placed in debt bondage to a
carpet maker in rural Pakistan. His parents, poor laborers, re-
ceived the equivalent of $12 for Iqbal. For the next six years, he
worked at a carpet loom for twelve or more hours per day. Some-
times chained to the loom, regularly beaten, he was fed little and
worked in terrible conditions, leaving him stunted and underde-
veloped for his age. In 1992, when he was ten years old, Iqbal es-
82
Biographical Sketches

caped from his slaveholder and attended a meeting organized by
a Pakistani human rights group that was pressing the govern-
ment to enforce its laws against bonded labor. Learning of his
rights, he refused to return to the loom despite pressure from the
slaveholder. He enrolled in a school, learned to read and write,
and became active in campaigns to free other child workers.
Over the next two years, he helped to liberate hundreds of
children from bonded labor. His youth and activism inspired
people around the world and gained international attention. In
1994, he was given the Human Rights Youth in Action Award by
the Reebok Foundation and was named “Person of the Week” by
ABC News. Around the world he visited schools and spoke to stu-
dents about the problem of child labor and bondage. After his call
for a boycott of Pakistani carpets, exports from that country fell.
On April 16, 1995, a few months after his return to Pakistan
from the United States, Iqbal was gunned down while riding a bi-
cycle with a friend near his grandmother’s village. Some Pak-
istani human rights workers claim that his murder was the work
of the “carpet maﬁa”—angry loom owners whose ability to en-
slave children had been hampered by Iqbal’s work. The Pakistani
government says there is no evidence of this, but the government
has also jailed or persecuted those people who have called for an
investigation of Iqbal’s murder.
While in the United States, Iqbal had visited the Broadmead-
ows Middle School in Quincy, Massachusetts, and talked to the
children there about debt bondage and child labor. Shocked by
his murder, the students there organized the “School for Iqbal”
campaign in order to build a school in his home village of
Muridke. They raised thousands of dollars over the next two
years; the school was built, equipped, and opened in 1998. Broad-
meadows students have been honored for their campaign with
many awards and, in 1998, they joined the Global March Against
Child Labor. You can visit their campaign online at http://
www.digitalrag.com/iqbal/index.html.
Keshav Nankar (1961–)
Keshav Nankar was born into a debt-bonded family in Maha-
rashtra state, India. When Nankar was two years old, his father
died, thereby transferring his debt to Nankar and his mother.
When he was six, he attended school and was considered a bright
student, but the moneylender demanded that he leave school in
Biographical Sketches
83

his second year and work full-time grazing animals. At age six-
teen, Nankar became a bonded laborer in his own right, and his
decision to marry further bound him to his landlord. Despite
having worked for ten years, he had no money because his labor
supposedly went to repaying his father’s debt, and he had to bor-
row 700 rupees (about $20) from his master to pay the “bride
price.” There was no written agreement for the loan, and he was
only given food for his work.
Seven years later, Vivek and Vidyullata Pandit visited
Nankar’s district, where they identiﬁed forty bonded workers in
his village (see the Pandits’ biography later in this chapter). In
July 1983, the Pandits were able to secure Nankar’s release. In re-
venge, local landlords organized a labor boycott in the area and
refused to employ any of the former bonded laborers. The Pan-
dits arranged to provide food for them and their families so they
would not have to reenter the cycle of bonded labor. Nankar
organized a campaign in his village demanding work for all of
the ex-bonded laborers at minimum wage. His success led him to
become a labor activist organizing the people in his area, and he
set up a cooperative growing watermelons that is still in opera-
tion. Thanks to his activism, the workers in his area are receiving
a fair wage and a meal in return for their labor. He is currently the
chairman of the labor union and an executive member of organi-
zations that campaign against bonded labor. He has ensured that
his children, who are now in school, do not return to a life in debt
bondage. When Vivek and Vidyullata Pandit received the 1999
Anti-Slavery Award from Anti-Slavery International, they imme-
diately presented it to Keshav Nankar, who received it on behalf
of bonded laborers in India.
Vivek (1957–) and 
Vidyullata (1957–) Pandit
Vivek and Vidyullata Pandit are a husband-and-wife team who
have touched and changed the lives of thousands of bonded la-
borers. Vivek was born in 1957 in Maharashtra, India, Vidyullata
in Bombay the same year. Vivek’s uncle had bonded laborers
who served Vivek food as a child, but he did not realize until
later that they were enslaved. Vivek and Vidyullata met in a po-
litical youth movement in Bombay, where he was studying soci-
ology and she was studying science at a university. In 1975,
84
Biographical Sketches

Vidyulatta went to jail for two-and-a-half months in protest of
government actions. Soon disillusioned with India’s political par-
ties and standard answers, the couple decided to start out on
their own. They left their jobs and moved to a small village in the
countryside.
Working with like-minded friends, they established medical
camps and preschool classes and organized a leprosy detection
campaign. Getting to know the young people of the village, they
realized that there was a widespread problem with debt bondage.
Together they decided to devote their energies to bonded labor-
ers and, ever since, they have put their lives at stake to help
people out of bondage and into freedom. More than 1,500 people
have been liberated through their efforts.
The Pandits have set up three integrated organizations based
in Thane District that operate throughout Maharashtra, creating a
framework that ﬁrst liberates bonded laborers and then ensures
that they can lead a free life: Vidhayak Sansad, set up in 1979,
identiﬁes and releases bonded laborers; Shramajeevi Sanghatana,
a trade union founded in 1982 for former bonded laborers and
other marginalized groups, secures equal and fair wages for men
and women; and Samarthan, formed in 1993, lobbies state offi-
cials for the development and implementation of legislation
against this system of enslavement.
The Pandits believe that in order for bonded laborers to be
truly free, they must be released from the psychological bonds as
well as the physical. They must be made to believe that it is possi-
ble to stand up to their former landlords and to adjust to a life of
freedom. As Vidyullata Pandit says, “the three most important
things people need to fight bonded labor are knowledge of the
law, self-conﬁdence to bring about change, and . . . conviction to
ensure they don’t go back to bonded labor once they are released”
(Interview with author, September 2000). The Pandits have de-
vised a program of education that prepares the former bonded la-
borers for a life of freedom. They are taught basic science to in-
crease their curiosity and attention for detail, role-playing to
stimulate problem solving, and games to develop strategic think-
ing and teamwork. Those who want to become active in the trade
union receive further training, and there are former bonded labor-
ers working in all three organizations. The Pandits’ philosophy is
based on self-worth. They teach bonded laborers that they have
the same value as any other member of society and that no human
being deserves to be exploited and oppressed. By providing these
Biographical Sketches
85

structures, the Pandits have enabled former bonded laborers to
break free from the cycle of bonded labor.
Father Edwin Paraison (1962–)
Father Paraison, a Haitian Episcopal priest, braved armed guards
to rescue and repatriate over a hundred children separated from
their families and forced to work on sugar plantations in the Do-
minican Republic. Haitian workers, including children, are lured
with offers of work and then enslaved in the sugar harvest. Haiti
and the Dominican Republic are located on the same island and
share a border. Traditionally rivals, poor Haitians are treated
badly in the Dominican Republic.
Edwin Paraison was born in Haiti in 1962 and later studied
theology at seminary. His first church was in Romana, Haiti,
where he developed a strong relationship with the sugar workers
at the local sugar processing plant. A change of bishops and some
political friction meant that Paraison was transferred to Bara-
hona, in the Dominican Republic, to establish a local church. Here
he became more involved in the plight of Haitians enslaved to
work on the sugar harvest in the Dominican Republic. Since the
Haitian government was receiving a payment for every worker
provided and the Dominican government was keen to avoid any
exposure of the use of slave labor that would threaten their mar-
ket for sugar in the United States, Paraison faced deadly opposi-
tion. To counter the abuse, Paraison set up programs to help Hait-
ian workers with their basic needs and to educate them about
their rights. With other priests, he monitored the movement of
people, especially children, into the Dominican Republic, and set
up a twenty-four-hour helpline. The work immediately gener-
ated many cases of enslaved workers and children, who Paraison
freed. After more than sixty-five cases had been resolved, an
armed attack killed one of Paraison’s coworkers, and a wounded
coworker who was taken into police custody after the attack
“committed suicide” while in jail. Threatening phone calls ex-
plained that Paraison was next.
Paraison conducted research at this time to discover how
many Haitians were being held in Dominican prisons, often with-
out having been charged. He then sought to free these prisoners.
When the Haitian government was overthrown in 1991, very
large numbers of Haitians ﬂed into the Dominican Republic, and
Paraison found himself the key spokesperson for this refugee
86
Biographical Sketches

community. His work there revealed the serious violations of hu-
man rights suffered by the refugees even after the Dominican Re-
public passed laws to protect them. After U.S. network news
broadcast a report on his work, he was called to testify before the
U.S. Congress, but in Haiti a foreign coworker was expelled for
helping him carry out research. In 1992, he received a special
award from the City of Boston and was asked to advise the Euro-
pean Community. In 1994, he received the Anti-Slavery Award
from Anti-Slavery International. He still lives in the border region
between Haiti and the Dominican Republic, helping migrants
and refugees.
Shakil Patan (1956–1998)
Born in Hyderabad, Pakistan, Shakil Patan was the child of
refugees from India at the time of the division of India and Pak-
istan. He was born with the last name Khan but changed it as a
protection for his family when he became involved in human
rights work. He received a master’s degree in political science
and was active in student campaigns for democracy and rights,
becoming a leader in the ﬁght to restore democracy in Pakistan
during the military dictatorship of the 1970s. While still a
teenager, he was jailed by the government for a month, then later
for two months; then in his twenties, he spent twenty-one consec-
utive months in jail. His crime was calling for democracy and
civil rights.
In 1986, he was one of the cofounders of the Human Rights
Commission of Pakistan (HRCP); in 1991 he organized the HRCP
Task Force on the Sindh. The Sindh is a rural state within Pak-
istan that has large amounts of slavery through debt bondage.
Patan collected documentary evidence in Sindh of debt bondage,
imprisonment of workers, buying and selling of people, rape of
women in bonded families, and terror and torture committed by
landlords. This evidence was submitted to the government ac-
cording to Pakistan’s law against bonded labor, but the corrup-
tion of local ofﬁcials is such that no action has been taken. More
often than not, exposed landlords have simply made threats and
sold their bonded families to get rid of the evidence. Patan
worked closely with one village inhabited by oppressed minority
families, leading raids that freed more than 2,000 people in all.
Television coverage of these raids resulted in Patan becoming
well known, and death threats began to follow him. In 1998, he
Biographical Sketches
87

was killed in a car accident. His widow, Nasreen Patan, has taken
over the leadership of the HRCP Sindh Task Force.
Father Ricardo Rizende (1952–)
Rizende is a Roman Catholic priest who fought for human rights
in the Para state of Brazil. Despite repeated threats to his life from
well-known killers in Para’s lawless frontier, Father Rizende per-
sistently denounced the enslavement of workers in mining and
ranching since his arrival in the Amazon. The Brazilian-born
Rizende took a course in religious studies and philosophy and
later earned a master’s degree in agricultural and social develop-
ment. He moved to the town of Rio de Maria in Para to assume
his first job as a priest in 1977. Working with trade unions and
lawyers, he has freed and helped to rehabilitate hundreds of
slaves. The cost has been high—since the mid-1980s, seven of the
activists in the local rural workers’ union have been killed, other
priests and lawyers have been gunned down, and several at-
tempts have been made on Rizende’s life. Rio de Maria became
known as the “town of death foretold” because the published
threats were so often followed by murder.
In 1996, Rizende left Para when his colleagues convinced
him that the danger had become severe and that his death was
next. He moved to Rio de Janeiro and gained a doctorate degree
with research into human rights. From Rio, he has continued to
campaign and speak out against the enslavement of workers in
Brazil. The author of several books, he has grown from a local
parish priest into an international expert on human rights and
slavery. He was given the Anti-Slavery Award in 1992.
Salma Mint Saloum (1956–)
Like her mother and grandmother before her, Salma Mint Sa-
loum, was a slave in Mauritania. In 1997, desperate to find a
way to freedom for her family, she escaped. A heroine in the
likeness of Harriet Tubman, Salma bravely crossed the river
border into Senegal, and then smuggled herself across the At-
lantic Ocean on a cargo ship to freedom, arriving in America in
1999. A pillar of courage, determination, and strength, she has
worked to free her children from slavery in Mauritania and now
wants to bring them to live with her in the United States. Hers is
the clear voice of the freed slave, her first hand testimony an in-
88
Biographical Sketches

dictment of the slavery in Mauritania and in our world. This is
part of her story (the full version appears in Chapter 6):
Finally I met a man in the market who told me that
Senegal was just across the river. I decided I had to try
again. I ran to the river, where a man with a small
wooden boat agreed to take me to Senegal. There I made
my way to a safe house run by a former slave from Mau-
ritania. I stayed in Senegal for a few years, earning my
keep by doing housework. But I never felt safe. Always I
was afraid that the master of the family would pay
people to ﬁnd me and bring me back to his house.
When I got to the U.S., I worked braiding hair. The
ﬁrst time I was paid for work I had done, I cried. I had
never seen a person paid for her work before in my life.
It was a very good surprise.
In Mauritania, I didn’t dare go to the government, be-
cause they wouldn’t listen. It doesn’t matter what the
laws say, because they don’t apply the laws. Maybe it’s
written that there is no slavery, but it’s not true. Even in
front of the president of Mauritania I can say in full
voice that there is slavery in Mauritania, because now I
am as free as he is. (Provided to the author by Salma
Mint Saloum)
In 2000, Salma sought legal asylum in the United States,
through the New York Association for New Americans (NYAYA).
Though Mauritania had suffered U.S. trade sanctions for its ap-
palling human rights abuses, her hearings came as the United
States resumed trade, choosing to ignore slavery for political rea-
sons. An immigration judge ruled Salma was a slave entitled to
U.S. protection and freedom. She is now building a new life,
learning English, and devoting herself to working and speaking
out against slavery.
Amar Saran (1954–)
Amar Saran comes from the city of Allahabad in India. He stud-
ied sociology at a university in New Delhi, then later earned a
law degree, following in the footsteps of his father and grandfa-
ther. For many years he practiced law, mostly criminal law, and
had nothing to do with questions of slavery. But in 1995, he was
asked to join the state Vigilance Committee on Debt Bondage.
Biographical Sketches
89

These committees are supposed to watch for and prosecute cases
of bondage, but the committee in the state of Uttar Pradesh had
become quiet and the state government had announced that Ut-
tar Pradesh was free of bondage. Not long after he joined the Vig-
ilance Committee, a local human rights activist told Saran he
could show him some bonded labor. Not far into the countryside
they discovered entire villages bonded and working at making
gravel and quarrying.
Shocked by what he found, Saran began to press a case for
their release and soon discovered that the moneylenders and
landlords had powerful friends. He found that the raja (or prince)
of Shankargarh, which included the local area, had secured per-
petual leases for the minerals in the land under more than forty
villages. Because the land is poor for farming, mining is the only
way that local people can make a living. The local people were
threatened with expulsion by the raja’s middlemen and then led
into bondage to work the gravel pits and quarries. The little
money gained by the adults was not enough to support their
families, and all the children of the villages were also pressed into
the work. When Saran brought legal cases to abolish the debts
and bondage, the courts delayed taking action. Gaining no help
from the courts, Saran began working with a local group to orga-
nize the villagers into small-scale credit unions. Although it
seems hard to imagine that bonded laborers could beneﬁt from a
credit union, they managed to put tiny amounts into the “bank”
each week and slowly built up a sum that could be borrowed
without terrible interest or false accounting. Even greater than
the amount of pooled savings was the sense of empowerment
gained by the credit union members. After a portion of the sav-
ings had been used to buy some members out of their bondage,
most of the other members simply freed themselves, refusing to
work any longer unless it was for a decent wage, thus canceling
their own debts.
Faced with united workers, the middlemen backed down,
and soon villages were building schools and taking their children
out of the quarries. But being freed of debt did not always mean
that the villagers could earn a good living. Soon it became clear
that in order to gain any security, the workers would need to
lease their own quarries and work for themselves. But here they
collided again with the raja, who controlled all of the mineral
rights and would only give leases for huge sums. Since it is In-
dian government policy to support poor people with grants of
90
Biographical Sketches

mineral leases, to make rehabilitation payments to freed bonded
workers, and to support credit unions, and given that little of this
had happened, Saran filed a major lawsuit. The lawsuit asked
that the existing laws be enforced and that the question of leases
be resolved. The families in the one village that has been able to
get a lease to some government land have seen their lives trans-
formed and their incomes greatly increased. The lawsuit is still
not resolved, for delaying tactics are being used by the landlords.
Saran continues to press the case and to work with local groups
to help them free themselves from bondage.
Suman (1961–)
This remarkable young woman has guided almost 2,000 children
freed from slavery into their new lives. The daughter of a govern-
ment employee, Suman was born in New Delhi, India. While at-
tending university, she volunteered to help when a flood de-
stroyed many homes nearby. Many of the victims were poor
migrants, whose temporary shelters and few possessions had
been swept away. She was struck both by their resilience and by
the lack of interest shown by the government in their condition.
The experience made her reconsider her plan to enter govern-
ment service.
One day in 1982, Suman was waiting for a bus and began to
talk with two little boys. The boys were wearing ragged clothes
and carrying bundles. When she asked where they lived, they
replied, “In the garbage dump.” Forgetting about the bus, she
went with them to see their “home” and found more children
working in the dump sorting the rubbish and picking out any
sort of material that could be sold. She discovered that, because
they were illiterate, they were regularly cheated when they sold
their goods. Raising some funds through grants and loans,
Suman bought gloves and shoes for the children and began to
teach them to read and write.
After a few years, Suman learned about the release of chil-
dren from slavery in the carpet industry. While attending a con-
ference, she met others concerned about children in slavery as
well as released bonded laborers. In 1989, she co-founded the
South Asian Coalition on Child Servitude (SACCS) and led the
development of Mukti Ashram, a rehabilitation center for freed
child slaves. Since then, she has managed the center, developing
the techniques for helping child slaves reclaim their place in the
Biographical Sketches
91

world. As they grow, the children take much of the responsibility
for maintaining the center.
Suman uses only one name because the caste system in India
is sometimes used to justify the enslavement of people from so-
called lower castes. Since a person’s last name usually indicates
his or her caste position, she has given up her last name in order
to demonstrate the equality of all people. When asked about her
plans for the future, she responds, “I will work until child labor is
abolished and all the kids are in school. My dream is that the chil-
dren here at the center will become natural leaders, participating
in all levels of decision making.” Her advice to any young person
who wants to make a difference is this: “Have confidence and
clarity in your desire to do the right thing; get experience by help-
ing others. You don’t have to be special—anyone can do it!” (In-
terview with author, September 2000).
Moctar Teyeb (1959–)
Moctar Teyeb was born an abd, or slave, in Mauritania. As a child,
one of his duties was to take his master’s children to school each
morning; if he tried to listen to the lessons through the window of
the school, he was driven away. When he tried to attend the local
Koranic (religious) school, he was beaten. During most of his
youth, Teyeb lived a nomadic life, traveling with his master’s
livestock, walking long distances and doing the hardest work. As
he grew older, his interest in education increased and he began to
clash with his master. Then in the early 1970s, Teyeb’s father es-
caped to Senegal. Like Frederick Douglass, Teyeb continued to
educate himself in any way he could, secretly teaching himself to
read. When he told his master in 1977 that he wanted to become a
teacher, he was ridiculed and sent away to the capital city to
work there. Slave life in the city was less controlled than in the
countryside and, in 1978, Teyeb took the opportunity to follow
his father and escape to Senegal.
After reuniting with his father, they set off together for the
Ivory Coast, where they believed there would be a chance for
Teyeb to attend school. After a harrowing trip across country,
they reached their destination. At the age of twenty-two, Teyeb
attended school for the first time in his life. He learned French
and then persuaded the French Embassy to give him papers that
stated he was Mauritanian (Mauritania was once a French
colony). His academic skills were so good that he was soon
92
Biographical Sketches

awarded a scholarship to study in Libya and then Morocco.
Though overjoyed at the chance to learn, his time in Libya and
Morocco was made difﬁcult by the fact that Arab classmates re-
sented having an ex-slave in class and condemned him for his an-
tislavery activism. Ultimately earning a law degree, he returned
to Mauritania and found himself in a strange situation: Though
he was regularly picked up and questioned by the police, he was
not imprisoned. While his old master did not attempt to reclaim
him, he found he did not ﬁt into any community. He was able to
continue contact with the underground antislavery movement.
Finally receiving a Mauritanian passport, he gained a visa to
the United States and came to live with a relative in New York.
Taking any sort of job, he devoted himself to studying toward an
American law degree and improving his English. He also began
speaking out and educating others about slavery in Mauritania.
Before high school and university audiences as well as in various
public gatherings, Teyeb discusses the deep-rooted slavery sys-
tem from the unique perspective of an ex-slave. He often makes
presentations about slavery in Mauritania. Speaking out in this
way takes courage—the Mauritanian government is already try-
ing to silence him. But every opportunity to tell his story brings
more support for the antislavery movement. He continues to live
in New York where he works and studies.
Harriet Tubman (1820–1913)
Harriet Tubman was the most courageous and daring of the
“conductors” on the Underground Railway, which brought
American slaves to freedom in the early nineteenth century. She
was born Araminta Ross, a slave, in Maryland. Physically abused
and starved as a child, she was partially disabled. Her life almost
ended at fifteen when she blocked an overseer pursuing an es-
caping slave and received a terrible blow to the head. For years,
she was dull-witted and unproductive, but family support and a
strong will guided her to a slow but miraculous recovery. In the
1840s, she was angered to learn that her mother had been freed
by a previous owner’s will, but her mother had never been told,
and that her family was about to be sold again. In 1849, she es-
caped to Philadelphia and took her mother’s name, Harriet.
Within two years, she had joined with William Still, the black
abolitionist and organizer of the Underground Railway in Penn-
sylvania. In 1851, she sneaked back into the slave states and came
Biographical Sketches
93

back with a group of escaped slaves; it was the ﬁrst of many such
trips. Though illiterate, she was a superb strategist and planned
her trips carefully, carrying them through with rigid determina-
tion. Making at least nineteen trips, she freed hundreds of slaves,
including her own parents and other relatives. More than $40,000
was offered for her capture—the equivalent of $4 million in to-
day’s money. While taking slaves to the North, she met and
worked with Frederick Douglass as well as Susan B. Anthony
and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. During the Civil War, she organized
a group of black spies and scouts who carried out espionage and
gained valuable information for the Union forces. She personally
guided a group of black soldiers into a Confederate-held town
and disabled the rebel supply line. After the war, Tubman
worked to get women the right to vote. She was buried in 1913
with military honors.
John Woolman (1720–1772)
John Woolman was a Quaker and pioneer abolitionist born in
colonial New Jersey. He has been described as having been an
odd young man. During his youth, he tried to ﬁnd simplicity and
an ethical way of life that often led him to curious decisions, such
as choosing to wear only clothes that had not been dyed with col-
ors. After some time as a shopkeeper, he gave it up in order to
travel more among the Quakers in colonial America. He took up
“conveyancing”—the writing up of bills of sale, deeds, and
leases—as a way to support himself. When his first employer
asked him to draw up a bill of sale for a slave, Woolman did so
but was very troubled at the time and afterward. From that point
forward, he refused to write up any legal document regarding
slavery, and he would take every opportunity to convince his
clients of the immorality of slavery and urge them to free their
slaves.
In 1746, he traveled in the southern colonies, where slavery
was more prominent, and stayed with slaveholding Quaker fam-
ilies. He was so disturbed by what he saw that he wrote a pam-
phlet against slavery that was published, and then followed it
with a call to all Quakers to renounce slavery. By 1758, his quiet
but urgent campaigning among Quakers paid off with a general
rule against keeping slaves or participating in the slave trade. By
this action, the Quakers became the ﬁrst organized body to op-
pose slavery in North America. Woolman also campaigned for
94
Biographical Sketches

equal treatment for Native Americans, and for living simply so
that a person’s resources could be better put to helping others.
“The business of our lives,” he wrote, is “to turn all the treasures
we possess into the channel of universal love” (Religious Society
of Friends 1999, 14, 23). Though a quiet and simple person, Wool-
man’s example led the Quakers to become the mainstay of the
coming abolitionist movement. Quakers are still active today in
antislavery work.
References
Basu, Rekha. “Hometown Kid Fighting the New Face of Slavery.” 
Des Moines Register, August 1, 2003, also available at: http://www.
dmregister.com/opinion/stories/c5917686/21878226.html.
Hallegren, Bo. “Child Labor and the Situation of the Textile Industry in
India.” Human Rights Solidarity, Vol. 6, No. 3. Asian Human Rights Com-
mission, New Delhi, September 1996, also available at: http://
www.ahrchk.net/hrsolid/mainﬁle.php/1996vol06no03/164.
Hochschild, Adam. Bury the Chains: Prophets and Rebels in the Fight to Free
and Empire’s Slaves. New York: Houghton Mifﬂin, 2005, p. 89.
Religious Society of Friends, Quaker Faith and Practice. London: The
Yearly Meeting of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers) in Britain,
1999.
Ryan, Barbara. “Douglas, Frederick.” In The Historical Encyclopedia of
World Slavery, Vol. 1, Junius Rodriguez (ed.) Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-
CLIO, 1997, p. 221.
References
95


6
Facts, Data, Evidence, 
and Testimony about
Contemporary Slavery
T
he material included here aims to give the reader a sense of
the scale and diversity of slavery in the modern world—and
some insight into its inhumanity—at the beginning of the
twenty-ﬁrst century. This chapter offers an overview of the main
forms of slavery, both old and new, that exist around the globe. It
draws on a wide range of documents including book extracts, re-
ports to United Nations committees, interviews with modern-
day slaves, speeches from antislavery campaigners and their
supporters, press stories, and brieﬁngs.
It begins with some key facts and figures, followed by a
summary of the most important documents in international law
and conventions that define and condemn slavery. This helps
provide the context for the individual and collective stories of
slaves and antislavery activists that follow.
These stories and evidence are divided into different kinds
of slavery, although in practice there is a good deal of crossover
between them. Traditional-style slave ownership in Mauritania,
bonded labor in rural Asian societies, forced labor in Bosnia or
Burma, the trafficking and sexual slavery of young girls from
Thailand to the United States, domestic slavery in countries as
diverse as the Philippines, Haiti and the United Kingdom—all of
these variations on contemporary slavery have much in com-
mon. But they in their different ways show the many forms that
slavery as a social and economic relationship can take.
97

The section concludes with a brief examination of the com-
plex issue of child labor and two recent campaigns aimed at end-
ing the use of young children in the production of goods sold to
consumers. Not all child labor is slavery. But children enslaved in
bonded labor or forced prostitution are two particularly perni-
cious kinds of slavery which have received a signiﬁcant amount
of attention worldwide.
Facts and Figures
The Slavery Index
Estimated number of slaves taken from Africa during
the 400-year Atlantic slave trade: 13 million
Estimated number of slaves in the world in 1999: 27
million
Maximum estimated number of slaves transported
from Africa by British slave traders at the height of
the Atlantic trade (1730s–1740s), per year: 23,000
Estimated number of people trafﬁcked across borders
worldwide in 2004: 600,000 to 800,000
Estimated number of slaves transported into the United
States each year: 20,000
Number of human trafﬁckers arrested and charged by
the U.S. government in 2003: 111
Number of human trafﬁckers convicted of their crimes
in 2003: 77
Number of international treaties enacted between 1815
and 1957 “for the suppression of the slave trade”: 300
Cost of a 19-year-old agricultural slave in Mississippi in
1850 in 2004 dollars: $43,000
Cost of a 19-year-old agricultural slave in West Africa
today in 2004 dollars: $40
Average proﬁt of the British slave trade, 1761–1807: 9.5
percent
Average proﬁt of Thai brothel using enslaved
prostitutes, today: 856 percent
98
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

Cost of bringing an Indian slave family into freedom
and economic stability: $32 (does not mean buying
them out or paying off their illegal debt)
Cost of freeing all the slaves in the world at $32 each:
$864 million
Total box-ofﬁce earnings of the ﬁlm Finding Nemo in
2003: $864 million
Amount the U.S. Congress approved for spending on
nanotechnology research in 2006: $864 million
Wage bill in 2003 of the Texas “hunting industry”: $864
million
The Spread of Slavery
Figure 6.1 shows the percentage of countries in the world having
different amounts of slavery. Fewer than one country in ﬁve has
no reported slavery, and a little under a third of all countries have
very little or rare slavery. Slavery is a regular and persistent fea-
ture of life in just over half of all countries. A little less than one
country in ten has slavery regularly contributing to many sectors
of their economy. About two ﬁfths of all countries have smaller
amounts of slavery, which are, nonetheless, constant features in
their national economy.
But why do some countries have more slavery than others?
Why do some countries have persistent regular slavery and some
countries have none at all? If we look at all the countries around
the world and ask what things most strongly predict whether or
not slavery exists in a country, a statistical test ﬁnds the strongest
predictors of slavery in a country (in this order):
• Government and police corruption
• High level of infant mortality
• Population has high proportion of young people 
and children
• Country has low gross domestic product (GDP) 
per capita
What this indicates are the very factors discussed in Chapter 1
that have led to the emergence of new forms of slavery and an in-
Facts and Figures
99

crease in slavery worldwide. Countries with a high proportion of
children under the age of fourteen are countries experiencing the
bulk of the population explosion. For those countries that also
suffer from extremes in poverty and a lack of welfare services
(measured by GDP and infant mortality), economic and social
vulnerability becomes a regular part of life. When this large,
poor, vulnerable population lacks protection from government
and suffers police corruption, one result can be slavery.
Another pressure that seems to push countries toward a
higher level of slavery is international debt. Many countries in
the developing world must carry large debts to the World Bank
or other lenders, and so must put most of their national income to
paying the interest on these debts. If we look at those countries
that are named by the World Bank as having a heavy debt load
and compare them with countries that do not have large interna-
tional debts, there is a marked difference with regard to slavery.
Half of the countries with a heavy debt load have slavery as a
regular feature in their economies, compared to only 12 percent
of those countries with a small amount of international debt. Al-
most three quarters of countries with a large international debt
find that their citizens are regularly trafficked into slavery in
other countries, compared with less than a third of those with
low international debt. The chart depicted in Figure 6.2 shows
how international debt and slavery are related.
100
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony
No slavery
18%
Persistent small 
amounts of 
slavery
31%
Slavery in some 
sectors
12%
Slavery in many 
sectors
9%
Very little 
slavery
30%
Figure 6.1
Percentage of countries with different levels of
slavery (192 countries in total)

With slavery so widespread, it is fair to ask what laws and
international agreements have been passed against it, and to
wonder whether they are, in fact, effective. The next section re-
views the many, and often confused, laws and conventions that
exist concerning slavery.
Key International Laws 
and Conventions on Slavery
Slavery has not always been deﬁned in the same way in interna-
tional conventions. Table 6.1 shows how the deﬁnition of slavery
has changed over time.
These different deﬁnitions and the naming of other activities
as “slavery” means that many things have been called slavery that
we may or may not think actually constitute slavery. Table 6.2
Key International Laws and Conventions on Slavery
101
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
%
No slavery
Very little slavery
Small persistent
amounts
Slavery in some
sectors
Slavery in many
sectors
Low Debt Load
High Debt Load
0
Figure 6.2
Amount of slavery in countries with high and low
international debt

shows most of the activities that have been called “slavery” by in-
ternational agencies and compares them to our deﬁnition:
Slavery: A social and economic relationship in which a
person is controlled through violence or its threat, paid
nothing, and economically exploited. 
There are literally hundreds of international laws and con-
ventions that variously deﬁne, condemn, and outlaw slavery in
its various past and present forms. The following selected ex-
102
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony
TABLE 6.1
Summary of the Evolution of Slavery Conventions
Slavery Convention
Deﬁnition/Declaration Regarding Slavery
Slavery 
Slavery deﬁned:
Convention (1926)
The “status or condition of a person over whom all of
the powers attaching to the right of ownership are
exercised”
Forced Labor added: States should “prevent
compulsory or forced labor from developing into
conditions analogous to slavery”
Universal 
Servitude added: “No one shall be held in 
Declaration (1948)
slavery or servitude; slavery and the slave trade should
be abolished in all their forms”
Supplementary 
Servile Status added: Practices referred to as 
Convention (1956)
servile status should be abolished:
a. debt bondage
b. serfdom
c. unfree marriages
d. the exploitation of young people for their labor
Economic, Social and 
Freedom to choose work added: Recognizes “the right
Cultural Covenant (1966)
of everyone to the opportunity to gain his living by
work which he freely chooses or accepts.”
Trafﬁcking Protocol of  
Trafﬁcking added: “the action of recruitment, 
the UN Convention on  
transportation, transfer, harboring, or receipt of
Transnational Organized  
persons by means of the threat or use of force, 
Crime (came into
coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, abuse
effect 2003)
of power or vulnerability, or giving payments or
beneﬁts to a person in control of the victim for the
purposes of exploitation, which includes exploiting the
prostitution of others, sexual exploitation, forced labor,
slavery or similar practices, and the removal of organs”

tracts mark key moments in the evolution of international law
on slavery.
Slavery Convention of the 
League of Nations (1926) 
Article 1 For the purpose of the present Convention, the follow-
ing deﬁnitions are agreed upon:
(1) Slavery is the status or condition of a person over whom
any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership are
exercised.
(2) The slave trade includes all acts involved in the capture,
acquisition or disposal of a person with intent to reduce him to
slavery; all acts involved in the acquisition of a slave with a view
to selling or exchanging him; all acts of disposal by sale or ex-
change of a slave acquired with a view to being sold or ex-
changed, and, in general, every act of trade or transport in slaves.
Key International Laws and Conventions on Slavery
103
TABLE 6.2
Practices Deﬁned as Forms of Slavery in International Conventions
Practice/Criteria
Totally
Paid nothing,
Violence or
Y = Yes
controlled
economically used
threat of violence
N = No
(Y/N)
(Y/N)
(Y/N)
Chattel Slavery
Y
Y
Y
“White Slavery”
Y
Y
Y
Forced Labor
Y
Y
Y
Debt Bondage
Y
Y
Y
Child Prostitution
Y
Y
Y
Forced Prostitution
Y
Y
Y
Sexual Slavery
Y
Y
Y
Migrant Workers
Y/N
Y/N
Y/N
Prostitution
Y/N
Y/N
Y/N
Forced Marriage
Y/N
Y/N
Y
Apartheid
Y/N
N
Y
Incest
Y/N
N
Y
Organ Harvesting
Y/N
N
Y/N
Caste
N
N
Y
Prison Labor
N
Y/N
Y
Source: “No One Shall Be Held in Slavery or Servitude: A Critical Analysis of
International Slavery Agreements.” Human Rights Review, Vol. 2, No. 2, January
2001, with Peter Robbins.

Article 2 The High Contracting Parties undertake, each in respect
of the territories placed under its sovereignty, jurisdiction, protec-
tion, suzerainty or tutelage, so far as they have not already taken
the necessary steps:
(a) To prevent and suppress the slave trade;
(b) To bring about, progressively and as soon as possible, the
complete abolition of slavery in all its forms.
Article 3 The High Contracting Parties undertake to adopt all ap-
propriate measures with a view to preventing and suppressing
the embarkation, disembarkation and transport of slaves in their
territorial waters and upon all vessels flying their respective
ﬂags.
(The 1926 Convention was adopted with slight amendments
by the UN in 1953.)
The Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights (1948)
Article 1 All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and
rights.
Article 4 No one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and
the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.
Article 13(I) Everyone has the right to freedom of movement and
residence within the borders of each state.
Article 23(I) Everyone has the right to the free choice of employ-
ment, to just and favourable conditions of work and to protection
against unemployment.
Supplementary Convention on the Abolition 
of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions
and Practices Similar to Slavery (1956)
Section 1—Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery
Article 1 Each of the States Parties to this Convention shall take all
practicable and necessary legislative and other measures to bring
about progressively and as soon as possible the complete aboli-
104
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

tion or abandonment of the following institutions and practices,
where they still exist and whether or not they are covered by the
deﬁnition of slavery contained in article 1 of the Slavery Conven-
tion signed at Geneva on 25 September, 1926:
(a) Debt bondage, that is to say, the status or condition aris-
ing from a pledge by a debtor of his personal services or of those
of a person under his control as security for a debt, if the value of
those services as reasonably assessed is not applied towards the
liquidation of the debt or the length and nature of those services
are not respectively limited and deﬁned;
(b) Serfdom, that is to say, the condition or status of a tenant
who is by law, custom or agreement bound to live and labor on
land belonging to another person and to render some determi-
nate service to such other person, whether for reward or not, and
is not free to change his status;
(c) Any institution or practice whereby:
(i) A woman, without the right to refuse, is promised or
given in marriage on payment of a consideration in money or in
kind to her parents, guardian, family or any other person or
group; or
(ii) The husband of a woman, his family, or his clan, has
the right to transfer her to another person for value received or
otherwise; or
(iii) A woman on the death of her husband is liable to be
inherited by another person; 
(d) Any institution or practice whereby a child or young per-
son under the age of 18 years, is delivered by either or both of his
natural parents or by his guardian to another person, whether for
reward or not, with a view to the exploitation of the child or
young person or of his labor.
Article 2 With a view to bringing to an end the institutions and
practices mentioned in article 1 (c) of this Convention, the States
Parties undertake to prescribe, where appropriate, suitable mini-
mum ages of marriage, to encourage the use of facilities whereby
the consent of both parties to a marriage may be freely expressed
in the presence of a competent civil or religious authority, and to
encourage the registration of marriages.
Key International Laws and Conventions on Slavery
105

Section II—The Slave Trade
Article 3 The act of conveying or attempting to convey slaves
from one country to another by whatever means of transport, or
of being accessory thereto, shall be a criminal offence under the
laws of the States Parties to this Convention and persons con-
victed thereof shall be liable to very severe penalties.
2. (a) The States Parties shall take all effective measures to
prevent ships and aircraft authorised to ﬂy their ﬂags from con-
veying slaves and to punish persons guilty of such acts or of us-
ing national ﬂags for that purpose.
(b) The States Parties shall take all effective measures to
ensure that their ports, airﬁelds and coasts are not used for the
conveyance of slaves.
3. The States Parties to this Convention shall exchange infor-
mation in order to ensure the practical co-ordination of the mea-
sures taken by them in combating the slave trade and shall inform
each other of every case of the slave trade, and of every attempt to
commit this criminal offence, which comes to their notice.
Article 4 Any slave who takes refuge on board any vessel of a
State Party to this Convention shall ipso facto be free.
Section III Slavery and Institutions and Practices similar to Slavery
Article 5 In a country where the abolition or abandonment of
slavery, or of the institutions or practices mentioned in article 1
of this Convention, is not yet complete, the act of mutilating,
branding or otherwise marking a slave or a person of servile sta-
tus in order to indicate his status, or as a punishment, or for any
other reason, or of being accessory thereto, shall be a criminal of-
fence under the laws of the States Parties to this Convention and
persons convicted thereof shall be liable to punishment.
Article 6 1. The act of enslaving another person or of inducing an-
other person to give himself or a person dependent upon him
into slavery, or of attempting these acts, or being accessory
thereto, or being a party to a conspiracy to accomplish any such
acts, shall be a criminal offence under the laws of the States Par-
ties to this Convention and persons convicted thereof shall be li-
able to punishment.
2. Subject to the provisions of the introductory paragraph of
article 1 of this Convention, the provisions of paragraph 1 of the
106
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

present article shall also apply to the act of inducing another per-
son to place himself or a person dependent upon him into the
servile status resulting from any of the institutions or practices
mentioned in article 1, to any attempt to perform such acts, to be-
ing accessory thereto, and to being a party to a conspiracy to ac-
complish such acts.
Section IV Deﬁnitions
Article 7 For the purposes of the present Convention:
(a) “Slavery” means, as deﬁned in the Slavery Convention of
1926, the status or condition of a person over whom any or all of
the powers attaching to the right of ownership are exercised, and
“slave” means a person in such condition or status:
(b) “A person of servile status” means a person in the condi-
tion or status resulting from any of the institutions or practices
mentioned in article 1 of this Convention;
(c) “Slave trade” means and includes all acts involved in the
capture, acquisition or disposal of a person with intent to reduce
him to slavery; all acts involved in the acquisition of a slave with
a view to selling or exchanging him; all acts of disposal by sale or
exchange of a person acquired with a view to being sold or ex-
changed; and, in general, every act of trade or transport in slaves
by whatever means of conveyance.
Convention on the 
Rights of the Child (1989) 
Article 27 1. States Parties recognize the right of every child to a
standard of living adequate for the child’s physical, mental, spiri-
tual, moral and social development.
Article 28 1. States Parties recognize the right of the child to edu-
cation, and with a view to achieving this right progressively and
on a basis of equal opportunity, they shall, in particular: (a) Make
primary education compulsory and available free to all . . .
Article 32 1. States Parties recognize the right of the child to be
protected from economic exploitation and from performing any
work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with the child’s
education, or to be harmful to the child’s health or physical, men-
tal, spiritual, moral or social development.
Key International Laws and Conventions on Slavery
107

ILO Convention Concerning the Prohibition and
Immediate Action for the Elimination of the
Worst Forms of Child Labor (1999) 
Article 1 Each Member which ratiﬁes this Convention shall take
immediate and effective measures to secure the prohibition and
elimination of the worst forms of child labor as a matter of ur-
gency.
Article 2 For the purposes of this Convention, the term child shall
apply to all persons under the age of 18.
Article 3 For the purposes of this Convention, the term the worst
forms of child labor comprises:
(a) all forms of slavery or practices similar to slavery, such as
the sale and trafficking of children, debt bondage and serfdom
and forced or compulsory labor, including forced or compulsory
recruitment of children for use in armed conﬂict;
(b) the use, procuring or offering of a child for prostitution,
for the production of pornography or for pornographic perfor-
mances;
(c) the use, procuring or offering of a child for illicit activi-
ties, in particular for the production and trafﬁcking of drugs as
deﬁned in the relevant international treaties;
(d) work which, by its nature or the circumstances in which
it is carried out, is likely to harm the health, safety or morals of
children.
United States Trafﬁcking 
Victims Protection Act (2000)
At the end of 2000, the U.S. Congress passed the law known as
the Trafficking Victims Protection Act. This law was a break-
through for the United States, bringing a much more clear deﬁni-
tion of what constituted human trafﬁcking. It called for the estab-
lishment an interagency taskforce at the top level of government
and an Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons
within the State Department, and required that ofﬁce to make an
annual report on all countries, demonstrating how well they
were doing in the global ﬁght against human trafﬁcking. If coun-
108
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

tries were not taking serious actions against trafficking, it al-
lowed the President to impose economic and other sanctions
against them. Such sanctions have now been imposed on Burma,
Cuba, Liberia, North Korea, and Sudan. The full text of the law
can be seen at http://www.state.gov/g/tip.
Excerpts from the Act
SEC. 102. PURPOSES AND FINDINGS.
(a) PURPOSES—The purposes of this division are to combat
trafficking in persons, a contemporary manifestation of slavery
whose victims are predominantly women and children, to ensure
just and effective punishment of trafﬁckers, and to protect their
victims.
(b) FINDINGS—Congress ﬁnds that:
(1) As the 21st century begins, the degrading institution
of slavery continues throughout the world. Trafﬁcking in persons
is a modern form of slavery, and it is the largest manifestation of
slavery today. At least 700,000 persons annually, primarily
women and children, are trafﬁcked within or across international
borders. Approximately 50,000 women and children are traf-
ﬁcked into the United States each year.
(2) Many of these persons are trafﬁcked into the interna-
tional sex trade, often by force, fraud, or coercion. The sex indus-
try has rapidly expanded over the past several decades. It in-
volves sexual exploitation of persons, predominantly women and
girls, involving activities related to prostitution, pornography,
sex tourism, and other commercial sexual services. The low sta-
tus of women in many parts of the world has contributed to a
burgeoning of the trafﬁcking industry.
(3) Trafﬁcking in persons is not limited to the sex indus-
try. This growing transnational crime also includes forced labor
and involves signiﬁcant violations of labor, public health, and hu-
man rights standards worldwide.
(4) Trafﬁckers primarily target women and girls, who are
disproportionately affected by poverty, the lack of access to edu-
cation, chronic unemployment, discrimination, and the lack of
economic opportunities in countries of origin. Traffickers lure
women and girls into their networks through false promises of
decent working conditions at relatively good pay as nannies,
maids, dancers, factory workers, restaurant workers, sales clerks,
or models. Trafﬁckers also buy children from poor families and
Key International Laws and Conventions on Slavery
109

sell them into prostitution or into various types of forced or
bonded labor.
(5) Traffickers often transport victims from their home
communities to unfamiliar destinations, including foreign coun-
tries away from family and friends, religious institutions, and
other sources of protection and support, leaving the victims de-
fenseless and vulnerable.
(6) Victims are often forced through physical violence to
engage in sex acts or perform slavery-like labor. Such force in-
cludes rape and other forms of sexual abuse, torture, starvation,
imprisonment, threats, psychological abuse, and coercion.
(7) Trafﬁckers often make representations to their victims
that physical harm may occur to them or others should the victim
escape or attempt to escape. Such representations can have the
same coercive effects on victims as direct threats to inflict such
harm.
(8) Trafﬁcking in persons is increasingly perpetrated by
organized, sophisticated criminal enterprises. Such trafﬁcking is
the fastest growing source of proﬁts for organized criminal enter-
prises worldwide. Proﬁts from the trafﬁcking industry contribute
to the expansion of organized crime in the United States and
worldwide. Trafﬁcking in persons is often aided by ofﬁcial cor-
ruption in countries of origin, transit, and destination, thereby
threatening the rule of law.
(9) Trafficking includes all the elements of the crime of
forcible rape when it involves the involuntary participation of an-
other person in sex acts by means of fraud, force, or coercion.
(10) Trafﬁcking also involves violations of other laws, in-
cluding labor and immigration codes and laws against kidnap-
ping, slavery, false imprisonment, assault, battery, pandering,
fraud, and extortion.
(11) Trafficking exposes victims to serious health risks.
Women and children trafﬁcked in the sex industry are exposed to
deadly diseases, including HIV and AIDS. Trafﬁcking victims are
sometimes worked or physically brutalized to death.
(12) Trafﬁcking in persons substantially affects interstate
and foreign commerce. Trafﬁcking for such purposes as involun-
tary servitude, peonage, and other forms of forced labor has an
impact on the nationwide employment network and labor mar-
ket. Within the context of slavery, servitude, and labor or services
which are obtained or maintained through coercive conduct that
amounts to a condition of servitude, victims are subjected to a
range of violations.
110
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

(13) Involuntary servitude statutes are intended to reach
cases in which persons are held in a condition of servitude
through nonviolent coercion. In United States v. Kozminski, 487
U.S. 931 (1988), the Supreme Court found that section 1584 of title
18, United States Code, should be narrowly interpreted, absent a
deﬁnition of involuntary servitude by Congress. As a result, that
section was interpreted to criminalize only servitude that is
brought about through use or threatened use of physical or legal
coercion, and to exclude other conduct that can have the same
purpose and effect.
(14) Existing legislation and law enforcement in the
United States and other countries are inadequate to deter trafﬁck-
ing and bring trafﬁckers to justice, failing to reﬂect the gravity of
the offenses involved. No comprehensive law exists in the United
States that penalizes the range of offenses involved in the trafﬁck-
ing scheme. Instead, even the most brutal instances of trafﬁcking
in the sex industry are often punished under laws that also apply
to lesser offenses, so that traffickers typically escape deserved
punishment.
(15) In the United States, the seriousness of this crime
and its components is not reﬂected in current sentencing guide-
lines, resulting in weak penalties for convicted trafﬁckers.
(16) In some countries, enforcement against trafﬁckers is
also hindered by ofﬁcial indifference, by corruption, and some-
times even by ofﬁcial participation in trafﬁcking.
(17) Existing laws often fail to protect victims of trafﬁck-
ing, and because victims are often illegal immigrants in the desti-
nation country, they are repeatedly punished more harshly than
the trafﬁckers themselves.
(18) Additionally, adequate services and facilities do not
exist to meet victims’ needs regarding health care, housing, edu-
cation, and legal assistance, which safely reintegrate trafﬁcking
victims into their home countries.
(19) Victims of severe forms of trafﬁcking should not be
inappropriately incarcerated, ﬁned, or otherwise penalized solely
for unlawful acts committed as a direct result of being trafﬁcked,
such as using false documents, entering the country without doc-
umentation, or working without documentation.
(20) Because victims of trafficking are frequently unfa-
miliar with the laws, cultures, and languages of the countries into
which they have been trafﬁcked, because they are often subjected
to coercion and intimidation including physical detention and
debt bondage, and because they often fear retribution and
Key International Laws and Conventions on Slavery
111

forcible removal to countries in which they will face retribution
or other hardship, these victims often ﬁnd it difﬁcult or impossi-
ble to report the crimes committed against them or to assist in the
investigation and prosecution of such crimes.
(21) Trafﬁcking of persons is an evil requiring concerted
and vigorous action by countries of origin, transit or destination,
and by international organizations.
(22) One of the founding documents of the United States,
the Declaration of Independence, recognizes the inherent dignity
and worth of all people. It states that all men are created equal
and that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalien-
able rights. The right to be free from slavery and involuntary
servitude is among those unalienable rights. Acknowledging this
fact, the United States outlawed slavery and involuntary servi-
tude in 1865, recognizing them as evil institutions that must be
abolished. Current practices of sexual slavery and trafﬁcking of
women and children are similarly abhorrent to the principles
upon which the United States was founded.
(23) The United States and the international community
agree that trafﬁcking in persons involves grave violations of hu-
man rights and is a matter of pressing international concern. The
international community has repeatedly condemned slavery and
involuntary servitude, violence against women, and other ele-
ments of trafficking, through declarations, treaties, and United
Nations resolutions and reports, including the Universal Declara-
tion of Human Rights; the 1956 Supplementary Convention on
the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and
Practices Similar to Slavery; the 1948 American Declaration on
the Rights and Duties of Man; the 1957 Abolition of Forced Labor
Convention; the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights; the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhu-
man or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; United Nations
General Assembly Resolutions 50/167, 51/66, and 52/98; the Fi-
nal Report of the World Congress against Sexual Exploitation of
Children (Stockholm, 1996); the Fourth World Conference on
Women (Beijing, 1995); and the 1991 Moscow Document of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
(24) Trafﬁcking in persons is a transnational crime with na-
tional implications. To deter international trafﬁcking and bring its
perpetrators to justice, nations including the United States must
recognize that trafﬁcking is a serious offense. This is done by pre-
scribing appropriate punishment, giving priority to the prosecu-
112
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

tion of trafﬁcking offenses, and protecting rather than punishing
the victims of such offenses. The United States must work bilater-
ally and multilaterally to abolish the trafﬁcking industry by taking
steps to promote cooperation among countries linked together by
international trafﬁcking routes. The United States must also urge
the international community to take strong action in multilateral
fora to engage recalcitrant countries in serious and sustained ef-
forts to eliminate trafﬁcking and protect trafﬁcking victims.
SEC. 103. DEFINITIONS.
In this division:
(1) APPROPRIATE CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES—
The term ‘appropriate congressional committees’ means the
Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on the Ju-
diciary of the Senate and the Committee on International Rela-
tions and the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Repre-
sentatives.
(2) COERCION—The term ‘coercion’ means—
(A) threats of serious harm to or physical restraint
against any person;
(B) any scheme, plan, or pattern intended to cause a per-
son to believe that failure to perform an act would result in seri-
ous harm to or physical restraint against any person; or
(C) the abuse or threatened abuse of the legal process.
(3) COMMERCIAL SEX ACT—The term ‘commercial sex
act’ means any sex act on account of which anything of value is
given to or received by any person.
(4) DEBT BONDAGE—The term ‘debt bondage’ means the
status or condition of a debtor arising from a pledge by the
debtor of his or her personal services or of those of a person un-
der his or her control as a security for debt, if the value of those
services as reasonably assessed is not applied toward the liquida-
tion of the debt or the length and nature of those services are not
respectively limited and deﬁned.
(5) INVOLUNTARY SERVITUDE—The term ‘involuntary
servitude’ includes a condition of servitude induced by means
of—
(A) any scheme, plan, or pattern intended to cause a per-
son to believe that, if the person did not enter into or continue in
such condition, that person or another person would suffer seri-
ous harm or physical restraint; or
Key International Laws and Conventions on Slavery
113

(B) the abuse or threatened abuse of the legal process.
. . .
(8) SEVERE FORMS OF TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS—The
term ‘severe forms of trafﬁcking in persons’ means—
(A) sex trafficking in which a commercial sex act is in-
duced by force, fraud, or coercion, or in which the person in-
duced to perform such act has not attained 18 years of age; or
(B) the recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision,
or obtaining of a person for labor or services, through the use of
force, fraud, or coercion for the purpose of subjection to involun-
tary servitude, peonage, debt bondage, or slavery.
(9) SEX TRAFFICKING—The term ‘sex trafficking’ means
the recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, or obtain-
ing of a person for the purpose of a commercial sex act.
United Nations Convention on 
Transnational Organized Crime (2000)
Also in 2000, the United Nations brought forward the Conven-
tion on Transnational Organized Crime. This Convention dealt
with organized crime in three areas: the illegal sale and trafﬁc of
weapons; drug trafﬁcking; and human trafﬁcking. To come into
force (be recognized as international law), a Convention has to be
approved (signed and ratified) by a minimum number of na-
tional governments. Sometimes this process of ratification will
take many years, but unlike many conventions, the Convention
on Transnational Organized Crime came into force quickly—on
September 29, 2003—but it has not been ratified by the United
States.
One part of the Convention is the Protocol to Prevent, Sup-
press and Punish Trafﬁcking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children. A protocol is a distinct part of a Convention that has to
be signed and ratiﬁed separately. This Protocol was a major step in
bringing forward a clear deﬁnition and plan for the international
effort to end human trafﬁcking. Known as the Trafﬁcking Protocol,
it aims to prevent and combat trafﬁcking in persons, to protect and
assist the victims with full respect for their human rights, and to fa-
cilitate international cooperation against trafﬁcking.
The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafﬁcking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children defines trafficking in
persons in this way:
114
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

Trafﬁcking in persons is (Art. 3.a):
• The action of recruitment, transportation, transfer, har-
bouring, or receipt of persons
• By means of the threat or use of force, coercion, abduc-
tion, fraud, deception, abuse of power or vulnerability, or
giving payments or beneﬁts to a person in control of the
victim
• For the purposes of exploitation, which includes exploit-
ing the prostitution of others, sexual exploitation, forced
labour, slavery or similar practices, and the removal of
organs
• Consent of the victim is irrelevant where illicit means are
established, but criminal law defences are preserved (Pro-
tocol Art. 3.b, Convention Art. 11.6)
The definition is broken down into three lists of elements:
criminal acts, the means used to commit those acts, and goals
(forms of exploitation). This deﬁnition of trafﬁcking is a key ele-
ment of the Protocol. It represents the ﬁrst clear deﬁnition at the
international level. It will greatly assist in the ﬁght against traf-
ficking by standardizing approaches to the problem. As it is
adopted it will help ensure that legislative and administrative
measures are consistent from country to country, and it will help
provide a common basis for statistical and research purposes.
When a country ratiﬁes the Trafﬁcking Protocol, it is agree-
ing to take speciﬁc actions:
• To make trafﬁcking in persons a criminal offense
• To protect and assist the victims of human trafﬁcking
• To help repatriate victims when this is appropriate
• To prevent trafﬁcking through information and mass me-
dia campaigns to alert and educate ofﬁcials and potential
victims, addressing factors such as “poverty, underdevel-
opment and lack of equal opportunity,” which make
people vulnerable to trafﬁcking, and using “legislative . . .
educational, social or cultural” or other measures to
reduce the demand that leads to trafﬁcking in the 
ﬁrst place
• To have their enforcement agencies cooperate with other
countries through information exchange and helping
with training
Key International Laws and Conventions on Slavery
115

• To strengthen their own border controls, imposing re-
quirements on commercial carriers to check passports
and visas, and to considering the denial or revocation of
visas of persons involved in trafﬁcking
The Trafﬁcking Protocol entered into force on December 25,
2003, and it has not been ratiﬁed by the United States.
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony 
about the Different Types of Slavery
Bonded Labor
Bonded labor is the most common form of slavery in the modern
world. A person pledges him or herself against a loan of money
but the length and nature of the service is not deﬁned and the la-
bor does not reduce the original debt. The debt can be passed
down through the generations, and “defaulting” can be punished
by seizing or selling children into further debt bonds. It is most
common in India and Pakistan.
Testimony about Bonded Labor in India
Keshav Nankar is an ex-bonded laborer who now works to liber-
ate others from such slavery. Vivek Pandit works with bonded la-
borers in the Thane district of India (see also their biographical
sketches in Chapter 5). They made the following speeches to an
audience in London on jointly receiving the annual Anti-Slavery
Award for 1999.
Keshav Nankar. Today, I am here in front of you, speaking
to you, after travelling thousands of miles. This is unbe-
lievable considering who I was in 1983. Today, I have the
capacity and the confidence to address thousands of
brothers and sisters. I am proud that today I can deal
with government ofﬁcials at various levels. And, if they
do not pay attention to my community’s genuine de-
mands, we will protest and demand our rights. Further-
more, I have become actively involved in the political
process. I contested the elections for the State Assembly. I
teach my fellow farmers the latest, modern techniques of
116
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

farming practices. Looking back at my past I cannot be-
lieve my present today. It seems unreal but it’s not a
dream, it is a reality born out of a lot of pain, a lot of
struggle and a lot of dreams put together.
I remember as a child, when I was six or seven years
old, my father enrolled me in the village school. I used
to like my school very much. I especially loved the
singing, dancing, and playing. But my father needed
some money. He asked his landlord—for whom he had
worked his entire life—for some money. The landlord
gave him the money but took me in return. He asked my
father, “What would your child do in school?” and
“How will he feed himself?” He said, “Remove him
from school, send him here to look after my cattle and I
will give him one meal a day.” That is how I was taken
out of school when I was seven years old and I was not
allowed to study beyond my ﬁrst standard.
I continued working with the landlord. I got married
and my wife and I worked in the fields and at home.
Through marrying me, my wife also became a bonded
laborer to my landlord. From dawn to midnight, we
used to fetch water, clean the utensils, wash clothes, col-
lect ﬁrewood and remove cow dung. We also had to pre-
pare the ground for sowing the seeds, transplanting the
saplings, nurturing the plants, harvesting the ﬁeld, and
ﬁnally husking the grains. The other agricultural labor-
ers, who were lucky not to be bonded, worked much
less and earned much more than me.
Once, to earn a bit more, I went to work with another
landlord. This angered my landlord. He sent his hench-
men to fetch me. They brutally assaulted me and ver-
bally abused me during the journey back to my landlord.
My wages were not sufﬁcient to feed my family even
once. My debt kept increasing. I was getting sucked into
a whirlpool. As a result, I became suppressed, with no
voice of my own. I wanted to break the shackles and get
out of this misery but I could not see any way out. In
1983, I met a few workers of Shramjeevi Sanghatana, a
trade union that had started mobilizing bonded labor-
ers, agricultural laborers and small farmers in the neigh-
boring areas. They built our conﬁdence and our powers.
They taught us to say NO and not to bow to any injus-
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
117

tice. They gave us the strength to ﬁght against all sorts
of atrocities that have been committed against us for
generations. The landlords troubled us in many ways
but the Sanghatana members remained with us through
all our sufferings and hardships. When we were beaten
severely, they were there getting beaten with us. When
we had no food, they starved with us. This is how our
struggle continued.
Today, in our area nobody dares to keep a bonded la-
borer. We proudly run the village Gram Panchayat
(Council). I contested the assembly elections based on
the credibility of Sanghatana, not on the power of
money. I lost the elections but it is not the result, but the
process that is important. I proved that a poor person
once without any rights, suppressed beyond imagina-
tion, could also emerge stronger and exercise his demo-
cratic rights to the fullest.
Today, I also do collective farming, along with the
other freed bonded and agricultural laborers. The land-
lords who were keepers of bonded labor now come to
me for advice on farming. This is not my story alone but
a story of thousands of changed lives. (Acceptance
speech given at the 1999 Anti-Slavery Awards Cere-
mony, London, England, October 27, 1999. Reprinted by
permission of Anti-Slavery International.)
Vivek Pandit. When I went to get my visa before coming
here I was interviewed by a lady at the Consulate who
asked me in wonder, “Are there still slaves in India?”
Perhaps some of you would ask the same question. The
answer my friends is yes. Even after ﬁfty years of free-
dom from colonial rule there are still millions of men,
women, and children who live lives of bondage. When
we went to work in the rural areas in the late seventies
we knew nothing of bonded labor or slavery, what we
saw in the villages was that they were not a homoge-
nous community. We saw that the landlord belonging to
the upper caste, with more money and political connec-
tions owned the tribals who were landless, abjectly poor
and belonged to the lowest stratum of the caste system.
The power was literally concentrated at the core even
geographically. All resources came to villages where the
118
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

landlords lived, while the tribals (indigenous people)
were pushed to the far-ﬂung hamlets, in the interior and
inaccessible forests.
We learned from the people how they took small sums
of money from the landlord during illness or marriage
and then were bonded to him for generations. The
bonded laborer was less than an animal. The landowner’s
bullocks were better taken care of than the human beings.
After the season transplantation of paddy the bullocks
were rested for a month or more and all this time the
bonded laborer was expected to gather the green fodder
for the cattle. I remember that the tribals would work
without respite till their feet rotted by being continuously
in the water. Ironically, the owners would beat the tribals
who could not work.
These were the slave citizens of a free country. This
was the irony in the largest democracy in the world.
When we began working for the release of bonded la-
borers we realized we were challenging the vested inter-
ests in the area. The release of bonded labor is a process
from slavery to freedom, and freedom is never gifted
away. Freedom can only be won through struggle, by
building the strength of the people. We realized that
those in bondage have to be prepared to overthrow their
chains at any cost, even at the cost of their lives. My ad-
vice to those who say they want to free bonded laborers
but are unable to do so because of police cases or threats
by landlords, I ask them, “What else did you expect?” It
is only natural that the powerful will react to keep their
interests intact. Dr. Martin Luther King had said, “Free-
dom has always been an expensive thing.” Indeed we
have to prepare to pay the highest price for it.
The essential condition of bondage is in the minds of
the people. While recording the statements of the hun-
dreds of bonded laborers, whenever we asked, “What is
your problem?” invariably they replied, “Nothing.” A
bonded laborer has no dreams and torture is a way of
life. They have been conditioned to accept that their
place is at the periphery of society. The process of re-
lease and rehabilitation of bonded labor is to restore the
personhood of the person, to restore self-esteem, conﬁ-
dence, and the feeling that they too can win. Until yes-
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
119

terday we had nothing but we can build for a better to-
morrow for our children. Release from bondage can
only come through collective action saying ‘no’ to an in-
human system. Thus, there were uniting slogans that
brought together the bonded laborers:
Tribals are human beings not cattle
We are demanding our rights as human beings.
Slogans and songs like these are helpful in reinforcing
the feeling of dignity in the bonded labor. When the
landlords attacked them a tribal woman said, “We will
eat bitter roots and crabs, but we will not bow down be-
fore the landlords.” That became another powerful slo-
gan in the struggle against bonded labor. The system of
bonded labor could not be fought in isolation. The
struggle against bonded labor was linked to the larger
struggle for rights of agricultural laborers, for minimum
and equal wages, for the restoration of tribal land
grabbed by the landlords and so on. The movement
grew, not strength in members, but strength in feeling,
belief and solidarity. More and more marginalized
people joined it and strengthened it. We learned that
bonded laborers do not become free because they are
not convinced that they can remain in freedom. The
message that goes across to the bonded laborer is that
the entire system is against them.
The landlords are obviously exploiting them, but the
law enforcement agencies do not help them either. They
know that they are being tortured but there is no one to
listen to their plight. They are not even convinced that
social workers or NGOs will listen to them. I remember
when we ﬁrst came across the issue of bonded labor, we
spent nearly two whole years trying to convince the
tribals to become free. The landlords were angry that we
were campaigning against them, and the tribals ran
away whenever they saw us because my uncle was a
bonded labor keeper. They thought we were the agents
of the landlords. A bonded laborer does not become free
overnight. In this period of transition we have to help
them in every possible way. Once they are free, the
bonded laborers become part of the larger community
of the workforce and are free to sell their labor to any
person. The issues of the larger community become
120
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

theirs. The poverty, illiteracy, disease and exploitation
that are the lot of the free labor also become their lot.
Another lesson we learned was that social legislation
by itself cannot destroy slavery. While powerful laws
are important and useful, without an insistent and
equally powerful voice to demand their implementa-
tion, laws have remained on paper. Similarly, any other
tool like using the media, public interest litigation or us-
ing legislative devices have to be linked to collective ac-
tion if they are to bring long lasting change in the lives
of the people. Releasing bonded laborers is not a project.
It is entering into the politics of tilting the balance of
power in favor of the marginalized. This requires know-
ing the various democratic institutions, the laws, and
the pulse of the people, the mind of the opponent. But
once bonded laborers are free the sky is the limit. They
do not wait for alternative employment or rehabilitation
packages. Freed bonded laborers in Thane (our district
in Maharashtra) have helped other bonded laborers all
over the country in their struggle for freedom. They
have even collected one Rupee each as a token contribu-
tion in the freedom struggle of Nelson Mandela and the
African National Congress. They have truly understood
in their hearts that no one is free till every one is free.
(Acceptance speech given at the 1999 Anti-Slavery
Awards Ceremony, London, England, October 27, 1999.
Reprinted by permission of Anti-Slavery International.)
Contract Slavery
Contract Slavery in Brazil
Contract slavery shows how modern labor relations are used to
hide slavery. Contracts are offered that guarantee employment,
but when the workers are taken to the place of work they find
themselves enslaved. This is the second largest but also the most
rapidly growing form of slavery today.
The main form of slavery found in modern-day Brazil is con-
tract slavery based on debt bondage. In a country where an esti-
mated one in five of the population lives in absolute poverty,
workers from areas hit by recession or natural disasters such as
drought are enticed into accepting verbal contracts on the basis of
false promises of well-paid work. They are then transported thou-
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
121

sands of miles in trucks to work on estates in isolated parts of the
Amazon states. Recruitment is carried out by a Gato (cat). The
workers are then told they are in debt for their transportation,
tools, food, and other inflated living costs while working and
forced into a cycle of bonded labor. In 2003, newly elected Presi-
dent Luiz Ignacio Lula da Silva (known as “Lula”) announced
dramatic increases in funding and efforts aimed at ﬁghting slav-
ery. Despite the increased activity, at least 25,000 people are
thought to be enslaved clearing land in the Amazon and making
charcoal for the nation’s steel industry. The work to end slavery in
Brazil is hampered by the fact that many of the large landowners
are also powerful politicians who block national and local efforts.
Evidence and Testimony from Brazil about Contract Slavery
From the early 1980s, as the wave of development swept into
Mato Grosso do Sul, recruiters began to appear in the slums of
Minas Gerais seeking workers with some experience of charcoal
making. These recruiters are called Gatos and are key players in
the process of enslavement. When they drive into the slums with
their cattle trucks and announce that they are hiring men or even
whole families, the desperate residents immediately respond.
The Gatos will go from door to door or use loudspeakers to call
people into the street. Sometimes the local politicians, even local
churches, will let them use public buildings and help them to re-
cruit workers. The Gatos explain that they need workers in the
ranches and forests of Mato Grosso. Like good salesmen they lay
out the many advantages of regular work and good conditions.
They offer to provide transport to Mato Grosso, good food on
site, a regular salary, provision of tools, and a free trip home
every month to see the family. For a hungry family it seems a
miraculous offer of a new beginning. In a charcoal camp in Mato
Grosso do Sul I spoke with a man named Renaldo who told me
about being recruited by the Gato:
My parents lived in a very dry rural area and when I got
older there was no work, no work at all there. So I de-
cided to go to the city. I went to São Paulo but that was
even worse, no work and everything was very expen-
sive, and the place was dangerous—so much crime! So
then I went up to Minas Gerais because I heard that
there was work there. If there was I didn’t find it, but
one day a Gato came and began to recruit people to
122
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

work out here in Mato Grosso. The Gato said that we
would be given good food everyday, and we would
have good wages besides. He promised that every
month his truck would bring people back to Minas
Gerais so that they could visit their families and bring
them their pay. He even gave money to some men to
give to their families before they left and to buy food to
bring with them on the trip. He was able to ﬁll up his
truck with workers very easily and we started on the
trip west. Along the way, when we would stop for fuel,
the Gato would say ‘Go on into the cafe and eat as much
as you like, I’ll pay for it.’ We had been hungry for a
long time, so you can imagine how we ate! When we got
to Mato Grosso we kept driving further and further into
the country. This camp is almost fifty miles from any-
thing, it is just raw cerrado for ﬁfty miles before you get
to even a ranch, and there is just the one road. When we
reached the camp we could see it was terrible: the condi-
tions were not good enough for animals. Standing
around the camp were men with guns. And then the
Gato said, ‘You each owe me a lot of money, there is the
cost of the trip, and all that food you ate, and the money
I gave you for your families—so don’t even think about
leaving.’
Renaldo was trapped. With the other workers he found he
could not leave the camp or have any say in the work he was
given to do. After two months, when the workers asked about go-
ing home for a visit they were told they were still too deeply in
debt to be allowed to go. (Bales 1999; © The Regents of the Univer-
sity of California. Reprinted by permission.)
Chattel Slavery
This is the form of slavery closest to the old slavery. A person is
completely owned by their master or mistress. They are sold, cap-
tured, or born into a lifetime of slavery. The slave children are
usually also treated as property and can be traded like cattle be-
tween owners. Chattel slavery is most commonly found in parts
of northern and western Africa and some Arab countries. It repre-
sents a small proportion of today’s slaves.
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
123

Evidence of Chattel Slavery in Mauritania
Mauritanian society is made of three groups, the Arab Moors
from the north, slaves and ex-slaves called Haratines, and the
Afro-Mauritanians in the south. Slavery has been abolished
many times in Mauritania, most recently in 1980 when perhaps
as many as one third of the country’s population of 2 million be-
came ex-slaves on paper. But many remain enslaved, either un-
aware of their rights or unable to translate legal freedom into
practical action. Salma Mint Saloum and Moctar Teyeb are for-
mer Mauritanian slaves, and their biographical sketches appear
in Chapter 5.
Bill of Sale for Two Slaves. In the name of Allah, most gra-
cious and most merciful, salutation and peace upon
him:
Mohamed Vall Ould Nema, son of Sidiba, bought
from Mohamed Lemine Ould Sidi Mohamed, son of
Taleb Ibrahim, a slave with her daughter named Kneiba
in the price of 50,000 [$30] Ouguiya received entirely by
the seller from the buyer. Therefore, it becomes effective:
his ownership of the two slaves listed. The two parties
did receive my witness and the buyer before accepted
the hidden defects of the slaves. The contract was made
at the end of the month of Hija of the year 1412 [1992] by
Abedrabou Montali Ould Mohamed Abderrahmane,
son of Berrou. God forgive me and my father and all the
believers.
Here is the ﬁnger[print] of the buyer’s left hand.
(Unpublished translation of bill of sale from Arabic
dated 1992. Reprinted by permission of Anti-Slavery In-
ternational.) 
Testimony about Chattel Slavery in Mauritania. My name is
Salma. I want you to read this attentively. If you want to
meet me, I am here. I am a witness, before the whole
world, to the fact of slavery in Mauritania.
I was born a slave. I was born in Mauritania in 1956.
My mother and father were slaves for one family, and
their parents were slaves of the same family. Ever since I
was old enough to walk, I was forced to work for this
family all day, every day. We never had days off. We
hardly knew that it was Saturday or Sunday, because we
124
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

had to work every day. Even if we were sick, we had to
work.
When I was still a child, I started taking over my
mother’s job, taking care of the ﬁrst wife of the head of
the family, and her 15 children. Every day at 5 AM I had
to make their breakfast. First, I had to get water, and
wood to make a ﬁre. We were in the desert, and the well
was far away, so often I had to walk a long way. I had to
cook all their meals, and clean their clothes, and watch
all the children. Even if one of my children was hurt or
in danger, I didn’t dare help my child, because I had to
watch the master’s wife’s children ﬁrst. If I didn’t, they
would beat me. I was beaten very often, with a wooden
stick or leather belt. One day they were beating my
mother and I couldn’t stand it, I tried to stop them. The
head of the family got very angry with me, and he tied
my hands, and branded me with a burning iron, and he
hit me across the face. The ring on his ﬁnger left a scar
on my face.
When I was a slave, I was never allowed to go to
school or learn anything more than some Koran verses
and prayers. But I was lucky, because the eldest son of
the master had gone to school away from our village
and had different ideas than his father. This eldest son
decided to help me. He saw that I was smart, and he se-
cretly taught me to speak French, and to read and write
a little. I think that everyone thought he was raping me,
but he was teaching me.
I always thought about liberty. Other slaves were
afraid of liberty. They were afraid that they wouldn’t
know where to go or what to do or who to talk to. But I
was never afraid. I told my mother that one day I would
be free. I always believed that I had to be free, and I
think that helped me to escape.
The first time I tried to escape was about ten years
ago. When I left the family’s village, I didn’t know
where to go, and I went in the wrong direction. I didn’t
know how close I was to Senegal, just on the other side
of the river. So instead of going to Senegal, I walked for
two days in the wrong direction. I found another family
with slaves, and I hid with the slaves, but that family
found me and sent me back. The head of the family pun-
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
125

ished me terribly. They bound my wrists and ankles and
tied me to a date tree in the middle of the family com-
pound, and left me there for a week. He cut my wrists
with a razor, so that I bled terribly. I still have scars on
my arms.
Finally I managed to escape. I met a man in the mar-
ket who told me that Senegal was not far away, that it
was just across the river, and that I could escape. So I de-
cided that I had to try. I ran away from the family com-
pound and went to the river. At the river, a man with a
small wooden boat agreed to take me into Senegal.
There I made my way to a safe house run by a former
slave from Mauritania.
I stayed in Senegal for a few years. I lived in this
house, and I earned my keep by doing work around the
house. But I never felt safe there. I knew that Mauritania
wasn’t far away. Always, I had in my head that the mas-
ter of the family could come and pay people to look for
me and bring me back to his house. I was afraid all the
time in Senegal.
When I got to the U.S., I found liberty. I worked when
I got here, braiding hair. That was the first time I had
been paid for work I had done. To be paid for my work,
that was really liberty. To work for someone and be
paid, and I can’t even explain it. I had never believed in
that. Even here, in New York, I believed that I would be
treated like I was in Mauritania. The first time I was
paid here, I cried that day. I had never seen a person
paid for her work before in my life. It was a very, very
good surprise. Now I am used to that. It has really made
me happy.
To work, and to learn things, to go to school, to learn,
to talk with people I choose to talk to: these things are
liberty to me. To have the liberty to discuss with people,
to be free to go where I want, to eat what I want, to sleep
where I want. Before, I didn’t have that. Really, seri-
ously, before, I didn’t have that. Also, to have my chil-
dren with me. One of the hardest things for me was
leaving my children behind in Mauritania, but I knew
that I had to escape ﬁrst and then ﬁgure out how to get
them out of there.
126
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

In the three years I have been here, I have been work-
ing to secure the liberty of my children, so that they
would be as free as me. I had to pay people in Senegal
so that they would ﬁnd them and bring them to Sene-
gal. Now most of my children are in Senegal. Every
morning I get up early, and buy a phone card, and I
speak with my children. All my children tell me that
they would rather die in the street than to return to
Mauritania. Also I have been paying for them to go to
school in Senegal. They never went to school in Mauri-
tania, there they got nothing. For them, they love to go
to school, to learn.
One of my children is now in the United States with
me. I want very, very much that the others will join us.
That is also liberty for me. In Mauritania, I never had the
right to make decisions concerning my own children.
Here, it is incomparably different.
I myself went to school in the U.S. I have been learn-
ing English. I want to continue learning English. I want
to learn many things. I want to learn to speak English
well, like everyone. I want to become an interpreter
somewhere. I also want to learn how to use computers.
These are things that would never ever have been possi-
ble for me in Mauritania.
In Mauritania, I didn’t dare go to the government, be-
cause they wouldn’t listen. Because for them, slavery is
normal. It doesn’t matter what the laws say there, be-
cause there they don’t apply the laws. Maybe it’s writ-
ten that there is no slavery, but it’s not true. Even in
front of the President of Mauritania I can say in full
voice that there is slavery in Mauritania, because now
I’m as free as he is.
In the beginning in the U.S. I was afraid of going to
Immigration. I was so afraid that I would be sent back to
Mauritania. After I met my lawyer, I learned that that
wasn’t true. Here, if you are honest and correct and you
tell the truth, you will really have your liberty. Here, it’s
freedom. The judge was honest, and he did his job. The
judge demanded proof, but then he paid attention and
listened. I met a doctor who helped me, and Kevin
Bales, and the Bellevue Program for Torture Survivors.
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
127

It was a big difference from Mauritania, and a big sur-
prise to me. A big difference.
I would like to be a citizen of the United States one
day. I want to learn English. I want my children to learn
English better than me. I want my children to be citi-
zens. I came here and got total liberty. I see that here
there is democracy, which to me means freedom of ex-
pression. In Mauritania, there was no liberty of expres-
sion. In Dakar, I was afraid to speak out, because we
were so close to Mauritania. I had to be cautious. I had
to be far, far, far from Mauritania. Here in America, I can
speak out. (Provided to the author by Salma Mint Sa-
loum, 2003)
War Slavery 
Slavery has been a feature of war for thousands of years. A spe-
cial form of slavery exists in southern Sudan—a chattel slavery
revived from the past and reborn to serve a war economy. The
civil war in Sudan between the Muslim North and the Christian
and Animist South (particularly the Nuer and Dinka peoples) be-
gan in 1955, a year before the country gained its independence. A
peace accord in the early 1970s led to a ten-year cessation in ﬁght-
ing, but collapsed in 1983. In the current round of the civil war,
slavery emerged as a weapon used by Northern militias against
Southern villages. It was a new factor in the war but also the re-
vival of one of the most ancient processes of enslavement. In as-
saults on “enemy” villages, government-supported militias have
attacked and killed people, destroyed crops, taken livestock, and
captured and enslaved some of the inhabitants as a tactic of war.
In 2002, the U.S. Congress passed the Sudan Peace Act that pro-
vided for a major new diplomatic effort to bring the war in Sudan
to an end. Pressure was brought to bear on all parties and, in late
May 2004, a deal was signed between the government and the
rebel Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) that involved pro-
tocols on power-sharing and the administration of three disputed
areas in central Sudan. However, as the Peace Accords were be-
ing signed, conﬂict was breaking out in the western Darfur Re-
gion of Sudan. This area is not covered in the peace treaty, and
progovernment militias began a campaign of murder, mass rape,
and “ethnic cleansing” aimed at driving hundreds of thousands
of people out of the region.
128
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

A ﬁfteen-year-old in Darfur described what happened when
she was captured by progovernment militia in February 2004:
When Kaileck was attacked, I fled towards the moun-
tains, but five horsemen caught me and took me far
away in a ﬁeld.” All ﬁve of them raped me twice. They
kept me for 10 days. They whipped me. I could not say
anything because they were armed. All I could do was
to cry. They tied up my arms and my legs and would
only release me when they raped me. They called me
Abeid [slave in Arabic]. Eventually they abandoned me.
Someone told my mother where I was and she came 
to take me back. I could not walk by myself. (BBC News
2004) 
International action has now been taken to reduce the con-
flict in the region and food aid has been rushed to the refugee
camps ﬁlled by the displaced people, but it is unclear how the sit-
uation will be resolved as Sudan lurches toward the end of its
civil war.
Testimony about Slavery in Sudan
Testimony of Ahok Akok, a woman interviewed at Khartoum.
Our family was captured about six years ago [that is,
about 1994] when we were already fleeing north and
had crossed into the North into Kordofan. I was cap-
tured with my son, Akai, and my two daughters, this
one called Abuk [present at the interview], who was
about eight at the time, and a younger one, about two.
We were taken by a tribe called Humr [that is, Misseriya
Humr], who split the three of us up. The man who took
me subsequently sold me on to some other nomads to
look after cattle, for about 130 Sudanese pounds. I had
to look after their cows and spent about six years with
them before I managed to escape to Makaringa village.
Meanwhile, my three children had been taken away
by others. For six years, until I reached Makaringa vil-
lage, I had no news of them. When I reached the village,
my son Akai heard where I was and joined me there.
He is with us at this CEAWC center. We then contacted
the Dinka Committee and they were able to find my
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
129

daughter Abuk, who had been renamed Khadija. She
had initially been put to work looking after livestock,
but had got into trouble when some animals had es-
caped—she was too little to look after them. After that,
she was employed as a domestic servant. She hardly
speaks any Dinka language now, only Arabic. I still
have no news of my youngest daughter and am still
hoping to ﬁnd her.
Testimony of Gabriel Muong Deng, a young man interviewed in
Ad-Dha’ein. I am from Warawar [possibly Wedweil],
near Marial Bai [in North Bahr El Ghazal]. I was ab-
ducted about ﬁve years ago and spent about four years
working for a man called Adam Mohamed. I am about
15 now, and was about nine or ten when taken.
At the time I was seized, I was attending Grade 1
school in Kwel. My father was already dead and my
mother was living with her brother. I was studying at
home on the day attackers came. Four others were taken
as well as me: two boys and two women. We thought
the noise was some distance away but the attack sur-
prised us. I had my hands tied and was put on a horse. I
was eventually taken all the way to Jebel Mara [in the
centre of Darfur, in West Darfur State]. We started by go-
ing to Mellam [Merem], I was told. It took about a
month to get there, accompanied by ﬁve men. Once in
the Jebel Mara, I was taken to a place called Rijit by
Adam Mohamed. He had a family of ﬁve boys and two
girls living in a tent. They belonged to the Salamat tribe
and spoke Arabic, which I gradually learned to speak.
One of the girls was called Howa.
Each year we moved to and from the south in about
June and October. I was given about 30 cows to graze.
Adam Mohamed had a riﬂe, which he taught me to use,
so that I could scare off wild animals [translated as
“wolves”]. To start with he would only let me have one
bullet at once, but eventually let me have more. The
family renamed me Mohamed and taught me to pray. I
was never sent to school. I did not meet other Dinka
boys looking after cattle.
One day [probably during 1998], I lost a cow and was
told to go and search for it. I asked if I might take the
gun, and was told I couldn’t. When I refused to go out,
130
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

Adam Mohamed took a stick and hit me extremely hard
here [he indicated his right collar bone, where he has a
protuberance, apparently as a result of a badly set bone].
This took almost a year to heal, and when I was better I
was determined to escape.
One night, when Adam Mohamed was away at the
beginning of the rainy season [probably about June
1999], I hid in the trees and left. I traveled by finding
other Dinka who would guide me. I went through Greda
and found Dinka from my own clan who helped me. 
I arrived in Ad-Dha’ein in about September 1999. (Anti-
Slavery International, 2001. Reprinted by permission.)
Evidence about Slavery in Sudan
PRESS RELEASE—UNICEF hails new research on miss-
ing children in Sudan
NEW YORK, 28 May 2003—UNICEF praised new re-
search released today by the Rift Valley Institute that
shows that over 10,000 children and adults abducted by
militia groups in Sudan over the past 20 years are still
missing.
UNICEF said the new information would make the
ongoing search for those still missing “far more effec-
tive, far more meaningful, and far more hopeful.”
“This has been an absolutely vital initiative,” said
JoAnna van Gerpen, the UNICEF Representative in Su-
dan, speaking of the Rift Valley Institute’s efforts. “For
the ﬁrst time since 1983 the true extent of the abductions
has been documented. It’s a huge step in helping us
search for the missing children and women. It drives
home the fact that they are real people with real names
and stories—not just statistics.”
The children’s agency called on the Government of Su-
dan, as well as major international donors and friends of
Sudan’s peace process, to seize the new data as an oppor-
tunity to make headway in ﬁnding those still missing.
The ﬁndings are the result of over 18 months of work
by the Rift Valley Institute to identify the names and de-
tails of individuals who were abducted in southern Su-
dan over the last 20 years.
The number of children and adults whose families do
not know where they are—some 10,380 according to the
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
131

data released today by the Institute—demonstrates how
serious the problem of abduction remains, even though
the incidence of abduction has fallen over the past two
years, UNICEF said.
Since the formation of the Government of Sudan’s
Committee for the Eradication of the Abduction of
Women and Children in May 1999, UNICEF has sup-
ported work by the authorities and tribal communities
in western Sudan to ﬁnd abducted children and women
and to reunify them with their families.
Over the past four years, over 700 people have been
reunified with their families in southern and western
Sudan. The most recent family reuniﬁcations took place
in mid-May, when UNICEF and Save the Children UK
ﬂew 62 children across the cease-ﬁre lines to their fami-
lies in parts of northern Bahr al-Ghazal held by the Su-
dan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA).
However, UNICEF has become increasingly con-
cerned about lack of progress and wants to see signiﬁ-
cantly more effective work on abduction by the Su-
danese authorities. “In our view, empowering local
governments and genuine community leaders—people
who know their area and feel a responsibility toward
it—is essential to progress,” van Gerpen said. “Knowl-
edge of the names, clans and villages of nearly every
missing child is an extraordinary tool. It should now be
possible to search for every individual by name—al-
though it will be a massive task.”
UNICEF believes donors and friends of Sudan’s peace
process have a responsibility to keep the issue of abduc-
tion alive in their relations with both the Sudanese gov-
ernment and the SPLA. This means taking a rigorous
look at how effective action against abduction can best
be encouraged and implemented, setting benchmarks
for progress and providing financial support. “We are
grateful to our fellow humanitarian organizations for
the tremendous work they have done in carrying out
this research and giving these abducted women and
children their names back,” van Gerpen said. “We hope
it will be a major step toward giving them their lives
back.” (UNICEF)
132
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

Slavery Linked to Religious Practice
Evidence and Testimony about the Trokosi System in Ghana
Slavery can also be linked to religion, as in the case of the young
girls given by their families as slaves to local fetish priests in
southeastern Ghana, Togo, Benin, and southwestern Nigeria.
Trokosi is a religious system and a traditional form of “justice”
whereby young girls in Ghana are dedicated to a shrine—and its
priest—to atone for offenses usually committed by men in their
family, often rape. The girl, who must be a virgin, may herself be
the product of the rape and the slavery is seen as a way of aton-
ing the gods and society. In other cases, the crime can be trivial
but the girl often remains a fetish slave for the rest of her life,
cooking, cleaning, farming, and serving the priest sexually until
he frees her, usually after she has borne children. At that point,
the girl’s family must provide another slave to take her place.
Ghana’s constitution forbids slavery but the practice continues to
be justiﬁed at the village level on religious grounds. Since 2000, a
new law against Trokosi has been passed in Ghana, and the gov-
ernment has taken steps to end the practice.
Testimony about Trokosi
The following two testimonies involve women from the Volta re-
gion in eastern Ghana who have all been released by Interna-
tional Needs, a local NGO based in Accra that has joined forces
with other organizations to oppose the abuse of women and chil-
dren through harmful culture practices or religious beliefs.
Julie Daobadri, 24, was sent to the Tsaduma Trokosi shrine.
Mercy Senahe, 23 years old, spent 12 years at the Avakpe shrine.
She is now training to be a dressmaker. All three accounts were
published in the Anti-Slavery Reporter, July 1998.
Julie Daobadri. I was only seven when I was sent to the
shrine because my grandfather, who I had never met,
had allegedly stolen four cedis (about 1 pence) from a
Trokosi slave. I was taken to the shrine to prevent my
family being killed. Between the age of 10 and 12, I la-
bored in the ﬁelds for the priest. Then the priest started
to sexually abuse me. If I refused his almost daily sexual
demands, was beaten mercilessly.
There was no food for me in the shrine. I was left in
tattered clothes and my parents, who promised to visit
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
133

me regularly with essential items, abandoned me. It
dawned on me that if I didn’t try and change the situa-
tion, I would die in slavery. So I escaped to a nearby vil-
lage where a young man made me pregnant. He ac-
cepted me into his house and fed and clothed me.
The priest sent young men after me and I was taken
back to the shrine where I was beaten until I collapsed. I
still have the scars that remind me of those evil days. I
wish I could erase those terrible years from my mind.
The young man was summoned to the shrine, ﬁned and
warned to stay away from me or die. At the age of 21, af-
ter more than 14 years in the shrine I escaped and
sought refuge at the International Needs Vocational
Training Center. 
Mercy Senahe. I was sent to the shrine when I was nine
years old because my grandmother stole a pair of ear-
rings. I was made to work from dawn until dusk in the
ﬁelds and when I came home there was no food for me to
eat. When I was 11, the priest made his ﬁrst attempt to
sleep with me. I refused and was beaten. The other girls in
the shrine told me it was going to keep happening, and if
I refused I would be beaten to death and so the next time
he tried I gave in. The suffering was too much so I tried to
escape to my parents but they wouldn’t accept me and
sent me back to the shrine. I couldn’t understand how my
parents could be so wicked. (Anti-Slavery Reporter, Anti-
Slavery International, London. Reprinted by permission.)
Evidence about Trokosi Slavery
“Liberating Ghanaian girls from ‘trokosi’”
Hundreds of families and guests came to Adidome,
Ghana, to celebrate with 128 women freed from years of
forced labor in the service of local priests. The women
were graduating from a vocational centre run by a local
non-governmental organization, International Needs
Ghana (ING), which helps women reclaim normal lives
in their communities.
“Changing centuries old customs and practices is not
easy,” said Fiaga Togbe Kwao, the chief of the Mepe Tra-
ditional Area in his address at the graduation ceremony.
134
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

He urged the crowd, gathered on 10 November 2001, to
support efforts to raise the status of women throughout
Ghanaian society.
The women at the vocational centre had all been
taken to serve as trokosi, literally “wife of the gods” in
the local Ewe language. According to the customary
practice in Ghana’s Volta region, which has lasted some
300 years, if someone commits a serious crime or social
infraction, traditional leaders order that a young girl
from that family be sent to the shrine as a form of atone-
ment. She is expected to serve the priest for three to ﬁve
years, after which the family might redeem her.
The practice, however, has commonly resulted in ex-
ploitation and sexual abuse of the young girls. Ms. Dora
Galley, now 22 years old and one of the women who
learned hairdressing skills at the vocational centre,
spent seven years in a shrine. She says she was com-
pelled by the priest to work on the shrine’s farm from
morning until evening without any payment or food.
“I had to cut down trees and uproot tree stumps to
burn into charcoal to sell and make some money to take
care of myself,” she says. “I did not have the right to take
crops from the farm unless the priest allowed me to. Oc-
casionally my parents sent me some food, but that was
kept in the priest’s room and I had to request it any time
I needed some. I was forced to have sex with the priest as
one of the rituals in the shrine, but luckily I did not get
pregnant.”
Ms. Patience Akope, now 31, tells a similar story. She
spent 21 years at a shrine and has one 15-year-old child.
“The priest did not allow me to visit the clinic for prena-
tal care or go to the hospital,” she explains. “Through-
out the pregnancy, I had to fend for myself.”
Trokosi is also practiced in Benin, Nigeria and Togo,
but most information on it comes from Ghana. Since its
inception, the ING has liberated and rehabilitated 2,800
trokosi women and children, although thousands more
are thought to exist.
All the graduates in Adidome spent between 6 months
and 3 years in the ING’s vocational centre. They were
taught skills such as batik, tie dyeing, soap and pomade
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
135

making, hairdressing and baking, which will be valu-
able as they try to build a new, independent life.
In June 2001, the ING received US$50,000 from the
UN Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) to im-
prove its anti-trokosi programs, including vocational
centers, psychological counseling, schools for trokosi
children, and campaigns to educate people on laws and
activities aimed at changing trokosi practices.
Ms. Florence Butegwa, UNIFEM’s regional program
coordinator in Lagos, Nigeria, notes that trokosi is just
one kind of abuse against women, among many around
the world. In other places, she told Africa Recovery, it
might be widow burning, female genital mutilation or
physical assault by family members. “Women’s rights
abuses are not unique to Africa,” she says. Nevertheless,
when viewed as “violations of the rights of women,”
practices such as trokosi are simply unacceptable.
Ms. Akope is adamant: “The practice of trokosi is a
crime and it should be stopped completely. Human be-
ings are not animals to be sacrificed. The government
should move quickly to arrest and jail those who are still
perpetuating this evil and dehumanizing practice of
keeping and abusing young innocent girls in the
shrine.”
Laws are not enough
Members of the ING and other activists in Ghana
have influenced the government to outlaw the trokosi
practice. In 1998, the Ghanaian parliament passed a law
banning all forms of ritualized forced labor.
In early 2001, President John Agyekum Kufuor, com-
menting on the practice of trokosi, declared, “Girls
should go to school, not to a shrine.” He pledged to en-
force the law. So far, however, no priest or family mem-
ber has been jailed for continuing the practice.
Ending behaviour that is embedded in tradition is
not simple. Cultural practices “die hard,” Mr. Wisdom
Mensah, the ING project coordinator, told Africa Recov-
ery. In October 2001, he noted, the ING held a seminar
for police ofﬁcers in the Volta region. A majority of par-
ticipants said they were not familiar with trokosi and
were not aware of the law against it. The ING’s focus,
he explained, is to sensitize people about trokosi, aim-
136
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

ing at its gradual elimination. Legislation alone cannot
do that.
Ms. Butegwa is similarly critical of only “criminaliz-
ing the practice without understanding why the practice
continues to exist.” As a result, she says, trokosi may be
perpetuated “in another form or underground.”
Some local groups have accused the ING of trying to
destroy traditional culture. “We are not against our cul-
ture,” Mr. Mensah explains. “We are against servitude,
slavery and child labor.”
In response to accusations that his group is attacking
the constitutional right of freedom of religion, he an-
swers: “Your freedom ends where someone else’s free-
dom begins. If you have a religion, a belief system or a
traditional practice that enslaves people, puts them in
servitude and reduces their dignity, then you violate our
national constitution.”
Because of his work, Mr. Mensah has received death
threats. But he is undeterred. “It’s worth devoting one’s
life to the cause of women.” (Nirit Ben-Ari, Africa Re-
covery, United Nations, January 31, 2004)
Forced Labor
Much of what we call slavery also goes by the name forced labor.
In part, this is because one part of the United Nations, the Inter-
national Labor Organization, is charged with investigating and
combating forced labor. The term originally referred to the practice
of governments enslaving their own citizens or others, but has
now broadened to include other types of slavery. The evidence
presented here looks ﬁrst at the ongoing situation of forced labor
in Burma, and then at a recent report on forced labor in the
United States.
In Burma, tens of thousands of men, women, and children
are used as laborers or bearers in military campaigns against in-
digenous people or on government construction projects. They
are forced to clear landmines from the roads, build military
camps, and act as porters for the army. Here violence is used to
enslave people whom the regime wishes to punish or eliminate
for the economic beneﬁt of the state. When a state is democratic
and just and an individual commits a crime with knowledge of
possible imprisonment, then they have taken on the risk of incar-
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
137

ceration of their own free will. If, however, a state is neither dem-
ocratic nor just, then incarceration may well be enforced enslave-
ment, often for political ends.
Testimony and Evidence about Forced Labor in Burma
EarthRights International published a report, “Entrenched: An
Investigative Report on the Systematic Use of Forced Labor by
the Burmese Army in a Rural Area,” in 2003. The report detailed
the use of torture and rape by the military in their exploitation of
forced labor. From the report:
Torture. Interviews describe physical violence and torture, in-
cluding kicking, punching, and beating. Men were restrained
while beaten either by having their hands tied or by being buried
in a hole. One village head sent a letter of complaint to a higher-
ranking ofﬁcer about the treatment that the villagers receive from
the soldiers. The letter angered the ofﬁcer, who while drinking in-
ﬂicted brutal punishment:
They [soldiers] stayed in one of the village farms. They
took anything they wanted from the hut. The headman
was so angry at this column that he wrote a letter to the
[Major]. Another village headman took the letter to send
to the Major. When the Major read the letter he beat this
headman. The major tied him up and beat him saying,
“All of you headmen are the same.” He tied him under a
coconut tree and slapped his face until he was uncon-
scious. The villagers wanted to help him but they were
afraid of [the Major] because he was drinking a lot of al-
cohol. At four in the morning a [local] man cut him free
and told him to run away because everyone thought
that the Major would kill him in the morning. He went
to the hospital in [nearby town], and stayed there for
one week. He had to pay 6,000 kyat for an injection and
tablets. The village had to give one goat to the soldiers
as a punishment for letting him run away. 
One head woman explained that men beg not to be headmen
so that they can avoid insults and beatings:
Last year [2001], Commander [name withheld] killed
four villagers that he didn’t trust in a certain village. In
138
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

August 2001, Captain [name withheld] arrested one
old man in my village, age 60, and beat him up. When
they let him go he started walking away but some sol-
diers called him back. He was old and deaf, so he
didn’t hear and kept walking. One soldier ran to him
and shot a carbine gun very close to his ear. He fell
down unconscious.
Sexual Harassment and Violence. Interviewees outline a general
pattern of sexual harassment that occurs while women perform
road watch duty. Women and girls are often subjected to fondling
and rude remarks. Hence, villagers try their best to send men for
this job.
[A] soldier came while two women were watching the
road, and he grabbed one woman’s hand and was
touching her and saying rude things. I saw this and
other people learned about this so families are afraid to
send girls to watch the road. (EarthRights International
2003)
Three interviews detail specific incidents of sexual harass-
ment by soldiers. Two cases of gang rape by the military are doc-
umented through eyewitness accounts. According to one army
deserter, the same soldiers presumably raped three more women:
Then I heard a lot of noise from one house. There were
some women screaming and crying. Two women came
out of the house. Two soldiers started raping them. I
knew the soldiers; they were [names redacted]. I saw
this with my own eyes from about twenty yards away.
There were three other women in the house with five
more soldiers, and there was a lot of shouting and cry-
ing inside the house. After the two soldiers outside let
the two women go, ﬁve soldiers and three women came
out of the house and all the women ran past me into the
jungle. The men were laughing and saying, “oh how
nice” after the women. They also stole some necklaces
from the house. We stayed in that village for two weeks.
We killed all the pigs in the village and dried the meat.
As we left, we burned down the whole village. (Earth-
Rights International 2003)
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
139

Evidence of Forced Labor in the United States
In 2004, Free the Slaves and the Human Rights Center at the Uni-
versity of California–Berkeley released the report “Hidden
Slaves: Forced Labor in the United States.” This was the ﬁrst re-
port to examine the extent of slavery and forced labor in modern
America.
Hidden Slaves: Forced Labor in the United States (Excerpts)
INTRODUCTION
Migrant-Camp Operators Face Forced Labor Charges
The New York Times, June 21, 2002
Takoma Park Couple Enslaved Woman
The Washington Post, June 10, 2003
Slavery in Florida’s Citrus Groves
The Miami Herald, Nov. 21, 2002
“Coyotes” Offer Evil Deal: Hondurans Forced into
Prostitution
The Washington Times, July 23, 2002
For most Americans the occasional newspaper headline is the
only indication that forced labor exists in the United States. Each
year forced labor generates millions of dollars for criminals who
prey on the most vulnerable—the poor, the uneducated, and the
impoverished immigrant seeking a better life. Held as captives,
victims of forced labor toil in slavelike conditions for months
and even years with little or no contact with the outside world.
Those who survive enslavement face enormous challenges as
they struggle to regain control over their shattered lives. Forced
labor is a serious and pervasive problem in the United States for
four reasons: it is hidden, it is inhumane, it is widespread, and it is
criminal.
• Forced labor is hidden. Each year thousands of men,
women, and children are trafficked into the United
States and forced to work without pay in deplorable
conditions. Most of them are rarely seen in public
places. Hidden from view, they toil in sweatshops,
brothels, farms, and private homes. To prevent them
from escaping, their captors confiscate their identifica-
tion documents, forbid them from leaving their work-
140
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

places or contacting their families, threaten them with
arrest and deportation, and restrict their access to the
surrounding community.
• Forced labor is inhumane. Victims of forced labor have
been tortured, raped, assaulted, and murdered. They
have been held in absolute control by their captors and
stripped of their dignity. Some have been subjected to
forced abortion, dangerous working conditions, poor
nutrition, and humiliation. Some have died during their
enslavement. Others have been physically or psycholog-
ically scarred for life. Once freed, many will suffer from
a host of health-related problems, including repetitive
stress injury, chronic back pain, visual and respiratory
illnesses, sexually transmitted diseases, and depression.
• Forced labor is widespread. Forced labor exists in ninety
cities across the United States. It is practiced in a wide
range of industrial sectors, including domestic service,
the sex industry, food service, factory production, and
agriculture. In the last ﬁve years alone the press has re-
ported 131 cases of forced labor in the United States in-
volving 19,254 men, women, and children from a wide
range of ethnic and racial groups. Of these 131 cases of
forced labor cited in the article, 105 listed the number or
the estimated number of persons who had been found in
a situation of forced labor. Although many victims are im-
migrants, some are U.S. residents or citizens.
• Forced labor is criminal. Forced labor is universally con-
demned and outlawed. Its practice in the United States
violates a host of laws including indentured servitude,
money laundering, and tax evasion. Yet criminals ﬁnd it a
highly proﬁtable and lucrative enterprise. Their workers
are forced to be docile, and when problems arise, “em-
ployers” know they can rein workers in with threats and
physical violence. Criminals also have learned that the
odds are good that they will never be held accountable in
a court of law.
Geographical Distribution of Victims
Our data suggest that forced labor operations have existed in at
least ninety U.S. cities over the past ﬁve years. This ﬁgure was de-
rived from a press survey of 131 cases of forced labor and a tele-
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
141

phone survey of forty-nine service providers across the United
States. The press survey located cases of forced labor in sixty-four
cities within the United States and its territories of Saipan and
Guam, while service providers reported forced labor in thirty-
eight cities in seventeen states, with twelve cities appearing in
both surveys. The survey of service providers also revealed that
the length of time victims were held in forced labor ranged from
a few weeks to more than twenty years, with the majority of cases
lasting between two and ﬁve years.
Our data also suggest that forced labor operations are con-
centrated in the states of California, Florida, New York, and
Texas—all of which are transit routes for international travelers.
Cities where reported forced labor occurred also tended to be in
states with large populations and sizable immigrant communities.
Our data is consistent with ﬁndings of the U.S. government. The
U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) reports that in 2003, the largest
concentrations of survivors of trafﬁcking who received federal as-
sistance resided in California, Oklahoma, Texas, and New York. In
2002, the DOJ reports that survivors of trafﬁcking who received
federal assistance resided in Texas (31 percent), Florida (19 per-
cent), and California (14 percent) (U.S. Department of Justice
2003). Note that these concentrations reflect where survivors
resided at the time they received federal assistance and does not
necessarily reﬂect where the forced labor operations occurred.
Enslavement for 
Commercial Sexual Exploitation
Women, young girls, and young boys are held in slavery and
forced into prostitution for the ﬁnancial gain of others in brothels
in the United States, Europe, and many developing countries
such as Thailand and the Philippines. The following report
touches on the enslavement of young American women into
prostitution.
A Teenage Prostitution Ring in Detroit, Michigan
Not all cases of forced labor involve undocumented immigrants.
In January 2003, a multistate ring of forced prostitution involving
young Midwestern women and girls, some as young as thirteen
years old, was uncovered when a seventeen-year-old girl pur-
sued by a group of men and women burst into a store in a De-
troit, Michigan, suburban strip mall and pleaded with a security
guard to help her. Seeing that the girl was terriﬁed and battered,
142
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

the guard evicted the group of pursuers from the store and took
her to the police (Schmitt and Hackney 2003).
The teenager told authorities that a man and a woman had
abducted her while she was waiting at a bus stop in downtown
Cleveland, Ohio. Her captors drove her to Detroit, where she was
held in a house with other female captives and forced to have sex
with male visitors (Schmitt and Hackney 2003). The captives
were always escorted around the house, even to the bathroom,
and the older women kept the younger ones in line by threaten-
ing and sometimes beating them. Each day the girls were given a
new assignment. Some would go to malls in the metro Detroit
area to sell jewelry and trinkets, others would be forced to dance
and strip for private parties and to have sex with men who vis-
ited the Detroit house (Schmitt and Hackney 2003).
The girls’ captors “did that punishment-reward thing,” a po-
lice investigator said. “They would get their nails and hair done. If
they stepped out of line, they got beat down. Some of the senior
women acted as enforcers” (Schmitt and Hackney 2003). In fact,
the young woman escaped when she and several other young
women were taken to the mall to get their hair done and to buy
clothes. When the group stopped at the mall to sell some jewelry,
she seized the opportunity and ran (Hackney 2003a). The young
woman’s mother remarked, “The whole thing is unreal—it’s like
slavery. They lure and coerce these girls into doing whatever they
want. It’s a sick game they are playing with our children” (Hack-
ney 2003a). Once in police custody, the young woman led the po-
lice to the house where they arrested Henry Davis, 32, otherwise
known as “Chicago,” “Tony,” or “Daddy,” the alleged leader of
the ring, and Jamal Rivers, 17. They were charged with multiple
felonies, including ﬁrst-degree criminal sexual conduct, kidnap-
ping, and transporting women for prostitution (Hackney 2003c).
On further investigation, the police discovered that Davis had
been operating a forced prostitution ring as early as 1995 by kid-
napping teenage girls and transporting them to cities throughout
the Midwestern United States (Schmitt 2003; Hackney 2003b). The
case never went to trial. In August 2003, Davis entered into a plea
agreement and was sentenced to serve forty years in prison
(Hackney 2003d). Despite his detention and his plea agreement,
most of the teenagers reported being so afraid of Davis that they
did not attend his formal sentencing hearing. Some of Davis’s vic-
tims say they now sleep with nightlights on or crawl into bed with
their mothers. Others say they are experiencing emotional prob-
lems. One young woman, who was raped repeatedly at the De-
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
143

troit house, is pregnant and believes she is carrying Davis’s child.
“The devastation [Davis] has brought on these young women is
just immeasurable,” the local prosecutor said (Hackney 2003d).
Evidence of Enslavement for Sexual Exploitation in Thailand
Thailand is well-known as a destination for sex tourism, which ex-
ploits large numbers of women and children. What is less known
is the widespread use of prostitutes by working-class Thai men,
and the way that young women are enslaved to work in the
working-class brothels. The following is an excerpt that details
the economics of a brothel using enslaved prostitutes in a provin-
cial city in Thailand:
Forced prostitution is a great business. The overheads
are low, the turnover high, and the proﬁts immense. In
this research I have tried to detail for the ﬁrst time the
business side of this form of slavery and to expose the
scale of exploitation and its rewards. It is far, far differ-
ent from the capital intensive slavery of the past which
required long-term investments and made solid but
small proﬁts. The disposability of the women, the spe-
cial profits to be made from children, all ensure a low
risk, high return enterprise. For all its dilapidation and
ﬁlth the brothel is a highly efﬁcient machine that in de-
stroying young girls turns them into gold.
To set up a brothel requires a relatively small outlay.
About 80,000 baht ($3,200) will buy all the furniture,
equipment, and fixtures that are needed. The building
itself will be rented for anywhere from 4,000 to 15,000
baht per month ($160 to $600). In addition to the prosti-
tutes the brothels need a pimp (who often has a helper),
a cashier/book-keeper, and sometimes employs a cook
as well. Pimps will get from 5000 to 10,000 baht per
month in salary ($200 to $400), cashiers about 7000 baht
($280) and the cook about 5000 baht ($200) or less. For
electricity and other utilities about 2000 baht ($80) is
needed each month. Beer and whisky must be bought
which is re-sold to clients. This leaves only two other
outgoings—food and bribes.
Feeding a prostitute costs 50 to 80 baht per day ($1.50
to $3.20). Slaveholders do not skimp on food since men
want healthy looking girls with full figures. Healthy
144
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

looks are important in a country suffering an HIV epi-
demic, and young healthy girls are thought to be the
safest. Bribes are not exorbitant or unpredictable, in
most brothels a policeman stops by once a day to pick
up 200 to 400 baht ($8–$16), a monthly expenditure of
about 6,000 baht ($240) which is topped up by giving
the policeman a girl for an hour if he seems interested.
The police are interested in the stability of the brothels: a
short side-street generates $32,000 to $64,000 each year
in relatively effortless income. The higher priced mas-
sage parlors and night-clubs pay much larger bribes and
will usually require a significant start-up payment as
well. Bribe income is the key reason that senior police
officials are happy to buy their positions and compete
for the most lucrative.
Income far exceeds expenses. Each of the twenty girls
makes about 125 baht ($5) for the brothel with each client
she has, and each day she has between ten and eighteen
clients, making 1250 to 2250 baht ($48 to $104). A single
day’s return is 25,000 to 45,000 baht ($1000 to $1800) just
on sex. And as can be seen from the table below, there are
a number of other ways for the brothel to turn a penny.
Monthly Income and Expenditure (in Baht) 
for the Always Prospering Brothel
Outgoings (per month)
Income (per month)
Rent 5,000
Commercial sex* 1,050,000
Utilities and bills 2,000
Rent paid by prostitutes 600,000
Food and drink 45,000
Sale of condoms 70,000
Pimp’s salary 7,000
Sale of drinks 672,000
Cashier 7,000
Virgin premium 50,000
Cook 5,000
“Interest” on debt-bond 15,000
Bribes 6,000
Payments to taxis and 
the like 12,000
Beer and whisky 168,000
Total Outgoings 257,000
Total Income 2,457,000
(in US dollars $10,280)
Monthly Proﬁt 2,200,000 (in U.S. dollars $88,000)
* Average 14 clients per day at 125 baht per client for 20 prostitutes for
30 days
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
145

The amount which is made on drinks, mostly the sale
of beer and whisky, is difﬁcult to measure. In the table
above the half a million baht is a conservative estimate
based on each client buying a single beer, which has
been bought by the brothel for 20 baht and sold for 80
baht. The prostitute’s rent averages 30,000 baht per
month for their rooms, and if half the girls are repaying
a debt-bond the amount made by the brothel each
month on the ‘interest’ would be at least 15,000 baht.
The sale of condoms is pure profit. Condoms are pro-
vided free of charge to brothels by the Ministry of
Health in an attempt to slow the spread of HIV. Clients
are charged 10 baht for a condom and most clients are
required to use one. Siri explained that she got through
three to four boxes of condoms each month, there are
100 condoms in each box.
The income shown as the virgin premium requires
some explanation. Some customers, especially Chinese
and Sino-Thais, are willing to pay very large amounts to
have sex with a virgin. There are two reasons for this.
The ﬁrst is the ancient Chinese belief that sex with a vir-
gin will reawaken sexual virility and prolong life. Ac-
cording to this belief, a girl’s virginity is a strong source
of yang (or coolness) and it quenches and slows the yin
(or heat) of the ageing process. Wealthy Chinese and
Sino-Thais (as well as Chinese sex tourists from Taiwan,
Singapore, Malaysia, and Hong Kong) will try to have
sex with virgins as regularly as possible and will pay
well for the opportunity. When a new girl is brought to
the brothel she will not be placed out in the selection
room with the other prostitutes, but kept back in an-
other room, the hong bud boree sut, the ‘room to unveil
virgins.’ Here she will be displayed, possibly with other
children, and her price will be negotiated with the pimp.
To deﬂower a virgin these men pay between 5,000 and
50,000 baht ($200 to $2,000). Deflowering often takes
place away from the brothel in a hotel room rented for
the occasion. The pimp or his assistant will often attend
as well since it is usually necessary to beat the girl into
submission.
The second reason the brothel can make a virgin pre-
mium is the general fear of HIV/AIDS. While Thai men
146
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

or other non-Chinese customers do not hold the same
beliefs about yin and yang, they do fear HIV infection. It
is assumed that virgins cannot carry the virus, and even
after a girl has lost her virginity, she can be sold at a
higher price as pure or fresh. One Burmese girl reported
being sold as a virgin to four different clients. The
younger the girl, or the younger looking she is, the
higher her price can be, as in Siri’s case. The premium
might also be paid to a brothel by another, higher class,
commercial sex business. Special ‘Members Clubs’ or
massage parlors might take an order from a customer
for a virgin, a pure girl, or a child. If the brothel doesn’t
have a suitable young girl on hand, it might arrange
with a broker for one to be recruited, or if time is press-
ing, kidnapped. The more expensive establishments
don’t normally want to get involved in procurement
and are willing to pay the brothels to find the young
girls. Once used in this way, the girl is put to work with
the other prostitutes in the brothel to feed the normal
proﬁt stream.
This profit stream makes sex slavery very lucrative.
The Always Prospering Brothel nets something like
26,400,000 baht a year ($1,056,000)—a return of 856% on
outgoings. Key to this level of proﬁt is the low cost of
each girl. A new girl, at a cost of 100,000 baht, requires a
capital outlay of less than 5% of one month’s proﬁt. Just
counting the sale of her body and the rent she must pay,
a brothel recovers the cost of buying a girl within two or
three months. Within the sex industry it is the slave-
holder that makes the highest proﬁts. Voluntary prosti-
tutes in night-clubs and massage parlors charge higher
prices, but have only three to ﬁve clients a day. Escort
girls may have only one client a night. Voluntary sex
workers also keep a much larger proportion of the
money they make, and exercise some discretion over
which clients they will take. By contrast, for the slave-
holder, total control of the prostitute, over the volume of
clients she must take, over the money she makes, means
vast proﬁts. There is no good estimate of the part the sex
industry plays in the Thai economy, and the total num-
ber of sex workers is hotly debated. But if we look just at
the estimated 35,000 young women held in debt
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
147

bondage, the annual proﬁts they generate are enormous.
If their brothels follow the same scheme as the Always
Prospering, the annual proﬁt made on these girls is over
46 billion baht ($1.84 billion). There is one other cost to
be laid against this profit, the price the girls pay with
their bodies, minds, and health. (Bales 1999; © The
Trustees of the University of California. Reprinted by
permission.)
Testimony about Sexual Slavery in Cambodia 
A member of the Sex Workers Union of Cambodia gave the fol-
lowing speech, published in the local press, to the First National
Conference on Gender and Development in Cambodia, held in
Phnom Penh in September 1999.
I came here today as a woman, a Khmer woman. I came
here today to tell you my story, in the hope that after
you listen to me you can understand my situation and
the situation of thousands of Khmer women and other
women around the world.
It is very difﬁcult for me to come here and speak to
you; but I am doing this because I want you to listen, to
me the real person; and I want you to remember me and
what I say to you today when you are in your offices
talking about policies and strategies that affect me and
my sisters.
I want you to remember we are not “problems,” we
are not animals, we are not viruses, we are not garbage.
We are ﬂesh, skin and bones, we have a heart, and we
have feelings, we are a sister to someone, a daughter, a
granddaughter. We are people, we are women and we
want to be treated with respect, dignity and we want
rights like the rest of you enjoy.
I was trafﬁcked, I was raped, beaten, and forced to ac-
cept men. I was humiliated and forced to be an object so
men, yes men, could take their pleasure, I brought proﬁt
to many and brought pleasure to others. And for myself
I brought shame, pain and humiliation.
But worst of all I receive demeaning comments from
you: you discriminate against me, you give yourselves a
148
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

job because of me and you are busy thinking about the
best way to protect the community from me.
The police come to Toul Kork [an area where prostitu-
tion is common] almost every day. They always have a
reason to come, but they come more frequently before
festivals like Pchum Ben, because we are an easy target
to extract money from.
In a public forum the chief of these police stands up
and states “We do not arrest the girls”: lies and more
lies. They arrest us and take our money, our jewelry,
sometimes even our few possessions we have in our
room like our bed covers.
If we cannot pay then they detain us for a day or two,
they give us no water. When they are convinced we sim-
ply have no money to pay they take us to another
brothel and sell us to a new maebon (pimp), usually for
US$100 for one girl. Then we become indebted once
again and have to pay off that debt to the new maebon.
This is trafﬁcking. The police, yes, the police sell us for
another cycle of slavery. Do you think it is in their inter-
ests to see my occupation decriminalized? Of course
not: then they lose their share of the money.
In one day we pay almost 15,000 riel in bribes to the
district police, to the municipal authorities and the local
authorities. Then another group of police come and arrest
us. If we do not run and hide we are re-sold to slavery.
Your solution is to ask these people to protect us. Think
again. They live off our blood. Money is too important to
everyone, money and more money. It is not enough to
eat: people demand more because they want nice things.
I come from a poor family; they sent me to study at a
cultural school in Phnom Penh. I was living with a fam-
ily but I could not contribute to my living, so they
helped me ﬁnd a job in a nearby hotel washing dishes.
This hotel had many sex workers. But I just washed
dishes and went to school.
One night a man followed me when I was on my way
home and raped me. I was only 17 years of age. You can-
not imagine how I felt and what impact this had on me.
But after that, I was lured to becoming a sex worker un-
der false promises.
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
149

I was sent to Stung Treng; I was beaten when I refused
to accept men. Shortly after I was taken to Stung Treng a
man came to pay for me to go with him. He paid my
maebon.
He took me to the pig slaughter house where he
worked and locked me in a dirty smelly cell. Then he
came back with six other men. They all, one by one,
raped me; one man raped me twice. After a whole night
of gang rape I was faint with pain.
When the morning came I heard the workers prepar-
ing to start their work. I heard the pigs being pushed
into the pens, they were screaming. I knew what that
feeling was like: I was no better than the pigs to these
men; they could have killed me. Something inside me
did die, and I will never be the same.
I am 24 years old and my life has been like this since
1993. I did not know the Khmer Rouge years but I have
heard the stories of suffering. People say they were
slaves.
Compared to my life for the last ﬁve years I think I and
my sisters have suffered and are suffering more than you
have. I know starvation, I know slavery, I know being
forced to work all day. But I also know physical violation
and torture every day, I know discrimination and hatred
from my country-people, I know not being wanted and
accepted from my society, the society that put me in this
condition. I know fear, I feel it every day, even now that I
dare speak my life is in danger.
This is a crime, but no one is punished. I fought the
Khmer Rouge [the communist dictatorship that con-
trolled Cambodia in the past], I was a soldier fighting
to protect you from the Khmer Rouge and risking my
life. I fought for the freedom of the Cambodian people,
this is what the commander told us we were to do and
I was proud I was fighting for freedom. I fought for
your freedom—only to become enslaved and abused
by you.
After all these years I now work as a sex worker. I also
run a union to unite sex workers to ﬁght for basic rights
and for freedom. We bring our voices to forums like this
to educate people like you, with the hope you can learn
from us. Many of my sisters are scared to join our strug-
150
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

gle because they live in constant fear of abuse and
threats.
Some of you think that I am bad because I choose to
remain a sex worker. My answer to those people is: I
think your society, my society, my motherland Cambo-
dia, is bad because it does not give girls like me choices;
choices that I see are better for me.
I think it is bad that my country allows men to rape
young women like me and my sisters and go unpun-
ished. I think it is bad that my society lets men seek and
demand the services of women like me. I think it is
criminal that we are enslaved to make money for the
powerful.
I think it is bad that my family are so poor and getting
poorer because they can not survive as farmers with lit-
tle resources which are getting smaller because more
powerful people move them off their land.
I think it is bad the police treat me and my sisters like
we are criminals but those who exploit us and take our
dignity, our money and sometimes our lives live in free-
dom, enjoying their lives with their families. Because
why? Because they have a powerful relative, because
they have money.
Is this right? Is this justice? My sisters and I we do not
create the demand, we are the objects; the demand
comes from the men, the men come to us. We are
cheated, deceived, trafﬁcked, humiliated and tortured.
Why? Because men want us and we bring money to the
powerful. But we are the powerless.
You give us AIDS; when we are no longer proﬁtable
you leave us to die, but we do not die in peace: you
point your ﬁnger and you blame us. You, the develop-
ment organizations, give us condoms and teach us all
the time about AIDS. We do not want your words, we
do not want your judgment, we do not want you to tell
us what is better for us. We know about AIDS; we watch
our sisters die from the disease.
Ask us if we have the power to demand condom use
from our clients. Look at me: you see a woman, but my
boss sees dollars. An extra payment to my boss and the
client does not wear a condom. If I protest I receive a
beating. If I die tomorrow no one cares: there are many
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
151

other girls who will be tricked and trafficked like me,
because we feed many people.
I do not want to go to your shelter and learn to sew so
you can get me work in a factory. This is not what I
want. If I tell you that you will call me a prostitute. But
those words are easy for you because you have easy so-
lutions to difﬁcult problems you do not understand, and
you do not understand because you do not listen.
My life has become this way now; for me there is no
turning back, so let me continue to practice my occupa-
tion, but recognize my occupation and give me my
rights, so I am protected and I can have power to de-
mand justice. (The Phnom Penh Post, September 17–30,
1999)
Domestic Slavery
Enslaved domestic workers have escaped or been freed from rich
households in the United States, United Kingdom, and France,
among other countries. This is one of the most common types of
slavery around the world. Children are especially vulnerable to
being made domestic slaves. In some parts of the Caribbean and
West Africa, children are given or sold into domestic service, and
organizations have grown up to free them and provide them with
an education. In Haiti and the Dominican Republic, these chil-
dren are called restavecs. Ownership is not asserted as such, but
strict control, usually enforced by violence, is used. The domestic
services performed by the child provide a good return on the up-
keep costs. When slavery is discovered in the United States, it is
often domestic slavery.
Evidence of Domestic Slavery in the United States
It is just like a ﬁsherman going to ﬁsh. You know, he has
his bait, he has his rod and also the hook itself. Now be-
fore he gets a ﬁsh, you know, he must put the bait. And
that’s exactly what happened, if he don’t put the bait, he
can’t get a fish. So they tell the parents a lovely story,
you know, what they will encounter when they come to
the United States. But behold, when they get into the
United States the picture is completely different, so any-
152
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

way they’re just using very lovely stories to entice the
parents to get the children into the United States.
—Louis
Louis works for the phone company. He also frees slaves.
When his family got together for the Thanksgiving holiday in
1999, Louis did what everyone does—he started lining up all the
relatives and taking pictures. As he snapped away he noticed
something strange. In the large group of family and friends one
teenage girl always tried to hide when he took a picture.
And I asked myself, you know, what’s wrong with the
young lady? At first I asked her, where do you come
from? She told me she was visiting from Indiana. That
is, she was staying with my cousin there. But something
stuck in my mind.
Louis had visited his cousin in Indiana several times and
didn’t remember ever meeting this young woman. Driving home
from the party he asked his wife what she knew about the girl.
His wife had heard that the girl had run away from her family,
eloped actually, and now was hiding with their cousin. Yet this
was a little odd as well, because the girl was obviously not from
the same ethnic group as his family.
Louis came to the United States from Cameroon in West
Africa in 1985, and in time became a U.S. citizen. With a degree in
management from an American university he holds down a good
job, and serves as an elder in his Presbyterian church. Living in
the suburbs in Virginia, Louis and his family were pursuing noth-
ing more and nothing less than the middle class dream of stabil-
ity and security. Now in his late forties he found himself puzzled
by the sight of this strange and troubled girl in the middle of his
family’s Thanksgiving holiday. Things just weren’t adding up, so
a few days later he drove over to visit his cousins where the
young woman was staying.
And then she began to tell me the story. And I felt so bad
about it . . . I mean everyone has a human feeling, if you
hear a story which is so terrible, you are moved, being
human. So I felt like this is wrong and she began to tell
me the stories. I began to put down in writing the stories
she told me and probably, if you read the whole report
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
153

that I wrote, you would come to the conclusion that
something was really, really wrong.
The more Louis heard, the more sickened he became. There
was no elopement in this girl’s past. Confused, isolated, still in
shock, she painfully recounted years of slavery in the suburbs of
Washington, DC.
Her name was Deborah [name changed]. Back in Cameroon,
at the age of fourteen, she had just ﬁnished school for the sum-
mer vacation when a friend of her aunt stopped by her parent’s
house. This woman explained that there was a Cameroonian fam-
ily in the United States that needed someone to help around the
house. In exchange, the family would help Deborah go to school
in America. It sounded like a great opportunity to Deborah and
to her parents. They talked it over carefully, and then agreed she
could go right away since the summer vacation had just begun.
That would give Deborah time to settle in before starting school
in the United States. Away from her parents, Deborah was intro-
duced to the family she would be working for; they helped sort
out her passport, bought her air ticket, and escorted her through
customs and immigration when they reached the United States.
Everything was nice until they reached Deborah’s new home in
America. Then the trap slowly closed.
The husband and wife showed Deborah the jobs they
wanted her to do. Soon the jobs filled her day completely and
they rapidly took complete control of her life. Up at six in the
morning, Deborah would be working long past midnight. When
she began to question her treatment, the beatings began. “They
used to hit me,” Deborah told me, “I couldn’t go for three days
without them beating me up.” The smallest accident would lead
to violence. “Sometimes I might spill a drink on the ﬂoor by mis-
take, they would hit me for that,” she said. In a strange country,
locked up in a strange house far from home, Deborah was cut off
from help. If she tried to use the phone she was beaten, if she
tried to write anything it was taken away from her. “It was just
like she was lost in the middle of a forest,” said Louis, “she was
completely isolated.”
Under complete violent control, paid nothing, working all
hours, this fourteen-year-old schoolgirl had become a slave. The
promises to help her go to school in America were just the bait
used to hook her. In Cameroon her parents received no word
from her, but had occasional reassuring messages from the family
154
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

that had enslaved her. The beatings and constant verbal abuse
broke the will of this young girl for a time, and her life dissolved
into a blur of pain, exhaustion, work, denigration, and fear. Debo-
rah lived for another four years in this state of permanent ex-
ploitation.
Someday we may know what happened in these years, but
perhaps not. Deborah today is nervous and withdrawn, still suf-
fering from the trauma of her enslavement. Her mind has deeply
buried her memories. What we do know is that one day after she
had turned eighteen, the woman who controlled Deborah found
her trying to talk to a neighbor. Dragging her away, “she started
yelling at me, started cursing me,” Deborah told me, “and I
couldn’t take it any more, I just had to run away.” Later that day
she ran to the home of a friend of her “employer.” She pleaded
for help, but this woman called the family that had enslaved her.
When Deborah realized this she ran again, this time to a nearby
shopping mall. Her only hope was a Cameroonian man she had
met in her “employers’” home, he had seemed nice and she had
learned his phone number. Begging change from passersby to
make a phone call, she managed to leave a message for him, ask-
ing him to pick her up. Without a coat, in the cold October night,
she waited outside the mall, for she had nowhere else to go, no
other place to turn. Four hours later, at nearly 11 PM, the man
picked her up and took her home to his family. This man was
Louis’s cousin.
In safety, Deborah was still in limbo. The family she was
staying with simply did not know what to do with her, and she
feared that in time her “employers” would try to take her back.
Then came Thanksgiving and the meeting with Louis. As Louis
gently drew out Deborah’s story it shocked and saddened him:
I felt terrible, I mean, I felt really terrible, because I
couldn’t imagine, not even in my slightest imagination,
that in this day-and-age someone would treat some-
body’s child the way she was treated. It made me sick in
my stomach.
Soon Louis had taken Deborah to stay with his own family,
and as she opened up to him even more shocking facts came out.
It occurred to Louis to ask Deborah if she knew of any more girls
in the same situation. “Oh, yes,” she replied. Following up on
Deborah’s lead he found two more young women in slavery, and
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
155

through subterfuge and daring he liberated them. Linda had
been brought to the United States at seventeen and spent four
years as a domestic slave, Sally had been brought at age ﬁfteen
and spent three years in bondage. Now Louis had three young
women staying with his family, their care and support coming
from his own pocket. His first job, he decided, was to reassure
their families, so he took videos of all three, and made a trip to
Cameroon. When they saw the video, the girl’s families were
overjoyed:
They were very happy to see me, and especially the fact
that I took the video of their children, they were ex-
tremely happy, because even if they now saw what their
daughters had gone through, at least they had ﬁrst hand
information from their children. I felt good about it be-
cause it was like a conclusion to me that I had done the
right thing. I could see their faces and I could see that
they realized at least, that someone was concerned
about the lives of their children.
Sally’s family had been told that their daughter had died in
America. Their shock and joy are hard to imagine. Meanwhile
Louis was digging up the connections that had smuggled the
girls into the United States. He found a network that recruited
girls from poor families promising education and jobs. One
woman provided a “stepping stone,” a house where the girls
were taken after leaving their families and prepared for the trip
to America. Some of the respected members of the Cameroonian
community in the United States were involved and Louis began
to understand he was up against something big. (Bales, Kevin.
How We End Slavery. Forthcoming.)
Evidence of Domestic Slavery in Haiti
In Haiti, children as young as six are given into slavery as
restavecs. The term comes from the French “rester avec” meaning
“to stay with.” The Foyers Maurice Sixto (children’s refuge pro-
ject) grew out of a shelter for child domestic servants opened on
the outskirts of the capital Port-au-Prince in 1989. Such shelters
provide educational activities for children every afternoon. Those
involved in this issue will agree that child domestic servitude in
Haiti is a dominant institution whose roots go back to the time of
156
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

slavery. It exposes minors of both sexes to a form of bondage that
proﬁts the adults to whom they have been entrusted.
The total number of child domestic servants ﬂuctuates con-
stantly. They come from rural families facing great hardship.
They do not have the opportunity to go to school or acquire a
practical trade. They number between 200,000 and 300,000, which
is 14 percent of Haiti’s young population, 85 percent of whom are
young girls between six and eighteen years of age.
The restavec, as they are commonly called, are typically
treated like young slaves. They are used as beasts of burden to
perform various household tasks: cleaning, frequent trips to shop
at the market and to fetch water from the well, taking care of the
children at home, carrying rubbish and excrement produced by
people and animals in the house, etc. They are the ﬁrst members
of the house to get up in the morning and the last to go to bed at
night. For food, they are usually given the leftovers of the fam-
ily’s meals. According to a survey conducted by the Institut-
Psycho-Social de la Famille (IPSOFA) for UNICEF, 30 percent of
these children say they only receive one meal a day. All this for
little or no pay. One meal a day and the promise of being sent to
school are their only reward for the hard work, beatings, and hu-
miliating insults they suffer. (Contribution by Father Miguel of
the Foyers Maurice Sixto, Haiti, to the UN Economic and Social
Council Commission on Human Rights, Subcommission on Pre-
vention, Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, Working
Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, 23 Session, Geneva,
May 1998)
Child Labor and Slavery
Child labor becomes slavery in the officially recognized sense
when it involves debt bondage or the child is sold into prostitu-
tion or given into domestic service. The most vulnerable children,
as with adults, are those who come from indigenous and migrant
communities. The UN Convention on the Worst Forms of Child
Labor calls on countries to take swift and effective measures to
prevent the most damaging exploitation of children, including
child slavery, prostitution, and pornography. But how should
governments go about stopping child labor and child slavery?
When the United States began to act against child labor, the situa-
tion of some children was actually made worse.
Reports, Evidence, and Testimony
157

Experience shows that blanket policies of banning all child
labor led by rich countries does not work. At the beginning of
the 1990s, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa introduced a bill calling
for a ban on the import of any goods which were manufactured
wholly or in part by children under the age of fifteen. The U.S.
Child Labor Deterrence Bill has not yet become law. However,
while it was under discussion, 50,000 children in Bangladesh
lost their jobs as employers fired them rather than risk having
their products, mostly clothing, banned from the United States.
Desperate for money, many of these children took other even
more exploitative and abusive jobs in other industries or were
forced into prostitution. The Harkin Bill has since been over-
taken by the Sanders Amendment passed in Congress in 1997,
which bans import of bonded child labor products. It also pro-
vided funds for the UN Commission on Human Rights and for
the ILO for activities relating to child bonded labor. The Sanders
Amendment played a part in the following example:
Evidence of Child Slavery in India
Citing Child Labor, U.S. Stubs Out Bindi Beedis
At a time when the United States is set to revise its list
of Indian ﬁrms facing sanctions, one company has been
added to the taboo list—Ganesh Beedis—which stops
the company from marketing its hand-rolled, unﬁltered
cigarettes (beedi) in the US for reason that it employs
child labor.
The “detention” order came into effect last week fol-
lowing a feature on Tobacco Slaves in India on the CBS
television network exposing the use of child labor in In-
dia’s beedi industry.
The feature apparently included indentured children
working for slave wages and being exploited in the
Mangalore Ganesh beedi industry in Tamil Nadu (In-
dia). The ﬁlm showed plenty of raw footage of children
toiling for up to 12 hours in abject conditions.
US Customs Commissioner Raymond Kelly said that
it is morally, ethically and legally wrong to import
goods made with forced or bonded labor, especially the
forced labor of children, into the US.
The order against the company will continue pending
the ﬁnal results of an investigation. The agency however
158
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony

has been investigating allegations of forced child labor
in the beedi industry in India even before the feature
surfaced. The estimated value of all imported beedis, in-
cluding those made by Mangalore Ganesh in ﬁscal year
1999 was $1.28 million, up from $915,000 the year be-
fore, said Customs spokeswoman Layne Lathram.
Mangalore Ganesh Beedis spokesman Priya Das,
denying the charges of employing child labor for manu-
facturing beedis has threatened legal action against CBS.
Mr Das argues that “beedi rolling is a skilled or semi-
skilled job. A child cannot roll a beedi. It has to be rolled
by an adult.”
Mr Das also points out that beedi rolling work was
given on contract and the company checks the quality
when they are returned to roll. “Morally we ensure that
no such irregularity like employment of child labor
takes place,” he said. “Ever since the company began in
1940, there was no complaint about child labor,” he
added. (Child Labor News Service, December 1, 1999)
References
Bales, Kevin. Disposable People: New Salvery in the Gobal Economy. Berke-
ley: University of California Press, 1999.
BBC News, June 10, 2004, quoted at: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/
world/africa/3791713.stm.
Earth Rights International. “Entrenched: An Investigative Report on the
Systematic Use of Forced Labor by the Burmese Army in a Rural Area,”
2003.
Hackney, Suzette. (2003a). “Abducted Teen’s Mother Describes House of
Horrors,” Detroit Free Press, January 15, 2003.
Hackney, Suzette. (2003b). “Fourteen-year-old Tells of Terrors in Sex
Ring,” Detroit Free Press, January 16, 2003.
Hackney, Suzette. (2003c). “More Sex Ring Arrests Likely Today,” Detroit
Free Press, February 4, 2003c.
Hackney, Suzette. (2003d). “Man Sentenced in Sex-Ring Case,” Detroit
Free Press, September 16, 2003.
Schmitt, Ben, and Suzette Hackney. “Sex Ring Busted by Kidnapped
Girl’s Tip,” Detroit Free Press, January 15, 2003. 
References
159

160
Facts, Data, Evidence, and Testimony
Schmitt, Ben. “More Charges in Sex Ring,” Detroit Free Press, February
15, 2003.
U.S. Department of Justice, Report to Congress from Attorney General John
Ashcroft on U.S. Government Efforts to Combat Trafﬁcking in Persons in Fiscal
Year 2003, 9.

7
Directory of Organizations,
Associations, and Agencies 
S
ome of the organizations listed here are based outside the
United States. If you wish to contact any of the following or-
ganizations by telephone from the United States, ﬁrst dial the
international access code 011, then the country code, then the city
code, then the local phone number. To make the listings more
clear, I have put the country code in square brackets and the city
or area code in parentheses.
The ﬁrst two organizations listed are the two main antislav-
ery groups with a global approach; after that, intergovernmental
organizations are listed ﬁrst, then governmental organizations,
and ﬁnally nongovernmental organizations are listed according
to the region of the world where they are based.
Global Antislavery Groups
Free the Slaves
1012 14th St. NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (866) 324-FREE; (202) 638-1865
Fax: (202) 638-0599
E-mail: info@freetheslaves.net
Web site: www.freetheslaves.net
Free the Slaves is the main American organization working to
end slavery across the globe. Founded in 2000, Free the Slaves
161

collaborates with other antislavery organizations through fund-
ing and networking, raises public awareness of contemporary
slavery, promotes slave-free trade, aids policy makers in enforc-
ing and drafting new legislation to prevent slavery, and contin-
ues research to understand forms of slavery and devise ways to
eliminate it. The strategy this organization uses to target slavery
is based upon the idea that adequate access to basic needs re-
duces vulnerability of poor people to enslavement. Also employ-
ing more direct methods, Free the Slaves operates according to
the principles that:
• All people have the right to be free from any form of slav-
ery, and to assert that right
• All people who are or have been enslaved should have
the opportunity to realize their full potential
and seeking to:
• Create an inclusive and diverse movement, respecting the
dignity and views of all people involved in eradicating
slavery
• Base all our strategies on accurate research
• Support sustainable solutions, preventing adverse reper-
cussions for those we aim to assist
• Attain guidance and ideas from agencies around the
world that are carrying out local and regional antislavery
programs
Working in the ﬁrm belief that slavery can be eradicated in
this lifetime, Free the Slaves supports other organizations that in-
vestigate slavery and carry out rescue missions to free enslaved
children and workers as well as helps freed slaves to begin their
lives outside of slavery.
Publications: Free the Slaves publishes a monthly electronic
newsletter providing updates in the campaign/ﬁght against slav-
ery that is available at the Web site.
Web site: The Web site provides a wealth of information on
slavery, its history and evolution, and its relevance today in the
products we consume. The site also offers educational resources,
links to partner organizations, important antislavery and human
rights documents, and details on how to take action against slav-
ery. Updates regarding projects of partner human rights organi-
162
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

zations as well as positive events in the ﬁght to end slavery are
regularly published on the site. A link is also provided to the Free
the Slaves activism page, which is dedicated to bringing aware-
ness to the greater population in an effort to combat slavery. Reg-
ular reports on activities and scheduling for future events as well
as practical ways to introduce antislavery activism to groups and
communities may be found there. Antislavery videos may be
purchased at the online store, and the online gift catalog shows
ways to contribute to the effort to free children, provide housing
for freed children, and purchase practical instruments of change
for communities of former slaves.
Anti-Slavery International
Thomas Clarkson House
The Stableyard
Broomgrove Road
London SW9 9TL UK
Phone: [44] 020 7501 8920
Fax: [44] 020 7738 4110
E-mail: info@antislavery.org
Web site: www.antislavery.org
Anti-Slavery International is the European sister-organization of
Free the Slaves and is a key organization concerned with contem-
porary slavery. Anti-Slavery is the oldest human rights organiza-
tion in the world. It was responsible for the abolition of slavery
within the British Empire in 1833 and was established in its pre-
sent form in 1839 to carry the ﬁght to other parts of the world. It
gave inspiration to the Abolitionist movement in the United
States and Brazil, and has contributed to the formulation of all
the relevant international standards on slavery.
Throughout its history, it has campaigned relentlessly and
intervened effectively on behalf of enslaved people. Generally,
the most marginalized and dispossessed groups fall victim to
slavery, and the antislavery movement has always been closely
allied with the struggle of indigenous people.
Anti-Slavery promotes the eradication of slavery and slavery-
like practices and supports freedom for everyone who is sub-
jected to such practices. The abuses that Anti-Slavery opposes in-
clude slavery and the buying and selling of people as objects,
trafficking of women and the predicament of migrant workers
who are trapped into servitude, debt bondage and other tradi-
Global Antislavery Groups
163

tions that force people into low-status work, forced labor, forced
prostitution, abusive forms of child labor, and early or forced
marriage and other forms of servile marriage. Anti-Slavery fo-
cuses on the rights of people who are particularly vulnerable to
exploitation of their labor—notably women, children, migrant
workers, and indigenous peoples.
Anti-Slavery pursues its objectives by
• Collecting information about these abuses, bringing them
to the attention of the public, and promoting public ac-
tion to end them
• Identifying ways in which these abuses can be brought to
an end and inﬂuencing policymakers in governments or
other institutions at national and international levels to
take action accordingly
• Supporting victims of the abuses that Anti-Slavery op-
poses in their struggle for freedom, in particular by work-
ing with organizations they establish and other organiza-
tions campaigning on their behalf
Publications: Anti-Slavery publishes more works on contem-
porary slavery than any other organization. Many of its publica-
tions are listed in Chapter 8. The organization also has the most
complete archive of materials concerned with the historical anti-
slavery movement.
Web site: The Anti-Slavery International Web site provides
access to its publications (an extensive catalog of books, research
reports, exhibitions, videos, and other materials), news of ongo-
ing campaigns and recent successes, an explanation of policies,
links to other groups, and a sound introduction to antislavery
work around the world.
Intergovernmental Organizations
International Labor Organization (ILO)
1828 L. St. NW
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 653-7652
Fax: (202) 653-7687
E-mail: burrylee@ilo.org
Web site: www.ilo.org/public/english/index.htm
164
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

The ILO’s main purpose is to promote and develop policies in-
spired by ideals of social justice aimed chieﬂy at improving the
position of workers within member states. The International La-
bor Conference, which is the permanent secretariat of the ILO,
meets once a year. Every three years it elects the Governing Body,
which includes ten member states designated as “states of chief
industrial importance.”
Publications: The Publications Bureau of the ILO presents an
extensive array of materials including books, CD-ROMS, jour-
nals, radiographs, and videos dealing with such areas as employ-
ment policy, developments in industrial relations, occupational
health and safety, and labor statistics and methods, as well as in-
formation on child labor practices. The Web site has a fully
searchable online shopping catalog for easy purchase.
Web site: The ILO Web site has links to news and contact in-
formation, as well as a large, scrolling menu of links to world-
wide branches of the organization.
UNESCO
2 United Nations Plaza, Room 900
New York, NY 10017
Phone: (212) 963-5995
Fax: (212) 963-8014
E-mail: e.minchenberg@unesco.org
Web site: www.unesco.org
The United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc, and Cultural Organi-
zation (UNESCO) came into being in 1946 when twenty states
ratiﬁed its constitution. As of October 19, 1999, the organization
has 188 member states. UNESCO’s stated goal is “to contribute to
peace and security in the world by promoting collaboration
among nations through education, science, culture and commu-
nication in order to further universal respect for justice, for the
rule of law and for the human rights and fundamental freedoms
that are afﬁrmed for the peoples of the world, without distinction
of race, sex, language or religion, by the Charter of the United
Nations” (UNESCO Strategy 2005).
Publications: UNESCO uses its publications to foster interna-
tional public awareness of its major programs in literacy,
bioethics, education, human rights, women, the environment,
sustainable development, and peace. UNESCO’s publications
catalog includes more than a thousand titles in English, French,
Intergovernmental Organizations
165

Spanish, Russian, Chinese, and Arabic, published under its own
imprint or copublished. UNESCO produces books, CD-ROMs,
periodicals, and scientiﬁc maps derived from UNESCO programs
and generally aimed at specialized users. For the general public,
UNESCO has recently developed a news series on key world is-
sues, such as Cultures of Peace. Full listings of UNESCO’s publi-
cations are available on the Web site.
Web site: UNESCO has an extensive Web site listing the orga-
nization’s goals, history, and constitution; current events, activi-
ties, and programs; and links to related organizations. It is avail-
able in English, Spanish, French, Russian, Arabic, and Chinese.
UNICEF: United Nations Children’s Fund
UNICEF House
3 United Nations Plaza
New York, NY 10017
Phone: (212) 326-7000
Fax: (212) 887-7465
E-mail: information@unicefusa.org
Web site: www.unicef.org
Founded in 1946, UNICEF is an advocate of children’s rights; it
works to protect those rights and helps the young meet their ba-
sic needs for sustenance and education and to expand their op-
portunities to reach their full potential. The organization uses the
Convention on the Rights of the Child as its guide in establishing
international standards of behavior toward children. UNICEF
provides primary health care, basic education, and sanitation in
many developing countries.
Publications: UNICEF compiles and makes readily available
information on the situation of children, the performance of
countries in fulfilling the promise to children, the protection of
children’s rights, and its own contributions in programs for chil-
dren. In addition to various news articles, UNICEF’s publication
program includes annual reports such as World Summit for Chil-
dren, Promise and Progress: Achieving Goals for Children, The State of
the World’s Children, The Progress of Nations 1999, and the UNICEF
Annual Report.
Web site: The UNICEF Web site is full of reference materials
including news articles, publications, statistics, and general and
research information.
166
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

UNIFEM: Women’s Human Rights Program
304 East 45th Street, Fifteenth Floor
New York, NY 10017
Phone: (212) 906-6400
Fax: (212) 906-6705
Web site: www.unifem.org
UNIFEM has worked since 1976 to empower women and to sup-
port gender equality. The organization’s main goals are strength-
ening women’s economic powers, increasing women’s roles in
governance and leadership, and promoting women’s human
rights.
Publications: UNIFEM publications include books and re-
ports on economic capacity issues, governance and leadership is-
sues, gender mainstreaming challenges, and human rights con-
cerns. UNIFEM and the Center for Women’s Global Leadership
recently copublished a training manual on women’s human
rights entitled Local Action/Global Change, Learning about the Hu-
man Rights of Women and Girls. The manual combines develop-
ment of rights awareness with issue-oriented actions and in-
cludes substantive information about the human rights of
women in such areas as violence, health, reproduction and sexu-
ality, education, the global economy, the workplace, and family
life. Other publications include videos, annual reports, and
speeches and statements on UNIFEM issues.
Web site: The UNIFEM Web site has a list of resources and
links to the organization’s mission statement, press releases, cur-
rent news regarding women’s rights, and other women’s rights
organizations.
World Trade Organization (WTO)
154 Rue de Lausanne
1211 Geneva 21
Switzerland
Phone: [41] (22) 739-5111
Web site: www.wto.org
Organized in 1995, the WTO grew from the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The WTO is an international trade
organization that deals with the global rules of trade between na-
tions. It works to ensure that international trade flows as
smoothly and predictably as possible. The general goal of the
Intergovernmental Organizations
167

WTO is to improve the welfare of the peoples of the member
countries.
Publications: The extensive list of WTO publications is conve-
niently divided into the following categories: free publications,
recent publications, legal publications, annual reports, trade pol-
icy reviews, special studies, and videos. The official WTO
newsletter FOCUS is available in back issues online, and an on-
line bookshop is available for immediate purchase of materials.
Web site: The WTO Web site has a hierarchical list of links un-
der the broad heading “General Information, Trade Topics, and
Resources.” The categories contain news texts, trade documents
and agreements, and links to other organizations.
Governmental Organizations
Ofﬁce to Monitor and Combat Trafﬁcking in Persons
U.S. State Department
Antitrafﬁcking hotline: 888 373 7888
Web site: www.state.gov/g/tip
The Ofﬁce to Monitor and Combat Trafﬁcking in Persons was es-
tablished by the Trafﬁcking Victims Protection Act of 2000. It co-
ordinates American government efforts against human trafﬁck-
ing and publishes an annual Trafficking in Persons Report
documenting the current state of trafﬁcking globally and report-
ing on the efforts of individual countries to ﬁght human trafﬁck-
ing. It supports projects and research overseas.
Web site: The Web site includes up-to-date information on
U.S. government efforts against trafﬁcking, factsheets, and links
to major reports and laws.
Nongovernmental 
Organizations by Region
Africa
African Network for the Prevention and the Protection Against
Child Abuse and Neglect (ANPPCAN)
P.O. Box 1768
Nairobi, Kenya
Phone: [254] (2) 573-990
168
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Fax: [254] (2) 576-502
E-mail: anppcan@africaonline.co.ke
Web site: www.anppcan.org
ANPPCAN is a Pan-African organization that advocates the pro-
tective rights of children and facilitates research and the ex-
change of scientific information about them. The organization
conducts situation analyses on the state of child abuse in Africa,
publishes the results, and advises African governments on how
to improve the conditions for children in Africa.
Publications: Annual reports on the state of child abuse and
neglect in Africa.
Web site: The Web site provides a mission statement, contact
information for chapters throughout Africa, descriptions of orga-
nization projects, access to annual reports, and links to interna-
tional organizations.
International Needs (IN)
P.O. Box 690
Dansoman Est.
Accra, Ghana
Phone: [233] (21) 226-620
E-mail: intneeds@ncs.com.gh
Web site: www.africaexpress.com/internationalneedsghana
Founded in 1974, International Needs is a Christian organization
that works to eradicate poverty, disease, and oppression world-
wide. It also aims to uplift the standing of women and children.
IN-Ghana’s work includes a Trokosi liberation project that aims
to free ritual slave girls and support them to build new lives (see
a description of Trokosi slavery in Chapter 6).
Publications: The organization publishes press releases re-
garding current projects and events. These press releases are
available on the Web site.
Web site: This Web site provides the mission statement of the
organization, contact information, an extensive news page, a de-
scription of IN services, and a search page for the IN Web site.
WAO-Afrique
399, 168 Rue Tokoin Solidarité
B.P. 80242
Lomé, Togo
Phone: [228] 214-113
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
169

Fax: [228] 217-345
E-mail: wao-afrique@bibway.com
Web site: www.membres.lycos.fr/waoafrique
Founded by a former child domestic, WAO Afrique works for the
protection and prevention of all forms of abuse, exploitation, and
trafﬁcking of children. Preventative initiatives include campaign-
ing, education, and awareness at the community and govern-
ment levels. The organization runs education and training pro-
jects for the police and other human rights organizations in order
to help them respond better to the increasing incidents of child la-
bor, exploitation, and trafﬁcking of children into and within Togo
and other West African countries.
Web site: This is a French-language Web site.
Asia
Anti-Slavery Society of Australia
G.P.O. Box 483 C
Melbourne, Victoria 3001 Australia
Phone: [61] (03) 9642 1015
E-mail: info@childlabor.net
Web site: www.anti-slaverysociety.org
The Anti-Slavery Society is dedicated to ending slavery and the
slave trade as well as bonded labor, child labor, child prostitution,
and the international trafﬁcking of women and children for pros-
titution. The society not only investigates and campaigns against
all forms of slavery but also organizes missions to rescue slaves,
reintegrate them into their communities, and raise consumer
awareness about goods produced by slave labor. The society re-
ceives no government funding; it relies on private contributions
to pay for its activities.
Web site: The Web site contains an extensive hierarchical
table of contents describing current slavery practices and
counter-methods.
Asia Monitor Resource Center (AMRC)
444 Nathan Road, Flat 8B
Kowloon, Hong Kong
Phone: [852] 2332-1346
Fax: 852] 2385-5319
170
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

E-mail: admin@amrc.org.hk
Web site: www.amrc.org.hk 
The Asia Monitor Resource Center (AMRC) is an independent
NGO that focuses on Asian labor concerns. The center provides
information, research, publishing, training, labor networking, and
related services to trade unions, labor groups, and other develop-
ment NGOs in the region. Its main goal is the support of demo-
cratic and independent labor movements in the Asian arena.
Publications: Publications include a quarterly report entitled
Asian Labor Update and various articles pertaining to labor
concerns.
Web site: The AMRC Web site provides a description of the
organization and a list of AMRC publications, but very little
other information.
Asian Migrant Center (AMC)
4 Jordan Road
Kowloon, Hong Kong
Phone: [852] 2312-0031
Fax: [852] 2992-0111
E-mail: amc@hk.super.net
Web site: www.paciﬁc.net.hk/~amc
The Asian Migrant Center was established in 1989 to help de-
velop alternatives to migrant work and to empower migrants in
Asia. It researches the conditions of migrant workers throughout
the continent and investigates the political and social movements
within their groups. The AMC supports a number of migrant
worker organizations to foster reintegration of migrants and raise
political awareness of their situation.
Publications: The organization’s major publication is the an-
nual Asian Migrant Yearbook ($55), a reference book on Asian mi-
grant workers and migration issues. The most recent edition of
the resource contains full-color maps of Asian labor migration;
photographs, charts, and country statistics; analytical reports
from sixteen Asian countries; and special articles on the impact of
the 1997 Asian financial crisis on migrant workers, violence
against women migrants, and globalization and migration.
Web site: The AMC Web site provides a resource list, informa-
tion for ordering the Asian Migrant Yearbook, descriptions of orga-
nization activities, and links to like-minded organizations.
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
171

Europe
Burma Peace Foundation
Online Burma/Myanmar Library
85 Rue de Montbrillant
1202 Geneva, Switzerland
Phone: [41] (22) 733-2040
E-mail: darnott@iprolink.ch
Web site: www.burmalibrary.org 
The Burma Peace Foundation confronts many of the same prob-
lems that the Burma Project addresses, such as human rights and
economic abuses.
Web site: Acting as a searchable online index, the Online
Burma Library holds over 100,000 Burma-related documents,
consolidating information from over 500 Web sites of NGOs, ac-
tivist organizations, and media sites.
Catholic Agency for Overseas Development (CAFOD)
Romero Close
Stockwell Road
London SW9 9TY UK
Phone: [44] (207) 733 7900
Fax: [44] (207) 274 9630
E-mail: cafod@cafod.org.uk
Web site: www.cafod.org.uk
CAFOD is the official relief and development agency of the
Catholic Church in England and Wales. It is committed to justice
for the world’s poor, regardless of religion; CAFOD funds more
than a thousand projects worldwide. It has been active in publi-
cizing and working against slavery and bonded labor in the de-
veloping world.
Publications: CAFOD issues policy briefings covering relief
and development issues; online fact sheets describing issues fac-
ing the developing world, such as racism, the environment, land
mines, food, aid, poverty, and the role of women; and press arti-
cles regarding CAFOD activities.
Web site: The CAFOD Web site has links to news articles,
campaigns for human rights, job opportunities, and a wealth of
information for people interested in becoming part of the organi-
zation.
172
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Child Rights Information Network (CRIN)
17 Grove Lane
London SE5 8RD UK
Phone: [44] (207) 716 2240
Fax: [44] (207) 793 7628
E-mail: info@crin.org
Web site: www.crin.org
CRIN is a global network of children’s rights organizations striv-
ing to improve the lives of children by exchanging information
about child rights, promoting the UN Convention on the Rights
of the Child, and developing capacity building and networking
tools.
Publications: CRIN maintains a publications database of the
publications (journals, newsletters, articles, and reports) of mem-
ber organizations. Many of these publications are available on
CRIN’s Web site.
Web site: Besides the publication database of member organi-
zations, the CRIN Web site offers extensive links to human rights
organizations and articles on the rights of children.
Christian Aid
35 Lower Marsh
Waterloo
London SE1 7RL UK
Phone: [44] (207) 620 4444
Fax: [44] (207) 620 0719
E-mail: info@christian-aid.org
Web site: www.christian-aid.org.uk
Christian Aid is an organization dedicated to helping people
worldwide overcome poverty and human rights abuses. It has
volunteers in more than sixty countries. A leader in overseas aid
and development, it also provides in-depth research and has
campaigned actively against bonded labor.
Publications: Christian Aid’s publication program issues reg-
ular reports to support its advocacy, campaigning, and lobbying
work. Recent reports have focused on the impact of debt on poor
countries, proposals for rapid debt cancellation, and business
ethics and ethical trading. Other areas of publication include
globalization, aid, human rights and governance, gender, and
participation.
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
173

Web site: The Christian Aid Web site provides newsbriefs, re-
ports, and information concerning human rights across the globe.
Clean Clothes Campaign
P.O. Box 11584
1001 GN Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Phone: [31] (20) 412-2785
Fax: [31] (20) 412-2786
E-mail: info@cleanclothes.org
Web site: http://www.cleanclothes.org
The Clean Clothes Campaign works to improve working condi-
tions in garment industries worldwide. The campaign works
with consumer organizations, trade unions, and other groups to
make sure that employers are responsible for providing safe and
fair conditions for their employees.
Publications: Several reports related to the work of the Clean
Clothes Campaign, including accounts of poor working condi-
tions, discussions of labor and consumer issues, and analyses of
independent monitoring models, are published on the organiza-
tion’s Web site.
Web site: The Web site has general news and current events
sections, a list of reviewed companies, a proposed code of con-
duct for employers, and contact information for concerned con-
sumers.
Comite Contre L’Esclavage Modern (CCEM)
31 Rue des Lilas
75019 Paris, France
[33] (1) 4452-8890
[33] (1) 4452-8909
Web site: www.ccem-antislavery.org
The CCEM, known in English as the Committee against Modern
Slavery, fights the intolerable practice of slavery in France and
abroad. Made up entirely of volunteers, the committee enlists
journalists, lawyers, social workers, doctors and health profes-
sionals, students, and retired people to work toward its goal of
ending slavery worldwide. Branches of this organization exist in
France, Belgium, Spain, and Italy.
Publications: The CCEM publishes reports on topics related
to the organization’s activities and ﬁndings.
174
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Web site: The CCEM Web site is offered in both French and
English. It has sections for news, activity reports, information for
people interested in joining the committee, and contact informa-
tion.
Defence for Children International (DCI)
P.O. Box 88
1221 Geneva 20, Switzerland
Phone: [41] (22) 734-0558
Fax: [41] (22) 740-1145
E-mail: dci-hq@pingnet.ch
Web site: //defence-for-children.org
Defence for Children International is a nongovernmental organi-
zation working for the protection and promotion of children’s
rights. Established during the International Year of the Child
(1979), DCI encourages concerted international action toward
promoting and protecting the rights of the child. It also seeks to
foster awareness and solidarity about children’s rights situations
by conducting research and monitoring of potentially abusive ar-
eas. DCI suggests both preventive and curative protection of all
children’s rights.
Publications: A regular newsletter and other information on
all aspects of children’s rights, through regular and ad hoc publi-
cations.
Web site: The DCI Web site is very limited in scope; it pro-
vides a mission statement and links to children’s rights stan-
dards.
Foundation Against Trafﬁcking in Women
P.O. Box 1455
3500 BL Utrecht
The Netherlands
Phone: [31] (302) 716-044
Fax: [31] (302) 716-084
E-mail: fe@stv.vx.xs4all.nl
The Foundation Against Trafficking in Women was founded in
the early 1980s in response to growing prostitution tourism. The
organization works with NGOs, international action groups, and
other women’s organizations to develop legislation and litigation
addressing the issue.
Web site: None
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
175

Free Burma
(No physical address)
E-mail: FreeBurma@POBox.com
Web site: www.ibiblio.org/freeburma
Free Burma is an organization that describes itself as “a collection
of hardware, software, documentation and volunteers” dedicated
to information dissemination about the current tyranny of the
military dictatorship in that country (Free Burma Web site). See
Chapter 6 for a description of forced labor in Burma.
Web site: The Free Burma Web site provides a mission state-
ment and description of the current situation in Burma, as well as
links to documents relating to Burma, almost daily news updates,
and ways to become involved in any of the organization’s areas
of concern. A CD-ROM is also available on the Web site contain-
ing the same information provided online.
Human Rights Information and Documentation Systems
International (HURIDOCS)
48 Chemin du Grand-Montﬂeury
CH-1290 Versoix, Switzerland
Phone: [41] (22) 755-5252
Fax: [41] (22) 755-5260
E-mail: info@huridocs.org
Web site: www.huridocs.org
Established in 1982, HURIDOCS is a global network of human
rights organizations. Its goal is to provide a “decentralized infor-
mation network” to workers in the field of human rights.
HURIDOCS offers the tools and techniques for information han-
dling, training courses on documenting human rights studies,
and advice and support on documentation centers and informa-
tion systems.
Publications: Reference books and software on the tools for
“Human Rights Information Handling,” reports on HURIDOCS
activities, and a regular newsletter. Publications must be ordered
through the organization. Some selections from the newsletter
and reports are available on the Web site.
Web site: The HURIDOCS Web site contains general informa-
tion about the organization as well as guidelines and formats for
human rights documentation.
176
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU)
5 Boulevard du Roi Albert II, Bte 1
1210 Brussels, Belgium
Phone: [32] (2) 224-0211
Fax: [32] (2) 201-5815
E-mail: internetpo@icftu.org
Web site: www.icftu.org
Established in 1949, the ICFTU is made up of 233 organizations in
152 countries worldwide; it has over 151 million members, over a
fourth of whom are women. The ICFTU is open to all democratic
trade unions. It works together with the International Labor Or-
ganization, the United Nations Economic and Social Committee,
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the World
Trade Organization. The confederation’s main goals are to defend
workers’ rights, encourage equal rights for women, eradicate
child labor, make education available for all, and support the en-
vironment.
Publications: The ICFTU publishes a monthly journal entitled
Trade Union World and a number of other publications each year
on particular themes. Additionally, it publishes the Survey of Trade
Union Rights each June, which provides information on more
than 115 countries violating basic trade union rights norms. An
online bulletin is also available via e-mail.
Web site: The ICFTU Web site contains a history of trade
unions and milestones in workers’ rights. It also provides a mis-
sion statement, a calendar of workers’ rights events, educational
materials, labor rights resolutions, and links to associated trade
union campaigns.
International Textile Garment and 
Leather Workers Federation (ITGLWF)
8 Rue Joseph Stevens
Brussels 1000, Belgium
Phone: [32] (2) 512-2833
Fax: [32] (2) 511-0904
Web site: www.itglwf.org
Comprising 206 trade unions in 106 countries, this organization
works to protect the rights of laborers in the textile and leather in-
dustries. It seeks regulations regarding child workers, overwork-
ing of laborers, and similar abuse in these industries.
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
177

Web site: The ITGLWF Web site provides news updates, a
code of conduct for the industry, descriptions of the federation’s
priorities, and links to regional ITGLWF chapters.
La Strada Ceska Republika
P.O. Box 305
Prague, Czech Republic
Phone: [420] (2) 2272-1810
E-mail: lastrada@strada.cz
Web site: www.strada.cz
La Strada’s goal is to prevent the trafﬁcking of women in Central
and Eastern Europe. It provides aid for victims and works to
raise awareness of the problem by lobbying government bodies
and conducting research.
Publications: The organization publishes informational
brochures for women regarding the problems of trafﬁcking.
Web site: This Web site is available in both Czech and En-
glish. It provides information on preventing women trafﬁcking,
support of victims, and international politics involved in the mat-
ter, as well as links to other ofﬁces throughout Eastern Europe.
NGO Group for the Convention on the Rights of the Child
c/o Defence for Children International
P.O. Box 88
1221 Geneva 20, Switzerland
Phone: [41] (22) 740-4730
Fax: [41] (22) 740-1145
E-mail: ngo-crc@tsicalinet.ch
Web site: www.crin.org/NGOGroupforCRC
A coalition of more than ﬁfty international NGOs working to fa-
cilitate implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, this organization is a subsidiary of DCI. Though the orga-
nization does not call for all child labor to be banned, it does sup-
port positive changes for child workers and “best interest” treat-
ment of children. The group’s major goal is to prevent
exploitative and abusive child labor and improve conditions for
working children.
Publications: Brochures on combating the sale of children,
child prostitution, and child pornography; eliminating the ex-
ploitation of child labor; education on the Convention on the
178
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Rights of the Child; and a guide for NGOs reporting to the Com-
mittee on the Rights of the Child are only available from the orga-
nization.
Web site: The Web site contains background information
about the group, contact addresses, a list of aims and objectives, a
list of NGO members, and a mailing list.
Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NUPI)
CJ Hambros Plass 2D
P.O. Box 8159 Dep.
N-0033 Oslo 1, Norway
Phone: [47] (2) 22 99 40 00
Fax: [47] (2) 22 36 21 82
Web site: www.nupi.no/default-e.htm
The Norwegian Institute of International Affairs researches inter-
national political and economic issues. Major topics of research
include the integration and sovereignty of Europe, collective se-
curity and peace operations, international economics, and devel-
opment policy.
Publications: Within the ﬁeld of international relations, NUPI
researchers publish articles, books, and reports. Some materials
are published directly by NUPI, whereas others are published by
domestic or foreign publishing houses.
Web site: This Web site is offered in both Norwegian and En-
glish. It contains research information, news items, general publi-
cations and texts of working papers, transcripts of international
affairs seminars, and contact information.
Rädda Barnen
Torsgatan 4
107 88 Stockholm, Sweden
Phone: [46] (8) 698-9000
Fax: [46] (8) 698-9010
E-mail: info@rbise
Web site: www.rb.se/eng
Rädda Barnen is the Swedish division of Save the Children.
Publications: Rädda Barnen publishes books, reports, videos,
and a magazine. A documentation database and a newsletter on
child soldiers are also available.
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
179

Web site: This Web site is similar to the Save the Children
Web site but focuses on a Swedish audience. The site is available
in Swedish and English.
Rugmark
Rugmark-German ofﬁce
c/o TRANSFAIR e.V.
Remigiusstrasse 21
50937 Köln, Germany
Phone: [49] (221) 942040-0
Fax: [49] (221) 942040-40
E-mail: rugmark@transfair.org
Web site: www.rugmark.de
Or:
Rugmark-USA
733 15th Street NW, Suite 912
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (202) 347-4205
Fax: (202) 347-4885
E-mail: info@rugmark.org
Web site: www.rugmark.org
The Rugmark campaign monitors the use of illegal child labor in
the carpet industry. It also aims to fulﬁll consumer demands for
socially responsible production conditions to avoid a consumer
boycott of hand-knotted carpets. Rugmark has worldwide orga-
nizational support including divisions in Europe, North America,
India, and Nepal.
Publications: Publications include organizational reports and
information on the status of child labor in the carpet industries in
India, Nepal, and Pakistan.
Web site: The Rugmark Web site is offered in both German
and English. It provides general information about the cam-
paign’s goals, news, information for prospective licensees, and
contact information.
Survival International
6 Charterhouse Buildings
London EC1M 7ET UK
Phone: [44] (207) 687 8700
Fax: [44] (207) 687 8701
180
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

E-mail: info@survival-international.org
Web site: www.survival-international.org
Survival International is a worldwide organization providing
support of tribal and indigenous peoples. It supports self-
determination of all people in regard to life, land, and human
rights. The organization also offers for sale tribal goods produced
under socially responsible conditions.
Publications: Publications include country-speciﬁc urgent ac-
tion bulletins, press releases, and success stories. All of these are
available on the Web site and are searchable by publication type
and country.
Web site: This Web site describes the organization’s cam-
paigns and offers backgrounds of numerous tribes and countries.
It also has sections for current news and events, application infor-
mation, a catalog of goods, and links to similar organizations.
Transnational Institute (TNI)
Paulus Potterstraat 20
1071 DA Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Phone: [31] (20) 662-6608
Fax: [31] (20) 675-7176
E-mail: tni@tni.org
Web site: www.tni.org
Since 1974, the Transnational Institute has worked to ﬁnd solu-
tions to global problems dealing with militarism, poverty, social
wrongs, and the environment. The U.S. branch of the institute has
sponsored exchange programs and other projects between the
United States and Russia. Over 850 Russian citizens participated
in these exchanges, and more than 1,200 U.S. citizens have made
the trip to Russia. Now, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the
Transnational Institute continues its exchange program with the
Commonwealth of Independent States.
Publications: TNI’s global research generates a comprehen-
sive publication program that includes full-length books, topical
reports, and a book series published in association with Pluto
Press. Also available are publications by TNI fellows. Descrip-
tions of publications and instructions for ordering are available
on the Web site.
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
181

Web site: The Transnational Institute’s Web site contains in-
formation and links to current news and projects, as well as an
extensive online archive of articles and past publications.
North America
Amnesty International USA
322 Eighth Avenue
New York, NY 10001
Phone: (212) 807-8400
Fax: (212) 627-1451
Web sites: www.amnesty-usa.org; 
www.amnesty-volunteer.org/usa/education
One of the world’s largest human rights organizations, Amnesty
International lists as its goals the liberation of prisoners of con-
science; ensuring fair, speedy trials for political prisoners; aboli-
tion of cruel treatment of prisoners (including torture and the
death penalty); and ending extrajudicial killings and disappear-
ances.
Publications: As part of its campaign to protect fundamental
human rights, Amnesty International regularly publishes country
reports and other documents on human rights issues around the
world. All published information is scrupulously analyzed and
cross-checked by the research department and legal offices in
London to ensure the integrity of the ﬁnal reports. These reports
are regarded by experts in various ﬁelds of study as one of the
most reliable sources for information on human rights issues. The
accuracy and strict impartiality with which the organization’s re-
search is conducted has made it a vital resource for many news
organizations, government agencies, lawyers, professors, and
students.
Web sites: The Web sites have an enormous amount of infor-
mation about human rights abuses, current events, and organiza-
tion activities. Links to other Amnesty International sites and
other human rights organizations are also provided.
Asian-American Free Labor Institute (AAFLI)
1925 K Street NW, Suite 301
Washington, DC 20006
Phone: (202) 778-4500
Fax: (202) 778-4525
182
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

The AAFLI is the international component of the AFL-CIO. The
institute works with Asian trade unions to enforce child labor
standards, worker health and safety standards, and safe labor
conditions.
Publications: The AAFLI publishes a quarterly newsletter, the
AAFLI News, and other informational material.
Web site: None
Break the Chain Campaign
733 15th St. NW, Suite 1020
Washington, DC 20005-2112
Phone: (202) 234-9382 ext. 244
Fax: (202) 387-7915
E-mail: joy@ips-dc.org (Director)
Web site: www.BreakTheChainCampaign.org
Break the Chain Campaign is a coalition of legal and social ser-
vice agencies, ethnically based organizations, social action
groups, and individuals devoted to protecting the rights of the
migrant domestic working community. Speciﬁcally, it focuses on
those domestic workers carrying A-3 or G-5 visas. (See Chapter 6
for a description of domestic slavery in the United States).
Publications: The Legal Rights and Resources Available to G-5 and
A-3 Domestic Workers. A handbook for work with domestic work-
ers, available from the campaign (No ISBN).
Web site: The Web site covers the work of the campaign. It in-
cludes a contact for those who know of a case of G-5 or A-3 abuse.
One section details the abuse and exploitation of G-5 and A-3 do-
mestic workers. Information on how to contact the Campaign for
Migrant Domestic Workers Rights is also given.
Burma Project
Burma Project
Open Society Institute
400 West 59th Street
New York, NY 10019
Phone: (212) 548-0632
Fax: (212) 548-4655
E-mail: burma@sorosny.org
Web site: www.burmaproject.org
The Burma Project, established by the Open Society Institute in
1994, aims to increase international awareness of conditions in
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
183

Burma (Myanmar) and to assist the country in making its transi-
tion from a closed to an open society. (See Chapter 6 for a descrip-
tion of forced labor in Burma.)
Publications: Publications include a bimonthly magazine,
Burma Debate, which serves as a forum for discussion of central
issues concerning Burma; Burma: Country in Crisis, a report that
provides background information on current events in Burma;
Burma News Update, a newsﬂash report that delivers timely up-
dates regarding current developments in Burma; and BurmaNet
News, an electronic newspaper covering Burma and providing re-
cent articles from newspapers, magazines, newsletters, the wire
services, and the Internet. Subscriptions to Burma News Update
and BurmaNet News are free and available by e-mail. Most publi-
cations are available on the Web site.
Web site: The Burma Project Web site has links to a history of
Burma, news reports, publications, current projects, grant/schol-
arship information, political and economic information, and thor-
ough descriptions of the problems threatening the Burmese
people.
Child Labor Coalition (CLC)
c/o National Consumers League
1701 K Street NW, Suite 1200
Washington, DC 20006
Phone: (202) 835-3323
Fax: (202) 835-0747
Web site: www.natlconsumersleague.org/clc.htm
Since 1989, the CLC has worked to end exploitation of child labor
and to encourage education, health, safety, and general well-
being for working children. The CLC researches child labor
abuses and publishes its ﬁndings in order to inﬂuence policy con-
cerning child workers.
Publications: No regular publications.
Web site: The CLC Web site offers advice of what consumers
can do to combat child labor, other background information, and
links to other child labor organizations.
Coalition Against Slavery in Sudan and Mauritania 
P.O. Box 3293
New York, NY 10027
Phone: (212) 774-4287
184
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

E-mail: casmasalc@aol.com
Web site: http://members.aol.com/casmasalc
This human rights organization brings together abolitionists and
human rights activists from all races, creeds, and nationalities to
collectively ﬁght for the eradication of the chattel enslavement of
black Africans. It is a response to the centuries-old practice of
buying, selling, and breeding Africans by Arab Moors and North
African Arabs that never stopped in the countries of Sudan and
Mauritania.
Publications: Cotton, Samuel. Silent Terror: A Journey into Con-
temporary African Slavery. New York: Writers and Readers Pub-
lishing, Harlem River Press, 1998.
Web site: The Web site contains recent news about work
against slavery in Mauritania and Sudan as well as an archive of
articles on the subject.
Coalition of Immokalee Workers
P.O. Box 603
Immokalee, FL 34143
Phone: (941) 657-8311
Fax: (941) 657-5055
E-mail: workers@ciw-online.org
Web site: www.ciw-online.org
The CIW is a community-based worker organization. Their mem-
bers are largely Latino, Haitian, and Mayan Indian immigrants
working in low-wage jobs throughout the state of Florida. CIW
has been extensively involved in bringing enslaved agricultural
workers to freedom. They organize actions and boycotts of com-
panies that will not take responsibility for the human cost of the
fruit and vegetables they buy.
Publications: The CIW Web site holds a large number of re-
ports and press materials.
Web site: This Web site has a large collection of materials for
student action. These include sample press releases and reports
from boycotts and demonstrations at universities around the
country. It is an invaluable resource for understanding the reality
of slavery in modern America.
ECPAT USA
157 Montague Street
Brooklyn, NY 11201
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
185

Phone: (212) 870-2427
Fax: 212) 870-2055
E-mail: info@ecpatusa.org
Web site: www.ecpatusa.org or www.ecpat.net
ECPAT is an international institution dedicated to eliminating
child pornography, child prostitution, and “the trafﬁcking of chil-
dren for sexual purposes.” ECPAT is nonpolitical and nonreli-
gious; it works with other organizations and governments to sup-
port its goals.
Publications: ECPAT has a number of books that are basic and
fundamental explanations of child prostitution and trafficking,
particularly The ECPAT Story, by Ron O’Grady (1996); The Rape of
the Innocent, also by Ron O’Grady (1994); Enforcing the Law against
the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children, ECPAT (1996); Child
Prostitution and Sex Tourism: A Series of Research Reports, by Dr. Ju-
lia O’Connell Davidson and Jaqueline Sanchez-Taylor, 1996; Look-
ing Back, Thinking Forward: The Fourth Report on the Implementation
of the Agenda for Action Adopted at the World Congress against Com-
mercial Sexual Exploitation of Children (2000); Five Years after Stock-
holm: The Fifth Report on the Implementation of the Agenda for action
(2001); and ECPAT Report on the Implementation of the Agenda for ac-
tion against the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children 2001–
2002 (2003).
Web site: The ECPAT Web site details current efforts to end
child exploitation, including the International Young People’s
Participation Project, which aims to increase the level of young
people’s participation in the campaign against the commercial
sexual exploitation of children. It intends to do this by collaborat-
ing with national partners in more than thirty countries.
Free the Children
7368 Yonge Street, Suite 3000 
Thornhill, Ontario L4J 8H9 Canada
Phone: (905) 760-9382
Fax: (905) 760-9157
E-mail: info@freethechildren.com
Web site: www.freethechildren.org
Set up by Canadian schoolchildren, Free the Children is dedi-
cated to eliminating the exploitation of children around the
world by encouraging youth to volunteer in, as well as to create,
programs and activities that relieve the plight of underprivileged
186
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

children. It is an organization run by children for children. It now
employs adults to work in its central ofﬁce, but only on the un-
derstanding that they are facilitators and administrators but do
not take part in making policy for the organization. Free the Chil-
dren funds schools, rehabilitation programs for ex-child laborers,
and aid for children in situations of conflict or natural disaster
around the world.
Publications: The book Free the Children, by organizer Craig
Kielburger, is sold through the Web site, as are a video about the
organization’s work and a CD of songs.
Web site: The Web site has a guide to projects run by Free the
Children and an explanation of its history.
Human Rights First
333 Seventh Avenue, 13th Floor
New York, NY 10001
Phone: (212) 845-5200
Fax: (212) 845-5299
E-mail: nyc@humanrightsﬁrst.org
Web site: www.humanrightsﬁrst.org
Founded in 1978, the Human Rights First works to ensure that all
governments are compliant with the International Bill of Human
Rights. It supports legal institutions dedicated to upholding hu-
man rights for all.
Publications: Extensive publications include books, topical re-
ports, and papers on such varied issues as asylum, freedom of as-
sociation, international justice, international financial institu-
tions, and international refugee programs. Pertinent issues are
also reported with a geographical emphasis, including papers on
matters in Africa, Europe, Latin America/Caribbean, and Middle
East/North Africa. Publication descriptions are available on the
Web site; most must be ordered from the organization. Human
Rights First’s program WITNESS, a partnership with Peter
Gabriel and Reebok, releases a biweekly series of human rights
videos called “WITNESS Rights Alert.”
Web site: The Human Rights First Web site is like a newspa-
per; it has links to articles about the legal aspects of worldwide
human rights violations.
Human Rights Watch (HRW)
350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
187

New York, NY 10118-3299
Phone: (212) 290-4700
Fax: (212) 736-1300
E-mail: hrnyc@hrw.org
Web site: www.hrw.org
HRW is dedicated to protecting human rights around the world.
It investigates and exposes human rights violations and holds
abusers accountable. The Human Rights Watch organization es-
tablished the Children’s Rights Project in 1994. This division of
HRW examines countries and organizations suspected of chil-
dren’s rights violations and publishes its ﬁndings in reports dis-
tributed to governments, institutions, and NGOs capable of end-
ing the child abuse. Human Rights Watch’s Women’s Rights
Project examines reports of women’s rights abuses worldwide. It
publishes its findings along with HRW’s other articles. The
Women’s Rights Project also keeps track of current events in the
ﬁeld of women’s rights.
Publications: The organization regularly publishes reports on
such topics as slavery, child rights, child labor, bonded child la-
bor, abduction, and the trafﬁcking of women and girls.
Web site: The main Web site details HRW’s many divisions
and has extensive links to HRW publications, campaigns, essays,
country brieﬁngs, and research materials. The Children’s Rights
Project Web page (www.hrw.org/children) has links to some of
its reports. The Women’s Rights Project Web page (www.hrw.
org/women) has links to news articles about women’s rights
abuses and transcripts of HRW’s reports on the subject.
International Forum on Globalization (IFG)
1009 General Kennedy Avenue #2
San Francisco, CA 94129
Phone: (415) 561-7650
Fax: (415) 561-7651
E-mail: ifg@ifg.org
Web site: www.ifg.org
Founded in 1994, the International Forum on Globalization is
dedicated to examining the impacts of economic globalization. It
organizes activities to inform the general public about the effects
of globalization.
188
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Publications: Publications include a newsletter for members
and papers discussing such issues as corporate governance, the
World Trade Organization, and the effects of globalization on the
environment, citizenship, and commerce. Descriptions of pub-
lished papers are available on the Web site.
Web site: The IFG Web site has links to forum events and
partner organizations.
Laogai Research Foundation (LRF)
1925 K Street NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20006-1132
Phone: (202) 833-8770
Fax: 202) 833-6187
E-mail: laogai@laogai.org
Web site: www.laogai.org
LRF was established by ex-laogai (forced labor camp) inmate
Harry Wu in 1992 to carry out research, publish, and publicize
the plight of the millions of Chinese held in gulags across
China—home to the most extensive forced labor camp system in
the world today.
Publications: The organization publishes an annual Laogai
Handbook, a newsletter, and special reports, and assists television
journalists in making documentaries exposing the abuse of hu-
man rights in the laogai.
Web site: The LRF Web site has links to foundation newsletters.
Multinational Monitor (Essential Information, Inc.)
P.O. Box 19405
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 387-8030
Fax: (202) 234-5176
E-mail: monitor@essential.org
Web site: www.multinationalmonitor.org
The Multinational Monitor is a monthly publication of Essential
Information, Inc., an organization that aims to provide provoca-
tive information to the public on important topics neglected by
the mass media and policy makers. The Multinational Monitor ex-
amines corporate activity, especially in the Third World, focusing
on the export of hazardous substances, worker health and safety,
labor union issues, and the environment.
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
189

Web site: The Multinational Monitor’s Web site has links to its
online issues.
Save the Children Federation
54 Wilton Road
Westport, CT 06880
Phone: (800) 728-3843
Web site: www.savethechildren.org
Save the Children helps impoverished and abused children
worldwide, addressing health and educational needs alongside
social and economic wrongs.
Publications: The organization has extensive publications
available online. This includes Champions newsbriefs, the
IMPACT newsletter, and annual and special reports. The major re-
port The State of the World’s Mothers is also available on the Web site.
Web site: Save the Children’s somewhat disorganized Web
site has links to children’s rights publications.
Sweatshop Watch
310 Eighth Street, Suite 303
Oakland, CA 94607
Phone: (510) 834-8990
E-mail: sweatinfo@sweatshopwatch.org
Web site: www.sweatshopwatch.org
Sweatshop Watch is a coalition of international human rights or-
ganizations. Its goal is to end sweatshop conditions for textile
workers.
Publications:
Sweatshop Watch publishes a quarterly
newsletter, current and back issues of which are available online.
The newsletter reports and discusses consumer and labor issues
related to human rights violations.
Web site: Sweatshop Watch’s Web site has links to related ar-
ticles and newsletters.
WITNESS
353 Broadway
New York, NY 10013
Phone: (212) 274-1664 ext.201
Fax: (212) 274-1262
E-mail: witness@witness.org
Web site: www.witness.org
190
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Founded in 1992 by singer Peter Gabriel, the Lawyers Committee
for Human Rights, and the Reebok Human Rights Foundation,
WITNESS is a nonproﬁt organization dedicated to strengthening
human rights advocacy by providing video and communications
technology for documenting human rights abuses. The videos are
then used as evidence before courts, educational materials for
raising awareness, and deterrents to further violations. WITNESS
partner organizations, totaling 150 in all, including television sta-
tions that air the videos and help to distribute the footage inter-
nationally.
Web site: This heavily trafﬁcked Web site (1.5 million hits per
month) provides the WITNESS mission statement as well as ac-
tual video footage, news updates, partner information, details for
training and getting involved, and an online store.
World Vision
34834 Weyerhaeuser Way South
P.O. Box 9716, Dept. W
Federal Way, WA 98063-9716
Phone: (888) 511-6598
Web site: www.worldvision.org/worldvision/master.nsf
World Vision is a Christian organization dedicated to ending
poverty, hunger, and human rights abuses worldwide. In India, it
has developed innovative programs for the liberation and reha-
bilitation of child bonded laborers.
Publications: Publications include an annual report, a quar-
terly periodical entitled World Vision Today, a monthly commen-
tary and fact sheet entitled Insider, and policy papers on such is-
sues as landmines and child sponsorship. Most of these
publications are available in full text online.
Web site: The Web site has current and past press releases,
links to current projects, articles about past activities, and links to
World Vision sites worldwide.
South America
Atalaya Regional Indigenous Organization
Organization Indigena Regional de Atalaya (OIRA)
Correo Central, Atalaya, Peru
Phone: [51] (64) 573-469
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
191

Formed in 1986 as a federation of local indigenous community
groups, OIRA works to organize local people into taking action
against the use of slavery affecting the more than 10,000 indige-
nous peoples in the Atalaya region of Peru. Some of OIRA’s
achievements include documenting information on sixty commu-
nities where slavery was taking place, running literacy courses
for indigenous bonded laborers on ranches and estates, persuad-
ing authorities to help local indigenous people to be ofﬁcially reg-
istered, and winning an agreement with the authorities over in-
digenous land rights. OIRA has freed more than 6,000 people.
Web site: None
National Forum on the Prevention
and Eradication of Child Labor
SBN Quadra 01
Bloco (F)-Sala 204
Ed. Palacio da Agricultura
SENAR/CA
Brazilia/ DF CEP 70040-000, Brazil
Phone: [55] (61) 226-6815
Fax: [55] (61) 321-5775
E-mail: infantil@senar-rural.com.br
This organization is coordinated by the Brazilian Ministry of La-
bor and is composed of forty institutions with representatives of
workers, employers, the federal government, and NGOs. A
methodology of work called “integrated actions” is at the heart of
this organization. It means that every institution member of the
forum should make an effort to concentrate his/her actions in a
speciﬁc area at the same time and with the same target group.
Web site: None
Pastoral Land Commission (CPT)
Head Ofﬁce
Rue 19, No. 34, First Andar
Centro-CEP, 74030-090
Goiania
Goias, Brazil
Phone: [55] (62) 212-6466
Fax: [55] (62) 212-0421
E-mail: cptnac@cultura.com.br
192
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

One of the most powerful defenders of land reform in Brazil,
the CPT reported 5,000 cases of slave labor in Brazil in 1991.
Web site: None
South Asia and Southeast Asia
Asian-American Free Labor Institute (AAFLI)
G.P.O. Box 596
Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh
Phone: [880] (2) 88-403
E-mail: aaﬂibd@pradeshta.net
The AAFLI is one of the AFL-CIO’s four international institutes.
For the past twenty-ﬁve years, the institute has been ﬁghting for
and promoting human rights in Asia. It works to eliminate child
labor and rehabilitate former child workers. The AAFLI works
with trade unions, human rights organizations, and both govern-
ment and NGO groups to promote public policies to enforce la-
bor rights and standards.
Web site: None
Bonded Labor Liberation Front, India (BLLF)
7 Jantar Mantar Road
New Delhi 110001, India
Phone: [91] (11) 336-6765/7943
Fax: [91] (11) 336-8355
E-mail: agnivesh@usnl.com
Web site: www.swamiagnivesh.com
Founded after police opened ﬁre on a workers’ demonstration in
1981, the BLLF-India initially aimed to free bonded laborers work-
ing in stone quarries near Delhi. It is now a nationwide organiza-
tion ﬁghting debt bondage in all parts of the economy, including
agriculture, where the largest number of bonded laborers exist. It
coordinates activities of local centers in identifying, releasing, and
rehabilitating bonded laborers; trains activists; educates bonded
laborers about their rights; runs education centers; and provides
legal advice. The organization established a National Day of Chil-
dren in Servitude on which rallies and demonstrations are held to
highlight the injustices of the debt bondage system.
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
193

Butterﬂies
C-7 First Floor
Prabhataria, Mohammedpur
Green Park Extension RK Puran
New Delhi 110066, India
Phone: [91] (11) 686-3935
Phone: [91] (11) 619-6117
Fax: [91] (11) 685-8117
E-mail: bﬂies@sdalt.erner.in
E-mail: ritap@giasdlo1.usnl.net.in
The Butterflies NGO works specifically with street children
around interstate bus terminals in India. It helps to educate the
children, provide them with health care, train them in vocations,
and ﬁle court petitions on their behalf.
Publications: Issues a quarterly magazine that keeps an ac-
count of child-related accidents and abuse.
Web site: None
Child Workers in Asia (CWA)
P.O. Box 29
Chantrakasem Post Ofﬁce
Bangkok 10904, Thailand
Phone: [66] (2) 930-0855/6
E-mail: cwanet@loxinfo.co.th
Web site: www.cwa.tnet.co.th
CWA is a network of NGOs and individuals involved with the
child labor movement in Asia. Through grassroots efforts and lo-
cal advocacy, this organization works to foster development of
child-focused NGOs. It also analyzes the situation of working
children in order to raise awareness of the matter, advise inter-
ested organizations, and publish pertinent information.
Publications: Publications include a quarterly newsletter on
child labor issues (available on the Web site).
Web site: The CWA Web site offers various declarations on
children’s rights, an extensive list of references regarding work-
ing children (organized by country and by topic, such as “bonded
child labor”), statistical information, current research informa-
tion, and links to related sites.
194
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

End Child Prostitution in Asian Tourism International
(ECPAT)
328 Phyathai Road
Bangkok 10400, Thailand
Phone: [66] (2) 215-3388
Fax: [66] (2) 215-8272
E-mail: info@ecpat.net
Web site: www.ecpat.net
The End Child Prostitution in Asian Tourism (ECPAT) campaign
began in 1990 in response to concern over increasing child prosti-
tution in Thailand, the Philippines, and Sri Lanka. It aims to per-
suade governments to introduce effective policing to end child
slavery and prostitution, make the promotion of tourism for child
prostitution illegal, and encourage legal punishment of abusers,
not victims. As a result of its work, these and other governments
have introduced stricter laws, and Sweden, Germany, and Aus-
tralia have passed laws allowing them to prosecute their citizens
for sexual abuse of children in other countries. Other ofﬁces are
established in forty countries, including Australia, Canada,
France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland, the United States, and the
United Kingdom.
Global Alliance Against Trafﬁc in Women (GAATW)
36, Bangkok Noi Ofﬁce
Bangkok 10700, Thailand
Phone: [66] (2) 864-1427/1428
Fax: [66] (2) 864-1637
E-mail: GAATW@mozart.inet.co.th
Web site: www.thai.net/gaatw
Formed at the International Workshop on Migration and Trafﬁc
in Women in 1994, the GAATW ensures that human rights of
trafficked women are protected by state authorities and agen-
cies. The organization involves grassroots women in practical
support and advocacy of international organizations with simi-
lar goals.
The GAATW campaigns for a new, broader definition for
“trafﬁcked persons” and promotes and facilitates action research
in the ﬁeld of trafﬁcking women.
Publications: The publication program includes practical
guidebooks such as Human Rights in Practice: A Guide to Assist
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
195

Trafficked Women and Children and The Migrating Women’s Hand-
book. The organization has also published a regional report enti-
tled Trafﬁcking in Women in the Asia-Paciﬁc Region, presenting the
background and methods of trafﬁcking in the region, thus giving
a clear picture of the conditions and circumstances that character-
ize the situations faced by trafﬁcked women.
Web site: The GAATW Web site lists current activities, bul-
letins and newsletters, documentation and standards regarding
women’s rights, publications available for purchase, links to
other Web sites, and a questionnaire regarding women’s rights.
Human Rights Commission, Pakistan (HRCP)
107 Tipu Block
New Garden Town
Lahore, Pakistan
Phone: [92] (42) 586-4994/583-8341
Fax: [92] (42) 588-3582
E-mail: hrcp@hrcp-web.org
Web site: www.hrcp.cjb.net
The HRCP is an organization working against bonded labor,
child labor, and forced marriage. A Special Task Force on the
Sindh province has brought the issue of bonded labor and kid-
napping of freed laborers to international attention. Over the past
ﬁve years, the Human Rights Commission has succeeded in free-
ing over 7,000 bonded laborers.
Publications: Every year, the HRCP publishes a comprehen-
sive report on the state of human rights in that country. In 2004, it
also published a major report on child labor entitled Rights of Pak-
istan Children: The Task Ahead.
Web site: The HRCP Web site provides up-to-the-minute re-
ports on human rights violations in Pakistan, press releases, a list
of its publications, and a special secton devoted to Afghanistan.
Informal Sector Service Center (INSEC)
P.O. Box 2726
Kathmandu, Nepal
Phone: [977] 1-427-8770
Fax: [977] 1-427-0551
E-mail: insec@insec.org.np
Web site: www.insec.org.np
196
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

INSEC works to promote and protect the human rights of people
in unorganized sectors of Nepal. Research into human rights
abuses includes the bonded labor system. It also runs human
rights and literacy training programs and works with the gov-
ernment to pass effective legislation banning all forms of bonded
labor.
Publications: INSEC’s documentation center produces and
circulates an annual report on human rights issues as well as reg-
ular newsletters. It has also published a comprehensive report on
bonded labor in western Nepal.
Web site: The INSEC Web site provides a history of the orga-
nization, a list of accomplishments, current INSEC programs and
publications, and general human rights information.
People’s Recovery, Empowerment and Development
Assistance (PREDA) Foundation, Inc.
Upper Kalakalan
Olongapo City 2200, Philippines
Phone: [63] (47) 223-9629
Fax: [63] (47) 222-5573
E-mail: predair@info.com.ph
Web site: www.preda.org
PREDA is a not-for-proﬁt human rights organization focusing on
women and children’s rights. It promotes just laws to empower
the poor and protect their rights. PREDA also aims to protect the
weak and defenseless, mainly children and women exploited in
demeaning labor such as prostitution. The organization assists the
sexually abused and leads investigations into allegations of abuse.
Publications: PREDA publishes a regular newsletter, available
online. It also posts all articles published externally about or
mentioning PREDA on its Web site.
Web site: The PREDA Web site has a history of the organiza-
tion, archives of its newsletter, links to projects, campaign links,
and an on-site search engine.
Shoishab
917 Iqbal Road
Mohammadpur, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Phone: [880] (2) 819 873
Fax: [880] (2) 9122 130
E-mail: shoishab@bangla.net 
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
197

Shoishab campaigns nationally on the rights of child domestic
workers and has demonstrated the abuses suffered by such chil-
dren through surveys. It also runs classes for children working as
domestic servants and other deprived children.
Web site: None
Society for the Protection of the Rights of the Child (SPARC)
No. 14, Fourth Floor
109-West, Sardar Begum Plaza
Blue Area, Islamabad, Pakistan
Phone: [92] (51) 227-9504
Fax: [92] (51) 227-9256
E-mail: isb@sparcpk.org
Web site: www.sparcpk.org
SPARC promotes and protects the rights of children according to
international labor standards, while also researching their cause
and raising awareness. Often collaborating with other NGOs, the
organization works on several issues related to children includ-
ing juvenile justice, child labor, breastfeeding protection, and cor-
poral punishment.
Publications: The “State of Pakistan’s Children” is released by
the organization annually analyzing the current state of chil-
dren’s rights and conditions in the country compared to interna-
tional standards. Discourse, an English-language magazine, ap-
pears twice yearly focusing on one theme of concern in child
rights. Other publications available in Urdu, English, and Sindhi
are also provided.
Web site: SPARC’s Web site provides access to a wealth of in-
formation relating to the core issues of the organization as well as
a mission statement, campaign information, and international
standards.
South Asian Coalition on Child Servitude (SACCS)
74 Aravali Apartment
DDA Kalkaji
New Dehli 19, India
Phone: [91] (11) 621-0807
Fax: [91] (11) 642-0029
E-mail: mukti@saccs.unv.ernet.in
Web site: www.saccsweb.org 
198
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

SACCS is a coalition of several organizations that work on child
labor–related issues in Southern Asia. The numerous NGOs, hu-
man rights organizations, and trade unions that make up SACCS
combat bonded labor and child servitude. Since its creation in
1989, SACCS has liberated many bonded children from various
industries. One SACCS project is the Mukti Ashram, a rehabilita-
tion center for freed child bonded laborers. See Chapter 5 for a bi-
ography of Mukti Ashram’s director, Suman.
Nongovernmental Organizations by Region
199


8
Selected Print 
and Nonprint Resources
W
hile the study of contemporary slavery is in its infancy, in
recent years, several well-known writers have begun
working on it. In spite of that, very few organizations, pub-
lishers, researchers, and writers address modern slavery. In turn,
this means two things: ﬁrst, that this cannot be a long chapter—
there is simply not a wide-ranging literature on the subject; and
second, there are still a lot of unanswered questions about slav-
ery today. Meanwhile, ﬁlmmakers have also turned their view to
slavery and trafﬁcking, and some award-winning documentaries
and one feature film (Lilya 4-Ever) are available. This ongoing
growth of materials means that it is easier than ever before to
learn about contemporary slavery. At the same time, some of the
most important and basic questions have yet to be answered
about new slavery. What, for example, is the best way to rehabil-
itate ex-slaves? What is the best way to get governments to take
action against slavery? And what are the best actions those gov-
ernments could take? How many people are actually being
caught up in international trafﬁcking? And where are they being
sent? How can we explain the demand for enslaved labor in a
country like the United States? None of these questions currently
have answers. It may be that as you use this book, you will also
think of questions that are not yet answered. If you do, try to be
adventurous in seeking answers. In the fight to end slavery
around the world, the questioning and work of every person is
important.
201

Print Resources
Books
Altink, Sietske. Stolen Lives: Trading Women into Sex and Slav-
ery. New York: Harrington Park Press, 1995. ISBN 1-85727-097-5.
Driven by the desire to start a career or escape poverty, women
migrate in search of work and a better life for themselves and
their families. For some, this search is the beginning of a night-
mare experience. From “hotel receptionist” to nightclub “dancer”
to “domestic worker,” this book exposes how women are hired in
their country of origin and then transported, left without money,
passports, or permits to become trapped into prostitution or do-
mestic slavery. Branded as illegal aliens and marooned in a cul-
ture they don’t understand, they have nowhere to go and no one
to help them. With personal testimony from women caught in the
trafﬁcking web, Stolen Lives reveals the violent inner workings of
international crime networks, the routes and methods involved,
and how the trafﬁcking gangs are able to circumvent the law.
Anderson, Bridget. Britain’s Secret Slaves—An Investigation
into the Plight of Overseas Domestic Workers. London: Anti-
Slavery International and Kalayaan, 1993. ISBN 0-90091-829-2.
This book documents the plight of overseas migrant workers in
the United Kingdom during a period when returning expatriates
and wealthy foreign nationals were allowed to bring domestic
staff into the country on a tourist visa. These individuals’ lack of
independent immigration status tied them to their employer be-
cause escape would cause them to lose their right to work at all
and be deported. Anderson’s investigation uses personal testi-
mony and detailed analysis of the UK concession and wider con-
text of labor migration in a world where economic disparities are
increasing. It also looks at the situation of Asian maids plus the
situation in Hong Kong and Canada and their attempts to solve
the problem.
Anti-Slavery International. Enslaved Peoples in the 1990s. Lon-
don: Anti-Slavery International, 1997. ISBN 0-90091-840-3.
The history of the struggle of indigenous peoples for the recogni-
tion of their rights has been intimately connected to the phenom-
202
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

enon of slavery. Throughout the world, indigenous peoples are
still subjected to a variety of forms of slavery, and this report
charts a cross-section of these terrible experiences in the 1990s,
varying from the sexual exploitation of women and children in
East Asia to debt bondage and serfdom in the Amazon.
Anti-Slavery International. This Menace of Bonded Labour: Debt
Bondage in Pakistan. London: Anti-Slavery International, 1996.
ISBN 0-900-91835-7.
This book looks at recent evidence of debt bondage in Pakistan and
the failure of the Pakistan People’s Party government to enforce
the law of 1992 that ofﬁcially outlawed it—despite the commit-
ment by President Benazir Bhutto before winning ofﬁce to eradi-
cate “this menace of bonded labour.” For the use of bonded work-
ers and campaigners on their behalf, the book reproduces in full
the text of the 1992 Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act and the
largely disregarded Rules of 1995, which should form the basis for
eradicating the bonded system and rehabilitating its victims.
Bales, Kevin. Disposable People: New Slavery in the Global Econ-
omy. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999; Revised Edi-
tion 2004. ISBN 0-52022-463-9 (PB).
This is an investigation of conditions in Mauritania, Brazil, Thai-
land, Pakistan, and India, revealing the tragic emergence of a
“new slavery,” one intricately linked to the global economy. Case
studies present actual slaves, slaveholders, and public ofﬁcials in
historical, geographical, and cultural contexts. The author offers
suggestions for combating the new slavery and provides exam-
ples of positive results from organizations such as Anti-Slavery
International, the Pastoral Land Commission in Brazil, and the
Human Rights Commission in Pakistan. Archbishop Desmond
Tutu called this “a well-researched, scholarly, and deeply disturb-
ing exposé of modern-day slavery with well-thought-out strate-
gies for what to do to combat this scourge.” (Also available in
Spanish, Portuguese, German, Norwegian, Japanese, Korean,
Turkish, Russian, and Italian.)
Black, Maggie. Child Domestic Workers: A Handbook for Re-
search and Action. London: Anti-Slavery International, 1997.
ISBN 0-90091-841-1.
Print Resources
203

In many countries, children working as maids, child-minders,
garden boys, and general helpers-about-the-house are a familiar
sight. Domestic work is, in fact, one of the most common forms of
child employment. But it is not known how many children are in-
volved, nor the age range of the workers, what led to their em-
ployment, the terms and conditions of their work, and their feel-
ings about it. This book explores ways of ﬁnding out about the
situation of these children. This practical guide draws on the ex-
periences and views of NGOs and others working with child do-
mestics in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Examining the rea-
sons why children working as domestic servants deserve
attention, the handbook’s step-by-step approach focuses on solu-
tions to research and methodological problems.
Brown, Louise. Sex Slaves: the Trafﬁcking of Women in Asia. Lon-
don: Virago Press, 2000. ISBN 1-86049-774-8.
Dispelling myths of the causes of the Asian sex industry, this
book explores the process by which young girls are sold or forced
into prostitution and allows the voices of the women to be heard
through their testimonies and experiences. With a close look into
the society in which this captivity and exploitation occur, the au-
thor concludes that the strict male domination of the culture is to
blame.
Cadet, Jean-Robert. Restavec: From Haitian Slave Child to Mid-
dle-Class American, An Autobiography. Austin: University of
Texas Press, 1998. ISBN 0-29271-202-2.
In his book, Jean-Robert Cadet relates his life in a moving, emo-
tional narrative. As a slave-child to a wealthy mistress in Haiti,
Cadet endured both physical and mental torture. From the age of
four, his childhood ended, and his life became dictated by the
whims of his master. As his story unfolds, the reader learns of
Cadet’s insatiable desire for knowledge and his determination to
attend school. Despite Cadet’s slave status, he is allowed to at-
tend the Catholic mission schools, where he takes pride in his
natural intelligence. Education carries Cadet throughout life—it
is his salvation.
Eventually, Cadet is abandoned by his master, only to be re-
united with her in America. At school, his abuse is soon found
out by a kind schoolteacher, and Cadet is sent to live with foster
parents. The young Cadet must now learn to cope with the
204
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

demons of the past, and the discrimination of white America. As
Cadet climbs through the ranks of the U.S. Army, becomes a suc-
cessful businessman, marries, and begins to teach school, he must
still face racism and intolerance. The reader sees that, although
Cadet’s lot has improved dramatically since his childhood, his
struggle is not yet over. Restavec is a gripping tale of slavery,
hardship, and determination.
Chang, Grace. Disposable Domestics: Immigrant Women Workers
in the Global Economy. Cambridge: South End Press, 2000. ISBN
0-89608-617-8.
Chang demonstrates how the women that perform the least de-
sirable jobs in America—as nannies, domestic workers, janitors,
nursing aides, and homecare workers—are crucial to our econ-
omy and society. In spite of the United States having a long his-
tory of immigration, these women workers are often now seen as
a potential drain on society. The denigrating attitudes they face
can mean ofﬁcial indifference when the workers face serious ex-
ploitation.
Colchester, Marcus. Slave and Enclave: The Political Ecology of
Equatorial Africa. London: World Rainforest Network, 1994.
ISBN 9-67999-876-2.
The Equatorial Africa of this study—Gabon, the Congo, and the
Central African Republic—has a long, sad history of slavery and
the deprivations of foreign forest product extraction. For the for-
est communities in the region the slave wars, conquest, forced re-
settlement, and labor in extractive industries and the lumber
camps has meant the undermining of their ways of life. Deprived
of rights and marginal to national economies built upon oil, tim-
ber, coffee, and diamonds, these people still ﬁnd themselves de-
prived of a political voice or control of their destinies. Leaked
studies carried out for the World Bank and published here for the
ﬁrst time show how the foreign-dominated timber companies act
with complete contempt for tentative resurgence of community
authority and the reawakening of long-submerged indigenous
traditions of equality and justice.
Cotton, Samuel. Silent Terror: A Journey into Contemporary
African Slavery. New York: Writers and Readers, 1998. ISBN 0-
86316-259-2.
Print Resources
205

This is the disturbing true account of a black American’s
journey into the horrors of modern-day slavery in Africa. Cot-
ton’s odyssey takes him from New York to Mauritania, where he
comes face-to-face with the Arab Berbers’ centuries-old practice
of enslaving black Africans. The book recounts Cotton’s month-
long trip to Africa, where he conducted ethnographic research
and created a film and audio record of contemporary African
slavery under the Arabs of Mauritania. The book is also the story
of an African-American’s struggle to come to grips with the
legacy of slavery and the brutal revelation that slavery continues
to thrive in Africa today.
DePaul University College of Law. In Modern Bondage: Sex Traf-
ficking in the Americas. Chicago: DePaul University College of
Law, 2002. ISBN 1-88900-102-3.
Since 1998, the International Human Rights Law Institute of De-
Paul University has monitored the rapidly growing problem of
trafﬁcking of women and children for the purposes of commer-
cial sexual exploitation. This is the report of a project that accom-
plished a social, economic, political, and legal analysis of trafﬁck-
ing in the Americas.
Ehrenreich, Barbara, and Arlie Russel Hochschild. Global
Woman: Nannies, Maids, and Sex Workers in the New Economy.
New York: Henry Holt, 2002. ISBN 0-80507-509-7.
This book is a collection of ﬁfteen essays covering various areas of
the global exploitation of women due to a new global economic
system and mass migration. Topics covered include mail-order
brides, sex tourism, modern-day slavery, and domestic labor.
Genovese, Eugene D. Roll Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves
Made. New York: Vintage Books, 1976. ISBN 0-39471-652-3.
This classic book goes into great detail on the history of slavery in
America. The hypocrisy and cruelty of the slaveholder class is
documented in painful detail. Genovese quotes extensively from
court decisions, slaveholder correspondence, and accounts by
former slaves and those who fought for their freedom. This is a
good introduction to historical American slavery, and you are un-
likely to ﬁnd a more thoroughly documented account of Amer-
ica’s most “peculiar” institution.
206
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Gibson Wilson, Ellen. Thomas Clarkson: A Biography. York:
William Sessions Limited, 1996. ISBN 1-85072-184-X.
A biography of a man often slighted in the historical record. His
was the first large-scale human rights campaign in human his-
tory. See also the newer book by Adam Hochschild listed later in
this chapter.
Greider, William. One World Ready or Not: The Manic Logic of
Global Capitalism. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997. ISBN 0-
14026-698-4.
Although not speciﬁcally about contemporary slavery, this is one
of the best books to explain the transformations in the world
economy that are making new slavery possible. It explores the
dynamics of the third industrial revolution by describing a story
of human struggle: of diverse peoples and nations faced with the
same dangers imposed by unregulated global ﬁnance, labor, and
competition. The resulting picture is bleak, but Greider points the
way toward solutions.
Hobbs, Sandy, Jim McKechnie, and Michael Lavalette. Child La-
bor: A World History Companion. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO,
1999. ISBN 0-87436-956-8.
A survey of working children from the Industrial Revolution to
the present day, this new reference guide goes beyond the usual
Third World conﬁnes. The authors analyze the problems and psy-
chological and social development of child workers, then present
an overview of child labor in specific countries and world re-
gions. They also examine individuals and organizations devoted
to improving the welfare of working children and discuss how
various governments, private organizations, and courts have
dealt with child labor. This reference contains accurate, up-to-
date information on a host of subjects, and the alphabetical en-
tries are cross-referenced by category.
Hochschild, Adam. Bury the Chains: Prophets, Slaves, and Rebels
in the First Human Rights Crusade. New York: Houghton Mifﬂin,
2005. ISBN 0-61810-469-0.
Print Resources
207

The campaign to end the slave trade in the British Empire was the
ﬁrst human rights campaign in human history. It may have been
one of the most successful as well, but the lessons and the remark-
able people who invented human rights campaigning are now all
but forgotten. This fascinating book concentrates on Thomas
Clarkson, the man who was known as “the Originator” for the
way he built up the antislavery movement. (See Chapter 5 of this
book for a brief biography of Clarkson.) Starting as a college grad-
uate in 1787, he put slavery on the political agenda and, in time,
formed a mass movement that brought legal slavery to an end.
Human Rights Watch. A Modern Form of Slavery: Trafﬁcking of
Burmese Women and Girls into Brothels in Thailand. New York:
Human Rights Watch, 1993. ISBN 1-56432-107-X.
Based on in-depth interviews with Burmese trafﬁcking victims,
this book documents the violations of internationally recognized
human rights committed against them. It also presents detailed
recommendations to the Thai and Burmese (Myanmar) govern-
ments and the international community for improving the pro-
tection of the thousands of women and girls who are trafﬁcked
into Thai brothels each year as well as for ensuring the prosecu-
tion of their abusers.
Human Rights Watch. Owed Justice: Thai Women Trafﬁcked into
Debt Bondage in Japan. New York: Human Rights Watch, 2000.
ISBN 1-56432-252-1.
Reporting on the experiences of many Thai women trafficked
into Japan working in slave-like conditions to pay back “debts,”
this book details the dangers experienced by those who escape,
the lack of assistance from Japanese ofﬁcials, and the failings of
both Thailand’s and Japan’s governments in reacting to and pre-
venting the trafﬁcking of women. 
Human Rights Watch. Pakistan: Contemporary Forms of Slavery.
New York: Human Rights Watch, 1995. ISBN 1-56432-154-1.
This book illustrates how, throughout Pakistan, employers
forcibly extract labor from adults and children, restrict their free-
dom of movement, and deny them the right to negotiate the terms
of their employment. It blames the government of Pakistan for
208
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

these abuses, both by the direct involvement of the police and
through the state’s failure to protect the rights of bonded laborers.
Human Rights Watch. Rape for Proﬁt: Trafﬁcking of Nepali Girls
and Women to India’s Brothels. New York: Human Rights Watch,
1995. ISBN 1-56432-155-X.
This book focuses on the trafficking of girls and women from
Nepal to brothels in Bombay, where they compose up to half of
the city’s estimated 100,000 brothel workers.
Human Rights Watch. The Small Hands of Slavery: Bonded Child
Labor in India. New York: Human Rights Watch, 1996. ISBN 1-
56432-172-X.
Based on interviews with over 100 children during a two-month
investigation in India, this report details their plight in the silk,
beedi (hand-rolled cigarettes), synthetic gems, silver, leather,
agricultural, and carpet industries.
Jok, Jok Madut. War and Slavery in Sudan. Philadelphia: Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania Press, 2001. ISBN 0-81221-762-4.
A look back into the history of slavery in Sudan and the regional
and religious conflicts that have been under way for centuries,
this book refutes popular belief for the cause of current slave
practices in the country, and explains the racial motivation be-
hind decades of oppression in the black south. 
Kielburger, Craig, with Kevin Major. Free the Children: A Young
Man Fights against Child Labor and Proves that Children Can
Change the World. New York: Harper Collins, 1998. ISBN 0-06093-
065-9.
This is the dramatic story of one child’s transformation from a
normal middle-class kid from the suburbs into an activist ﬁght-
ing against child labor on the world stage of international human
rights. Kielburger founded the organization Free the Children
with his schoolmates at the age of twelve. This book charts the
growing awareness and commitment of these young people and
the experiences that propelled them into the public eye as key
campaigners against child labor.
Print Resources
209

Kipiniak, Chris, et al. “Passion Play.” Nightcrawler V. 2, 1–4. New
York: Marvel Comics, February–May 2002.
This four-part comic book series explores the presence of slavery
in America. The title character, Nightcrawler, comes to the aid of
a Thai woman who has just escaped from her mistress after two
years of servitude and eventually defeats an international hu-
man trafficker responsible for selling hundreds of desperate
people.
Kuklin, Susan. Iqbal Masih and the Crusaders against Child Slav-
ery. New York: Henry Holt, 1998. ISBN 0-80505-459-6.
Here is the powerful story of Iqbal Masih’s life and death (see his
biography in Chapter 5) and of the movement that continues the
struggle against child labor today. This book shows how we are
all implicated in the global practice of child labor and how we
can all work together to end it.
Kyle, David, and Rey Koslowski, eds. Global Human Smuggling:
Comparative Perspectives. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 2001. ISBN 0-80186-590-5.
This book, a collection of pieces, examines case studies of human
smuggling in various regions, discusses the legal and social con-
structions of human smuggling, employment of illegal immi-
grants and trafﬁcking, and explores the sociohistorical context of
these issues.
Lean-Lim, L., ed. The Sex Sector: The Economic and Social Bases
of Prostitution in Southeast Asia. Geneva: International Labor
Organization, 1997. ISBN 9-22109-522-3.
This book focuses on the commercial sex sector and its institu-
tional structures and connections with the national and interna-
tional economies. It includes case studies of Indonesia, Malaysia,
the Philippines, and Thailand, illustrating how vested economic
interests and unequal relations between the sexes and between
parents and children interact with considerations based on hu-
man rights, workers’ rights, morality, criminality, and health
threats to inﬂuence the legal stance adopted by governments and
social programs targeting the sex industry. A chapter speciﬁcally
addresses child prostitution and why it should be treated as a se-
rious problem.
210
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Lebreton, Binka. Trapped: Modern-Day Slavery in the Brazilian
Amazon. Bloomfield, CT: Kumarian Press, 2003. ISBN 1-56549-
155-6.
Documenting the illegal trade in human lives that ends in
debt-slavery in the depths of the Brazilian Amazon, this book
provides a harrowing view of the lives of slaves, the slavehold-
ers, and the activists working against this injustice. 
Lee-Wright, Peter. Child Slaves. London: Earthscan Publications,
1990. ISBN 1-85383-044-5.
Based on research done with Anti-Slavery International for a
BBC-TV documentary, this book reveals the extent of exploita-
tion of child labor and services throughout the world. It shows
how what is eaten, worn, and used every day in Western homes
is all too often produced at the expense of poor children’s wel-
fare and freedom. It also covers the expansion of the child sex
tourism industry as travel to developing countries increases. In-
cludes case studies from India, Bangladesh, Malaysia, Brazil,
Thailand, Portugal, Turkey, Philippines, Mexico, and the United
States.
Luibhéid, Eithne. Entry Denied: Controlling Sexuality at the Bor-
der. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2002. ISBN 0-
81663-804-7.
Women’s sexuality has often been a factor in their admission to
the United States, in spite of the lack of law. This work explores
how the U.S. border became a site for controlling female sexual-
ity. Given that many women who are victims of human trafﬁck-
ing are brought to the U.S. in order to be forced into prostitution,
and that many trafﬁcked people are suffering sexual violence, the
judgments made at the border can have wide reaching conse-
quences.
McCuen, Gary E. (ed.). Modern Slavery and the Global Economy.
Hudson, WI: Gary E. McCuen Publications, 1998. ISBN 0-86596-
145-X.
Part of the Ideas in Conﬂict series, this book is a collection of short
articles by experts that explore and sometimes debate the issues
of marginal workers and global slavery, slave labor and child la-
bor, and economic growth and human rights. Blended with the
Print Resources
211

articles are exercises helping the reader to develop reasoning
skills, identify editorial bias, and interpret editorial imagery.
McGill, Craig. Human Trafﬁc: Sex, Slaves, and Immigration. Lon-
don: Vision Press, 2003. ISBN 1-90413-217-0.
McGill is a British journalist who has traveled the world to meet
and learn from people who have been caught up in human traf-
ﬁcking. He meets Chinese workers desperate to get to Europe, il-
legal workers in Australia, and women trafficked into Europe
and forced into prostitution. Unlike most work on trafﬁcking and
human smuggling, he also gets to know the trafﬁckers and smug-
glers. 
Masika, Rachel, ed. Gender, Trafﬁcking and Slavery. Oxford: Ox-
fam, 2004. ISBN 0-85598-478-3.
This book examines the operations of trafﬁcking and other kinds
of modern day slavery from a gender perspective. It explores the
relationships between gender, poverty, conﬂict, and globalization
that are driving today’s slave trade. The authors provide an
overview of what trafficking and slavery are, their magnitude,
and their complexity. 
Meltzer, Milton. Slavery: A World History. New York: Da Capo
Press, 1993. ISBN 0-30680-536-7.
This is a good introduction to the breadth of slavery’s history
from ancient times to the present day. It begins with the dawn of
civilization and carries the story of slavery forward to the present
day. This volume has many illustrations from many cultures and
historical periods.
Miers, Suzanne. Slavery in the Twentieth Century: The Evolution
of a Global Problem. Walnut Creek, CA: Alta Mira Press, 2003.
ISBN 0-75910-340-2.
This is the ﬁrst major historical work covering slavery, and the in-
ternational efforts to ﬁght it, in the twentieth century. Global in its
reach and carefully documented, this book is a central point for
any understanding of the evolution of modern slavery. It traces
the development of both contemporary slavery and the interna-
tional antislavery movement, particularly that of Great Britain.
The author explains the greater cruelty of newer forms of slavery. 
212
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Monzini, Paola. Il Mercato Delle Donne: Prostituzione, tratta e
sfruttamento. Rome: Donzelli, 2002. ISBN 8-87989-693-8.
Italian-language book on the state of women trafﬁcked into Italy
for commercial sexual exploitation. An English version is due out
in 2005. Paola Monzini was a researcher with the UN on human
trafﬁcking.
Nazer, Mende, and Damien Lewis. Slave: My True Story. New
York: Public Affairs, 2003. ISBN 1-58648-212-2.
This true story of contemporary slavery of a twelve-year-old girl
stolen from her village in Africa, details the abuse and horror ex-
perienced among the Nuba, a Sudanese tribe targeted by Arab
raiders for slave purposes. Mende, the young girl, is passed from
one cruel family of masters to another, beaten repeatedly and al-
lowed no life of her own. After seven years of captivity she es-
capes. 
O’Byrne, Darren. Human Rights: An Introduction. Essex: Prentice
Hall, 2003. ISBN 0-58243-824-1.
Using case studies and personal testimonies, this textbook pro-
vides a cross-disciplinary look at a number of current academic
debates within human rights. Topics including torture, the death
penalty, slavery, genocide, and refugees are explained in depth
and placed within the context of business, globalization, and
other areas of human rights concerns. Possibly the best textbook
for teaching human rights.
O’Dy, Sylvie. Esclaves en France. Paris: Albin Michel, 2001. ISBN
2-22612-259-1.
French-language book. Sylvie O’Dy was one of the founders of the
Committee against Modern Slavery in Paris, an organization that
has rescued many young women from slavery in that city. This
book explores the reality of slavery in the “City of Lights.”
Parreñas, Rhacel Salazar. Servants of Globalization: Women, Mi-
gration, and Domestic Work. Stanford: Stanford University Press,
2001. ISBN 0-80473-922-6.
This is the ﬁrst cross-national comparative study of Filipina labor
migration. The author did extensive fieldwork in Los Angeles
Print Resources
213

and Rome, Italy, ﬁnding that Filipina women on both continents
were experiencing similar dislocations and exploitation.
Pearson, Elaine. Human Trafﬁc, Human Rights: Redeﬁning Victim
Protection. London: Anti-Slavery International, 2002. ISBN 0-
90091-855-1.
Examining case studies and protection measures in ten different
countries across the globe, Anti-Slavery International makes
several recommendations regarding various areas of victim pro-
tection. 
Plant, Roger. Sugar and Modern Slavery: A Tale of Two Countries.
London: Zed Books, 1987. ISBN 0-86232-572-2.
Explores the link between the enslavement of Haitian workers
and the Dominican sugar harvest. The sugar produced then ﬂows
into U.S. and European markets. Haitian workers are often en-
slaved in the Dominican Republic during the annual sugar har-
vest. Brutally used and paid nothing, they do backbreaking work
in terrible conditions. Government and police complicity add to
their burden.
Robertson, Adam, and Mishra Shishram. Forced to Plough:
Bonded Labor in Nepal’s Agricultural Economy. London: Anti-
Slavery International and INSEC, 1997. ISBN 0-90091-837-3.
Investigates the situation of some of the most exploited groups of
rural workers in Nepal and the conditions that have allowed sys-
tems of forced and bonded labor to develop and persist despite
the ofﬁcial abolition of slavery in 1926. The book concludes with
recommendations for government, trade unions, and develop-
ment agencies, and calls for the introduction of legislation ban-
ning bonded labor in Nepal.
Rodriguez, Junius P. Chronology of World Slavery. Santa Barbara:
ABC-CLIO, 1999. ISBN 0-87436-884-7.
This volume traces the course of events, both great and small,
that have deﬁned the meaning of slavery throughout human his-
tory. Organized by geographic region and time period, it enables
readers to gain a quick understanding of how long slavery has
been part of human life and where it has occurred. It combines
multiple chronologies, sidebars on specialized topics, primary
214
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

source documents, and illustrations into a compelling portrayal
of slavery from the dawn of civilization to the present.
Rodriguez, Junius P., ed. The Historical Encyclopedia of World
Slavery, Volumes I and II. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 1997. ISBN
0-87436-885-5.
Documenting slavery on a global scale, this work is an invaluable
resource for anyone wishing to gain an understanding of the his-
tory of slavery throughout the world. With illustrations and
maps accompanying essays involving specific geographic loca-
tions, the encyclopedia delves into the practice of forced labor in
successive centuries. Presented in short but comprehensive en-
tries, 700 topics of world slavery are extensively cross-referenced
with bibliographical citations for further research.
Rosen, Ellen Israel. Making Sweatshops: The Globalization of the
U.S. Apparel Industry. Berkeley: University of California Press,
2002. ISBN 0-52023-337-9.
The open trading system of the global economy means that jobs
move freely to locations where workers are less expensive. The
U.S. clothing industry has seen very large numbers of jobs ﬂow to
areas of the developing world. In some of these new factories, the
workers are exploited in terrible ways. This book looks carefully
at how this loss of U.S. jobs has occurred.
Ruf, Urs Peter. Ending Slavery: Hierarchy, Dependency and Gen-
der in Central Mauritania. Bielefeld, Germany: Transcript Verlag,
1999. ISBN 3-93312-749-1.
Offers insights into the “how” of practices of slavery that persist
in parts of Mauritania up to the present day. It brings the gen-
dered structures of Moorish slavery to light and examines their
impact on strategies and tactics designed to bring this institution
to an end. Underlying this study is empirical data gathered dur-
ing two periods of ﬁeld research in rural central Mauritania.
Saunders, Kate. Eighteen Layers of Hell: Stories from the Chinese
Gulag (Foreword by Harry Wu). New York: Cassell Global Issues,
1996. ISBN 0-30433-297-6.
The author shows that millions of people still suffer in laogai—
forced labor camps—in the People’s Republic of China today, and
Print Resources
215

that Western nations participate in slave labor through trading
goods produced in the laogai. Among those telling their stories is
Harry Wu, a veteran of the laogai who attracted worldwide at-
tention in 1995 when he was arrested by the Chinese authorities
while attempting to gather more evidence for his campaign
against the laogai.
Sawyer, Roger. Slavery in the Twentieth Century. London and
New York: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986. ISBN 0-71020-475-2.
Though now somewhat dated, this is a good review of the state
of slavery in the world in the years prior to the end of the Cold
War. Reviews the situation of slavery around the world, looking
also at apartheid in South Africa and the case of prison labor in
the Soviet Union.
Seabrook, Jeremy. Children of Other Worlds: Exploitation in the
Global Market. London: Pluto Press, 2001. ISBN 0-74531-391-4.
More than 40,000 children die daily in the developing world from
avoidable sickness and disease, and tens of millions of children
labor in factories, mines, mills, and sweatshops, or scavenge for a
living on city streets and dumps. In the so-called developed
world, children’s lives are similarly blighted by drugs, alcohol,
sexual abuse, and violence. The children in rich countries are tor-
mented by unappeasable market-led hungers, while the children
of the poor are wasted by insufficiency. Seabrook argues the
global market is responsible for both of these ills.
Smith, Paul J., ed. Human Smuggling: Chinese Migrant Trafﬁcking
and the Challenge to America’s Immigration Tradition (Signiﬁ-
cant Issues Series). Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and In-
ternational Studies, 1997. ISBN 0-89206-291-6.
Recent cases of the smuggling of Chinese into the United States
have brought this issue very much to the fore. Shipping containers
holding trafficked Chinese landed in Seattle, Washington, and
Vancouver, Canada, in 1999. The dramatic increase in human
smuggling has, in large part, been driven by the significant in-
crease in Chinese citizens being smuggled around the world.
Stearman, Kaye. Slavery Today (Talking Points Series). Austin,
TX: Steck-Vaughn, 2000. ISBN 0-81725-320-3.
216
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Aimed at young adults, the Talking Points Series looks at some of
the most important and controversial current issues. The cause
and effects of these subjects are investigated within a global con-
text, with extensive use of illustrations and other evidence. This
book highlights the fact that slavery is not a thing of the past and
investigates the different circumstances that allow the practice to
survive. This is one of the best and easiest-to-use books about
contemporary slavery for young people.
Stowe, Harriett Beecher. Uncle Tom’s Cabin. New York: Harper-
Collins (paper), 1987. ISBN 0-06080-618-4.
An international bestseller that sold more than 300,000 copies
when it ﬁrst appeared in 1852, Uncle Tom’s Cabin was dismissed
by some as abolitionist propaganda, yet Leo Tolstoy deemed it a
great work of literature. Although “Uncle Tom” has become a pe-
jorative term for a subservient black, the Uncle Tom in the book is
a man who, under the most inhumane of circumstances, never
loses his human dignity. It is an inspiring book that still has the
power to give insights into the mindsets of slavery.
Sutton, Alison. Slavery in Brazil: A Link in the Chain of Modern-
ization. London: Anti-Slavery International, 1994. ISBN 0-90091-
832-2.
This is a gripping firsthand account of the spread of slavery
across Brazilian society based on six months of ﬁeld research in
Amazonia. It includes accounts of debt bondage in forest clear-
ance, charcoal burning, rubber tapping, and mining in the Ama-
zon region, where more than 70 percent of cases denounced in
the previous twenty years had occurred and where all thirteen of
the indigenous tribes who have been enslaved at one time or an-
other originate. Concludes with recommendations for action.
Taylor, Yuval, ed. I Was Born a Slave: An Anthology of Classic
Slave Narratives (2 vols., 1770–1849 and 1849–1866). London:
Payback Press, 1999. ISBN 0-86241-903-4.
This collection includes narratives from James Albert Gronnio-
saw, Olaudah Equiano (Gustavus Vassa), William Grimes, Nat
Turner, Charles Ball, Moses Roper, Frederick Douglass, Lewis
and Milton Clark, William Wells Brown, and Josiah Henson.
Print Resources
217

Thomas, Hugh. The Slave Trade: The History of the Atlantic
Slave Trade 1440–1870. London: Macmillan, 1998. ISBN 0-33373-
147-6.
This book views New World slavery in its international context.
The Portuguese and Spanish who ﬁrst came to Africa arrived in
search of gold. They found it, but they also found social systems
in which the ransom, buying, and selling of human beings had
long been established. These systems had existed in European an-
tiquity, and now they were revived when, shortly after making
contact with Africa, the European nations began to establish
colonies on the other side of the Atlantic; the horrible trafﬁc con-
tinued well into the nineteenth century. Thomas mines vast
archives and previously published histories to make his case.
This is one of the best and clearest books about the Atlantic slave
trade.
United Nations. Human Rights: A Compilation of International
Instruments. New York and Geneva: United Nations, 1994. ISBN
9-21154-098-4.
This is a handy reference book for anyone interested in the inter-
national conventions and law on human rights. It includes all the
major United Nations conventions that concern human rights.
Verney, Peter. Slavery in Sudan. London: Sudan Update and Anti-
Slavery International, 1997. ISBN 0-90091-839-X.
This report gives an outline of the history of slavery in Sudan and
its reemergence in the late twentieth century. Peter Verney, editor
of Sudan Update, puts the slavery issue into context and examines
the pitfalls of attributing responsibility solely to the present Su-
danese government. He underlines the importance of racial prej-
udice in Sudan’s conﬂict.
Williams, Phil, ed. Illegal Immigration and Commercial Sex: The
New Slave Trade. Portland, OR: Frank Cass, 1999. ISBN 0-71464-
384-X.
This volume examines the dynamics of the sex slave trade in both
Europe and Asia, identiﬁes the role of organized crime, and con-
siders the countermeasures that governments and law enforce-
ment agencies must take to combat this global problem.
218
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Wu, Harry, and Carolyn Wakeman. Bitter Winds: A Memoir of My
Years in China’s Gulag. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1993.
ISBN 0-47155-645-9.
This is the autobiographical account of Harry Wu—arrested as a
student and never formally charged or tried—who spent nine-
teen years in Chinese prison labor camps and returned twice in
disguise to document continuing human rights abuses by the
Chinese authorities. He succeeded in capturing for the ﬁrst time
on ﬁlm footage of life in the camps. Forced to work, starved, and
tortured, he watched other prisoners buried in unmarked graves
as he was reduced from being a member of the elite intelligentsia
to an anonymous skeleton.
Articles
Bales, Kevin. “The Social Psychology of Modern Slavery.” Scien-
tiﬁc American, April 2002.
In this article, the author explains that, despite popular belief, hu-
man slavery still exists. Estimating that about 27 million persons
are currently exploited as slaves, this piece seeks to explain the
persistence of slavery in modern times. Describing various forms
of slavery in real cases and the life circumstances that support its
existence, it is made clear that slavery of the past and contempo-
rary slavery are very different. Due to changes in global demo-
graphics and economics, human beings have become less valu-
able and more proﬁtable to their owners.
Cockburn, Andrew. “21st Century Slaves.” National Geographic,
September 2003.
Available in the online archive at the National Geographic Web site
(http://magma.nationalgeographic.com/ngm/0309/feature1/
index.html), this article offers an expansive view of international
slavery. Beginning in Eastern Europe, a major source of much of
the world’s trafﬁcking, the author writes of meeting with an infa-
mous slave trafﬁcker from whom more than thirty women were
rescued by international police. The women had become debt
slaves forced into prostitution in night clubs doubling as brothels.
In Mexico, the extreme poverty of peasants driven off their land—
in some part due to North American Free Trade Agreement—
leads them to move north as trafﬁcked slaves for low-wage jobs
Print Resources
219

in the United States. Some end up as farm slaves on plantations
while many women are forced into prostitution. 
Colors Magazine, “Slavery.” V. 53 (December 2002–January 2003).
(www.colorsmagazine.com)
This full volume of Colors Magazine is devoted to the topic of con-
temporary slavery. Beginning with modern perceptions of what
slavery is, this magazine corrects the prevailing idea that there
are no longer slaves and relates the experience of real former-
slaves who have managed to escape their torture and exploita-
tion. Sharing individual cases and personal accounts from all re-
gions of the world and all forms of slavery, a human face emerges
from interviews with both slaves and masters. 
Junger, Sebastian. “Slaves of the Brothel.” Vanity Fair, July 2002.
Investigating the violent underworld of sex trafficking, Junger
tells the story of economically backward and, in spots, war-torn
Eastern Europe’s trouble with corruption and desperation. This
article details the process by which many poor and optionless
young women are duped by promises of good jobs in the West
and then trafﬁcked into foreign countries where they are forced
into prostitution. Visiting several clubs and bars where trafﬁcked
women are sexually exploited for money they will not receive,
Junger interviews several prostitutes who help reveal the corrup-
tion rank among the local “businessmen,” government ofﬁcials,
and humanitarian personnel. 
Landesman, Peter. “Sex Slaves on Main Street.” New York Times
Sunday Magazine, January 25, 2004.
Focusing largely on trafficking into the United States and sex
slavery carried out there, this article traces the routes taken by
traffickers moving their victims illegally across borders and
chronicles the stages in a trafﬁcked victim’s experience. As the ar-
ticle points out, the key to the success of trafﬁckers is the cooper-
ation of corrupt local ofﬁcials in Mexico, a country that is both a
source of victims and a transit point for women trafﬁcked from
Eastern Europe into the United States.
220
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Teaching Packs
A ﬁve-part Teaching Pack is available from Free the Slaves. It is
aimed at junior high and high school students, but parts can be
used with younger children and at the university level. It is an ac-
tive, hands-on pack that generates lots of enthusiasm. There are
role-plays, games, exercises, and plenty of resources for further
study. The sections are:
Part 1
Slavery in the 21st Century: A Background Briefing on
Slavery and Human Rights
Part 2
Slavery Throughout History (with ﬁve learning activities)
Part 3
Slavery and Human Rights (with background information
on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and six ac-
tivities, including the “Beware the Slave Trader!” game)
Part 4
Bonded Labor Campaign: Case Studies, Campaigns, and
Action Projects
Part 5
Resources and Contacts (with educational resources, use-
ful Web sites, lists of appropriate ﬁlms, and books)
The Teaching Pack can be downloaded for free in PDF ﬁles. It can
be printed in color or black and white and reproduction and dis-
tribution is encouraged. It can be found under the “Resources”
section of www.freetheslaves.net.
Brieﬁngs and Reports
Anti-Slavery International. Children in Bondage—Slaves of the
Subcontinent. London: Anti-Slavery International, 1994. ISBN 0-
90091-827-6.
A useful overview of the variety of slavery to which indigenous
peoples are still subjected in the 1990s, from the sexual exploita-
tion of women and children in Southeast Asia to debt bondage
and serfdom in South America. The report shows how the history
of the struggle for the recognition of the rights of the 350 million
surviving indigenous peoples is intimately connected to the phe-
Print Resources
221

nomenon of slavery, and how repercussions of slavery are partic-
ularly severe for indigenous people.
Anti-Slavery International. Debt Bondage. London: Anti-Slavery
International, 1998. ISBN 0-90091-846-2.
A provocative and accessible report that provides an overview of
debt bondage around the world. Excellent for use with young
people; gives case histories, explanations, and recommendations.
Bequele, A., and W. E. Myers. First Things First in Child Labor:
Eliminating Work Detrimental to Children. Geneva: ILO, 1995.
ISBN 9-22109-197-X.
Uses numerous case studies to discuss the difﬁculties in deﬁning
work that is hazardous to children and the various preventative
approaches that have been used.
Black, Maggie. In the Twilight Zone: Child Workers in the Hotel,
Tourism and Catering Industry. Geneva: ILO, 1995. ISBN 9-22109-
194-5.
Children around the world are used and abused in the tourism
industry, but this little-studied group of child laborers and their
situations are not well known.
Bureau of International Labor Affairs, U.S. Department of Labor.
By the Sweat and Toil of Children: The Use of Child Labor in
American Imports—A Report to the Committees on Appropria-
tions, United States Congress (Vols. 1 and 2). Washington, DC:
Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1994.
The U.S. government conducted this review to identify any foreign
industry and their host country using child labor in the export of
manufactured products from industry or mining to the United
States. It includes regional overviews and an overview of the
“abolish or regulate” debate. Common kinds of child labor includ-
ing bonded labor are included. Also provides country proﬁles.
Bureau of International Labor Affairs, U.S. Department of Labor.
The Apparel Industry and Codes of Conduct: A Solution to the In-
ternational Child Labor Problem (Vols. 3 and 4). Washington, DC:
Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1996.
222
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Examines nine consumer label programs addressing child labor
in the hand-knotted carpet, leather footwear, soccer ball, and tea
industries together with other efforts by businesses to develop
and implement policies prohibiting child labor. An appendix in-
cludes the Adidas, Nike, and Reebok codes of conduct.
Bureau of International Labor Affairs, U.S. Department of Labor.
By the Sweat and Toil of Children: Efforts to Eliminate Child La-
bor (Vol. 5). Washington, DC: Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1998.
Reviews the child labor situation in sixteen countries where child
labor has been identiﬁed as a problem as well as the levels and
types of action being undertaken to reduce child exploitation in
those countries.
Cross, Peter. Kashmiri Carpet Children: Exploited Village
Weavers. London: Anti-Slavery International, 1996. ISBN 0-90091-
835-7.
Discusses the enslavement of children in the lucrative “Persian”
carpet industry.
Effah, Josephine. Modernized Slavery—Child Trade in Nigeria.
Nigeria: Constitutional Rights Project, 1996. ISBN 9-78294-408-4.
Documents the growing incidence of trafficking in young chil-
dren sold into domestic, sexual, and economic slavery in Nigeria.
Includes analysis of the political economy of Nigeria, the smug-
gling, kidnapping, and recruitment process, role of parents and
middlemen, domestic slavery, and forced prostitution. Published
with support from the Ford Foundation.
Forcese, Craig. Commerce with Conscience? Human Rights and
Corporate Codes of Conduct, No. 1, and Putting Conscience into
Commerce—Strategies for Making Human Rights Business as
Usual, No. 2. Montreal: International Center for Human Rights
and Democratic Development, 1997. ISBN 2-92208-407-8.
This two-part series presents the results of a survey of Canada’s
largest corporations and their international operations. The sur-
vey showed that only one in seven had codes of conduct with
minimal human rights standards, and it examines the effective-
ness of those that do exist. The second part provides an overview
Print Resources
223

of the kinds of campaigns that work to make corporations more
sensitive to human rights abuses in their international opera-
tions—strategies for consumers, shareholders, human rights ac-
tivists, and businesses campaigning for more accountable human
rights policies from governments and companies.
International Labor Organization. Child Labor—Targeting the In-
tolerable, Report 6 (1). International Labor Conference 86th ses-
sion, 1996. Geneva: ILO, 1998. ISBN 9-22110-328-5.
Report submitted to 174 ILO member countries as part of the
ILO’s campaign against child labor. It surveys international and
national law and practice highlighting effective action through
new international standards and includes sections on debt
bondage, prostitution, and hazardous occupations. For ILO pub-
lications in the United States, Canada, and Puerto Rico, contact
International Labor Office, 1828 L Street NW, Washington, DC,
20036; phone: (202) 653-7652; fax: (202) 653-7687; e-mail
burrylee@ilo.org. (Also published in Arabic, Chinese, French,
German, Russian, and Spanish.)
O’Grady, Ron. The Rape of the Innocent. London: ECPAT, 1994.
ISBN 0-95979-712-2.
From the coordinator of ECPAT, an international campaign to
end child prostitution, this booklet focuses on children in Asia
who are trapped in the slavery of prostitution. Covers traffick-
ing across borders, sex tourism, pornographers, AIDS, and the
need for political change and law enforcement. Includes case
studies, statistics, and maps outlining the scale and nature of
the problem.
Skrobanek, Siriporn. Human Capital—International Migration
and Trafﬁc in Women. London: CIIR, 1996. ISBN 1-85287-162-8.
This report shows how the rights of migrant women in Asia are
violated. It discusses the deﬁnition of trafﬁcking in international
conventions and describes the legal and illegal ways in which
women are brought from Thailand to work in other countries.
Concludes with recommendations for international action to pre-
vent trafﬁcking. The author is coordinator of the Global Alliance
Against Trafﬁc in Women.
224
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

United States Department of State. Trafﬁcking in Persons Report,
June 2004. U.S. Department of State Publication.
The fourth annual publication of its kind, this report is a compre-
hensive account of government efforts to prevent the trafﬁcking
of persons. Examining the efforts of their governments, countries
are ranked in tiers according to their compliance with the “mini-
mum standards for the elimination of trafﬁcking.” Used as a tool
of diplomatic dialogue, encouragement and assistance for full
compliance is offered by the State Department to listed countries
before sanctions for noncompliance are put into effect. 
Newsletters and Periodicals
The New Slavery (Special Issue of Index on Censorship)
Index on Censorship is a magazine devoted to supporting free jour-
nalism and opposing the suppression of the press around the
world. For almost thirty years, it has campaigned for imprisoned
writers, artists, dramatists, and journalists and published works
that have been censored in other parts of the world. Its January
2000 issue was a special issue on new slavery, with contributions
from Brian Edwards, Harry Wu, Ali Hassan, and Kevin Bales.
Copies of the special issue can be ordered from the magazine’s
Web site, www.indexoncensorship.org.
World of Work
International Labor Organization
1828 L Street NW
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 653-7652
Fax: (202) 653-7687
E-mail: burrylee@ilo.org
Web site: www.ilo.org
The Bureau of Public Information of the International Labor Or-
ganization provides full text (Adobe Acrobat—PDF—format
only) of this magazine at the ILO Web site. Recent issues contain
articles about slavery and forced labor; the global unemployment
crisis; child labor; the textile, footwear, and clothing industries;
and work stress, among other topics. World of Work is a quarterly
magazine that does not necessarily reﬂect the views of the ILO.
Note that this is a graphically rich magazine, and the ﬁles are cor-
Selected Nonprint Resources
225

respondingly large. It can be ordered from the ILO or down-
loaded from the ILO Web site. Back issues are also stored on the
Web site and can be read or downloaded there.
Selected Nonprint Resources
Very often the pioneers that open up a new area of human rights
are journalists and ﬁlmmakers. That has certainly been the case
with new slavery. With so much of the public ignorant of the ex-
tent of slavery, television plays an important role in raising
awareness. Most of the films and videos listed below were not
made by the big Hollywood studios or the main TV networks,
but they are strong and sometimes shocking to see. One of the
best introductions to new slavery is the documentary Slavery: A
Global Investigation, made by British ﬁlmmakers Brian Woods and
Kate Blewitt and available from the Free the Slaves Web site
(www.freetheslaves.net). This film won a Peabody Award for
Best Documentary and two Emmy Awards. You will also find
magazines and information here that can be downloaded directly
from the Internet. If you are interested in learning more about
current slavery issues, it is a good idea to keep an eye on current
television listings; news programs are carrying more and more
reports on slavery or human trafﬁcking.
CD-ROMs
ILOLEX 1999. Windows, ISBN 9220106043. New customers (ﬁrst-
time buyers): U.S. $200; multiuser license: 50 percent surcharge.
Order from www.ilo.org.
Since its creation, the International Labor Organization has devel-
oped an extensive body of texts in the ﬁeld of international labor
law. However, these texts are contained in numerous publications
that are not easily accessible. This has constituted a serious bar-
rier to their dissemination to ILO constituents and other inter-
ested institutions, for which the provisions adopted by the ILO
on a particular subject and their application around the world
would otherwise provide valuable guidance. ILOLEX is a full-
text trilingual database (English/French/Spanish) on interna-
tional labor standards with sophisticated search-and-retrieval
226
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

software. A single CD-ROM contains all three language versions.
Each language version includes:
• The ILO Constitution
• All the ILO conventions and recommendations
• The Reports of the Committee on Freedom of Association, 
from 1985
• The Comments of the Committee of Experts on the Appli-
cation of Conventions and Recommendations, from 1987
• The Annual Report of the Conference Committee on the
Application of Standards, from 1987
• The Reports of Committees and Commissions established
under Articles 24 and 26 of the ILO Constitution to exam-
ine representations and complaints, from 1985
• Ratiﬁcation lists by convention and by country
In sum, ILOLEX contains about 70,000 full-text documents
divided into several chapters. It is possible to search the whole
database by subject classiﬁcation, country, particular convention,
or free text query using words or expressions.
Key Indicators of the Labor Market 1999 (KILM). CD-ROM only
(single user), U.S. $99.50; ISBN 9-22110-834-1; print and 
CD-ROM set, U.S. $180; ISBN 9-22111-705-7. Order from
www.ilo.org.
A valuable, wide-ranging reference tool, Key Indicators of the Labor
Market (KILM) provides the general reader, as well as the expert,
with concise explanations and analysis of the data on the world’s
labor markets, including world and regional estimates. Harvest-
ing vast information from international data repositories as well
as regional and national statistical sources, this comprehensive
reference offers data on a broad range of countries and issues
such as labor force, employment, unemployment, underemploy-
ment, educational attainment of the workforce, and more for the
years 1980 and 1990 and all available subsequent years. KILM is
available in two formats—standard print version and CD-ROM.
The CD-ROM’s interactive design allows users to customize their
searches by any combination of indicator, country, year, data in-
puts, and more and makes searching for relevant information
quick and simple.
Selected Nonprint Resources
227

The World Guide 2003/2004
The World Guide is an up-to-date reference opus on the past and
present of human societies, offering text, maps, graphics, im-
ages, music, and statistics on all the nations of the planet. It pro-
vides analysis of main international issues from the human
rights, social, and environmental angles. Since 1997, it has been
published on the Internet along with The Guide Weekly, a weekly
update service.
The World Guide is divided into two large sections: The ﬁrst
provides analysis of major international problems and tenden-
cies, and the second offers current information on 217 nations of
the world, including some still ﬁghting for their independence,
and all the current members of the United Nations.
The first section pursues the problems of population, chil-
dren, food, health, education, women, work, communications,
refugees, indigenous people, debt, aid, trade, arms, transnation-
als, climate change, international organizations, and so on.
Within each subject area, a “themes” subsection is renewed peri-
odically according to how issues have evolved over the two-year
period. The 1999/2000 issue carries an overview of the twentieth
century on the basis of ﬁve thematic areas: the Earth and its peo-
ples, society, science and technology, the economy, and interna-
tional relations.
In the second section, the main text brings together the his-
tory of the country since the times of the ﬁrst peoples, an element
corrected and extended in each edition, and the most relevant
events of the past two years. The proﬁle and statistics, giving the
latest available ﬁgures, complete the update.
The book contains more than 750,000 words, including text
and statistical data; more than 250 maps of the countries, with
their corresponding regional location; some 650 charts; and
10,000 references. The World Guide is researched and published in
Montevideo, Uruguay, by the Third World Institute (ITeM) in
conjunction with an extensive worldwide network of persons
and civil organizations.
The new CD-ROM, which appears with the 1999/2000 edi-
tion, incorporates multimedia elements. The text, statistics, and
maps of the printed version are accompanied by the flags, na-
tional anthems, and a selection of photographs of all the coun-
tries on the planet. This version also includes the Amnesty Inter-
national and Social Watch annual reports. All the data, charts,
228
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

photographs, maps, and texts can be printed or downloaded to
your computer. The CD-ROM or book can be ordered at the Third
World Institute Web site at www.guiadelmundo.org.uy or
through www.amazon.com. Orders by post can be made to:
Books on Wings
973 Valencia Street
San Francisco, CA 94110
Phone: (415) 285-1145
Fax: (415) 285-3298
The Social Watch Annual Report 2004
Also from the Third World Institute, the Social Watch report
keeps track every year of progress and regression in the path to-
ward eradicating poverty and achieving gender equity, a promise
made by governments at the UN in 1995 and reaffirmed in the
year 2000 at the Millennium Summit. It is published annually in
print and CD-ROM format. The electronic version is available to
everyone free of charge. Find it at www.socwatch.org. 
Exhibitions
The Changing Face of Slavery
This twenty-panel exhibition, available in both A1 (59.4cm 
84.1cm) and A3 (29.7cm  42cm) sizes, takes the audience on a
visual journey through history, from the time of the transatlantic
slave trade to slavery in contemporary society. It introduces the
idea of rights, both natural and human, and presents the Univer-
sal Declaration of Human Rights as the common goal for all peo-
ples of all nations. Children’s rights are an important component
of the exhibition, which focuses on the worst forms of child la-
bor, including the carpet industry in South Asia and child do-
mestic work in West Africa. It also looks at the exploitation of
migrant workers hidden away as domestic slaves in parts of
London.
There is a strong emphasis on the both past and present cam-
paigners, from people such as Olaudah Equiano and Mary Prince
who fought against the transatlantic slave trade, to present day
campaigners working to eradicate such contemporary forms of
slavery as exploitative child labor and bonded labor.
Selected Nonprint Resources
229

The Changing Face of Slavery is ideal for display in school
classrooms, libraries, halls, and museums. Available by contact-
ing info@antislavery.org.
Human Trafﬁc
Human Trafﬁc is a sixteen-panel (51  41 cm) black and white ex-
hibition, which documents the trafficking of children in Benin
and Gabon, West Africa. It is a testament to the extraordinary
bravery and courage of children who have been manipulated, de-
ceived, beaten, and raped by the adults who enslave them. It
reaches behind the headlines, looking at the people who are ﬁght-
ing for these children’s rights and asks what can be done to bring
an end to this horriﬁc trade.
Ideal for galleries and creative art spaces, as well as schools
and libraries, the exhibition is a powerful and visual educational
tool. Available by contacting info@antislavery.org.
Pamphlets, Photographs and Digital Images,
Posters, Press Kits, and Other Materials
The International Labor Organization is the part of the UN that is
directly concerned with slavery, forced labor, child labor, and
trafﬁcking. It produces several kinds of materials in many differ-
ent languages.
Pamphlets
The ILO provides leaﬂets that explain its work and address sub-
jects like child labor and slavery. These can be ordered from the
ILO or printed directly from its Web site at www.ilo.org. Leaﬂets
include “The ILO: Its Origins and How It Works” and “What We
Do: Social Justice and Child Labor.”
Photographs and Digital Images
The ILO has photographers around the world documenting the
problems of child labor, forced labor, and other work-related is-
sues. Stored on its Web site are thousands of photographs that
can be searched and reproduced. The ILO allows anyone to copy
and use these photographs as long as the source is credited. A
230
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

search on the words “forced labor,” for example, will generate ten
very good pictures.
Historical and contemporary images are now available
from Anti-Slavery International in digital form. Where possible,
Anti-Slavery will provide the images at a resolution and format
to suit individual needs. These are normally sent as e-mail at-
tachments. Fees to reproduction rights are decided on a sliding
scale, starting from $65.00; a minimum search fee may be levied
on complex image requests. Orders can be made to: info@
antislavery.org.
Posters
New posters focusing on major areas of ILO activities are now
available. Employers’ and workers’ organizations, trade unions,
and other organizations active in the promotion of fundamental
human rights in the workplace may receive limited quantities
(posters are printed in English, French, Spanish, German, Russ-
ian, and Arabic). One poster in the series is concerned with slav-
ery. For information, call the Washington, DC, ILO office: (202)
653-7652.
Press Kits
When the International Labor Organization does a large-scale in-
vestigation or publishes an international report on a subject, it
also provides press kits that break down the information into
clear and easily used sections. A good example is the 1996 press
kit Stop! Child Labor, which deals extensively with child slavery as
well as child labor more generally, and consists of three sections:
“Child Labor Today: Facts and Figures,” “Child Labor: Action
Needed at the National Level,” and “International Action: Stan-
dards Need Reinforcing.” The press kits are available in printed
form or can be downloaded or printed directly from the ILO’s
Web site, www.ilo.org.
Other Materials
The director general of the ILO makes regular reports to the UN.
These reports are also available from the ILO office or from its
Web site. Researchers and ofﬁcers of the ILO also regularly make
speeches to conferences around the world. These speeches are
Selected Nonprint Resources
231

usually available in English, French, and Spanish from the Web
site (www.ilo.org) and are cataloged by subject matter.
In the United States, Canada, and Puerto Rico please contact:
International Labor Ofﬁce
1828 L Street NW
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 653-7652
Fax: (202) 653-7687
E-mail: burrylee@ilo.org
Videotapes
Agenda 21
Length: 13 episodes of 26 minutes each
Cost: Call or e-mail for details
Date: 1994
Distributor: TVE
Prince Albert Road
London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] (207) 586 5526
Fax: [44] (207) 586 4866
E-mail: tve-uk@tve.org.uk
As the successor to WTN’s best-selling Earthﬁle series, Agenda 21
offers viewers a popular treatment of topical environment and de-
velopment issues. The series takes its name from Agenda 21, the
agreement signed by over 180 world leaders at the historic Rio
Earth Summit in 1992, setting out a blueprint for sustainable de-
velopment in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Using this as a framework
to explore what sustainable development means in practice,
Agenda 21’s television magazine format accommodates a mix of
topics within each episode and includes episodes with subjects
such as slave labor in Burma (Myanmar).
The Amahs of Hong Kong
Length: 11 minutes
Cost: Purchase $95, rental $25 (reduced rates for some groups)
Date: 1995
Distributor: Bullfrog Films
P.O. Box 149
Oley, PA 19547
232
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Phone: (610) 779-8226
Fax: (610) 370-1978
This film explores the lives of Filipina maids, called amahs, in
Hong Kong. Forced by mass poverty and continuing economic
crisis to leave their families and homeland behind, the amahs
send 70–85 percent of their earnings back to the Philippines. The
women often suffer horriﬁc abuse from their employers, and the
sacrifices they make are enormous, but so are the potential re-
wards: money to educate their children and to improve their own
living when retired.
Bonded Labor Campaign
Length: 8 minutes
Cost: $10.00
Date: 1999
Distributor: Anti-Slavery International
Thomas Clarkson House
The Stableyard, Broomgrove Road
London SW9 9TL
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] 020 7501 8920
Fax: [44] 020 7738 4110
E-mail: antislavery@antislavery.org
This video highlights the work of Anti-Slavery Award winners
and human rights activists Vivek and Vidyullata Pandit and the
plight of those held in debt bondage.
The Carpet Slaves—Stolen Children of India
Length: 47 minutes
Cost: call or e-mail for details
Date: 2001
Distributor: HBO (www.hbo.com)
This documentary follows SACCS, a coalition of human rights or-
ganizations and NGOs combating bonded labor and child servi-
tude, as they attempt to find a group of children forced into
bonded labor as carpet weavers. Central to the ﬁlm is the journey
made by the father of a boy among the group, whom he hasn’t
seen since the boy was kidnapped ﬁve years earlier. The two are
reunited in a surprise raid on a carpet loom worked by child la-
borers. The charcoal workers in Brazil are also featured in the ﬁlm. 
Selected Nonprint Resources
233

The Changing Face of Slavery
Length: 30 minutes (plus 60-page booklet)
Cost: $30.00
Date: 1997
Distributor: Anti-Slavery International
Thomas Clarkson House
The Stableyard, Broomgrove Road
London SW9 9TL
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] 020 7501 8920
Fax: [44] 020 7738 4110
E-mail: antislavery@antislavery.org
This is a well-researched video and teaching pack that focuses
on slavery past and present for the eleven- to fourteen-year-old
age group. Part one concentrates on the transatlantic slave trade
and encourages young people to look at why the trade began
and its importance for the growth of wealth in Britain. Part two
links the growth of that wealth to the Industrial Revolution and
the employment of young children. Part three brings the histor-
ical roots and contemporary issues concerning child labor to-
gether.
The Charcoal People
Length: 70 minutes
Cost: $22.46 (DVD)
Date: 2001
Distributor: World Sales
Zazen Producoes
Rua Perl 251/403
Jardlm Botanico,
Rio de Janeiro, CEP 22460-100
Brazil
Phone: [55] (21) 512-9572
E-mail: zazen@vot.com.brn
This documentary examines the life of the charcoal workers in the
rain forests of Brazil. Uneducated, illiterate, and desperately poor,
whole families of men work in the hellish business of charcoal
making. Interviewing generations of charcoal workers, this ﬁlm
portrays these workers in the midst of misery as beautiful and
hopeful. 
234
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Children’s News 1
Length: 26 minutes
Cost: Call or e-mail for details
Date: 1994
Distributor: TVE
Prince Albert Road
London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] (207) 586 5526
Fax: [44] (207) 586 4866
E-mail: tve-uk@tve.org.uk
This program looks at how the world’s governments are re-
sponding to UNICEF’s call to ratify and implement the Conven-
tion on the Rights of the Child. Presented as a “video newspa-
per,” it charts the progress of global ratification since 1990 and
focuses on three countries that are taking solid steps to imple-
ment the convention: The first is Bolivia, where the government,
supported by UNICEF, is undertaking a national drive against
infant mortality (one of the highest rates in the world). This is
followed by Norway, where the world’s first “child ombuds-
man,” or spokesperson for the rights of children, speaks in par-
liament on behalf of children and campaigns for their rights.
The focus next shifts to Thailand, where the government and
UNICEF are funding projects to provide young girls with skills
and self-confidence through the Daughters Education Program
to prevent the exploitation of children, particularly through sex
tourism. The program ends with a call for global ratification
and implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child.
Daughters of Africa: Senegal
Length: 15 minutes
Cost: Call or e-mail for details
Date: 1999
Distributor: TVE
Prince Albert Road
London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] (207) 586 5526
Fax: [44] (207) 586 4866
E-mail: tve-uk@tve.org.uk
Selected Nonprint Resources
235

Three quarters of Senegal’s children don’t attend school. Of these,
over 60 percent are girls. Child labor is common, and girls as
young as nine work as illiterate, domestic servants in the capital
city, Dakar. But with support from UNICEF, Tostan—a U.S.
NGO—has developed an informal basic education program to
provide literacy classes to rural women. Tostan also tries to per-
suade mothers to attend school with their daughters so they may
acquire the basic knowledge that will help them improve their
living conditions, and abandon traditional harmful practices like
female genital mutilation.
Dying to Leave
Length: 2  54 minutes
Date: 2003
Distributor: Film Finance Corporation of
Australia and Thirteen/WNET
New York
Contact: J. Braun
E-mail: braun@thirteen.org
Phone: (212) 560-2715
Originally aired on PBS as part of the Wide Angle series, this two-
part program examines the widespread modern phenomenon of
illegal migration of persons. Detailing the hardships braved by
the desperate number of people escaping economic destitution in
their home countries, the video traces the journey made in har-
rowing means to the goal and employment, often prostitution,
slavery, sweatshop labor, or agricultural work. Part One exam-
ines the smuggling of persons, while Part Two explores human
trafﬁcking. 
The Face of Decent Work
Length: 18 minutes
Cost: $12.95
Date: 1996
Distributor: International Labor Organization
In the United States, Canada, and Puerto Rico contact:
Ms. Karen A. Lee
International Labor Ofﬁce
1828 L Street NW
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 653-7652
236
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Fax: (202) 653-7687
E-mail: burrylee@ilo.org
Web site: www.ilo.org
This is a riveting exposé of the world’s most deadly professions
and workplace hazards. By spotlighting mining, agricultural, fac-
tory work, and other professions, the video shows how primitive
forms of labor have remained unchanged in their methods for
nearly a thousand years. It shows the victims of the pressure to
produce in an increasingly competitive and global economy—
from the world’s deepest mine in India, where men still extract
coal by hand, to the charcoal ﬁelds of Brazil, where families are
enslaved in a hellish landscape of smoldering ovens; to the chem-
ical factories of Africa, where innocent children are scarred for
life by the fallout of industrial disaster. In their own words and
voices, the men, women, and children who endure the most intol-
erable working conditions on earth tell their stories. Available in
English, French, and Spanish.
Going Home Guinea
Length: 31 minutes
Cost: Purchase $150, rental $45 (reduced rates 
for some groups)
Date: 1999
Distributor: Bullfrog Films
P.O. Box 149
Oley, PA 19547
Phone: (610) 779-8226
Fax: (610) 370-1978
Mohammed is just ten years old. For most of 1997, he was forced
to act as a young ﬁghter with rebel forces in the jungles of Sierra
Leone. His duties included carrying heavy equipment, acting as a
personal servant to other soldiers, and torturing and disciplining
any of the other child soldiers who stepped out of line. Eventu-
ally he escaped to Guinea, where he was one of thousands lining
up to register at the Gueckedou refugee camp. In 1997, Guinea
was host to an estimated 430,000 refugees: 190,000 Sierra
Leoneans and 240,000 Liberians who had escaped the eight-year
civil war there. This film evaluates the success of the Guinean
government and the UN High Commission for Refugees
(UNHCR) in protecting the rights pledged in this huge African
refugee population under the OAU Convention.
Selected Nonprint Resources
237

Haiti’s Cinderellas: “They Call Me Dog”
Length: 24 minutes
Cost: Call or e-mail for details
Date: 1994
Distributor: TVE
Prince Albert Road
London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] (207) 586 5526
Fax: [44] (207) 586 4866
E-mail: tve-uk@tve.org.uk
This Danish coproduction focuses on Haiti’s population of chil-
dren from age ﬁve to ﬁfteen—three quarters of them girls—who
work as domestics in middle-class homes. Forced into unpaid
servitude, the majority cannot read or write. Exploring UNICEF’s
work with such forgotten children, the ﬁlm shows how—in spite
of their bondage—the children find ways to change their lives.
Available in English, Spanish, and French.
Holidays for Us
Length: 26 minutes
Cost: Call or e-mail for details
Date: 1997
Distributor: TVE
Prince Albert Road
London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] (207) 586 5526
Fax: [44] (207) 586 4866
E-mail: tve-uk@tve.org.uk
Statistics don’t account for the millions of children who live invis-
ible lives as unregistered laborers—their special needs unseen
and unmet. But in Bangladesh, Haiti, and India new organiza-
tions are investigating their problems, as shown in this video.
Human Trafﬁc
Length: 11.5 minutes
Cost: £6 (VHS)
Date: 2002
Distributor: Anti-Slavery International
Thomas Clarkson House
238
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

The Stableyard, Broomgrove Road
London SW9 9TL
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] 020 7501 8922
Fax: [44] 020 7738 4110
E-mail: antislavery@antislavery.org
A video useful for organizational talks and workshops, this short
ﬁlm documents prostitution, child trafﬁcking, and forced labor in
West Africa and Europe. Interviews with women trafﬁcked into
prostitution in Italy and England, a child slave forced to hawk
water on the streets of Ghana, and activists against these injus-
tices all offer a personal view of modern slavery.
I Am a Child
Length: 52 minutes
Cost: $40.50
Date: 1996
Distributor: International Labor Organization
In the United States, Canada, and Puerto Rico contact:
Ms. Karen A. Lee
International Labor Ofﬁce
1828 L Street NW
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 653-7652
Fax: (202) 653-7687
E-mail: burrylee@ilo.org
Web site: www.ilo.org
Neither a catalog of horrors nor a fairy tale, I Am a Child is a fable
of despair and hope. Through compelling images and moving
personal stories, the viewer learns about children working in the
ﬁelds and plantations of Kenya and the streets and workshops of
Brazil. They are the innocent victims of poverty and exploitation.
To rescue them, to return their childhood to them, is the moral
imperative for every humane society. This video is intended as a
contribution to that cause. Available in English, French, German,
Portuguese, and Spanish.
Inside Burma, Land of Fear
Length: 51 minutes (2 parts for classrooms: 33 min. and 17 min.)
Cost: Purchase $250, rental $85 (reduced rates for some groups)
Date: 1997
Selected Nonprint Resources
239

Distributor: Bullfrog Films
P.O. Box 149
Oley, PA 19547
Phone: (610) 779-8226
Fax: (610) 370-1978
Inside Burma exposes the history and brutality of one of the
world’s most repressive regimes. Award-winning filmmakers
John Pilger and David Munro go undercover to expose how the
former British colony is ruled by a harsh, bloody, and uncompro-
mising military regime. More than a million people have been
forced from their homes and untold thousands killed, tortured,
and subjected to slavery.
Nobel Peace Prize–winner Aung San Suu Kyi, daughter of
the assassinated independence leader Aung San, spent six years
under house arrest. In 1990, her party, the National League for
Democracy, won 82 percent of the parliamentary seats. The gen-
erals, shocked by an election result they never expected, threw
two hundred of the newly elected MPs into prison. Suu Kyi’s
party has never been allowed to take elected ofﬁce. She warns in
the video that far from liberalizing life in Burma, foreign invest-
ment and tourism can further entrench the military regime.
It Takes a Child: Craig Kielburger’s Story—
A Journey into Child Labor
Length: 56 minutes (2 parts for classrooms, 28 min. each)
Cost: Purchase $250, rental $85 (reduced rates for some groups)
Date: 1998
Distributor: Bullfrog Films
P.O. Box 149
Oley, PA 19547
Phone: (610) 779-8226
Fax: (610) 370-1978
This is the video story of Craig Kielburger (see Chapter 5), who
was twelve years old when child labor activist Iqbal Masih was
killed in Pakistan. Shortly after, a seven-week trip to South Asia
turned him into a passionate, articulate, and effective advocate
on behalf of child laborers everywhere. He started a child-run or-
ganization called Free the Children, which now has 10,000 mem-
bers worldwide. It directs lobbying and petition efforts at govern-
ments and big business, and has raised over $150,000 to buy
240
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

children out of bondage and create a school for them, while also
raising world awareness.
Jessica: A Saudi Slave
Length: 41 minutes
Cost: Call or e-mail for details
Date: 1996
Distributor: TVE
Prince Albert Road
London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] (207) 586 5526
Fax: [44] (207) 586 4866
E-mail: tve-uk@tve.org.uk
“Saudi nationals believe that if they have hired a Filipino worker,
they have bought the whole life of that worker,” comments
Mustafa, responsible for protecting the rights of Filipino “guest”
workers in Saudi Arabia. Jessica Sumanga was just one of 2,000
Filipinos who leave their country every day to work abroad. Her
youngest daughter was in need of a heart operation, and so in
desperation for money, Jessica left her family two years ago to
work in Saudi Arabia. Bruno Sorrentino’s horrifying ﬁlm exposes
Jessica’s traumatic plight as she runs away from her first em-
ployer, who has not only failed to pay her and abused her but has
also taken her passport. For the next two years, Jessica is passed
from household to household, working as an unpaid maid—she
is fundamentally a modern slave. Eventually, she has to turn to il-
legal means to escape her desperate situation. Winner, Best Tele-
vision Feature Documentary, Asian TV Film Media Academy
Awards (1996); Justice Award, One World Broadcasting Trust
Awards (1996, UK); and Bronze Plaque, Columbus International
Film Festival.
Life on the Line
Length: 38 minutes
Cost: Call or e-mail for details
Date: 1995
Distributor: TVE
Prince Albert Road
London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
Selected Nonprint Resources
241

Phone: [44] (207) 586 5526
Fax: [44] (207) 586 4866
E-mail: tve-uk@tve.org.uk
In 1988, troops from SLORC—the Burmese military regime’s no-
torious State Law and Order Restoration Council—brutally sup-
pressed student demonstrations for democracy in Rangoon (Yan-
gon). In protest, Western governments cut off all aid. Since then,
Burma’s military ruler, General Ne Win, has been courting the
West again, seeking ﬁnance for new infrastructure and tourist de-
velopment in the country. Director Damien Lewis and anthropol-
ogist Tom Sheahan spent eight months in Burma (Myanmar) in-
vestigating how this is affecting ordinary Burmese citizens.
Traveling through the countryside, they ﬁlmed evidence that Ne
Win’s government has been forcibly clearing whole villages, rak-
ing the houses with machine guns and rounding up the inhabi-
tants to work—in chain-gangs—on clearing jungle and building
roads for a new pipeline carrying gas from the coast to Rangoon.
Lilya 4-Ever
Length: 109 minutes
Cost: Call or e-mail for details
Date: 2002
Distributor: Memﬁs Films
33 Charlotte St.
Fifth Floor
London W111R
Phone: [44] (020) 7153 4421
Fax: [44] (020) 7153 4446
Web site: www.metrodomegroup.com
Directed by Swedish ﬁlmmaker Lukas Moodysson, Lilya 4-Ever is a
ﬁctional representation of the current trend of trafﬁcking Eastern
Europan women to Western Europe to be prostituted as sex slaves.
Lilya is a teenager in a former Soviet country dreaming of life in
America when her mother abandons her, and her aunt, friends,
and school system fail her in the same short span of time. Eventu-
ally taken by a boyfriend to Sweden, Lilya ﬁnds herself trafﬁcked
and forced to work as a prostitute for her pimp/boyfriend where
her youth makes her particularly attractive to the older Western
men who pay for her. Unable to communicate and without docu-
mentation, she has little chance of escape. This ﬁlm exposes the
desperate circumstances that lead to human trafﬁcking.
242
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Modern Slavery
Length: 10 minutes
Cost: $15
Date: 2001
Distributor: Free the Slaves
1012 14th St. NW
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (202) 638-1865
E-mail: info@freetheslaves.net
Web site: www.freetheslaves.net
This very short ﬁlm is an excellent introduction to contemporary
slavery. It uses footage from other sources and ﬁlm shot in India
by Free the Slaves. It examines slavery in the United States, India,
West Africa, Brazil, and the United Kingdom. The economic un-
derpinning and key actions that governments can take are exam-
ined. It is not available for broadcast, but may be used in any
other way. 
Our News, Our Views
Length: 30 minutes
Cost: $30.00
Date: 1999
Distributor: Anti-Slavery International
Thomas Clarkson House
The Stableyard, Broomgrove Road
London SW9 9TL
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] 020 7501 8920
Fax: [44] 020 7738 4110
E-mail: antislavery@antislavery.org
This video pack examines children’s rights, child labor, and the
media, and is comprised of eight news reports written, produced,
and presented by groups of young people. Designed for fourteen-
to eighteen-year-olds, the activities encourage individuals to de-
velop and express their own ideas.
Out of Sight, Out of Mind
Length: 15 minutes
Cost: $15.00
Date: 1999
Distributor: Anti-Slavery International
Selected Nonprint Resources
243

Thomas Clarkson House
The Stableyard, Broomgrove Road
London SW9 9TL
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] 020 7501 8920
Fax: [44] 020 7738 4110
E-mail: antislavery@antislavery.org
An estimated one million girls under age eighteen work as maids
in the Philippines for little or no pay and unlimited hours. Pro-
duced with local NGO Visayan Forum, this campaign video was
given extensive airing on Philippine television and was also
shown in the U.S. Congress. This exposure added to Visayan Fo-
rum’s work on this issue and has resulted in a new law being pro-
posed to protect child domestic workers.
The Price of Progress
Length: 54 minutes
Cost: Purchase $250, rental $75 (reduced rates for some groups)
Date: 1989
Distributor: Bullfrog Films
P.O. Box 149
Oley, PA 19547
Phone: (610) 779-8226
Fax: (610) 370-1978
This classic ﬁlm investigates three huge resettlement schemes in
India, Indonesia, and Brazil—all sponsored by the World Bank,
the world’s largest lending institution. Some $30 billion in grants
and loans are provided each year by development banks and
other institutions to developing countries, frequently for mega
projects that involve uprooting indigenous peoples. Using the
World Bank’s own documents, the ﬁlm analyzes the social, envi-
ronmental, and economic costs of some of the bank’s lending
policies. As one person says, “Next to killing them, the worst
thing you can do to a people is to force them to move.”
Rights and Wrongs
Length: 3 episodes of 26 minutes each
Cost: Call or e-mail for details
Date: 1995
Distributor: TVE
Prince Albert Road
244
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] (207) 586 5526
Fax: [44] (207) 586 4866
E-mail: tve-uk@tve.org.uk
These episodes from the British series Rights and Wrongs concern
issues of new slavery: “Child Labor” reports from Pakistan and
elsewhere on the millions of child workers systematically abused,
despite international treaties drawn up to protect their rights;
“Human Rights in Asia” marks the sixth anniversary of Tianan-
men Square and the twentieth anniversary of the end of the Viet-
nam War by reviving the debate about human rights in Asia; and
“Human Rights Progress in South Africa” examines that coun-
try’s difﬁcult journey toward its objectives in the year following
democratic elections.
Rights, Camera, Action
Length: 30 minutes with booklet
Cost: $30.00
Date: 1999
Distributor: Anti-Slavery International
Thomas Clarkson House
The Stableyard, Broomgrove Road
London SW9 9TL
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] 020 7501 8920
Fax: [44] 020 7738 4110
E-mail: antislavery@antislavery.org
A video and booklet education pack plus evaluation form exam-
ining the sensitive subject of the commercial exploitation of chil-
dren for use with fourteen- to eighteen-year-olds. It covers child-
hood, the UN Convention of the Rights on the Child, selling
children, child prostitution and pornography, and trafﬁcking. It
also aims to develop awareness of and take action against this
growing global problem, also exploring techniques and issues
concerning video production.
Slavery: A Global Investigation
Length: 78 minutes
Cost: $20.00
Date: 2000
Selected Nonprint Resources
245

Distributor: Free the Slaves
1012 14th St. NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (202) 638-1865
E-mail: info@freetheslaves.net
Web site: www.freetheslaves.net
This is the ﬁrst major ﬁlm made about new slavery. It was pro-
duced by Home Box Ofﬁce and the British Network Channel 4,
and made by the award-winning filmmakers Brian Woods and
Kate Blewitt. Filmed in India, Brazil, West Africa, London, and
Washington, DC, it shows real slavery and explains how it fits
into the global economy. The ﬁlmmakers actually buy slaves in
Africa and help to free child slaves in India. This is the most im-
portant ﬁlm made about contemporary slavery.
A Sporting Chance
Length: 9 minutes
Cost: $20.00
Date: 1997
Distributor: Christian Aid (UK)
35 Lower Marsh Waterloo
London SE1 7RT
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] (207) 620 4444
Fax: [44] (207) 620 0719
Web site: http://www.stolenchildhoods.org/webfs.html
About 55 million children work in all kinds of trades in India
from sewing sports shoes to serving as domestic servants. Some
of these children work long hours making sporting goods that
they will never be able to use. The video looks at the work these
children do and how local organizations are seeking to improve
their lives.
Sudan—The Secret Story
Length: 26 minutes
Cost: Call or e-mail for details
Date: 1998
Distributor: TVE
Prince Albert Road
London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
246
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Phone: [44] (207) 586 5526
Fax: [44] (207) 586 4866
E-mail: tve-uk@tve.org.uk
Filmmaker Damien Lewis traveled secretly to an area placed off-
limits to UN aid workers to uncover evidence of a deliberate
campaign of genocide by the Sudan regime. His ﬁlm shows that
the roots of the problem are manmade and lie in a deliberate pol-
icy by the government in the north to clear out the black non-
Islamic peoples and impose an Islamic Arabic-speaking state in
order to gain control of the south’s oil ﬁelds.
Tomorrow We Will Finish
Length: 26 minutes
Cost: Call or e-mail for details
Date: 1995
Distributor: TVE
Prince Albert Road
London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] (207) 586 5526
Fax: [44] (207) 586 4866
E-mail: tve-uk@tve.org.uk
Over 150,000 girls between the ages of ﬁve and sixteen work in
Nepal’s 2,000 carpet factories. The stories portrayed in this pro-
gram are based on cases complied by Child Workers in Nepal, a
children’s labor organization. They include the history of three
girls, Suri, Tama, and Maya, forced by poverty to work in the
city’s carpet factories for sixteen hours a day and denied their
rights as children.
Ujeli: A Child Bride in Nepal
Length: 60 minutes
Cost: Call or e-mail for details
Date: 1992
Distributor: TVE
Prince Albert Road
London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] (207) 586 5526
Fax: [44] (207) 586 4866
E-mail: tve-uk@tve.org.uk
Selected Nonprint Resources
247

Filmed on location in the Rasuwa district of Nepal, this is the
story of ten-year-old Ujeli. Against the advice of her teacher and
doctor, who warn of the dangers of early child bearing, Ujeli’s
parents arrange for her to be married. Excluded from school and
forced to work from dusk to dawn, Ujeli rapidly assumes the re-
sponsibilities of an adult woman, including motherhood. This
tragic tale unfolds in a land where an estimated 40 percent of
women get married before they reach age fourteen. As a result,
Nepal’s maternal mortality rate of 850 per 100,000 live births is
among the highest in the world. In Nepali with English subtitles.
Under the Carpet—Bihar’s Lost Boys
Length: 15 minutes
Cost: $20.00
Date: 1994
Distributor: Christian Aid (UK)
35 Lower Marsh Waterloo
London SE1 7RT
United Kingdom
Phone: [44] (207) 620 4444
Fax: [44] (207) 620 0719
This documentary takes a look at child labor in the Indian carpet
industry and at international campaigning efforts against child
labor. For students aged sixteen and older.
Web Sites
There are a few Web sites that exist independently of any other
publications or organizations, some of which are the work of stu-
dents. The ones listed here are excellent introductions to child la-
bor and slave labor.
Free the Slaves
www.freetheslaves.net
This is your ﬁrst stop for information about modern slavery, cur-
rent action against slavery around the world, and lots of resources
on new slavery. There are fact sheets, the voices and stories of cur-
rent slaves and ex-slaves, and pictures of slaves and freed slaves
from around the world. In the resources section is a complete
teaching pack for use with junior high and high school students. A
complete linked site (www.activism.freetheslaves.net) is devoted
248
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

to students and others who want to do something about modern
slavery. Here you ﬁnd all the materials needed to launch a cam-
paign against modern slavery. Background documents and links
are given in the Resources section. In the Online Store you can buy
books and the Emmy Award–winning video Slavery: A Global In-
vestigation, as well as all-cotton Free the Slaves t-shirts.
Global March against Child Labor
www.globalmarch.org
The Global March movement began when thousands of people
marched together to jointly put forth the message against child
labor. The march, which started on January 17, 1998, touched
every corner of the globe, built immense awareness, and led to a
high level of participation from the masses. This march finally
culminated at the ILO Conference in Geneva. The voices of the
marchers were heard and reﬂected in the draft of the ILO Con-
vention against the Worst Forms of Child Labor. The following
year, the Convention was unanimously adopted at the ILO Con-
ference in Geneva. The site keeps you up to date with anti-child-
labor action around the world.
ILO U.—The Child Labor Web site for High School and
College Students
http://www.us.ilo.org/ilokidsnew/ILOU/ilou.html
Sponsored by the Washington, DC, a branch of the International
Labor Organization of the United Nations. At this site you can
take a crash course in child labor, ﬁnd out how students can make
an impact in the ﬁght against child labor, and join the ILO Stu-
dent Leader Network to get alerts and updates via e-mail.
Immaculata High School (Somerville, 
New Jersey) Child Slave Labor News
www.geocities.com/Athens/Styx/7487
The students and faculty of Immaculata High School are very con-
cerned about the problem of child slave labor. Each year, the senior
U.S. History II Honors class, taught by Miss Joann Fantina, pub-
lishes numerous newsletters covering many aspects of child slave
labor. A new group of students takes over the project each year as
the previous class graduates. It is a common interest among the
students and is continued enthusiastically year after year.
Selected Nonprint Resources
249

250
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
National Underground Railroad Museum Freedom Center
www.freedomcenter.org
The National Underground Railroad Museum Freedom Center
opened in Cincinnati, Ohio, in September 2004. This remarkable
museum chronicles the history of the Underground Railroad and
the ﬁght for freedom of slaves in America before 1865. The mu-
seum covers the historical side of the story brilliantly but also
hosts several sections on contemporary slavery and on the
people, and especially the young people, who are fighting for
freedom today. The FreedomStations on the Web site are an inter-
active learning area where you can do in-depth research on a
very large database of photos and documents. This is a great Web
site for teachers and students.
Ofﬁce to Monitor and Combat Trafﬁcking in Persons—U.S.
State Department
www.state.gov/g/tip
The U.S. government’s main antislavery agency is the Ofﬁce to
Monitor and Combat Trafﬁcking in Persons. Their Web site is a
lively introduction to antitrafﬁcking work around the world. The
office publishes an annual report on global human trafficking,
listing the situation in almost every country. Copies may be
downloaded from the site. 
Rugmark
www.rugmark.org
Rugmark is a global organization dedicated to taking child and
child slave labor out of carpet making and to offering educational
opportunities to children in India, Nepal, and Pakistan. Rugmark
takes child labor out of carpet making by loom and factory moni-
toring, as well as consumer labeling. It provides education by
running schools for former child workers. Their Web site holds a
wealth of information on child labor and the rehabilitation of
child workers. It also explains how a certification process
works—how carpets with the Rugmark label can be sold in the
knowledge that they are free of child and slave labor. You can
also ﬁnd shops that sell Rugmark rugs on this site.

Glossary 
Chattel labor
The traditional form of slavery when one person
totally owns another.
Child labor
Not all child labor is banned, but sometimes par-
ents pass their child on to another person whether or not money
is exchanged, and that person gains control of the child and the
child’s labor. Children are extremely vulnerable to physical
abuse—beatings and sexual—excessively long hours and/or be-
ing made to work in dangerous or cramped conditions. Girl do-
mestic servants are especially vulnerable to sexual abuse. Some
children are enslaved in debt bondage (see debt bondage) where
a parent or relative pawns the child, sometimes at a very young
age, in return for loans that they can never repay.
Some employers argue they need the “nimble fingers” of
children. But they really mean a docile and controllable labor
force. A good example would be a ten-year-old boy working
fourteen-hour days at a carpet loom. At night he sleeps under the
loom with his parents hundreds of miles away in his home vil-
lage. He may be chained, especially if he has tried to escape.
Convention or covenant
Agreements in international law be-
tween sovereign states. A convention is an agreement between
states, but one that is less formal than a treaty.
Debt bondage (also called bonded labor)
When an individual
works for another indefinitely to pay off a debt. A person be-
comes a bonded laborer when their labor is demanded as a
means of repayment for a loan. The person is then tricked or
trapped into working for very little or no pay, often for seven
days a week. The value of their work is greater than the original
sum of money borrowed. There are in fact two distinct forms of
251

debt bondage, both meeting this criterion but in different ways.
In many cases of debt bondage, the labor power (and indeed the
very life of the debtor) becomes collateral for the debt. This es-
tablishes the trap of bondage since all the labor power of the
debtor is the collateral property of the lender until the debt is re-
paid—the debtor is unable to ever earn enough to repay the debt
by their own labor. This arrangement is a hallmark of the debt
bondage of the Indian subcontinent. In other areas, the work of
the debtor may ostensibly be applied to the debt, but through
false accounting or extortionate interest, repayment remains for-
ever out of reach. In the ﬁrst form, the very nature of the agree-
ment that transforms labor power into collateral practically dis-
qualiﬁes the debtor from ever repaying their debt. In the second
form, it is a violation of the agreement, when “the value of those
services as reasonably assessed is not applied towards the liqui-
dation of the debt,” that traps the debtor (United Nations Sup-
plementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave
Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery, 1957).
Debt bondage can be inherited from one generation to another,
maintaining members of a family in permanent bondage in re-
turn for an old loan, the details of which have long been forgot-
ten. In some cases, employers who are owed money sell the debt
to a new employer.
Forced labor
Any work or service that a person does not do
voluntarily and which is only done because of a threatened pun-
ishment or penalty. Forced labor is often a feature of war. There
are exceptional circumstances when it is seen as acceptable un-
der international law. A country may make convicted prisoners
perform forced labor or compulsory military service. In countries
affected by war or civil conﬂict, such as Burma, those enslaved
are often the weak or defenseless such as refugees, members of
ethnic minorities, women, or children.
Globalization
That process of social change that is making the
world “smaller.” Features of globalization are the way that time
and distance are no longer seen as barriers to communication,
and the way that people all over the world are now exposed to
the same products, media, and ideas. One result of globalization
is that national governments are less able to control the ﬂow of
money, products, information, and people across their borders.
252
Glossary

Indigenous (people)
Native or original to an area as in “in-
digenous culture.” Often used to refer to the inhabitants of a ter-
ritory prior to invasion or colonization as well as to their descen-
dants. Indigenous peoples, such as the native India tribes of the
Amazon, are particularly vulnerable to slavery.
Migrant labor
Some domestic workers are subjected to slavery,
particularly children and immigrants who work and live in the
same house or premises as their employer and are paid little or
nothing for their work, often on grounds that they receive food
and lodging. They are cut off from families, local society, and
possible protection. Cases continue to be uncovered in countries
like the United States, where servants are brought in from
abroad, either legally or illegally, and then treated as slaves.
Nongovernmental organization (NGO)
NGOs are indepen-
dent organizations that are not part of any state or interstate
agency. They include charities, nonprofit organizations, volun-
tary groups, professional associations, trades unions, and human
rights bodies. NGOs do a great deal of the research and work lib-
erating and rehabilitating slaves around the world.
Serfdom
This is when agricultural workers cannot leave the
place where they live and work—often very similar to debt
bondage in practice. Where a tenant is bound to live and labor on
land belonging to another person and provide them with a ser-
vice in return, whether for reward or not and is not free to
change their status. In many countries, individuals, families, or
entire social groups have traditionally been obliged to work for
others for little or no reward. This status usually has no basis in
law, but the practice persists and is often enforced with violence.
Servile marriage
This is where a young girl or woman has no
right to refuse being entered into a marriage. In servile marriage,
a young woman is often given in exchange for money or other
payment, and she can sometimes be inherited by another person
if her husband dies, or even sold to someone else. A typical case
is when a twelve-year-old girl is told her family has arranged a
marriage with a sixty-year-old man. She has no opportunity to
exercise her right to refuse and is unaware that she can do so.
“Servile marriage” is listed in the United Nation’s conventions as
“a practice similar to slavery.”
Glossary
253

Slave
The word “slave” comes from the word Slav (as in Slavic
peoples), arriving in Middle English from Old French esclave and
medieval Latin sclavus, sclava, meaning “Slavonic” (captive). It
descends from Roman times when German tribes supplied the
slave markets of the Roman Empire with captured Slavs.
Slavery
In the 1956 Supplementary Convention on the Aboli-
tion of Slavery, the United Nations deﬁnes “slavery” as:
(a) Slavery means, as deﬁned in the Slavery Conven-
tion of 1926, the status or condition of a person over
whom any or all of the powers attaching to the right of
ownership are exercised, and ‘slave’ means a person in
such condition or status:
(b) A person of servile status means a person in the con-
dition or status resulting from any of the institutions or
practices mentioned in article 1 of this Convention;
(c) Slave trade means and includes all acts involved in
the capture, acquisition or disposal of a person with in-
tent to reduce him to slavery; all acts involved in the ac-
quisition of a slave with a view to selling or exchanging
him; all acts of disposal by sale or exchange of a person
acquired with a view to being sold or exchanged; and,
in general, every act of trade or transport in slaves by
whatever means of conveyance.
And added into that definition are “Institutions and Prac-
tices Similar to Slavery” which are:
(a) Debt bondage, or the status or condition arising
from a pledge by a debtor of his personal services or of
those of a person under his control as security for a
debt, if the value of those services as reasonably as-
sessed is not applied towards the liquidation of the debt
or the length and nature of those services are not re-
spectively limited and deﬁned
(b) Serfdom, or the condition or status of a tenant who
is by law, custom or agreement bound to live and
labour on land belonging to another person and to ren-
der some determinate service to such other person,
whether for reward or not, and is not free to change his
status
(c) Any institution or practice whereby:
254
Glossary

(i) A woman, without the right to refuse, is
promised or given in marriage on payment of a consid-
eration in money or in kind to her parents, guardian,
family or any other person or group
(ii) The husband of a woman, his family, or his
clan, has the right to transfer her to another person for
value received or otherwise
(iii) A woman on the death of her husband is li-
able to be inherited by another person
(d) Any institution or practice whereby a child or
young person under the age of eighteen years, is deliv-
ered by either or both of his natural parents or by his
guardian to another person, whether for reward or not,
with a view to the exploitation of the child or young
person or of his labor.
However, these deﬁnitions do not necessarily serve to deﬁne
slavery across history. For the purposes of this book, slavery is
deﬁned as a social and economic relationship in which a person
is controlled through violence or its threat, paid nothing, and
economically exploited.
Social clause
Social clause is a general term which refers to in-
troducing social standards into trade agreements which have
usually been driven by economic considerations only. For exam-
ple, the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) now
has a social clause making international trade agreements condi-
tional on respect for a number of internationally recognized la-
bor standards. The question of a social clause is one of the areas
of controversy in the World Trade Organization. Many people
believe that a “social clause” is an important way to prevent
goods made with slave labor from being imported to countries
like the United States. On the other hand, many developing
countries resist a “social clause” because they feel it will only
work to keep their imports from being purchased abroad.
State(s) party
In the United Nations Conventions or in interna-
tional law a state party is a country whose government has signed
up to a treaty or agreement and is legally bound to follow its pro-
visions.
Untouchables/outcasts
A term used to describe all those in
Hindu society, primarily in India, who do not belong to the four
major Hindu castes. Untouchables are now designated in India
Glossary
255

256
Glossary
as “scheduled castes.” Discrimination against these castes is per-
vasive in India and Nepal. In Nepal, there are even segregated
water fountains in public places for “untouchables.” This dis-
crimination is linked to slavery in that most people enslaved in
South Asia come from these castes. 

Index
257
A
A-3 visas, 34
Abolitionists
Clarkson, Thomas, 74–75
Douglass, Frederick, 76–77
freeing domestic slaves in the
United States, 152–156
Woolman, John, 94–95
Activists
Father Rizende, 88
government persecution of,
71–72, 79–80, 82–83
Kielburger, Craig, 64, 80–81,
186–187
labor activists and
organizations, 84, 90–91,
177–178, 182–183, 193
Masih, Iqbal, 82–83
Pandit, Vivek and Vidyullata,
84–86
Paraison, Father Edwin, 86–87
Saran, 89–91
Teyeb, Moctar, 92–93
Adoption of Children Ordinance
Law, 61
Africa
chattel slavery, 16
restavecs, 17
See also individual countries
African Network for the
Prevention and the Protection
Against Child Abuse and
Neglect (ANPPCAN),
168–169
Agnivesh, Swami, 71–72
Agriculture
activist organizations, 192–193
economic change affecting size
of slave population, 6
India’s debt bondage, 10
prosecution of forced labor
perpetrators, 40
Ahok Ahok, 129–130
Akope, Patience, 135
Alexander II, 58
American Civil War, 58–59
American South
Clarkson, Thomas, 74–75
comparing old and new forms
of slavery, 9
Douglass, Frederick, 76–77
Emancipation Proclamation,
58–59
Tubman, Harriet, 91–92

Amnesty International USA, 182
Ancient civilizations, 2, 25, 55–56
Anthony, Susan B., 94
Anti-Slavery International
history of, 32–33
honoring Father Paraison, 87
honoring Father Rizende, 88
honoring Kamara, 80
honoring Lopez Loyola, 82
honoring Vivek and Bidyullata
Pandit, 84
information about, 163–164
name change, 62
slavery in Nepal, 64
Anti-Slavery Society for the
Protection of Human Rights,
62
Anti-Slavery Society of Australia,
170
Anti-Slavery Squadron, 58
Apartheid deﬁned, 103 (table)
Arab countries, chattel slavery in,
16
Argentina, 57
Asia Monitor Resource Center
(AMRC), 171
Asian-American Free Labor
Institute (AAFLI), 182–183,
193
Asian Migrant Center, 170–171
Atalaya Regional Indigenous
Organization (OIRA), 192
Atlantic slave trade, 56
Awareness, 22–23
Awathi, Supriya, 30
B
Bangladesh, 68
Bed-wetting, 73
Beedis (Indian cigarettes), 18–20,
158–159
Benin, trokosi slavery in, 135
Black Plague, 56
Bolivia, 57
Bonded labor. See Debt bondage
Bonded Labor Act (Pakistan), 64
Bonded Labor Liberation Front
(BLLF), 72, 193
Bonnetti, Rene and Margarida,
1–2
Brazil
contract slavery testimony,
121–123
Father Rizende’s activism, 88
freeing enslaved children, 68
Lei Aurea, 59
Lopez Loyala’s search for her
kidnapped son, 81–82
Quirós Law, 58
Break the Chain Campaign, 34–36,
183
Britain
Abolition Act, 57–58
exploitation of indigenous
Peruvians, 59
Factory Act, 57
See also England
British and Foreign Anti-Slavery
Society, 58, 62
Brothels, legalization of, 29–30
Burma/Myanmar
abolition of slavery, 60
organizations and associations
combating slavery, 172,
183–184
testimony about forced labor,
137–140
UN investigation of slavery in,
65
U.S. sanctions against, 68
war slavery, 17
Burma Peace Foundation, 172
Burma Project, 183–184
Butegwa, Florence, 136
258
Index

Butterﬂies, 194
Buxton, Thomas F., 58, 60
C
Cadena family, 40
Cadet, Jean-Robert, 73–74
Cambodia, sexual slavery in,
148–152
Cameroonian slaves, 153–155
Caribbean countries, restavecs in,
17
Carpet weavers
freeing child laborers, xv–xvi,
33
Masih, Iqbal, 82–83
Rugmark, 34, 64–65, 67, 180
Suman’s rehabilitation of freed
slaves, 91–92
Caste position, 92, 103 (table)
Catholic Agency for Overseas
Development (CAFOD),
172–173
Charcoal manufacturing, 122
Charitable organizations
exploiting choirboys, 77–79
redemption of slaves, 24–26
Chattel slavery
characteristics of, 16
deﬁned, 103 (table), 251
Mauritania, 79–80
Sudan’s war slavery, 128–132
testimony about Mauritania’s,
123–128
Child activists
children ﬁghting against
slavery, 36
Free the Children, 36, 64,
80–81, 186–187
Kachepa, Given, 77–79
Kielburger, Craig, 64, 80–81,
186–187
Masih, Iqbal, 82–83
Slavery: A Global Investigation
(ﬁlm), 66–67
Child labor and child slavery
child labor deﬁned, 252
child pornography and
prostitution, 62, 103 (table),
185–186
Convention on the Rights of
the Child, 107
domestic servitude in France,
20–23
Dominican sugar plantations,
86–87
Free the Slaves organization,
xv–xvi, 32–33, 66, 140–142,
161–163
Hong Kong, 60
India’s beedi industry, 18–20,
158–159
international efforts against,
157–158
International Organization of
Employers, 64
Lopez Loyola’s search for her
son, 81–82
Masih, Iqbal, 82–83
organizations and associations
combating, 175–176, 178–180,
184, 190–192, 194, 197–199
Pakistan’s statistics, 66
restavecs, 17, 73–74, 156–157
Rugmark’s efforts against, 34,
64–65, 67, 180
Sri Lanka’s adoption law, 61
Suman’s rehabilitation of freed
slaves, 91–92
testimony from Sudanese
victims, 130–131
trokosi practice in Ghana, 18,
133–137
UN organizations targeting,
31–32
Index
259

Child labor and child 
slavery (cont.)
UNICEF, 166
in the United States, 152–156
U.S. legislation against
products of, 65
WAO-Afrique, 169–170
war slavery, 17
Child Labor Coalition (CLC), 184
Child Rights Information
Network (CRIN), 173–174
Child Soldiers Protocol, 67
Chile, 57
China, 62
Chocolate, 66, 67
Choirs, 78
Christian Aid, 173
Christian Solidarity International,
25
Citrus pickers, 40
Civil conﬂict. See War slavery
Clarkson, Thomas, 32–33, 57,
74–75
Clean Clothes Campaign, 63–64,
174
Coalition Against Slavery in
Sudan and Mauritania,
184–185
Coalition of Immokalee Workers,
40, 185
Cocoa Protocol, 67
Collateral, debt bondage and, 16
Colonial America, 56
Colonialism, 59
Comite Contre L’Esclavage
Modern (CCEM), 175
Condoms, 146
Congo Reform Association (CRA),
59
Congress of Vienna, 57
Constraint, deﬁning, 28
Consumption, 24, 42–44, 53
Contract slavery, 16–17, 121–123
Control of slaves, 2–3, 27–30
Convention for the Suppression of
the Trafﬁc in Persons and
Exploitation of the
Prostitution of Others, 61
Convention on the Rights of the
Child, 107, 178–179
Conventions, 251. See also
International laws and
conventions on slavery
Coolie labor, 58, 60
Cost of slaves. See Price of slaves
Covenant, deﬁned, 251
Credit unions, 90
Crusades, 25
D
Daobadri, Julie, 133–134
Dark ﬁgure of crime statistics, 47
Davis, Henry, 143
Death threats against activists, 88
DeBaca, Lou, 75–76
Debt bondage
ancient England, 55
contract slavery in Brazil,
121–123
deﬁned, 16, 103 (table),
251–252, 254
India’s agricultural slaves, 10
India’s beedi industry, 19–20
Masih, Iqbal, 82–83
Nankar, Keshav, 83–84
Nepal’s ban on, 66
organizations and associations
combating, 193
Pandits’ activities against,
84–86
Peru, 59
prostitutes in Thailand, 144–148
redemption of slaves, 27
Saran’s activism against, 89–91
260
Index

Sindh, Pakistan, 87–88
Swami Agnivesh’s work
against, 72
testimony about, 116–121
Thailand’s prostitutes, 10–11
Uttar Pradesh’s mining
industry, 89–91
Debt burden, developing
countries, 100–101
Declaration of the Rights of Man,
56
Defense for Children
International (DCI), 175–176
Deng, Gabriel Muong, 130–131
Denmark, 56
Department of Justice, 53
Detroit, Michigan, 142–144
Devadasi women, 18
Displaced persons, 6
Disposability of people, xii, 8–11,
144–148
Disposable People (Bales), 66
Domestic slavery
Break the Chain campaign,
34–36
in France, 20–23
in Haiti, 156–157
restavecs, 17, 73–74
Saloum’s domestic servitude in
Mauritania, 124–128
Satia family prosecution, 41
in the United States, 1–2,
152–156
Veerapool prosecution, 40–41
Dominican Republic, 86–87
Dos Santos, Hilda, 1–2, 3
Douglass, Frederick, 25, 76–77, 
94
E
EarthRights International report,
138–140
Economic, Social and Cultural
Covenant, 102 (table)
Economic Community of Western
African States (ECOWAS), 67
Economic relationship
as deﬁning characteristic of
slavery, 4
economic change affecting size
of slave population, 6
ECPAT USA, 185–186, 195
Education
Cadet as restavec, 73–74
Douglass’s self-education and
secret slave schools, 76–77
Friendship Schools Campaign,
81
level of education determining
vulnerability, 44
Rugmark efforts to protect and
educate children, 34
“School for Iqbal” campaign,
83
Teyeb’s self-education and
activism, 92–93
university-level courses on
slavery, 68
Egypt, ancient, 55
El Hor, 62–63
Emancipation Proclamation,
58–59
Empowerment of slaves, 90,
119–120
End Child Prostitution in Asian
Tourism International
(ECPAT), 185–186, 195
England, 55, 57, 75
“Entrenched: An Investigative
Report on the Systematic Use
of Forced Labor by the
Burmese Army in a Rural
Area” (EarthRights
International report), 138–140
Index
261

Escaping, 45
Ethics: global responsibility for
slavery and slave labor, 23–24
Ethnicity. See Race and ethnicity
Europe’s agricultural policy
affecting global slave 
market, 7
Exploitation as deﬁning
characteristic of slavery, 4
F
Factory Act (1833), 57
Florida, 18
Forced labor
deﬁned, 103 (table), 252–253
organizations and associations
combating, 188
testimony about, 137–142
in the United States, 140–142
Forced Labor Convention, 61
Forced prostitution deﬁned, 103
(table)
Former Soviet Union, trafﬁcking
in women, 32
Forms of slavery. See Chattel
slavery; Contract slavery;
Debt bondage; Prostitution
Foundation Against Trafﬁcking in
Women, 176
Foyers Maurice Sixto (children’s
refuge project), 156
France, 20–23, 58
Free Burma, 172
Free the Children, 36, 64, 80–81,
186–187
Free the Slaves organization,
xv–xvi, 32–33, 66, 140–142,
161–163
Free will as deﬁning characteristic
of slavery, 4
Freed slaves
Cadet, Jean-Robert, 73–74
child carpet weavers, 
xv–xvi, 33
emancipation organizations,
62–63
Kachepa, Given, 77–79
Masih, Iqbal, 82–83
Saloum, Salma Mint, 88–89
Teyeb, Moctar, 92–93
French Committee Against
Modern Slavery (CCEM), 21
French Revolution, 56
Friendship Schools Campaign, 81
G
G-5 visa, 34
Gabriel, Peter, 190–191
Galley, Dora, 135
Gatos (bonded labor recruiters),
122–123
Ghana, trokosi practice in, 18,
133–137
Girls. See Women and girls
Global Alliance Against Trafﬁc in
Women (GAATW), 195–196
Global March Against Child
Labor, 32, 65, 83
Global organizations, 32–33
Globalization, 188, 252
Government corruption and
complicity
bonded labor in India, 
120–121
contributing to new slavery,
7–8
Dominican Republic, 86–87
enforcing trokosi legislation in
Ghana, 136–137
Mauritania, 89, 127
persecution of activists, 71–72,
79–80, 82–83
police bribes for brothels in
Thailand, 145
262
Index

police extortion from
Cambodian prostitutes, 149
Sindh, Pakistan, 87–88
supporting India’s mining
industry, 90–91
U.S. victims’ unwillingness to
work with law enforcement
personnel, 48–49
Vidyulatta’s protest and
imprisonment, 85
war slavery, 17
Greece, ancient, 55
H
Haiti
domestic slavery in, 156–157
independence, 56
Paraison, Father Edwin, 86–87
restavecs, 73–74
Hardenburg, W.E., 59
Harkin, Tom, 76, 158
Harkin Bill, 158
Health issues, 43. See also
HIV/AIDS
“Hidden Slaves: Forced Labor in
the United States,” 140–142
Historical overview, 2–3
HIV/AIDS
Cambodia’s prostitutes, 151
fear of AIDS leading to child
prostitution, 30
Thailand’s prostitutes, 11,
146–147
Holy Roman Empire, 56
Hong Kong, 60
Human Rights Center at the
University of California
Berkeley, 140–142
Human Rights Commission of
Pakistan, 87, 196
Human Rights First, 189
Human Rights Information and
Documentation Systems
International (HURIDOCS),
176
Human Rights Watch, 187–188
Human trafﬁcking in the United
States, 140–142
I
ILO Convention Concerning the
Prohibition and Immediate
Action for the Elimination of
the Worst Forms of Child
Labor (1999), 65, 66, 108
Immigrants: forced labor in the
United States, 140–142
Immoral Trafﬁc Protection Act, 29
Incest deﬁned, 103 (table)
India
banning bonded labor, 63
beedi industry, 18–20, 158–159
carpet loom labor, 34
comparing old and new forms
of slavery, 10
early abolitionists, 58, 60
ethnic divisions, 12
Nankar, Keshav, 83–84
organizations and associations
combating slavery, 194
Pandit, Vivek and Vidyullata,
84–86
prevalence of debt bondage, 16
prosecution of prostitutes, 29
redemption of slaves, 24–25, 27
Saran, Amar, 89–91
slave population statistics, 4
Suman, 91–92
Swami Agnivesh, 71–72
testimony about bonded labor,
116–121
Indigenous peoples, 59, 180–181,
192, 252
Index
263

Informal economy, 41–44
Informal Sector Service Center
(INSEC), 196–197
International Bill of Human
Rights, 189
International Child Labor
Elimination Act, 65
International Cocoa Initiative, 67
International Confederation of
Free Trade Unions (ICFTU),
177
International Convention for the
Suppression of the White
Slave Trade, 59
International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid, 62
International Forum on
Globalization (IFG), 188
International Labor Organization
(ILO)
child labor convention, 108
Forced Labor Convention, 61
founding of, 60
history of antislavery efforts,
31
information about, 164–165
International Organization of
Employers, 64
Tripartite Declaration of
Principles Concerning
Multinational Enterprises
and Social Policy, 63
Worst Forms of Child Labor
Convention, 65, 66, 108
International laws and
conventions on slavery,
101–103
International Needs organization,
133–137, 169
International Organization for
Migration (IOM), 32
International Organization of
Employers, 64
International Program on the
Elimination of Child Labor
(IPEC), 31
International Textile Garment and
Leather Workers Federation
(ITGLWF), 177–178
Investment, 23–24
J
Japan
child prostitutes, 62
establishment of brothels, 61
race and ethnicity in slaves, 12
slave population statistics, 4
K
Kachepa, Given, 77–79
Kamara, Cheikh Saad Bouh, 
79–80
Khmer women, 148–152
Kielburger, Craig, 64, 80–81,
186–187
Kufuor, John Agyekum, 136
L
La Strada Ceska Republika, 178
Labor activists and organizations,
84, 90–91, 177–178, 182–183,
193
Laogai prison camps, 62, 188
Laogai Research Foundation
(LRF), 188
Lawyers Committee for Human
Rights, 191
League of Nations, 30–31, 60, 61,
103–104
Legal work
Break the Chain Campaign,
34–36
DeBaca, Lou, 76
264
Index

international laws and
conventions on slavery,
101–103
Saran, Amar, 89–91
Legislation
ancient civilizations, 2
inadequacy of, 121
outlawing trokosi in Ghana,
136–137
prosecution of prostitutes,
28–39
TVPA, 48–49, 66, 67–68
Lei Aurea, 59
Leopold II, 59
Lincoln, Abraham, 58–59
Lopez Loyola, Dona Pureza,
81–82
M
Malaya, 60
Masih, Iqbal, 80, 82–83
Mauritania
abolition of slavery, 63, 68
emancipated slaves’
movement, 62–63
Kamara, Cheikh Saad Bouh,
79–80
organizations and associations
combating slavery, 184–185
race and ethnicity, 12
Saloum, Salma Mint, 88–89
testimony about chattel
slavery, 123–128
Teyeb, Moctar, 92–93
Mauritanian Human Rights
Association (MHRA), 79–80
Media reports on slavery, 53,
131–132
Mensah, Wisdom, 136–137
Mesopotamia, 55
Migrant labor deﬁned, 103 (table),
253
Mining industry, 89–91
Model Business Principles, 64
Morel, E.D., 59
Mott, Lucretia, 58
Mukti Ashram, 91–92
Multinational Monitor (Essential
Information, Inc.), 189–190
Murder
activists in Brazil, 88
Masih, Iqbal, 83
Patan, Shakil, 87–88
Myanmar. See Burma/Myanmar
N
Nankar, Keshav, 83–84, 116–118
Narrative of the Life of Frederick
Douglass (Douglass), 77
National Anti-Slavery Day, 68
National Forum on the Prevention
and Eradication of Child
Labor, 191–192
National Geographic magazine, 68
National Institute of Justice (NIJ)
study, 44–46
National Islamic Front, 63
Native Americans, 95
Nepal
banning debt bondage, 66
human rights organizations,
196–197
slave population statistics, 4
Netherlands, 57, 59, 63–64
NGO Group for the Convention
on the Rights of the Child,
178–179
Nigeria, trokosi slavery in, 135
Nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs)
deﬁned, 253
ﬁghting child labor, 32
role in arresting trafﬁckers, 46
Sudan cease-ﬁre, 65
Index
265

North-South divide: agricultural
policy affecting global slave
market, 6–7
Norwegian Institute of
International Affairs (NUPI),
179
O
Ofﬁce to Monitor and Combat
Trafﬁcking in Persons, 168
Oil-producing countries, 12
Old slavery, 8–11, 16
Optional Protocol on the
Convention of the Rights of
the Child, 67
Organ harvesting deﬁned, 103
(table)
Organized crime convention,
114–116
Outcasts prostitutes as, 28
Ownership of slaves, 2–3
P
Pakistan
banning debt bondage, 67
Bonded Labor Act, 64
ethnic divisions, 12
human rights organization, 196
Masih, Iqbal, 82–83
Patan, Shakil, 87–88
Rugmark, 34
slavery and child labor
statistics, 4, 66
Pandit, Vivek and Vidyullata,
84–86, 118–121
Paraison, Father Edwin, 86–87
Paris, France, 20–23
Pastoral Land Commission (CPT),
192–193
Patan, Shakil, 87–88
People’s Recovery, Empowerment
and Development Assistance
(PREDA) Foundation, Inc.,
197
Peru, 57, 59
Peruvian Amazon Company, 59
Philippines’ human rights
organizations, 197
Police
failure to notice victims, 45–46
government corruption
contributing to new slavery, 8
prostitution, 28–29
supporting victims while
prosecuting perpetrators,
50–52
U.S. victims’ unwillingness to
work with, 48–49
See also Government
corruption and complicity
Population. See Statistics
Post–Cold War globalization
increasing opportunities for
slavery, 7
Poverty as common denominator
of slaves, 12
Price of slaves
American South, 9
disposability of slaves, xii, 5
factors contributing to slave
glut, 8–11
Slavery Index, 98–99 (box)
Thailand’s prostitutes, 11
Prison labor deﬁned, 103 (table)
Proﬁts from Thai brothels,
145–147, 145 (table)
Property, slaves as, 9. See also
Chattel slavery
Prostitution
Cadena family prosecution, 40
Convention for the
Suppression of the Trafﬁc in
Persons and Exploitation of
the Prostitution of Others, 61
266
Index

deﬁned, 103 (table)
early legislation against, 59
enslavement of girls in the
United States, 142–144
ethical considerations over,
27–30
forced prostitution deﬁned,
103 (table)
Japanese military, 61
sexual slavery in Cambodia,
148–152
sexual slavery in Thailand,
10–11, 144–148
See also Sexual slavery and
exploitation
Protect Act, 68
Psychological effects of bondage,
43–44, 74, 85–86, 119–120,
143–144
Public awareness, 46–47, 52–53
Q
Quakers, 94–95
Quirós Law, 58
R
R&A Harvesting, 40
Race and ethnicity
American South, 9
ethnic cleansing in Sudan, 128
modern slavery eliminating
ethnic considerations, 11–13
slavery in Mauritania, 79–80
victims of slavery in the United
States, 43
Rädda Barnen, 179–180
Rape
by Burmese soldiers, 139–140
devadasi women, 18
ethnic cleansing in Sudan, 129
sex workers in Cambodia,
149–150
Reauthorization Bill, 67–68
Recruitment techniques, 44
Redemption of slaves, 24–27
Reebok Human Rights
Foundation, 191
Refugees, 86–87, 89
Religion
devadasi women, 18
Father Paraison’s activism,
86–87
Father Rizende’s activism, 88
organizations and associations
combating slavery, 172–173,
191
redemption of slaves by
charitable organizations,
24–26
Swami Agnivesh on, 72
trokosi practice in Ghana, 18,
133–137
Repatriation, 52
Responsibility, 23–24
Restavec: From Haitian Slave Child
to Middle-Class American
(Cadet), 74
Restavecs (domestic slaves), 17,
73–74, 152, 156–157
Revictimization of escaped slaves,
51–52
Rivers, Jamal, 143
Rizende, Father Ricardo, 88
Rome, ancient, 55
Rug weaving. See Carpet weavers
Rugmark, 34, 64–65, 67, 180
Rural slaves: Thailand’s
prostitutes, 10–11
Russian abolition of slavery, 58
S
Saint Dominique, 56
Saloum, Salma Mint, 88–89,
124–128
Index
267

Samarthan, 85
Sanders Amendment, 158
Saran, Amar, 89–91
Satia family, 41
Saudi Arabia, 61, 62
Save the Children Federation,
179–180, 190
Senahe, Mercy, 133, 134
Serfdom, 56, 254–255
Servile marriage, 255
Sexual slavery and exploitation
abduction and enslavement in
the U.S., 142–144
domestic slavery in the U.S., 35
forced laborers in Burma,
139–140
restavecs, 73
sex tourism, 144–148, 195
sexual slavery deﬁned, 103
(table)
trokosi practice in Ghana, 18,
133–137
See also Prostitution
Shoishab, 197
Shramajeevi Sanghatana, 85,
117–118
Sierra Leone, 57, 60
Sindh, Pakistan, 87–88
Slave deﬁned, 253
Slave trade
Brazil’s Quirós Law, 58
deﬁned, 253
historical occurrences of, 56
Slavery: A Global Investigation
(ﬁlm), 66–67
Slavery Convention (1926), 30, 60,
102 (table), 103–104
Slavery deﬁned, 3–4, 102–103, 103
(table), 253–254
Slavery Index, 98–99 (box)
Social change affecting size of
slave population, 6
Social clause, 255
Society for the Protection of the
Rights of the Child (SPARC),
198
Somalia, 67
South Asian Coalition on Child
Servitude (SACCS), 91–92,
198–199
Spain, 57
Sri Lanka, 61
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 58, 94
State(s) party, 255
Statistics
domestic slave population,
22–23
forced labor and slavery in the
United States, 47, 142
global slave populations, 4–6
global spread of slavery,
99–101
Slavery Index, 98–99 (box)
Still, William, 93
Sudan
organizations and associations
combating slavery, 184–185
redemption of slaves, 24, 25–26
war slavery, 17, 63, 128–132
Sugar production, 24, 86–87
Suman, 91–92
Supplementary Convention on
the Abolition of Slavery, the
Slave Trade and Institutions
and Practices Similar to
Slavery, 62, 102 (table),
104–107
Suppliers of workers, 42–43
Supply-and-demand economy of
slavery, 42–44
Survival International, 
180–181
Sweatshop Watch, 190
Sweden, 29–30, 57
268
Index

T
Teaching Teachers to Teach (TTT),
78
Teyeb, Moctar, 92–93
Thailand
enslavement of Thai women in
Japan, 12
sexual enslavement, 144–148
slave glut and prostitution,
10–11
Tobacco (beedis), 18–20, 158–159
Togo, trokosi slavery in, 135
Torture
Burma’s forced labor, 138–139
domestic slaves, 20–21
Trade unions, 90–91, 177, 182–183,
193
Trafﬁcking in Persons section of
the U.S. Department of
Justice, 53
Trafﬁcking Victims Protection Act
(TVPA), 48–49, 66, 67–68
Transnational Institute (TNI),
181–182
Tripartite Declaration of
Principles Concerning
Multinational Enterprises
and Social Policy, 63
Trokosi (religious prostitution), 18,
133–137
Tubman, Harriet, 93–94
U
Uganda, war slavery in, 17
Ukraine, trafﬁcking in women, 32
UN Convention on the Rights of
the Child, 63
UN Convention on Transnational
Organized Crime, 102 (table),
114–116
UN Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM), 136, 167
UN Working Group on
Contemporary Forms of
Slavery, 63
UNESCO, 165–166
UNICEF, 131–132, 166
UNIFEM: Women’s Human
Rights Program, 136, 167
Unions, 90–91, 177, 182–183, 193
United Nations
Convention on Transnational
Organized Crime, 114–116
history of antislavery efforts,
30–32
investigating slavery in Burma,
65
UNESCO, 165–166
UNICEF, 131–132, 166
Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 61
See also Headings beginning with
UN; International Labor
Organization
United States
agricultural policy affecting
global slave market, 6–7
antislavery legislation, 57,
108–114
Break the Chain Campaign,
34–36
Child Soldiers Protocol, 67
evidence of domestic slavery,
152–156
evidence of forced labor,
140–142
examples of slavery, 18
Free the Slaves, 33
increasing public awareness,
52–53
informal economy contributing
to growth of slavery, 41–44
Model Business Principles, 
64
Index
269

United States, (cont.)
obstacles to stopping slavery,
47–49
organizations and associations
combating slavery, 185
pressure on Sudan, 26
slave population statistics, 5
themes and characteristics of
slavery in the U.S., 44–47
United States Trafﬁcking Victims
Protection Act (2000), 108–114
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 30–31, 61, 102 (table),
104
Untouchables/outcasts, 255
U.S. Child Labor Deterrence Bill,
158
U.S. Congress, TVPA and, 48–49,
66–68
U.S. Justice Department, 76
U.S. State Department, 168
Uttar Pradesh, India, 89–91
V
Veerapool, Supawan, 40–41
Vidhayak Sansad, 85
Violence
as deﬁning characteristic of
slavery, 3–4
against domestic slaves,
154–156
Vulnerability, cultivating, 45
W
WAO-Afrique, 169–170
War slavery
characteristics of, 17
Child Soldiers Protocol, 67
historical overview of slavery,
2–3
history of, xi
Mesopotamia, 55
redemption of slaves, 24, 25–26
Sudan, 128–132
testimony about forced labor in
Burma, 137–140
Washington, DC, domestic
slavery in, 34–36
White slavery deﬁned, 103 (table)
Wilberforce, William, 57, 74, 75
WITNESS, 190–191
Women activists
Lopez Loyola, Dona Pureza,
81–82
Suman, 91–92
Tubman, Harriet, 91–92
Women and girls
domestic servitude, 34–36
organizations and associations
combating slavery, 176, 178,
195–196
servile marriage, 255
slavery deﬁned, 254–255
trokosi practice in Ghana, 18,
133–137
UN organizations targeting
trafﬁc in, 32
UNIFEM, 167
See also Prostitution
Woolman, John, 94–95
Worker Exploitation Task Force,
76
Working Group on Contemporary
Forms of Slavery, 31
World Anti-Slavery Convention,
58
World Congress Against
Commercial Sexual
Exploitation of Children, 65
World Muslim Congress, 62
World Trade Organization (WTO),
167–168
270
Index

World Vision, 191
World War II, 61
Worst Forms of Child Labor
Convention, 65, 66, 108
Wu, Harry, 62, 188
Y
Yemen, 62
Z
Zarempka, Joy, 35
Index
271


About the Author
Kevin Bales is president of Free the Slaves, the U.S. sister organiza-
tion of Anti-Slavery International (the world’s oldest human
rights organization), and Professor of Sociology at Roehampton
University in London, as well as serving on the board of direc-
tors of the International Cocoa Initiative. His book Disposable
People: New Slavery in the Global Economy, published in 1999, was
nominated for the Pulitzer Prize and has now been published in
eleven languages. Archbishop Desmond Tutu called it “a well re-
searched, scholarly and deeply disturbing expose of modern
slavery.” A revised edition was published in 2005. His work won
the Premio Viareggio for services to humanity in 2000, while the
documentary based on his work won the Peabody Award for
2000 and two Emmy Awards in 2002. He was awarded the Laura
Smith Davenport Human Rights Award in 2005; the Judith
Sargeant Murray Award for Human Rights in 2004; and the Hu-
man Rights Award of the University of Alberta in 2003. He is a
Trustee of Anti-Slavery International and was a consultant to the
United Nations Global Program on Trafﬁcking of Human Beings.
Bales has been invited to advise the U.S., British, Irish, Norwe-
gian, Japanese and Nepali governments, as well as the govern-
ments of the Economic Community of West African States, on the
formulation of policy on slavery and human trafﬁcking. He re-
cently edited the “Anti-Human Trafficking Toolkit” for the
United Nations and published, with the Human Rights Center at
the University of California–Berkeley, a report on forced labor in
the United States. He is working with the chocolate industry to
remove child and slave labor from its product chain and writing
on contemporary slavery (see, for example, his feature article in
the April 2002 Scientiﬁc American). His new book Understanding
Global Slavery will be published in September 2005. He gained his
PhD at the London School of Economics.
273

