Editors Note:
VirWox wised up to this method and started forcing users to validate their
SL avatars..
Thought I'd tidy this up a bit with a noob-friendly tutorial on how to buy
bitcoins with a CVV through VirWox.
What you will need.
Valid CVV (any country will do) [1]
Clean Socks5 proxy as close as possible to cardholder's address [2]
Good DNS setup [3]
CC -> SLL -> BTC
Ok lets get started.
You'll need an email account. Go create a new one at
yahoo/gmail/whatever.....doesn't matter which (i wouldn't use tormail for
this......too much of a flag).
Go to https://www.virwox.com/, and create a new account using the email
you just set up and the name on the CVV. Just make up a fake SL avatar -
you don't need to validate it.
You will then have to confirm your new account by retrieving the temp
password from your email.
First thing to do in Virwox is change your password in the "Change
Settings" tab on the left.
Now we're ready to do some carding. Click "deposit" and scroll down to the
Skrill(moneybookers) option. Then enter the max amount for the currency of
1
Starbucks @BMR
new methods to cashout a 
credit card
2013

your card (currently $56 for USA cards) and click the moneybookers logo.
If you have NoScript installed you will have to temporarily allow all this
page. Enter the details you have for the CVV and make up a fake date of
birth if you dont have a genuine one.
If all goes well, you will then be taken back to the main page with your
USD/EUR/GBP balance filled.
On the "exchange" menu left of screen choose USD/SLL to convert to Linden
$s, then BTC/SLL to convert to bitcoin.
Now withdraw.
Easy Profit.
Note:
Typically Virwox hold funds for 48 hours before releasing.
You can process payments a total of 3 times with each card.....one
transaction every 24hours.
CC -> Moneygram -> BTC
If you have fulls (ssn, dob, etc) you can try cashing out through
moneygram. To do this just go to site and sign up for an account under the
cardholders name. Be sure to chain a regional socks5 with your Tor
connection so you appear to be from the same country that the cardholder
is in [4]. Select Same Day service. It will prompt you for the card
details, dob, and the last 4 digits of the ssn. I would suggest running
this name through a background check (any background search site will do)
in case you have to answer a security question to send the funds over.
Don't try to send over too much. If you accidentally go over the limit or
try to send a suspicious amount you risk flagging the account. No more
than $300 from each CC. If everything goes smoothly you can try exchanging
through https://wm-center.com for bitcoins. You can find more information
on WM-Center here: https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/WM-Center
CC -> Forex -> BTC
author: NinjaFrog
The process is actually really simple. I was surprised to find the site.
Kinda found it by accident actually.
Site: http://www.rationalfx.com
Using a foreign currency exchange site to change money on a credit card
into a foreign currency and to wire transfer the money into a bank
account.
In this case, the bank account is at https://mtgox.com
2

The process goes as follows:
Make an email account anywhere.
Make an account at MtGox.
Make an account at rationalfx.com. (all account info in the name of the cc
holder).
In rationalfx, add account details, addy, card number, MtGox wire info.
Make a transfer.
Process takes 3-5 business days... It turns a cc transaction into a wire
transfer so it takes a couple days... (Note: in the interest of speed and
not getting the transaction reversed, Monday/Tuesday is the best day to
start the transaction)
Once the money is in MtGox, turn it into bitcoins as quickly as possible
and move it into your other bit wallets. Wash the coins if necessary...
Easy huh?
Already pulled it off once. 400GBP through a MC without any issues.
rationalfx does not seem to have any real safeguards in place. Tor works
fine there (though it is best to use an exit node wherever your card
holder lives).
When I was testing it first with a visa, it told me 3 times in a row that
the transfer failed. I lowered the amount each time and tried again. After
the 3rd time it went through but I didn't have the Verified by Visa
password so I couldn't continue. BOTH Visa AND MC , it seems, will pop up
with a verification thingy if its enabled on the card. (Usually US/UK
cards)
Make sure when you deposit to MtGox, you include the account
identification info for that spacific account. You can find it on the
'funding options' -> 'Bank wire' page... If you forget that info you wont
get your money..
So there you have it. Its simple as pie.. This is not 100% of the info but
ya'll can figure out the rest..
3

